NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A NEW LOOK AT THE U.S. FORECLOSURE CRISIS:
PANEL DATA EVIDENCE OF PRIME AND SUBPRIME BORROWERS FROM 1997 TO 2012
Fernando Ferreira
Joseph Gyourko
Working Paper 21261
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21261

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2015

We appreciate the excellent research assistance of Matt Davis, Lindsay Relihan, Yitong Wang, and
Chen Zheng. We thank Raphael Bostic, Keith Head, Vernon Henderson, Henry Overman, Melissa
Prado, Olmo Silva, Nancy Wallace, Paul Willen and seminar participants at the Nova School of Business
and Economics, London School of Economics, NBER Real Estate Summer Institute, Trinity College
Dublin, Inter-American Development Bank, Lubrafin Conference, and Homer Hoyt Institute for comments
and suggestions. We are grateful to the Research Sponsors Program of the Zell/Lurie Real Estate Center
at Wharton for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Fernando Ferreira and Joseph Gyourko. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

A New Look at the U.S. Foreclosure Crisis: Panel Data Evidence of Prime and Subprime Borrowers
from 1997 to 2012
Fernando Ferreira and Joseph Gyourko
NBER Working Paper No. 21261
June 2015
JEL No. E0,G0,H0,J0,R0
ABSTRACT
Utilizing new panel micro data on the ownership sequences of all types of borrowers from 1997-2012
leads to a reinterpretation of the U.S. foreclosure crisis as more of a prime, rather than a subprime,
borrower issue. Moreover, traditional mortgage default factors associated with the economic cycle,
such as negative equity, completely account for the foreclosure propensity of prime borrowers relative
to all-cash owners, and for three-quarters of the analogous subprime gap. Housing traits, race, initial
income, and speculators did not play a meaningful role, and initial leverage only accounts for a small
variation in outcomes of prime and subprime borrowers.

Fernando Ferreira
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
1461 Steinberg - Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
fferreir@wharton.upenn.edu
Joseph Gyourko
University of Pennsylvania
The Wharton School of Business
3620 Locust Walk
1480 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
gyourko@wharton.upenn.edu

I.

Introduction
Most economic analysis of the recent American housing market bust and the subsequent

default and foreclosure crises focuses on the role of the subprime mortgage sector.1 Roughly
three-quarters of the papers on the crisis reviewed in the next section use data only from the
subprime sector and typically include outcomes from no later than 2008. For example, Mian &
Sufi (2009) use mortgage defaults aggregated at the zip code level from 2005 to 2007 to
conclude that a “salient feature of the mortgage default crisis is that it is concentrated in
subprime ZIP codes throughout the country.” However, subprime loans comprise a relatively
small share of the complete housing market--about 15% in our data and never more than 21% in
a given year. In addition, we document that most foreclosures in the United States occurred after
2008. These two issues raise questions about the representativeness of results based on selected
subprime samples.
In this paper we provide new stylized facts about the foreclosure crisis and also
empirically investigate different proposed explanations for why owners lost their homes during
the last housing bust. We use micro data that track outcomes well past the beginning of the crisis
and cover all types of house purchase financing – prime mortgages, Federal Housing
Administration (FHA)/Veterans Administration (VA)-insured loans, loans from small or
infrequent lenders, and all-cash buyers -- not just the subprime sector. The data (described
below in Section III)) contain information on over 33 million unique ownership sequences in just
over 19 million distinct owner-occupied housing units in 96 metropolitan areas (MSAs) from
1997(1)-2012(3), resulting in almost 800 million quarterly observations. It also includes
information on up to three loans taken out at the time of home purchase, and all subsequent
refinancing activity. Thus, we are able to create owner-specific panels with financing
information from purchase through sale or other transfer of the home.
These data show that the crisis was not solely, or even primarily, a subprime sector event.
It started out that way, but quickly morphed into a much bigger and broader event dominated by
prime borrowers losing their homes. Figure 1 reports the raw number of homes lost via
1

There is no legal definition of what constitutes a subprime mortgage. Researchers have used rules based on lender
lists and credit score cutoffs, and in all cases found very high rates of subprime distress. We discuss the methods
used by other researchers in the next section, with section III detailing how we distinguish prime from subprime
borrowers.

2

foreclosure or short sale for the five different types of owners we track each year across all 96
metropolitan areas in our sample. There are only seven quarters, 2006(3)-2008(1) at the
beginning of the housing market bust, in which there were more homes lost by subprime
borrowers than by prime borrowers, although the gap is small as the figure illustrates. Over this
time period, which is the focus of much of the previous literature in this area, 39,094 more
subprime than prime borrowers lost their homes. This small difference was completely reversed
by the beginning of 2009, as 40,630 more prime borrowers than subprime borrowers lost their
homes just in the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th quarters of 2008. An additional 656,003 more prime than
subprime borrowers lost their homes from 2009(1)-2012(3), so that twice as many prime
borrowers lost their homes than did subprime borrowers over our full sample period.
One reason for this pattern is that the number of prime borrowers dwarfs that of subprime
borrowers (and the other borrower/owner categories we consider). Table 1 lists the absolute
number and share of all our borrower/owner categories over time. The prime borrower share
varies around 60% over time and did not decline during the housing boom. Subprime borrower
share nearly doubled during the boom, but only up to 21%. Subprime’s increasing share came at
the expense of the FHA/VA-insured sector, not the prime sector.
This helps put Figure 2’s plot of foreclosure/short sale rates by borrower/owner type in
proper perspective. Sharply higher subprime distress rates became evident early in the housing
bust, just as the previous literature shows.2 However, those high rates never affected anything
close to a majority of the market. Moreover, loss rates among the much larger group of prime
borrowers started to increase shortly thereafter—within a year. The jump in the foreclosure rate
for prime owners become even more relevant empirically over time, as the market share of
subprime borrowers dramatically declined after 2008 as shown in Table 1.
After documenting basic facts about the housing bust, we turn to estimating panel data
models of the probability of losing a home in foreclosure or via short-sale as a function of prime
and subprime status and other factors. That our micro data allows us to create panels of full
ownership sequences provides a potentially important advantage relative to earlier research that
relied on loan-level data sets. Our ability to track borrowers/owners using different types of debt
2

The ‘Small’ lender sector also has a sudden and sharp early spike upward around the same time as Subprime. This
group includes owners who financed their homes from nontraditional ‘small’ sources that issued no more than 100
mortgages throughout our sample period. This group itself is very small in number, never amounting to more than
2%-3% of all owners. See below for more on them.

3

(such as subprime versus prime mortgages) over time means that we can also use our panel to
estimate whether there are common factors that can explain foreclosure activity across mortgage
labels. For example, we can measure negative equity conditions (i.e., when the current loan-tovalue (LTV) ratio is greater than one) for each quarter in each ownership sequence.
Current LTV is a powerful predictor of home loss, regardless of borrower type. This is
consistent with the implications of a traditional home mortgage default literature which shows
that negative equity changes an owner’s incentive to keep current on one’s loan (see Foster and
Van Order (1984), Kau, Kennan & Kim (1994), and Deng, Quigley & Van Order (2000), for
example).3 Controlling flexibly for current LTV almost fully explains the spike and continued
elevated rate of foreclosures and short sales by prime borrowers during the housing bust. Thus,
prime borrowers do not lose their homes at appreciably higher rates during the crisis than do all
cash owners after controlling for negative equity. Because the incentives arising from the
presence of negative equity do not vary by type of mortgage contract to a first approximation,
traditional mortgage default models imply this variable should be influential in accounting for
home losses in the subprime sector, too. That is what we find. Current LTV explains about
three-quarters of all home losses among subprime borrowers on average, including about onehalf in the spike of the first year of the crisis.
The traditional mortgage default literature also posits a potentially important role for
borrower illiquidity (typically thought of as arising from negative income shocks) in the decision
to default, which is a precursor to losing one’s home.4 Because there are no large U.S. data sets
with individual measures of on-going unemployment status, we are like the rest of the literature
in being unable to test directly for this effect.5 However, our data provide proxies for borrower

3

While we observe the precise date the owner lost her home to foreclosure or short sale, we cannot tell when the
initial default occurred. There are industry rules of thumb that can be applied to impute the start of the distress
sequence, but they vary by jurisdiction and over time. In any event, we are more interested in home loss, which is
measured with accuracy in our data.
4
See Foote, et. al. (2010) for more on this ‘double trigger’ hypothesis. That terminology arises as follows.
Negative equity is one trigger, but it is a necessary, not sufficient, condition for default. If the owner subsequently
suffers a negative income shock that renders the household illiquid and unable to make monthly debt service
payments in a timely manner, that is the second trigger which guarantees default because not even a sale of the
property can pay off the outstanding balance when there is negative equity.
5
The Panel Survey on Income Dynamics (PSID) does provide information on the employment status of household
members, but its samples are too small for our purposes. We also experimented with aggregate employment
measures, but they had little or no impact on further reducing the gap between subprime and prime foreclosure rates.
Large attenuation bias is to be expected when an aggregate measure is used to proxy for individual unemployment
status (Gyourko and Tracy (2014)). For example, if the local unemployment rate doubles from 5% to 10% in a

4

illiquidity such as census tract-by-quarter indicators (that control for local economic conditions
over time at the neighborhood level) or ownership indicators (that precisely control for
individual conditions which are permanent, but have no time variation) in our specifications.
These proxies show an economically modest impact on the probability of losing one’s home, but
the role of negative equity remains very powerful. That said, it could be that our better measured
LTV control is reflecting some of the impact related to unobserved individual income shocks.
For example, only 18% of our owners who ever experienced negative equity ended up losing
their homes.6 That is a large number, given that 40% of our ownership sequences had negative
equity for at least one quarter. However, if only negative equity mattered, all of them
presumably would have defaulted and ultimately lost their homes. While we remain agnostic on
the precise strength of each of these two mechanisms, our results show that their combined effect
is to eliminate almost entirely the empirical importance of the Prime and Subprime labels in
explaining differential probabilities of foreclosure during the housing bust.
We also estimate whether a host of other ‘initial conditions’ affect the probability of
home loss or weaken the impact of negative equity. These include owner demographics such as
race, initial self-reported income and whether she is a speculator, housing unit traits such as the
number of bedrooms and square footage of living space, and other financial factors such as initial
LTV, whether there is a second loan or a refinancing, and the loan cohort. Neither borrower
traits nor housing unit traits appear to have played a meaningful role in the foreclosure crisis.
Initial LTV has been shown to account for about 60% of the foreclosure crisis based on
simulations of a macro model (Corbae and Quentin (2015)), and Bayer, Ferreira and Ross
(forthcoming) and Palmer (2014) find that the cohort of the most recent purchase or refinancing
is influential in predicting defaults. However, our data reveal only modest impacts for these
factors on whether owners ultimately lose their homes. We argue that these variables are best
thought as helping measure current LTV more accurately.
While this study is focused on the foreclosure crisis, it obviously is related to a large
literature on how the U.S. housing boom started and evolved. In other work, we document
quarter, 90% of the labor force still is employed, so regressing whether an individual owners lost a home to
foreclosure or engaged in a short sale on that aggregate variable is not likely to be statistically significant.
6
That is quite close to an independent estimate made by the firm CoreLogic which reported that 85% of owners in
negative equity as of the second quarter of 2012 still were current on their mortgages
(http://www.dsnews.com/articles/borrowers-in-negative-equity-slowly-declining-as-home-values-gain-report-201209-12).

5

substantial variation in when housing booms began across metropolitan areas and show that the
initial jumps in local prices tend to coincide with jumps in local area income (Ferreira and
Gyourko (2013)). Shiller (2005) and Case, Shiller and Thompson (2012) famously argued that
the subsequent sharp increases in price-to-income and price-to-rent ratios were based on
unrealistic expectations of house price growth. Soo (2015) uses local newspaper coverage to try
to quantify those animal spirits, with DeFusco, et al. (2014) examining how heterogeneity in
local market price increases might have generated spillover effects on price growth in nearby
areas. The role of speculators in pushing up prices in certain markets has been analyzed by
Chinco and Mayer (2014) and Haughwout , et al. (2011). Mian and Sufi (2011) and Bhutta and
Keys (2013) respectively study the roles of house prices and interest rates in increasing equity
extraction during the housing boom and on future default rates. In addition to the host of
research on the subprime sector discussed in the next section, there is a recent debate about
changes in buyer composition during the run up of the housing boom (Adelino, Schoar and
Severino (2015); Mian and Sufi (2015)). We do not directly address a question related to this
latter debate—namely, whether prime borrower foreclosures would have happened in the
absence of the initial increase in subprime distress. We suspect the answer is ‘yes’, as Figure 1
shows a somewhat similar timing in the surge of foreclosures across borrower types. However,
presenting a complete theory and empirical analysis that links the beginning of local housing
booms, how they evolved, and their respective busts, all within the broader context of the
economic cycle which included a global financial crisis, requires a separate analysis that is left to
future research.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section II discusses the related mortgage market
literature focusing on the consequence of the bust. This is followed by a detailed description of
our data in Section III. Section IV reports the empirical results. There is a brief conclusion.
II.

Related Literature: Implications of the Focus on Subprime
Even though prime and subprime borrowers were losing their homes in roughly equal

numbers as the crisis began (Figure 1), because loss rates initially spiked so sharply among
subprime borrowers (Figure 2), researchers paid particular attention to that sector. Appendix
Table 1 reports a list of published papers from 2008(1) to 2014(2) on the housing bust. While

6

not exhaustive, it is representative of primarily empirically-oriented work on the fallout from
bust.7
There are a number of noteworthy patterns in this research. First, three-quarters of the
papers focus exclusively on the subprime sector in their data and analysis (see column 2). There
is no legal definition of what distinguishes a subprime from a prime loan. Previous research uses
one of two methods to categorize loan type. Papers using loan level data typically use a credit
score cutoff (the FICO score range used runs from 600-660) to distinguish subprime from prime
borrowers. Other research relies on lender lists compiled annually by HUD since 1997 or
industry publications such as Inside Mortgage Finance, which reports the top 20 subprime
lenders each year from 1990-onward, to make this distinction.8 Lender lists focus on subprime
loans that are securitized in the private sector, while low FICO scores capture mortgages that
could be kept by banks and mortgage issuers and also mortgages securitized by the government.
Both sets of papers find large default rates for subprime mortgages.
Second, the vast majority of the studies analyzing borrower payment behavior use loan
level data (see column 3), with the predominant data source being First American Core Logic
Loan Performance (LP, hereafter; see column 4 for the specific data provider). This source is
based primarily on subprime mortgages which were used to collateralize private label mortgagebacked securities (MBS). The strength of the LP data is that they are rich in detail on loan
traits.9 A countervailing weakness is that it cannot be used to generate panels of ownership
sequences, unless the owner never changes the debt it uses. Hence, these studies generally
cannot control for the addition of new debt or link refinancing of original debt across a unique
owner. Thus, cumulative LTVs cannot be known with accuracy unless these data are merged
7

The articles listed here are published pieces in three urban/real estate journals (Journal of Urban Economics, Real
Estate Economics, Journal of Housing Economics), select finance journals (Journal of Finance, Review of Financial
Studies, Journal of Financial Economics), select banking-related journals (Journal of Banking and Finance, Journal
of Monetary Economics) and general interest economics journals (American Economic Review, various American
Economic Journals, Quarterly Journal of Economics, and the Review of Economics and Statistics). This list does
not contain unpublished working papers. It also excludes a host of published work on related topics including local
spillovers of foreclosures (e.g., Biswas (2012), Campbell, Giglio and Pathak (2011), Chan, et. al. (2013), Cheung,
Cunningham and Meltzer (2014), Harding, Rosenblatt and Yao (2009), Schuetz, Been and Ellen (2008), and
Whitaker and Fitzpatrick (2013)) and macroeconomic effects of the housing boom and bust (e.g., Mian and Sufi
(2011, 2014)).
8
Inside Mortgage Finance, which previously was called B&C Mortgage Finance, claims to capture up to 85% of all
subprime originations in most years. See Chomsisengphet & Pennington-Cross (2006) for more detail on this source.
9
See Mayer, Pence and Sherlund (2009) for an excellent overview of this data source. Similar data providers listed
in the table include LPS Applied Analytics (which includes data on prime and subprime mortgages), Black Box
Logic LLC, the HMDA files (which cover prime and subprime borrowing), and OCC-OTS Mortgage Metrics
(which also covers prime and subprime mortgages).

7

with a credit bureau panel. As Appendix Table 1 documents, researchers have merged these data
with credit bureau files (from Equifax typically) that provides detailed credit risk information on
the borrower. This combination provides the foundation for much of the empirical work listed in
the table on the role of loan and borrower traits in explaining subprime default patterns in
particular.10
Most of these studies also use data from a relatively short window of time (see column
5). The private label subprime mortgage-backed securities market did not really boom until late
in the last housing cycle, so these data do not become nationally representative until the middle
of the last decade. The vast majority of studies also do not use originations from later than 2008.
It is rare for borrower outcomes to be tracked past that year, too, which is two years prior to the
peaking of prime borrower distress rates.
Geographic coverage is varied. Many studies use multi-state samples, and some have
made considerable effort to control for differences in economic (and housing price) conditions
across metropolitan areas. However, there has not yet been an extensive effort to control for
detailed location effects within a metropolitan area.
While mostly limited to the subprime sector and the very beginning of the housing bust,
these data have been useful in examining a host of interesting topics. Appendix Table 1
highlights that there have been a number of studies on special topics or features of the subprime
market such as the impact of securitization on the all-on costs of origination, on lender screening
incentives, and on incentives to renegotiate or work out distressed loans. There also have been
separate studies on predatory lending and the prevalence and impact of untruthful data (e.g., ‘liar
loans’). This earlier research generally could not address the potential role of common factors
across the prime and subprime sectors. That requires panels of complete ownership sequences
combined with detailed financing information. It is to the creation of such data that we now turn.
III.

Data Description
The home purchase and financing transactions files compiled by the data vendor

DataQuick are the foundation of the rich micro data used in this paper. They permit us to
10

The closest anybody comes to our goal of analyzing distress in the broader mortgage or housing market is
Ascheberg, et. al. (2013). It notes the rise borrower defaults as the housing bust unfolded, but takes a very different
research approach from ours. Those authors construct a dynamic simulation model to impute the spillover effects of
subprime defaults on prime defaults.

8

observe sales transactions of single family units and homes in condominium or multi-unit
structures. We also observe the financing associated with those purchases, as well as subsequent
refinancings and subordinate mortgages. Our sample includes this information for the 96
metropolitan areas listed in the Appendix Table 2, along with their start and end dates. As the
appendix table notes, different metropolitan areas enter the sample at different times, some as
early at 1993(1), so homes purchased before these dates do not enter our study sample (unless
they are resold later). We report results based on data from 1997(1)-2012(3) since we have
coverage on virtually all MSAs over this time span.11
Detailed information is provided on the following variables (among others): (a)
transaction date; (b) name of the buyer if the observation is for a purchase; name of the owner if
the observation is for a refinancing or other debt; (c) name of the seller if the observation is for a
home purchase; (d) names of up to three lenders for any type of transaction involving new debt;
(e) sales price for all home purchases; (f) mortgage amounts for up to three loans on all
observations using any type of financing; (g) street address and census tract of the underlying
home; (f) various home characteristics including age of the home, size as reflected in the
number of bedrooms, bathrooms, and square footage, etc.; and (g) codings provided by
DataQuick indicating whether a transaction involves a home being foreclosed by a creditor, as
well as whether the home is being sold out of foreclosure to a new owner; in both cases, names
of the principals are reported, along with a purchase price for the latter type of transaction.
Because individual owners and all their financings can be tracked over time, we use these
data to create a panel of individual ownership sequences. An ownership sequence is the
complete span of time a unique owner owns a given residence. Our final panel contains
33,545,252 ownership sequences on 19,648,475 homes. There are just fewer than 780,000,000
quarterly observations on these ownership sequences from 1997(1)-on.
A. The Number and Types of Transactions
The predominant type of transaction is an arms-length purchase of an existing home.
These constitute 80.2% of all our home sales transactions. Arms-length sales of new homes

11

In practice, we have an unbalanced panel since more houses that are newly built or resold enter the sample over
time. Fortunately, the impact on our panel estimates is not likely to be major because the foreclosure crisis starts in
2006-2007 when sample sizes have stabilized. See Table 1 for more detail.

9

from the builder (or other entity) to a household make up another 11.2% of all purchases.12 The
remaining sales observations are comprised of purchases out of foreclosure (8.6%). DataQuick
does not code these as arms-length trades between two disinterested parties, but they are readily
identifiable from another variable categorizing ‘distress’ transactions.13
We also observe about 48 million financings not associated with a home purchase. These
include refinancings and the taking on of junior debt. First, second and third loans at purchase
are clearly identified. However, DataQuick does not identify whether a subsequent financing
within a unique ownership sequence represents a refinancing of existing debt or the taking on of
an additional loan. We adopt the following rule to distinguish between the two cases. If a new
mortgage taken out subsequent to purchase has an initial loan balance that is more than 50% of
the total mortgage balance taken out at purchase or is more than 50% of the imputed current
price of the home, we assume the new loan is a refinancing that replaces the prior debt;
otherwise, it represents junior debt, which is added to the outstanding loan balance. Using this
rule, we observe about 34 million refinancings and just over 14 million second loans.
B. Classifying Owners
Each ownership sequence is classified as one of five types based on the type of financing
used by the owner. The most straightforward is those who buy their housing unit without using
any debt. These are referred to as Cash owners in all tables and figures. They constitute a
relatively stable 10%-11% share of our sample until 2010, after which their share increases to
over 16% in 2012 (Table 1). If an owner purchases a house with no debt, but subsequently takes
out a mortgage, that owner is no longer considered a Cash owner as of the quarter of the loan
origination.
All other ownership sequences involve the use of some type of debt. We divide each of
these owners into one of four groups of borrowers: (a) Prime; (b) Subprime; (c) FHA/VAinsured; or (d) ‘Small’. Lender lists are used to define subprime mortgages because we do not
have access to credit score micro data. More specifically, we define a borrower as subprime if it
12

We can confirm new home sales by analyzing another variable identifying the year the home was built, as well as
the name of the seller. The former allows us to exclude land sales (which occur prior to the time the structure was
built). For new homes, the seller usually is a home builder.
13
The seller in these cases typically is some type of financial entity, while the buyer usually is a household. See the
discussion below for more on these transactions. Some do not consider these ‘normal’ sales, but they certainly are
home purchases, and we count them as such. Their transaction prices also are included in the price series described
below, although we can do all our analysis excluding them.

10

obtained its loan(s) from a lender on either the HUD or Inside Mortgage Finance lists, but the
loan was not insured by FHA or VA. This group is called Subprime in all tables and figures.14
As Figure 2 above and the data reported below show, our Subprime group has very high rates of
home loss, which is consistent with the rest of the literature regardless of their data and
procedure for distinguishing subprime from prime.
However, we do not categorize all other borrowers as Prime. Two other categories are
included to help ensure we do not conflate subprime and prime owners. The first is comprised of
borrowers whose loans were guaranteed by FHA or VA (regardless of lender identity). They are
labeled FHA/VA owners in all tables and figures.15 These loans often are considered of
subprime quality because of the very high initial loan-to-value ratios usually involved, but we
treat them separately from the ‘private’ subprime group. As shown above, the time series on
their shares in our panel almost are the mirror images of one another.
We also distinguish another category of owners who were financed by individuals,
households, or firms that issued less than 100 loans throughout our sample period. Our
reasoning is that those owners who obtain financing from individuals or other entities that do not
appear to be traditional banks and financial institutions could be riskier, and thus more subprimelike. We label them as ‘Small’ owners because they obtained their debt from entities that issued
a very small number of loans.16 Their temporal pattern of foreclosures/short sales is much more
like that for Subprime than for Prime as shown above in Figure 2. That said, they always
constitute a small share of our sample, never amounting to more than 2%-3% of all observations
in any one year.

14

The entities on the subprime lender list generally distinguish among the several units of a lender. For the HUD
list in particular, identification was based on the HMDA identification number of the entity, and different
subsidiaries of a large bank typically had different ID numbers. Thus, having a subsidiary of (say) Bank of America
that HUD believes specializes in subprime lending on the list does not mean that all of Bank of America’s mortgage
issuance gets classified as subprime. Banks and subsidiaries also enter and leave the HUD list over time. The HUD
list also ends in 2005. The Inside Mortgage Finance publication also lists specific units of some large financial
institutions, but we also consider those units as subprime if they ever show up on that publication’s list.
15
Ten metropolitan areas in the northeastern part of the country do not report data for this particular variable. They
are Barnstable Town, MA, Boston-Cambridge-Quincy, MA-NH, Bridgeport-Stamford-Norwalk, CT, Harford-West
Hartford-East Hartford, CT, New Haven-Milford, CT, Pittsfield, MA, Providence-New Bedford-Fall River, RI-MA,
Springfield, MA, and Worcester, MA. We still include observations from these metropolitan areas in our regression
analysis, but code this variable for them so that it is estimated separately from that for the other MSAs. Hence,
coefficient estimates for this group of borrowers reported below in Table 3 are based on the 86 MSAs that have full
information on FHA/VA loan status.
16
That said, some of these small lenders could arise from measurement error in the way DataQuick reports the
names of lenders in the data.

11

All remaining owners with debt are Prime borrowers by definition. Their share always
exceeds 50%, and it rose, not fell, as the boom built, from a low of 54.9% in 2000(1) to a high of
65.6% in 2008(1). Thus, the rough doubling of Subprime share over the same period is at the
expense of the FHA/VA-insured sector, not the Prime sector (Table 1).
C. Distress: Losing One’s Home Via Foreclosure or Short Sale
We define distress as the home being lost to foreclosure or short sale. Foreclosed homes
are explicitly identified in the DataQuick files by a distress code that indicates the exact date
when the home was lost by the previous owner. We are able to confirm this by looking at the
name of the new owner, which typically is some type of financial entity (e.g., bank, RMBS pool
number, special servicer), not a household. We define a short sale as a transaction in which the
sales price is no more than 90% of the outstanding balance on all existing debt. DataQuick has a
variable that indicates when a sale is considered a short-sale, but our conversations with the
company revealed that such information is based on a proprietary model. Our proxy for shortsales matches the DataQuick indicator 90% of the time. We use our version of short-sales
because the DataQuick variable is only populated since 2004. Of the 2.971 million cases of
owners losing their homes depicted in Figure 1, two-thirds were due to foreclosure (2.071
million) with the rest (0.899 million being short sales). We report results below using only
foreclosures that yield very similar findings.
D. Constant Quality House Prices
Constant quality nominal house price series are used throughout our analysis. We use
hedonic price indexes, rather than repeat sales indexes popularized by Case and Shiller (1987,
1989) because of their much less onerous data requirements.17 This is relevant because we create
semi-annual price indexes for groups of census tracts that are intended to proxy for
neighborhoods within a metropolitan area.18 There is significant variation in price growth over
time across tract groups, and that heterogeneity is exploited when creating loan-to-value ratios
for individual ownership panel sequences.
17

That said, at the metropolitan area level, the correlation between our hedonic price indexes and repeat sales
indexes typically is higher than 0.95.
18
Because there are few home sales within a given tract in any period, we aggregate tracts into groups of 4-6, with
the average being 4.5 tracts per group. The grouping is done to make the tracts as contiguous as possible.

12

We do not include observations for which the reported sales price is less than $10,000 or
greater than $5 million. Nominal price in logarithmic form for units in each neighborhood is
modeled as a function of the square footage of the home entered in quadratic form, the number of
bedrooms, the number of bathrooms, and the age of the home. We also include a dummy for
condominiums or houses located in subdivisions and interact these dummies with the linear and
quadratic terms for square footage. The hedonic index values are derived from the coefficients
on the semi-annual dummies included in the model – the actual equation and additional details
are available upon request. The estimated indexes are then normalized to 100 in 2000(S1) for all
neighborhoods.
Figure 3 reports the graphs of the neighborhood-level semi-annual hedonic price series
for four of our 96 metropolitan areas: Boston-Cambridge-Quincy, Las Vegas-Paradise, PhoenixMesa-Scottsdale, and San Francisco-Oakland-Fremont. Tract groups in a given metropolitan
area tend to move together over time, but there is considerable variation both on the upside and
downside of the cycle. For example, the mean nominal price appreciation from 2000(1) to the
cyclical peak across the 154 tract groups for which we estimated neighborhood-level hedonic
price indexes in the Boston metropolitan area was 87.1%, with a standard deviation of 24.3
percentage points. The lowest neighborhood-level price growth to the peak was 48.6%,
compared to 167.2% for the highest. There is less spatial heterogeneity in the bust, where the
mean price decline from the peak to trough was 69.1%, with the spread from lowest to highest
decline only 20 percentage points (from -61.1% to -82.6%). Naturally, this means that some
submarkets in the Boston metro performed materially better than others since 2000(1). The
mean price growth since 2000(1) was 45.8%, with the full range across neighborhoods running
from 1.5% to 92.4%. This type of spatial heterogeneity is typical across tract groups within a
given metropolitan area (larger ones in particular).
E. Leverage at Purchase and Over Time
Loan and purchase price data are combined to compute loan-to-value (LTV) ratios.
Doing so at purchase is straightforward: divide the sum of all mortgages taken out at purchase
by the purchase price recorded by DataQuick. Figure 4 shows how initial LTV varies over time
by the different types of borrowers/owners who used debt. FHA/VA-insured loans have much
higher initial LTVs (close to 1) than both prime and subprime loans throughout our full sample
13

period, and actually fell slightly over our sample period. Subprime borrower average initial
LTVs did increase from about 81% to 85% as the boom built in the mid-2000s. There is a more
modest increase in Prime borrower initial LTVs over the same time period. Thus, there was not
a dramatic surge in initial leverage ratios for the typical borrower in any sector of the mortgage
market while the long boom in house prices built.
Current LTV by quarter must be estimated. Fortunately, in addition to having panels of
ownership sequences that make its estimation feasible, two features of our data allow for a more
accurate estimation than exists in other research: (a) the complete history of home financings,
including refinancings and second loans; and (b) neighborhood-level house price indexes.19 In
imputing the numerator, we presume that all new debt taken on is fully amortizing, 30-year,
fixed rate product. This is a conservative assumption that almost certainly leads us to understate
true LTV, particularly on subprime product which the literature suggests more often involved
adjustable rate mortgages (ARMs) and terms that did not require immediate amortization of
principal. To impute current house value in the denominator, we start with house price at
purchase, and update it on a half-year basis using our neighborhood-level price indexes. Noise
in the denominator can arise in different ways. For example, values for distressed properties are
likely to be overstated because they probably were receiving lesser maintenance and repairrelated investment. This provides another reason why current LTV could be underestimated.
However, we suspect that variation provided by refinancings, second loans and the local price
index likely overshadow the measurement error due to this factor.
Leverage ratios at purchase may not have spiked during the run-up in prices as the boom
built, but Figure 5 shows that average current LTV steadily declined by about 20 percentage
points from 1997 until 2005-2006 near the peak of the housing price cycle. This fall in leverage,
which is due to the extraordinary rise in house prices during the long boom, occurred across all
borrower types. This pattern then reversed itself by the end of 2006, after which house prices
fell dramatically and current LTVs increased rapidly to unprecedentedly high levels by 2009.
The average current LTV for prime borrowers was just above 1.0 in the first quarter of 2009,
while that for Subprime and FHA/VA borrowers was above 1.2. The average Prime owner

19

Some private data vendors have begun creating cumulative LTVs on observations in their loan-level data sets.
Essentially, they do it as we do, by linking to deeds records (which is what DataQuick does) so they can track a
given observation over time. To our knowledge, this has not yet shown up in current or published research.

14

continued to have no equity in its home for the three following years, while that for all other
owner types with debt remained in negative equity.
F. Identifying Speculators
Researchers and popular commentators have argued that speculators may have played an
important role in the building of the last housing boom, thereby helping make its ultimate demise
worse (e.g., Haughwout, et. al. (2011); Chinco and Mayer (2014)). We identify speculators in
one of two ways. First, we follow Chinco and Mayer (2014) who reasoned that since speculators
would not be living in the purchased unit, they would have their tax bills sent to another address.
We compare the precise street address of the housing unit with the address to which the tax bill is
sent – the ‘Tax Address’ in the DataQuick files. Whenever the two are appreciably different, we
call that purchaser a speculator.20 The second way we identify whether a purchaser is a
speculator is by whether the buyer has a name that is a business. This includes corporate or
commercial names that include LLC or INC in them, homebuilders, or trusts (especially
mortgage-backed securities trusts which are typically identified by a four-digit number in their
names).21 Appendix Figure 1 shows that the share of speculators by type of borrower increases
for all categories until 2002, but then remains stable for Prime, Subprime, and FHA/VA
borrower/owners, while it keeps escalating for Cash owners and Small borrowers.
G. Demographics and Income of Borrowers
A weakness of the DataQuick files is that they do not contain any information on the
owners beyond their names. To gain more insight into borrower demographic characteristics
(race and gender of the head of the household) and the self-reported income levels, we match
individual sales transactions to loan application data in the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act
(HMDA) files. Observations are merged as follows. In the first step, each transaction was
matched to a loan using the year in which the transaction occurred, the full 11 digit Census tract
number, the lender name, and the exact loan amount. In cases where there were multiple
matches, one of them was randomly assigned as being a true match while the rest were
20

By appreciably different, we generally mean that more than one number in the street address before the zip code
differs.
21
Other academic research has identified speculators by whether the ‘flip’ properties quickly (e.g., Bayer, Geissler,
Magnum and Roberts (2011)). We also investigated those cases, but more than 99% of them were already
encompassed by our measures of tax address and names of business.

15

considered unmatched. The remaining unmatched observations were then merged based only on
year, Census tract and exact loan amount with multiple matches being randomly assigned as in
the first step. This two-step process was repeated several times allowing for the loan amounts to
differ from each other in increments of $1,000 up to a total allowable difference of $10,000.
Any observations remaining after this process then went through an identical matching procedure
using 9 digit Census tract numbers. Observations surviving that procedure are considered to be
unmatched. In total, 92.7% of the sales transactions in DataQuick were matched at some point in
the procedure. Of those, approximately 60% were matched in the first step. Because we are
unsure about the quality of the matches in subsequent steps, in the empirical work below we
always distinguish the demographics in two groups – perfect and imperfect matches – and
include both in the estimation. Reported regression coefficients are for the perfect matches only.
Finally, the demographic data for Cash buyers is missing by definition because they never took
out a loan, and hence, cannot be matched with any HMDA observation.
H. Summary Statistics
Table 2 reports summary statistics for a number of variables of interest in our empirical
work for the full sample and also for each of the five owner categories, with their shares in our
overall sample in parentheses: Prime (61%), Subprime (15%), FHA/VA (10%), Cash (11%),
and Small (2%). The top panel notes distress rates. Foreclosures always are at least twice as
prevalent as short sales in leading to the loss of a home. And, the unconditional probability of a
Subprime owner losing its home is well more than double the rate a Prime owner does. The
sample-wide mean is 0.73% for Subprime owners (1-in-137) versus only 0.34% (1-in-294) for
Prime owners, but Figure 2 above shows that masks substantial heterogeneity over time. The
group of owners that borrowed from ‘small’ lenders has a distress rate of 0.42%, above that for
Prime owners, but well below that for Subprime owners. The same is true of borrowers using
FHA/VA-insured mortgages, who have a distress rate of 0.38%. Not surprisingly, all cash
owners have the lowest rate of home loss at 0.14% or 1-in-714. By definition, these owners
cannot lose their homes to lenders. Examination of the names of the parties taking over these
homes in foreclosure indicates that it is property taxes that are not being paid for the most part,
as a local taxing authority or municipality often takes ownership.

16

Panel 2 reports data on housing traits. There is no evidence here that Subprime owners
purchased systematically smaller or appreciably older units. Demographics are reported in Panel
3.22 There are only modest differences in the fraction of male borrowers (defined as the head of
household) across the four borrower types. Racial differences are quite large. The White share
of Subprime owners is 10 percentage points below that of Prime owners, at 63% versus 73%.
The FHA/VA-insured category has a similarly low White share. Reported income on the loan
application recorded in the HMDA files shows Subprime owners to be less rich than Prime
owners, but the difference is only 6%. There were many claims about misstatements on ‘liar
loans’ in the subprime sector, so this modest difference may reflect some of that misreporting.
Note that FHA/VA-insured borrowers, who are required to provide documentation about their
earnings, have appreciably lower incomes on average. Panel 3 also reports aggregate data on
speculators. One-quarter of all ownership sequences are classified as speculators, and they are
more prevalent among the all Cash owner group at 61%.
The fourth panel reports summary statistics on house prices and LTV at the time of
purchase. Transaction prices are higher and similar for both prime and subprime borrowers, and
smaller for owners who took FHA/VA-insured loans. However, subprime owners are more
likely to use high leverage than prime owners at purchase. But by no means are Subprime
owners the most leveraged owners in our sample. Borrowers of FHA/VA loans tend to use much
more debt at purchase. Nearly two-thirds (64%) of them have 95%-100% LTVs at origination,
and another 23% have no equity at purchase.23
The fifth panel of Table 2 breaks down the financings by whether they are for a purchase
or any subsequent financing. For the overall sample, 51% of all ownership sequences never
altered the debt they took on at purchase (see column 1). Another one-third (34%) refinanced
and another 15% took out a second mortgage. Across owner types, the Subprime group was the
least likely to not refinance or take on a second mortgage. Finally, the last panel shows averages
for current LTV, which has been discussed above and in Figure 5.

22

Statistics are reported here for perfect matches only.
This does not appear to reflect data error. FHA rules allow home buyers to borrow the upfront fee that FHA
charges for guaranteeing the mortgage and add it to the mortgage balance. That, plus other loan sources, leads to
over one-fifth of FHA/VA-insured borrowers having 100% (or slightly higher) loan-to-value ratios at origination.
23

17

IV.

Empirical Results
A. Panel Structure Estimates: Negative Equity and Borrower Illiquidity
We estimate various panel specifications, where the dependent variable is a binary

distress outcome yht which equals one if the owner lost the home via foreclosure or short sale that
quarter and equals zero otherwise, and it is indexed by housing ownership sequence h and yearquarter t. We always control for the different type of borrowers/owners (Ok): Prime, Subprime,
FHA/VA, Small and Cash, with Cash being the omitted category in all reported results. A given
owner is classified as one (and only one) of these types each quarter, with k indexing the five
ownership types.24
We first investigate the importance of the two key factors suggested by the traditional
home mortgage default literature: negative equity and borrower illiquidity. Negative equity is
directly measured for each housing unit each quarter by the current LTV variable discussed in
the previous section. Current LTV enters the model split into two dozen intervals (denoted by
the vector Dht), typically of 10 percentage points in terms of leverage (i.e., from 30-39% LTV,
40-49%, etc.) in order to see whether entering negative equity status or being more and more
underwater increases the probability of losing one’s home. Because there is no large micro data
source that tracks homeowner-level employment status, we proxy for the presence of a negative
income shock that would render a household illiquid by including census tract-by-quarter fixed
effects (denoted Stn in the model below) that allow us to capture very local (but still not
household-specific) economic conditions in each quarter t. There are nearly 1.6 million of these
dummy variables. Given the extremely large number of observations, this does not pose a
statistical problem. Rather, the primary challenge is computational, which is why we estimate
linear probability models of the following type:
(1) yht = αkOhtk + Stn + ρDht + μht ,
where μht is the standard error term. Estimates are clustered at the census tract level.

24

Classification is straightforward for any quarter in which an owner has no more than one mortgage. If there are
multiple loans and at least two have different classifications, we use the following order to determine owner type:
Subprime, FHA/VA, Prime, and Small. Thus, if the owner has at least one Subprime loan and any number of other
types of loans, it is classified as Subprime. If it does not have any subprime loans, but has at least one FHA/VAinsured loan and any other loans, it is classified as FHA/VA, and so forth.

18

Table 3 reports results. The first column only includes the financing type dummies with
no other covariates. Recall that Cash owners always are the omitted category, so that the
estimated coefficients must be interpreted as relative to the 0.14% home loss rate for that group
of owners (see the means in the top panel of Table 2). These baseline results confirm that Prime
borrowers lose their homes at less than half the rate at which Subprime borrowers do. Subprime
loss rates are larger than the other owner categories, too, which tend to be more similar to that for
Prime owners. Hence, those we identify as Subprime borrowers certainly do look riskier
unconditionally than the other groups of owners.
Including the census tract-by-quarter fixed effects vector in the second specification
means that Prime versus Subprime loss rates are now being made for ownership sequences in the
same neighborhood that faced similar average local economic shocks. Those results show
increases in the Prime and Subprime coefficients of roughly the same magnitude. This means
the Prime – Subprime gap in home loss rates largely is unaffected by these controls.25 This
suggests that Subprime and Prime owners are dispersed across tracts within a metropolitan area
rather than spatially concentrated in a select few. Hence, we can rule out a dense spatial
concentration of subprime loans in select neighborhoods that experienced some type of strong
negative economic shock as explaining why subprime distress rates were so high.26
The results in the next column (#3) show that current LTV is much more influential. The
point estimates on each ownership category fall substantially. All but the Subprime borrowers
are no longer appreciably more at risk of losing their homes via foreclosure or short sale than are
all Cash owners. The Prime owners’ coefficient is negative (as is that for FHA/VA borrowers),
indicating that once current LTV is controlled for, they are less likely to lose their homes than all
Cash owners. The difference is quite small in absolute terms, but it is not unexpected or
illogical. Prime borrowers should be very good credit risks, and they do not include as many
speculators as the Cash owner group does. And, the ‘distress gap’ between Subprime and all
Cash owners also falls by about three-quarters.
25

The Prime/Subprime gap narrows by only 4%.
The first column of Appendix Table 3 supports this assertion with its listing of the average share of tracts within a
MSA that never had a Prime owner (top panel) or a Subprime owner (bottom panel) within its boundaries at any
point in our sample period. On average, virtually no tracts never had a Prime owner in them, while only 3.5% of
tracts have never had a Subprime owner. The remaining three columns of that table report the share of tracts
containing 25%, 50% and 75% of each owner type, respectively. Neither Prime nor Subprime owners are randomly
dispersed geographically, but both are pretty widespread. For example, 45.3% of tracts contain 75% of Prime
owners on average; the analogous figure for Subprime owners is 46.6%.
26

19

It is noteworthy that these results are robust to a couple of important alternative
specifications. First, the findings are not much altered if we restrict the measure of home loss to
foreclosures only. In that case, the coefficients on the Prime, Subprime, FHA/VA, and Small
categories of borrowers/owners are -0.00088, 0.00121, -0.00126, and 0.00008, respectively.
Thus, it is negative equity, not any distinction between foreclosures and short sales that is driving
the findings. We also estimated specifications adding lagged values of Current LTV to the
specification in column 3 of Table 3. In that case, the coefficients on Prime, Subprime, FHA/VA
and Small become -0.00097, 0.00173, -0.00205, and -0.00078, respectively. The similarity in
results is not surprising, as it is not obvious that LTV at the time of initial delinquency is more
relevant than LTV at the time of foreclosure. Non-strategic defaulters only go through
foreclosure if they cannot sell for more than the outstanding mortgage balance when they
actually lose the home. Even strategic defaulters that first miss a payment because they know
they will give up the house ultimately might care more about LTV in the future.
Figure 6 plots each individual current LTV interval estimate for specification 3 of Table
3. As expected, increasing leverage from very low levels has little or no impact on the
probability of losing one’s home until negative equity is approached. Loss rates continue to
increase the deeper underwater the owner becomes. For example, the impact of being from 3040% underwater (current LTV bin of 1.3-1.4) is ten times larger than that of being barely above
water (current LTV bin of 0.9-1.0). At 1.1%, it is very large economically, too, given the low
average loss rates reported in Table 2. Even so, the probability of losing the home doubles again
by the time one has a current LTV of 1.8-1.9, and goes above 3% in absolute value for the most
highly leveraged owners.27 This indicates that a large fraction of the distress in residential real
estate markets, regardless of the type of mortgage finance, was concentrated among borrowers
living in homes that were underwater.28
This large average impact is not being driven solely by the subprime sector, as shown in
Appendix Figure 2. This plot, which is based on a specification that interacts our current LTV
variable with borrower/owner type shows that a given amount of leverage is associated with a
higher probability of home loss for a Subprime versus a Prime borrower. However, the shapes of
27

Unconditionally, 30% of all owners who ever experienced a current LTV>2.0 subsequently lost their homes. That
is 1.67 times the 18% share among those who ever experienced negative equity.
28
The plot in Figure 6 looks very similar when other covariates are added ranging from household features to other
components of leverage discussed below. This suggests that our negative equity variable both is well measured and
that its effects on foreclosures and short sales are unlikely to be due to omitted factors.

20

the plots are similar and the impact of being underwater on Prime borrowers is very large relative
to the average probability of foreclosure or short sale in that sector of the market.
Figure 7 documents heterogeneity in the Prime and Subprime effects over time, and in
doing so, highlights how powerful negative equity is in accounting for homeowner distress after
the global financial crisis began. These plots are from augmented versions of the first three
specifications reported in Table 3 that allow for the impact of owner type to vary by quarter and
borrower/owner type. There are a number of noteworthy features of these results. First,
controlling for negative equity via our current LTV variable completely accounts for the spike in
Prime borrower home losses relative to all Cash owners that begins in 2007 (left panel). Second,
negative equity also is influential in explaining Subprime sector foreclosures/short sales. It
accounts for about one-half of the sharp early spike in home losses in that sector before 2008.
Following that, Subprime sector foreclosures are about three-quarters lower once the owner’s
negative equity position is controlled for (right panel). Third, prior to the global financial crisis,
borrowers in the Prime and Subprime sector were no more likely to lose their homes than all
Cash owners once we know their current LTV ratio. This is not unexpected, as sound
underwriting should lead to groups of non-speculator owner-occupiers who are good credit risks.
What is striking is that this remains true for Prime borrowers throughout the housing bust period.
Given that the vast majority of foreclosures occurred in that sector from 2009-on, this suggests
the crisis was largely one of sound borrowers falling into negative equity because of very large
declines in house prices. Robustness tests reported below will confirm that initial conditions
such as purchase quarter LTV and loan cohort effects do not change this conclusion.
Figure 8 documents heterogeneity in the Prime and Subprime effects by market. Each
mark represents one of the 96 metropolitan areas in our sample that are arrayed in ascending
order starting from the lowest Prime or Subprime coefficient in each specification (thus, the
order of markets can and does differ by specification plotted). As the plot in the left panel for
Prime borrower/owners shows, controlling for current LTV eliminates the gap in home loss rates
with respect to all Cash owners in virtually all MSAs. The top five markets, which still have
very small coefficients ranging from 0.00058-0.00163, are Memphis, TN-MS-AR, and four
Rustbelt markets in Ohio (Springfield, Columbus, Dayton, and Cleveland-Elyria-Mentor). The
next five markets also are relatively small and in economic decline. The right panel shows that
current leverage explains much, but not all, of the gap between Subprime borrower and all Cash
21

owner foreclosures/short sales in the typical market, but there are bigger outliers at the top end of
the distribution. They also are smaller and older industrial metropolitan areas in economic
decline. Eight of the top ten Prime markets are also among the top ten Subprime markets.29
Thus, at the local market level, relatively high foreclosure/short sale rates after controlling for
current LTV are concentrated in declining areas where defaults and ultimately, home losses, are
less dependent of individual negative equity conditions.
We also estimated MSA-level models with heterogeneity over time to help gain insight
into what might account for the sharp spike in subprime defaults beginning in 2007 and 2008.
We know from Figure 7 that negative equity and other variables can account for no more than
one-half of that initial jump. It turns out that this surge is associated with a spatially
concentrated group of markets in central California. For example, the top ten metropolitan areas
in terms of loss rates among subprime borrowers/owners in 2006(3) are all Rust Belt or declining
industrial areas, as discussed above. One year later in 2007(3), the Detroit and Cleveland
markets still have the two highest home loss rates among subprime borrowers, but seven of the
other eight markets are Stockton, CA, Modesto, CA, Merced, CA, Sacramento-Arden-ArcadeRoseville, CA, Yuba City-Marysville, CA, Vallejo-Fairfield, CA, and Riverside-San BernardinoOntario, CA. Six months later at the end of the first quarter of 2008(1), Detroit still remains, but
only has the seventh highest subprime sector home loss rate, Stockton has the highest loss rate,
and other central California markets of Bakersfield and Salinas have joined the top ten. It is not
until the beginning of 2009 that we see the Las Vegas-Paradise, NV, Phoenix-Mesa-Scottsdale,
AZ, and small Florida markets join the top ten list. Thus, the initial increase in the subprime
sector distress was driven by an array of central California markets in a way that only partially
can be accounted for by our measure of current LTV.
B. Panel Structure Estimates: Other Potential Factors
The popular press and much of the previous scholarly literature have also focused on
other factors to explain the foreclosure crisis. Nonacademic commentators often wrote about
homeowners stretching to buy bigger and better homes during the boom in a ‘keeping up with

29

The two in the Subprime top ten list not in the Prime top ten are Detroit-Warren-Livonia, MI, and CincinnatiMiddletown, OH-KY-IN. The two in Subprime list not in the Prime top ten are Baltimore-Towson, MD, and
Yakima, WA. Hence, all 22 MSAs are industrial markets in economic decline.

22

the Jones’s’ mentality.30 It is true that the size of the typical new home rose substantially during
the boom31, but typical unit size is similar across borrower types except for the FHA/VA group,
who bought smaller homes on average (panel 2, Table 2). The findings reported in column 4 of
Table 3 show that adding housing units traits including the square footage of living area (in
quadratic form), the number of bedrooms and bathrooms, and age of the unit to the specification
with census tract-by-quarter fixed effects does not change the coefficient on the borrower/owner
category variables virtually at all, much less to the extent that adding current LTV did. Adding it
to the third specification that also includes current LTV does not alter any of our aforementioned
conclusions either. Nor do these variables have an economically large independent impact on
the probability of home loss.
Next we look at household traits, which include the race and gender of the owner, the
self-reported initial income of the owner and our imputation for whether the owner is a
speculator. These variables could impact foreclosures in a number of ways. Race, for example,
could be important since minorities have a larger share of subprime mortgages relative to prime
(panel 3, Table 2), and usually have less wealth than non-minorities (Bayer, Ferreira, Ross,
forthcoming). Speculators could react faster to the first sign of negative equity and stop making
monthly payments early in order to avoid future bigger losses. One quarter of our owners are
categorized as speculators, but there is only a small difference in their share of the Prime and
Subprime groups (panel 3, Table 2). Low self-reported income could indicate a lower likelihood
to sustain mortgage payments in the future. These are all plausible mechanisms, but adding
these household traits to the specification including census tract-by-quarter fixed effects is barely
more impactful than adding housing unit traits was (column 5, Table 3). Thus, owner
demographics, reported income and speculator status cannot account for differences in
foreclosure/short sale outcomes across borrower/owner types, and they do not vitiate the
influence of negative equity in explaining those differences.
This is not to say that factors such race do not matter at all. It does, but not in a way that
can materially explain outcomes across borrower categories. For example, Whites do lose their
30

One example is the Dr. Housing Bubble Blog which wrote frequently on this issue as far back as 2006
(http://www.doctorhousingbubble.com/category/keeping-up-with-the-joneses/). It is not hard to find examples in
the mainstream media such as this New York Times’s article “Housing Costs Rise. So Does Life on the Edge’ from
October 8, 2006 (http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9C03E5D91530F93BA35753C1A9609C8B63).
31
The median square footage of a new constructed single family home in the United States rose by nearly 11% from
2000 to 2007 according to U.S. Census data (see the chart “Median and Average Square Feet of Floor Area in New
Single-Family Houses Completed by Location” at https://www.census.gov/const/C25Ann/sftotalmedavgsqft.pdf).

23

homes less frequently than Blacks as expected (ceteris paribus), but the absolute magnitudes of
their impacts are relatively small and they are virtually uncorrelated with borrower type. [The
racial/ethnic group with the highest rate of home loss is Hispanics.] Female heads are more
likely to lose their homes than are male heads, but once again, this outcome is not strongly
correlated with borrower type. The economic impact of self-reported initial income is quite
modest in size, but this could be due at least partially to the variable being noisy. Speculators do
lose their homes at slightly higher rates than non-speculators, but the coefficient is relatively
small (0.00019) and does not change the relative impacts across borrower types.
The next three columns of Table 3 investigate whether other measures of leverage that
influence current LTV can explain the foreclosure probabilities. The first component is initial
LTV, which mechanically corresponds to the first current LTV observation in any ownership
sequence. We look at this variable individually because recent work by Corbae and Quintin
(2015) concludes that about 60% of the foreclosure crisis can be explained by higher initial LTV
based on simulations of a macro model of housing markets they developed. This variable is
transformed into five intervals for estimation purposes: 0.0-0.8, 0.8-0.9, 0.9-0.95, 0.95-1.0, and
1.0+. The regression results reported in column 6 show that initial leverage is more influential
than the housing units and household trait vectors, but its impact is substantially less than that of
current LTV for all but the FHA/VA-insured borrower groups. The extremely strong impact on
this category of borrowers probably is due to their extremely high initial leverage being the
salient fact about them. Controlling for initial leverage does account for over half the gap in the
rate of home loss for Prime borrowers relative to all Cash owners (i.e., the relevant coefficient
falls by 55% from 0.00329 in column 2 to 0.00147 in column 6), but that is far from fully
accounting for the Prime – Cash gap, which current LTV does. Controlling for initial LTV
yields a Subprime sector coefficient that is three times larger than when current LTV is
controlled for (contrast column 3 versus column 6).
Column 7 then separately controls for whether refinancing a prior lien or taking on a
second loan can account for foreclosure/short sale outcomes. Either change can directly
contribute to variation in current LTV by discretely altering the mortgage balance during an
ownership sequence. We know from Table 2 (columns 1 and 2, fifth panel) that nearly one-half
of all ownership sequences in our sample contained a refinancing or second mortgage, and that
this share was even higher among Subprime borrowers (columns 5 and 6, fifth panel). That this
24

could prove important is suggested by Mian and Sufi’s (2011) conclusion that home equitybased borrowing may explain one-third of mortgage defaults between 2006 and 2008. However,
our findings imply no material economic role for this factor in accounting for foreclosure and
short sales outcomes across different types of borrowers. In absolute terms, the loss rates from
foreclosures or short sales for all types of borrowers are slightly higher, not lower, relative to all
Cash owners if there is a refinancing or junior lien (compare with column 2). This could be due
to positive selection in the sense that it was the better credit risks that were able to refinance
and/or take on a second loan. Relatively speaking, the gap between outcomes for Prime versus
Subprime borrowers also is changed only slightly, presumably because both types of borrowers
refinanced a lot. In any event, there is no evidence that foreclosures or short sales can be
accounted for by refinancing or second loans in general or in the subprime sector specifically.
The next column reports results for testing whether cohort dummies based on the quarter
of the last purchase or mortgage transaction within an ownership sequence impact the probability
of foreclosure or short sale. These cohorts affect current LTV because houses bought or
refinanced near the peak of the housing boom had the largest declines in prices after the
beginning of the recession, and therefore suffered the largest increases in current LTV. As
shown above in Figure 3, these cohort effects may be quite relevant in MSAs where all
neighborhood prices moved in sync with the rest of the market during the housing boom. Also,
Bayer, Ferreira, and Ross (forthcoming) and Palmer (2014) report that cohort effects may
explain some of the movements in defaults and prices respectively. Their impacts tend to be
slightly less influential than those for initial LTV (compare column 8 with column 6), and thus
are not a substitute for the impact of negative equity conditions as reflected in our current LTV
control.
Column 9 includes all loan trait variables—initial LTV, whether there was a refinance or
2nd mortgage, and origination cohort. The results indicate that the latter two variables have some
influence independent of initial LTV (compare to column 6), but the combination still is not as
impactful as controlling for current LTV (column 3).32

32

Computational constraints arising from estimating standard errors clustered at the census tract level required using
a 50% random subsample (of each MSA) for this specification. The point estimates reported are not materially
different from those arising from using the full sample, but not clustering. See the notes to Table 3.

25

Column 10 then includes current LTV and all other loan traits.33 The pattern of results is
similar to that for current LTV in column 3. Outcomes for Prime borrowers, who suffer the most
losses of their homes to foreclosure and short sale, are virtually indistinguishable from those for
all Cash owners. The gap between Subprime borrowers and all Cash owners remains positive,
and is actually larger than when only current LTV is controlled for. As before, FHA/VA-insured
borrowers do not lose their homes at higher rates once one controls for current or initial LTV,
and small borrowers still are slightly more likely to lose their homes, but negative equity reduced
that gap substantially. Finally, the estimated coefficients for the underlying negative equity
controls are only 10-20% lower in this specification than in column 3, while the estimated
coefficients for initial LTV are 50-70% lower when compared to the respective estimates in
column 6.34
In sum, controlling for current LTV accounts for virtually all of the increase in
foreclosures among Prime borrowers and a substantial fraction of the surge in Subprime home
losses. Other variables that help predict current LTV are useful, but they reasonably can be
interpreted as reducing the noise in our measure of negative equity at the individual homeowner
level. As noted above, it is true that current LTV, which is measured at the household level,
could proxy for micro-level borrower illiquidity conditions that our census tract-by-quarter fixed
effects may not capture well for the reasons outlined in Gyourko and Tracy (2014). Much better,
micro-level data on employment status, is necessary to provide a convincing test of the impact of
desirability to pay (negative equity) versus ability to pay (unemployment). We did experiment
with specifications that included ownership-specific fixed effects and quarter dummies (as
opposed to the neighborhood-by-quarter fixed effects) to try to get around this problem, but these
specifications also show a limited role for this type of permanent individual level factor.35
33

Computational constraints also required estimating this specification on a smaller subsample (25%) – see the
notes to Table 3.
34
For example, current LTV bin [1.5,1.6) point estimates dropped from 0.017 to 0.014, and bin [2.4,2.5) point
estimates dropped from 0.03 to 0.026. Meanwhile, initial LTV bins (0.9,0.95], (0.95,1.0], and (1.0,max] had drops
from point estimates (0.0025, 0.0062, 0.0046) in column 6, to (0.0011, 0.0033, 0.0015) in column 10.
35
Ownership fixed effects in principle deal with the permanent component of borrower illiquidity. In practice, the
inclusion of ownership fixed effects did not change the impact of current LTV over time across borrower/owner
groups – see Appendix Figure 3. Models with ownership fixed effects are identified by variation in households that
switched mortgage type (e.g., from Prime to Subprime) within a given ownership sequence at the moment of a
refinancing. That subsample is large, as nearly one-third of all our ownership sequences involved some type of
switch. However, ‘switchers’ are obviously not a random subsample. Temporally, there is a tripling in the amount
of switching as the boom built in the first half of the 2000s (which means virtually none of that subsample lost their
homes during that period). Subprime owners switch at more than double the rate of Prime owners (62% versus

26

V.

Conclusion
The housing bust and its consequences are among the defining economic events of the

past quarter century. Constructing and analyzing new and very large micro data spanning the
cycle and all sectors of the mortgage market leads us to reinterpret the ensuing foreclosure crisis
as something much more than a subprime sector issue. Many more homes were lost by prime
mortgage borrowers, and their loss rates not only increased relatively early in the crisis, but
stayed high through 2012. This new characterization of the crisis motivates a very different
empirical strategy from previous research on this topic. Rather than focus solely on the subprime
sector and subprime traits, we turn to the traditional home mortgage default literature that
explains outcomes in terms of common factors such as negative equity and borrower illiquidity.
The key empirical finding is that negative equity conditions can explain virtually all of
the difference in foreclosure and short sale outcomes of Prime borrowers compared to all Cash
owners. This is true on average, over time (including the spike in their foreclosure rate
beginning in 2009), and across metropolitan areas. Given the predominance of this group in
terms of foreclosures and short sales, this is tantamount to explaining the crisis itself. We can
explain much, but not all, of the variation in Subprime borrower outcomes in terms of negative
equity or borrower illiquidity conditions, so something potentially ‘special’ about the subprime
sector still is unaccounted for. That said, it also could be that a less noisy measure of borrower
illiquidity would be able to account for this residual variation. That remains for future research.
None of the other ‘usual suspects’ raised by previous research or public commentators
change this conclusion. Housing quality traits, household demographics (race or gender), buyer
income, and speculator status do not have a material influence on outcomes across borrower
types. Certain loan-related attributes such as initial LTV, whether a refinancing occurred or a
second mortgage was taken on, and loan cohort origination quarter do have some independent
influence, but they are much weaker than that of current LTV.
While ours is not a normative economic analysis, our findings have potentially important
implications for public policy. Regulatory issues are much more challenging when the economic
27%) One also can envision two-sided selection leading to higher distress rates in the sample of Subprime
switchers. That is, households with declining credit quality could be switching from prime to subprime mortgages.
Nonetheless, estimates from Appendix Figure 3 make any detailed discussion about the potential pitfalls of the
ownership fixed effects somewhat moot, as the specification including them does not outperform that with current
LTV and census tract-by-quarter fixed effects.

27

cycle itself plays a large role. That is the implication of our finding that large numbers of Prime
borrowers who did not start out with extremely high LTVs still lost their homes to foreclosure.
In that context, effective regulation is not just a matter of restricting certain exotic subprime
contracts associated with extremely high default rates. We do not have detailed loan trait data,
but it turns out that we do not need it to account for much of the difference in the propensity to
lose one’s home across prime and subprime mortgage borrowers.
Our findings also can help inform homeowner bailout policy. We are not able to provide
a definitive recommendation one way or another, but we can rule out one noteworthy reason
offered for not aiding homeowners—namely, that the crisis was mostly about irresponsible
subprime sector actors (both lenders and borrowers) who were undeserving of transfers. Of
course, this is not to say that there was no such behavior. The evidence from other research and
serious journalists is that there was. However, it is clear from the passage of time (and the
accumulation and analysis of new data that provides) that the problem was much more
widespread and systemic. That is the meaning of a common factor playing such an influential
role in determining foreclosure losses across all types of borrowers. That knowledge may or
may not have affected policy makers’ and the public’s perspectives on bailouts. What we do
know is that significant distress in the housing market which dramatically weakened household
sector balance sheets had very large negative macroeconomic effects (Mian and Sufi (2014)).
In terms of research needed to make progress in understanding this past housing bust, and
perhaps more importantly, the next one to come, there is one area in urgent need of more work:
combining micro-level labor market data with housing data. That will allow for stronger tests of
the impact of borrower illiquidity on defaults and foreclosures. This likely will take much effort
and a change in policy among government data collectors, but it is a useful goal.

28

References
Adelino, Manuel, Kristopher Gerardi, and Paul Willen. “Why Don’t Lenders Renegotiate More
Home Mortgages? Redefaults, Self-Cures, and Securitization”, Journal of Monetary
Economics, Vol. 60, no. 7 (2013): 835-853.
Adelino, Manuel, Antoinette Schoar, and Felipe Severino. “Changes in Buyer Composition and
Expansion of Credit During the Boom”, National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper w20848, January 2015.
Agarwal, Sumit, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, Souphala Chomsisengphet, and Douglas
Evanoff. “The Role of Securitization in Mortgage Renegotiation”, Journal of Financial
Economics, Vol. 102, no. 3 (2011): 559-578.
______________________________________________________________________________
_______. “Predatory Lending and the Subprime Crisis”, Journal of Financial Economics,
Vol. 113, no. 1 (2014): 29-52.
Aschberg, Marius, Robert Jarrow, Holger Kraft, and Yildiray Yildirim, “Government Policies,
Residential Mortgage Defaults and the Boom and Bust Cycle of Housing Prices”, Real
Estate Economics, forthcoming (2013 web version available).
Bayer, Patrick, Fernando Ferreira, and Stephen Ross, “The Vulnerability of Minority
Homeowners in the Housing Boom and Bust”, American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy, forthcoming.
Bayer, Patrick, Christopher Geissler, Kyle Magnum and James Roberts. “Speculators and
Middlemen: The Strategy and Performance of Investors in the Housing Market”, NBER
Working Paper 16784, February 2011.
Ben-David, Itzhak. “Financial Constraints and Inflated Home Prices During the Real Estate
Boom”, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, Vol. 3, no. 3 (2011): 55-87.
Bhardwaj, Geetesh and Rajdeep Sengupta. “Subprime Cohorts and Loan Performance”, Journal
of Banking & Finance, Vol. 41 (2014): 236-252.
Bhutta, Neil, and Ben Keys. “Interest Rates and Equity Extraction During the Housing Boom”,
mimeo, University of Chicago, 2013.
Biswas, Arnab. “Housing Submarkets and the Impacts of Foreclosures on Property Prices”,
Journal of Housing Economics, Vol. 21, no. 3 (2012): 235-245.
Bubb, Ryan and Alex Kaufman. “Securitization and Moral Hazard: Evidence from Credit Score
Cutoff Rules”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 63 (2014): 1-18.
Campbell, John, Stefano Giglio, and Parag Pathak. “Forced Sales and House Prices”, American
29

Economic Review, Vol. 101, no. 5 (2011): 2108-2131.
Capozza, Dennis and Robert Van Order. “The Great Surge in Mortgage Defaults 2006-2009: The
Comparative Roles of Economic Conditions, Underwriting, and Moral Hazard”, Journal
of Housing Economics, Vol. 20, no. 2 (2011): 141-151.
Case, Karl and Robert Shiller. “Prices of Single Family Homes Since 1970: New Indexes for
Four Cities”, New England Economic Review, September/October (1987): 45-56.
________________________. “The Efficiency of the Market for Single Family Homes”,
American Economic Review, Vol. 79, no. 1 (1989): 125-37.
Case, Karl, Robert Shiller and Anne Thompson. “What Have They Been Thinking? Homebuyer
Behavior in the Hot and Cold Markets”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall
(2012): 265-298.
Chan, Sewin, Michael Gedal, Vicki Been, and Andrew Haughwout. “The Role of Neighborhood
Characteristics in Mortgage Default Risk: Evidence from New York City”, Journal of
Housing Economics, Vol. 22, no. 2 (2013): 100-118.
Cheung, Ron, Chris Cunningham, and Rachel Meltzer. “Do Homeowners Associations Mitigate
or Aggravate Negative Spillovers from Neighboring Homeowner Associations?”, Journal
of Housing Economics, Vol. 24, no. 1 (2014): 75-88.
Chinco, Alex and Christopher Mayer. “Misinformed Speculators and Mispricing in the Housing
Market”, NBER Working Paper 19817, January 2014.
Chomsisengphet, Souphala and Anthony Pennington-Cross. “Evolution of the Subprime
Mortgage Market”, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, Vol. 88, no. 1 (2006): 3156.
Coleman IV, Major, Michael LaCour-Little, and Kerry Vandell. “Subprime Lending and the
Housing Bubble: Tail Wags Dog?”, Journal of Housing Economics, Vol. 17, no. 4
(2008): 272-290.
Corbae, Dean, and Erwan Quintin, “Leverage and the Foreclosure Crisis”, Journal of Political
Economy, Vol.. 123, n.1 (2015): 1-65.
DeFusco, Anthony, Wenjie Deng, Fernando Ferreira and Joseph Gyourko. “The Role of
Contagion in the Last American Housing Cycle”, Zell/Lurie Real Estate Center at
Wharton Working Paper, 2014.
Demyanyk, Yuliya and Otto Van Hemert. “Understanding the Subprime Mortgage Crisis”,
Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 24, no. 6 (2011): 1848-1880.
Deng, Yongheng, John Quigley, and Robert Van Order. “Mortgage Terminations, Heterogeneity,
30

and the Exercise of Mortgage Options”, Econometrica, Vol. 68, no. 2 (2000): 275-307.
Elul, Ronel, Nicholas Souleles, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Dennis Glennon, and Robert Hunt.
“What “Triggers” Mortgage Default?”, American Economic Review, Vol. 100, no. 2
(2010): 490-494.
Ferreira, Fernando and Gyourko, Joseph. “Anatomy of the Beginning of the Housing Boom:
U.S. Neighborhoods and Metropolitan Areas, 1993-2009”, Zell/Lurie Real Estate Center
at Wharton Working Paper, March 2013.
Foote, Christopher, Kristopher Gerardi, Lorenz Goette, and Paul Willen. “Just the Facts: An
Initial Analysis of Subprime’s Role in the Housing Crisis”, Journal of Housing
Economics, Vol. 17, no. 4 (2008): 291-305.
__________________________________________________________. “Reducing
Foreclosures: No Easy Answers”, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2009. University of
Chicago Press, April 2010.
Foote, Christopher, Kristopher Gerardi, and Paul Willen. “Negative Equity and Foreclosure:
Theory and Evidence”, Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 64, no. 2 (2008): 234-245.
Foster, Chester and Robert Van Order. “An Option-based Model of Mortgage Default”, Housing
Finance Review, Vol. 3, no. 4 (1984): 351-372.
Goodman, Allen and Brent Smith. “Residential Mortgage Default: Theory Works and So Does
Policy”, Journal of Housing Economics, Vol. 19, no. 4 (2010): 280-294.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. “The Determinants of Attitudes toward
Strategic Default on Mortgages”, The Journal of Finance, Vol. 68, no. 4 (2013): 14731515.
Gyourko, Joseph and Joseph Tracy. “Reconciling Theory and Empirics on the Role of
Unemployment in Mortgage Default”, Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 80, no. 1
(2014): 87-96.
Harding, John, Eric Rosenblatt, and Vincent Yao. “The Contagion Effect of Foreclosed
Properties”, Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 66, no. 3 (2009): 164-178.
Haughwout, Andrew, Donghoon Lee, Joseph Tracy and Wilbert van der Klaauw, “Real Estate
Investors, the Leverage Cycle and the Housing Market Crisis”, Federal Reserve Bank of
New York Staff Report 514, 2011.
Haughwout, Andrew, Richard Peach, and Joseph Tracy. “Juvenile Delinquent Mortgages: Bad
Credit or Bad Economy?”, Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 64, no. 2 (2008): 246-257.
Jiang, Wei, Ashlyn Aiko Nelson, and Edward Vytlacil. “Liar’s Loan? Effects of Origination
31

Channel and Information Falsification on Mortgage Delinquency”, The Review of
Economics and Statistics, Vol. 96, no. 1 (2014): 1-18.
Kau, James, Donald Keenan, and Taewon Kim. “Default Probabilities for Mortgages”, Journal
of Urban Economics, Vol. 35, no. 3 (1994): 278-296.
Kau, James, Donald Keenan, Constantine Lyubimov, and V. Carlos Slawson. “Subprime
Mortgage Default”, Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 70, no. 2 (2011): 75-87.
Keys, Benjamin, Tanmoy Mukherjee, Amit Seru and Vikrant Vig. “Financial Regulation and
Securitization: Evidence from Subprime Loans”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol.
56, no. 5 (2009): 700-720.
_____________________________________________________, “Did Securitization Lead to
Tax Screening? Evidence From Subprime Loans”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
Vol. 125, no. 1 (2010): 307-362.
Keys, Benjamin, Amir Sufi, and Vikram Vig. “Lender Screening and the Role of Securitization:
Evidence from Prime and Subprime Mortgage Markets”, Review of Financial Studies,
Vol. 25, no. 7 (2012): 2071-2108.
LaCour-Little, Michael, Charles Calhoun, and Wei Yu. “What Role Did Piggyback Lending Play
in the Housing Bubble and Mortgage Collapse”, Journal of Housing Economics, Vol. 20,
no. 2 (2011): 81-100.
Mayer, Christopher and Karen Pence. “Subprime Mortgages: What, Where, and to Whom?”,
NBER Working Paper 14083 (2008).
Mayer, Christopher, Karen Pence, and Shane Sherlund. “The Rise in Mortgage Defaults”,
Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 23, no. 1 (2009): 27-50.
Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi. “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from
the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 124, no. 4
(2009): 1449-1496.
_____________________. “House Prices, Home Equity-Based Borrowing, and the US
Household Leverage Crisis”, American Economic Review, Vol. 101, no. 5 (2011): 21322156.
_____________________. House of Debt. The University of Chicago Press: Chicago and
London, 2014.
_____________________. “Fraudulent Income Overstatement on Mortgage Applications during
the Credit Expansion of 2002 to 2005”, National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper w20947, 2015.

32

Moulton, Shawn. “Did Affordable Housing Mandates Cause the Subprime Mortgage Crisis?”,
Journal of Housing Economics, Vol. 24, no. 1 (2014): 21-38.
Nadauld, Taylor and Shane Sherlund. “The Impact of Securitization on the Expansion of
Subprime Credit”, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 107, no. 2 (2013): 454-476.
Palmer, Christopher. “Why Did So Many Subprime Borrowers Default During the Crisis: Loose
Credit or Plummeting Prices?”, MIT Working Paper, July 2014.
Piskorski, Tomasz, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig. “Securitization and Distressed Loan
Renegotiation: Evidence from the Subprime Mortgage Crisis”, Journal of Financial
Economics, Vol. 97, no. 3 (2010): 369-397.
Rose, Morgan. “Geographic Variation in Subprime Loan Features, Foreclosures, and
Prepayments”, The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 95, no. 2 (2013): 563-590.
Schuetz, Jenny, Vicki Been, and Ingrid Gould Ellen. “Neighborhood Effects of Concentrated
Mortgage Foreclosures”, Journal of Housing Economics, Vol. 17, no. 4 (2008): 306-319.
Shiller, Robert. Irrational Exuberance. Princeton University Press: Princeton , NJ (2nd
Edition): 2005.
Smith, Brent. “Stability in Consumer Credit Scores: Level and Direction of FICO Score Drift as
a Precursor to Mortgage Default and Prepayment” Journal of Housing Economics, Vol.
20, no. 4 (2011): 285-298.
Soo, Cindy. “Quantifying Housing Spirits: News Media and Sentiment in the Housing Market”,
University of Michigan working paper, 2015.
Whitaker, Stephan and Thomas Fitzpatrick IV. “Deconstructing Distressed-Property Spillovers:
The Effects of Vacant, Tax-Delinquent, and Foreclosed Properties in Housing
Submarkets”, Journal of Housing Economics, Vol. 22, no. 2 (2013): 79-91.

33

Figure 1: Total Foreclosures + Short Sales Over Time by Owner Type

Figure 2: Unconditional Distress Probabilities (Foreclosures + Short Sales) Over Time by
Owner Type
34

Figure 3. Hedonic Price Indexes by Neighborhood; Selected MSAs

Figure 4. Average Initial LTV by Borrower Type Over Time
35

Figure 5. Average Current LTV by Borrower Type Over Time

Figure 6. Current LTV Estimated Coefficients

36

Figure 7: Heterogeneity – Prime and Subprime Borrowers Estimates by Quarter

Figure 8: Heterogeneity – Prime and Subprime Borrowers Estimates by Metropolitan Area

37

Table 1. Number and Share of Owner types, 1997-2012

Notes: Our calculations based on our final data described in section III.

38

Table 2. Summary Statistics, 96 Market Aggregate and by Owner Type

Notes: Calculations based on final data described in section III.

39

Table 3. Panel Estimates

Notes:
1. Estimates of the relative probability of foreclosures or short-sales for different home owner types based on equation (1) in the text. The omitted
category is all specifications is all-Cash owners.
2. Standard errors are based on clustering at the census tract level. Because of computational constraints, the results in Column (9) are from a 50% random
subsample of each MSA, whille those for Column (10)’s specification require a smaller 25% subsample to estimate clustered standard errors. Point
estimates are not changed in any material way relative to estimating on full samples without clustering.
3. The Current LTV variable is entered in discrete form via the 25 bins depicted in Figure 6. They range from 0.0-0.3, 0.3-0.4, …, 2.4-2.5, 2.5+.
4. The Housing Trait vector includes square footage (entered quadratically), the number of bedrooms, and the number of bathrooms.
5. The Household Trait vector includes self-reported income, race and gender of the head of the household, and a dummy for speculators. To surmount
computational constraints, this variable is made discrete by each owner being coded by an indicator variable as being in one (and only one) bin.
6. The Refi/2nd Mortgage dummy variable and Loan Origination Cohort vector of dummy variables are as described in Section III.

40

Appendix Figure 1: Share Over Time of Owner Types Classified As Speculators

Appendix Figure 2: Heterogeneity -- Current LTV Coefficients for Prime and Subprime Borrowers

41

Appendix Figure 3. Prime and Subprime Borrowers Estimates by Quarter with Ownership Fixed Effects (HH FE)

42

Appendix Table 1: Existing Literature--Data, Coverage, Issue Focus
Select Published Papers on Mortgage Performance From 2008(1) to 2014(2)
Data Coverage Characteristics
Paper

Sector

Type

Source

Time Period

Geographic
Coverage

Aggregation

Haughwout, Peach and
Tracy 4(2008)

Subprime

Loan Level

First American Core Logic Loan 1/01-4/07 originations; tracked
National
Performance (LP)
through 4/08

Micro; 1% subsample;
117,000 loans

Mayer and Pence (2008)

Subprime

Loan Level

First American Core Logic Loan
1998-2006
Performance (LP), HUD, HMDA

National

Micro

Foote, et. al. (2008)

Subprime

Panel

Warren Group

Massachusetts

Micro

Coleman, LaCour-Little &
Subprime
Vandell (2008)
Mayer, Pence and
Sherlund (2009)
Adelino, Gerardi and
Willen (2009a); now
forthcoming

Subprime

1987-March 2008

Aggregate
Cross-Section, HMDA, LP
1998-2006
Time Series
First American Core Logic Loan
Loan Level
1/03-6/07 originations
Performance (LP)

Issue Focus
2nd leins; early defaults;
underwriting standards
descriptive; geographic
concentration; different data
sources
Underwriting interacted with
deteriorating economy

20 S&P/Case-Shiller
MSA
MSAs

Price dynamics

National

Micro

Descriptive; comparison across
cohorts; detail on loan traits

Subprime

Loan Level

First American Core Logic Loan 1/05-6/07 originations; tracked
National
Performance (LP)
through 8/08

Micro

Securitization and default

Keys, , et. al. (2009)

Subprime

Loan Level

First American Core Logic Loan
1/01-12/06 originations
Performance (LP)

National

Micro

financial regulation and
securitization

Foote, et. al. (2010)

Prime + Subprime

Loan Level

LPS Applied Analytics

originations through 2008;
good coverage from 2005-on

National

Micro

Double Trigger hypothesis;
subprime defaults before resets

Mian and Sufi (2009)

Subprime

Loan Level

Equifax (originations for
purchase)

1991-2007 originations; tracked
40 MSAs
through 2007

Zip code-level

Onset of subprime defaults; role
of supply vs. demand factors

Elul, et. al. (2010)

Subprime

Loan Level

First American Core Logic Loan
2005-06 originations; tracked
Performance (LP); merged with
through 4/09
Equifax credit panel

National

Micro

Double Trigger hypothesis

Piskorski, Seru and Vig
(2010)

Subprime

Loan Level

Lender Processer Services (LPS; 2005-2006 originations; tracked
National
formerly McDash Analytics)
through 3/08

Micro

Securitization and renegotiation

Keys, et. al. (2010)

Subprime

Loan Level

First American Core Logic Loan
1/01-12/06 originations
Performance (LP)

National

Micro

Securitization and lax screening

Goodman and Smith (2010) Subprime

Loan Level

LPS Applied Analytics

National

Zip code-level

State-level policy effects

Demyanyk & Van Hemmert
Subprime
(2011)

Loan Level

First American Core Logic Loan 2001-2007 originations; tracked
National
Performance (LP)
through 6/08

Micro

Role of underwriting vs.
economic conditions in default

Ben David (2011)

House Prices

Home Sales

Chicago MLS

Chicago

Micro

Role of inflated prices on default

Agarwal, et. al. (2011)

Prime + Subprime

Loan Level

OCC-OTCC Mortgage Metrics

National

Micro

Role of securitization in workouts
43

1991-2008 originations

2005-2008
originations tracked between
October 2007-May 2009

Appendix Table 1 Cont'd: Existing Literature--Data, Coverage, Issue Focus
Select Published Papers on Mortgage Performance From 2008(1) to 2014(2)
Data Coverage Characteristics
Paper

Sector

Type

Source

Time Period

Geographic
Coverage

2000-2009 originations; tracked
National
though 2009
1997-2008(1) originations;
20 MSAs
tracked through 2009(2)

Aggregation

Issue Focus

Capozza and Van Order
(2011)

Subprime

Loan Level

Mortgage Bankers Association

Kau, et. al. (2011)

Subprime

Loan Level

Black Box Logic LLC

Smith (2011)

Prime + Subprime

Loan Level

LPS Applied Analytics

2001-2008 originations

Florida

Micro

LaCour-Little, Calhoun and
Prime + Subprime
Yu (2011)

Loan Level

HMDA

2001-2008 originations

National

State and Zip codelaggregation

Estimate default model; role of
underwriting
Default model; role of borrower
and loan traits
Documents stability of FICO
scores
impute rise of simultaneous
second mortgages

Keys, Sufi and Vig (2012)

Prime + Subprime

Loan Level

Lender Processer Services (LPS;
2001-2006 originations
formerly McDash Analytics)

National

Micro

Securitization and screening

Rose (2013)

Subprime

Loan Level

Guiso, Sapienza and
Zingales (2013)

Household
Borrowers

Survey

Adelino, Gerardi and
Willen (2013)

Borrowers-Prime +
Subprime

Loan Level

Lender Processer Services (LPS;
2005-2011
formerly McDash Analytics)

National

Micro

Nadauld and Sherland
(2013)

Subprime

Loan Level

First American Core Logic Loan
1997-2007 originations
Performance (LP)

National

Zip code-level

Aschberg, et. al. (2013)

Prime + Subprime

NA

NA

macro-type model

match moments

NA

Jiang, Nelson and Vytacl
(2014)

Proprietary—not
fully revealed

Loan Level

Single mortgage bank
(anonymous)

1/04-2/08 originations; tracked
National
through 1/09

Bhandwaj & Sengupta
(2014)

Subprime

Loan Level

First American Core Logic Loan
2000-2006 originations
Performance (LP)

National

Micro

compares early vs. late cohorts;
focus on role of macro effects

Bubb & Kaufmann (2014)

Borrowers—Prime +
Loan Level
Subprime

Lender Processing Services
Applied Analytics (LPS)

2003-2009 originations

National

Micro

Moral hazard and securitization

Agarwal, et. al. (2014)

Subprime

Loan Level

HMDA

2005-2007 originations

Chicago

Zip code-level

Moulton (2014)

Subprime

Loan Level

HMDA

2006-07 originations; tracked
through 2008

National

Census tract-level

First American Core Logic Loan 2002-2006 originations; tracked
10 MSAs
Performance (LP)
through October 2008
Chicago Booth Kellogg School
12/08-9/10 survey waves
National
Financial Trust Index

Micro
Micro

Micro
NA

Micro

Role of underwriting, loan traits,
and aggregate location traits
Imputes strategic defaults from
survey answers
Documents loan modification
types; estimates model of lender
behavior
supply side effects through
lower costs and screening
incentives
dynamic simulation model of
spillovers onto prime market from
subprime default
role of 3rd party originations
(outside brokers) vs. bank
originations in default

Impact of predatory lending
legislation in IL
RD on affordable housing goal
targets

44

Appendix Table 2. Sample Coverage
Akron, OH
Atlantic City, NJ
Bakersfield, CA
Baltimore-Towson, MD
Barnstable Town, MA
Bellingham, WA
Boston-Cambridge-Quincy, MA-NH
Bremerton-Silverdale, WA
Bridgeport-Stamford-Norwalk, CT
Cape Coral-Fort Myers, FL
Carson City, NV
Chicago-Naperville-Joliet, IL-IN-WI
Chico, CA
Cincinnati-Middletown, OH-KY-IN
Cleveland-Elyria-Mentor, OH
Colorado Springs, CO
Columbus, OH
Corvallis, OR
Dayton, OH
Deltona-Daytona Beach-Ormond Beach, FL
Denver-Aurora, CO
Detroit-Warren-Livonia, MI
Eugene-Springfield, OR
Flagstaff, AZ
Fort Collins-Loveland, CO
Fort Walton Beach-Crestview-Destin, FL
Fresno, CA
Gainesville, FL
Grand Junction, CO
Hanford-Corcoran, CA
Hartford-West Hartford-East Hartford, CT
Honolulu, HI
Jacksonville, FL
Kingston, NY
Lakeland-Winter Haven, FL
Las Vegas-Paradise, NV
Los Angeles-Long Beach-Santa Ana, CA
Madera, CA
Medford, OR
Memphis, TN-MS-AR
Merced, CA
Miami-Fort Lauderdale-Miami Beach, FL
Modesto, CA
Mount Vernon-Anacortes, WA
Napa, CA
Naples-Marco Island, FL
New Haven-Milford, CT
NYC-Northern NJ-Long Island, NY-NJ-PA

Start
1997q2
1998q1
1993q1
1997q2
1994q1
1995q1
1993q1
1994q1
1993q1
1998q1
1996q1
1997q1
1995q1
1997q1
1997q1
1998q1
1997q2
1997q1
1997q1
1998q1
1998q1
1998q1
1995q1
1996q1
1998q1
1996q2
1993q1
1998q1
1998q2
1996q1
1993q1
1997q4
1996q1
1994q1
1998q1
1995q1
1993q1
1994q1
1995q1
1998q2
1993q1
1997q1
1993q1
1996q1
1993q1
1998q1
1993q1
1998q1

End
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3

Norwich-New London, CT
Ocala, FL
Oklahoma City, OK
Olympia, WA
Orlando, FL
Oxnard-Thousand Oaks-Ventura, CA
Palm Bay-Melbourne-Titusville, FL
Panama City-Lynn Haven, FL
Pensacola-Ferry Pass-Brent, FL
Peoria, IL
Phoenix-Mesa-Scottsdale, AZ
Pittsfield, MA
Portland-Vancouver-Beaverton, OR-WA
Port St. Lucie-Fort Pierce, FL
Prescott, AZ
Providence-New Bedford-Fall River, RI-MA
Punta Gorda, FL
Redding, CA
Reno-Sparks, NV
Riverside-San Bernardino-Ontario, CA
Sacramento--Arden-Arcade--Roseville, CA
Salem, OR
Salinas, CA
San Diego-Carlsbad-San Marcos, CA
San Francisco-Oakland-Fremont, CA
San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara, CA
San Luis Obispo-Paso Robles, CA
Santa Barbara-Santa Maria-Goleta, CA
Santa Cruz-Watsonville, CA
Santa Rosa-Petaluma, CA
Sarasota-Bradenton-Venice, FL
Seattle-Tacoma-Bellevue, WA
Spokane, WA
Springfield, MA
Springfield, OH
Stockton, CA
Tallahassee, FL
Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL
Tucson, AZ
Tulsa, OK
Vallejo-Fairfield, CA
Vero Beach, FL
Visalia-Porterville, CA
Washington-Arlington-Alexandria, DC-VA-MD
Worcester, MA
Yakima, WA
Yuba City-Marysville, CA
Yuma, AZ

Start
1993q1
1996q1
1998q2
1995q1
1997q1
1993q1
1998q1
1996q2
1998q1
1996q3
1995q1
1993q1
1993q4
1998q1
1995q1
1993q1
1998q1
1995q1
1995q1
1993q1
1993q1
1994q1
1993q1
1993q1
1993q1
1993q1
1994q1
1993q1
1993q1
1993q1
1998q1
1993q1
1995q1
1993q1
1997q2
1993q1
1998q1
1997q1
1995q1
1998q2
1993q1
1997q1
1993q1
1998q1
1993q1
1994q1
1995q1
1996q1

End
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3
2012q3

45

Appendix Table 3. Spatial Concentration of Borrower Types, MSA Level, Aggregate Across Years

46

