NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF TRADE AND INTERNATIONAL LABOR MOBILITY
Sebastian Galiani
Gustavo Torrens
Working Paper 21274
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21274

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2015, Revised August 2018

Previously circulated as "The Political Economy of Trade and Labor Mobility in a Ricardian
World." We appreciate the suggestions made by participants in presentations given at
Georgetown University, Trento Summer School 2015, UECE Lisbon Meetings 2015, SAET
Meetings 2016, Banco de Mexico, and Berlin Workshop on New Insights into Political Economy
2016. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Sebastian Galiani and Gustavo Torrens. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Political Economy of Trade and International Labor Mobility
Sebastian Galiani and Gustavo Torrens
NBER Working Paper No. 21274
June 2015, Revised August 2018
JEL No. F13,F22
ABSTRACT
We explore the political economy of trade and migration policies in several models of
international trade. We show that in a Ricardian world, free trade and no international labor
mobility is a Nash equilibrium outcome, but free trade and free international labor mobility is not.
The result holds under different assumptions about the set of goods, preferences and the number
of countries. An analogous result also holds in multifactor economies such as: a version of the
standard two-sector Heckscher-Ohlin model, the Ricardo-Vinner specific factors model, and a
three-sector model with a non-tradeable sector. We also study three extensions of our model in
which free trade and at least partial labor mobility is a Nash equilibrium outcome. One extension
introduces increasing returns to scale. Another an extractive elite. Finally, we allow the recipient
country to charge an immigration fee in the form of an income tax and distribute the proceeds
among domestic workers, which induces a Pareto improvement for the global economy.

Sebastian Galiani
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
3105 Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
galiani@econ.umd.edu
Gustavo Torrens
Department of Economics
Wylie Hall, 100 S Woodland Ave
Bloomington, IN 47405-7104
India
gtorrens@indiana.edu

in advanced and low-income countries differ by a factor of 10 or more (see, for example, Rodrik 2002,
and Freeman 2006); which suggests that restrictions on labor mobility could be the largest distortion
in the world economy (see, for example, Clements 2011). Moreover, there are at least two good reasons to study the political economy of trade and migration policies simultaneously rather than as two
independent policies.
First, theoretical trade models explicitly or implicitly imply that international trade and factor mobility could be complements and/or substitutes. If they are complements, why do we observe harsher
restrictions to international migrations than to international trade? If they are substitutes, why do we
observe illegal migration between countries that engage in free trade? Second, countries can potentially
engage in free international trade and labor mobility, impose trade and migration restrictions, choose
a combination of free trade and migration restrictions or vice versa. Indeed, as Brexit reminds us, the
political economy of trade and migration cannot be simply mapped into a one-dimension policy decision
(say, more, or less globalization). On the contrary, it seems that the pro-Brexit coalition favors free trade,
but opposes free labor mobility.1
We develop an international political economy model for the determination of trade and labor mobility
policies. First, all countries simultaneously decide on their trade and migration policies with the aim of
maximizing the wellbeing of domestic workers. In order to keep things as simple as possible, we assume
that only a fraction of the labor endowment of each country is mobile and that trade and migration policies
can adopt only two values: free trade and no trade, and free labor mobility and no labor mobility.2 In
the case of two countries, no trade is equivalent to complete autarky and no labor mobility implies that
mobile workers must stay in their countries of origin. In the multi-country case, each country must select
its trade and labor mobility partners. In other words, the trade policy of any given country can be
described as the set of countries with which that country agrees to engage in free trade. The situation
with respect to migration policy is analogous. Second, mobile workers decide where they will reside and
work. Finally, countries engage in trade, production and consumption.
We consider two families of economies (and several variations within each family): Ricardian
economies and factor proportions models. For all these models, we obtain a rather negative result.
We show that, although it is always possible to find conditions under which free trade and no labor
mobility is a Nash equilibrium outcome of the political economy game, free trade and free labor mobility
is never a Nash equilibrium outcome. From a positive point of view, this may help to explain why international labor markets are much less integrated than international markets of commodities are. However,
this suggests a significant misallocation of resources in the global economy as well as a substantial failure
of international institutions. From a normative point of view, this result could also be judged undesirable
1
2

See, for example, https://voxeu.org/article/brexit-four-freedoms-and-indivisibility-dogma
In Section 5 we relax this assumption.

2

based on fairness considerations. For this reason, we also explore several ways of overcoming this negative
result. In particular, we show that if quantitative migration restrictions are replaced by a migration fee
implemented as an income tax on migrants whose revenue is distributed among domestic workers in the
recipient country, workers all over the world will be better off. Thus, free trade and free labor mobility
will become a Nash equilibrium outcome.

1.1
1.1.1

The challenge of achieving free trade and international labor mobility
Ricardian economies

In a Ricardian economy, trade is not a source of conflict because everybody gains when countries specialize
in their comparative advantages and engage in international trade. Thus, free trade and no labor mobility
is a Nash equilibrium outcome of the political economy game that we studied. In a Ricardian world, free
trade does not produce real wage equalization because countries use different production technologies.
As a consequence, if countries that engage in trade also allow free labor mobility, workers will move from
poor to rich countries until real wages are equalized. Then, under free trade, labor mobility reduces wages
in rich countries and, hence, workers from rich countries prefer to block migration flows. Free trade and
free labor mobility is not a Nash equilibrium outcome of the political economy game.
We show that this logic applies not only to a simple Ricardian model, but also to more complex
Ricardian economies, including those with a continuum of goods (as in Dornbusch, Fischer and Samuelson,
1977), non-homothetic preferences (as in Matsuyama, 2000) and multiple countries (as in Eaton and
Kortum, 2002). In a nutshell, we confirm the basic results obtained using the simple Ricardian model
under several variations in the model’s assumptions (set of goods, preferences, and set of countries). For
each Ricardian model, we also deduce the conditions under which free trade induces partial convergence,
full divergence and a reversal of fortune in terms of the well-being of workers in each country. In all
cases, free trade and free labor mobility lead to full convergence, but this is never a Nash equilibrium
of the political game. Thus, in a Ricardian world, the lack of convergence in levels of well-being across
countries can be attributed to an international political equilibrium that blocks free labor mobility.
1.1.2

Factor proportions models

A Ricardian world is by no means the unique economic environment in which free trade does not preclude
international migrations, but political interactions lead to no labor mobility. Several multifactor models
produce analogous results. We study three of them: a version of the standard two-sector HeckscherOhlin model, the Ricardo-Vinner specific factors model, and a three-sector model (two tradeable goods
and one non-tradeable good).3 In a two country Heckscher-Ohlin model with country-specific total factor
3

See, Galiani, Heymann and Magud (2017), Galiani, Schofield and Torrens (2014), and Galiani and Somaini (2018).

3

productivity, free trade does not induce full wage equalization, which opens the door to migration flows.
However, free trade and free labor mobility is never a Nash equilibrium outcome. The reason is that
domestic workers in the country with high real wages under free trade prefer to block free labor mobility
because the flow of immigrants would reduce their real wages. We also show that in a Heckscher-Ohlin
economy is more complicated than in a Ricardian economy to support free trade and no labor mobility
as a Nash equilibrium outcome. Only when the country with high real wages under free trade is fully
specialized in the non-labor intensive good (which requires that the countries are endowed with very
dissimilar relative factors endowments), workers in both countries are willing to support free trade.
In a Ricardo-Vinner specific factors economy, free trade and free labor mobility is not a Nash equilibrium outcome either. Once again, under free trade, real wages decrease with the size of the labor force,
inducing workers in the country with high real wages to favor blocking labor mobility. In order to keep
things as simple as possible, we assume that both industries are equally labor-intensive, which makes
free trade and no labor mobility a Nash equilibrium outcome. On the contrary, if industries differ in
their labor intensities, workers in the country with a comparative advantage in the non-labor-intensive
industry might prefer to block free trade.
Finally, we explore trade and migration policies in a model with three sectors (two tradeable and one
non-tradeable) and three factors of production (e.g., capital, natural resources and labor). This model
allows us to capture a different channel through which workers are in favor of free trade, namely, the
role of the non-tradeable sector. In the poor country, which specializes in the natural resource-intensive
good, workers are employed in the non-tradeable sector. They support free trade because it increases the
demand of the non-tradeable good and, hence, wages. In the rich country, which is diversified, workers are
employed in the capital-intensive manufacturing sector and in the non-tradeable sector. They support
free trade because it expands the demands for the manufactured good and the non-tradeable good,
inducing higher wages. Thus, free trade and no labor mobility is a Nash equilibrium outcome. Regarding
international labor mobility, workers in the poor country clearly support free labor mobility because they
want to be able to migrate to the rich country. Even if some workers are immobile, they will also support
free labor mobility since a reduction in the labor force of the poor country will increase wages and improve
the terms of trade. However, workers in the rich country prefer to block immigration because any increase
in the domestic labor force reduces their wages and deteriorates the country’s terms of trade. Thus, free
trade and free labor mobility is not a Nash equilibrium outcome.
1.1.3

Inducing free trade and free labor mobility

We also study three alternative ways of overcoming this negative result, that is, we explore changes in
the economic and political environment as well as in the set of policy instruments available, that make

4

trade and labor mobility a Nash equilibrium outcome.
First, we introduce differentiated products, monopolistic competition and increasing returns to scale,
à la Krugman (1979) and Helpman (1981), in one of the tradeable sectors of a simple Ricardian economy.
In this environment, workers from a scarcely populated rich country may prefer to allow migration flows,
at least for a certain range of the population, because a bigger labor force induces an expansion of the
number of varieties produced and a reduction in the price of each variety. Indeed, we deduce conditions
under which free trade and some, but not full, free international labor mobility is a Nash equilibrium
outcome of the political economy game. This may help to explain why immigration policies in the U.S.
were very liberal until the end of the 19th century, but then became much more restrictive in the early
20th century.
A second way of generating free labor mobility is to introduce an elite that extracts income from
workers as in Acemoglu and Robinson (2012). In particular, we show that, if the extractive elite in the
rich country is powerful enough, then free labor mobility is possible. The reason for this is that, although
the extractive elite in the rich country is hurt by the reduction in wages induced by an inflow of workers,
immigrants are also a new source of income for the elite (more workers to extract from). Hence, if the
second effect outweighs the first one and the elite is relatively powerful, then the rich country will permit
an inflow of workers. Trade, however, is not a source of conflict between workers and the elite because,
in a Ricardian world, everybody gains from trade. In other words, workers in a rich country only care
about wages, while the extractive elite cares about total labor income. This produces a conflict of interest
between workers and the elite in regard to labor mobility but not with regard to trade policy.
Finally, we introduce an immigration fee. In particular, we assume that the recipient country can
charge an income tax to immigrant workers and pay transfers to domestic workers. Under free trade, the
flow of immigrants has an ambiguous effect on the wellbeing of workers from the rich country because,
on the one hand, it reduces real wages in the rich country, but, on the other hand, it increases the
revenue from immigration fees. Moreover, we find conditions under which the second effect dominates
the first one and, therefore, workers from the rich country are better off charging an immigration fee that
induces positive migration flows rather than completely blocking migration. Mobile workers in the poor
country are always better off if they can migrate to the rich country, while immobile workers from the
poor country benefit from the rise in real wages caused by the outflow of workers. Thus, free trade and
international labor mobility subject to a positive, but not prohibitive immigration fee could be supported
as a Nash equilibrium outcome.

5

1.2

Related literature

As we have already mentioned, the economic and political economy literature has devoted much less
attention to migration than to international trade in both theoretical and empirical terms (Facchini,
2004, and Facchini, Mayda and Mishra, 2007). Nevertheless, there is a very interesting body of literature
on labor mobility, migration policies and the political economy of migration. First of all, there is a wellestablished body of literature on international factor mobility and, in particular, on the determinants
and effects of migration (see, among others, Mundell 1957, Markusen 1983, Grossman 1983, and Wong
1995).
Second, several works have shed light on the crucial role played by international labor mobility
in the convergence of living standards between Europe and America during the 19th and early 20th
centuries (e.g., Taylor and Williamson, 1997, O’Rourke and Sinnott, 2003, O’Rourke, 2004, and Hatton
and Williamson, 2005).4 These studies suggest that international labor mobility has a strong influence on
cross-country convergence of levels of well-being. Numerous authors have also documented the fact that
migration policies became much more restrictive in the 20th century and that, nowadays, international
labor markets are much less integrated than international markets of commodities are (e.g., O’Rourke,
2004 and Hatton and Williamson, 2007, Rodrik 2002, Freeman 2006 and Clements 2011).5
Third, there is an empirical literature that investigates the effects of several shocks that affected
migration flows on wages and employment of domestic workers. See, among others, Nickell and Saleheen
(2009) for a recent evaluation of the literature and new estimates for Great Britain. Unfortunately, these
works focus on relatively small shocks in migration flows and, therefore, they are not necessarily informative on the effects of unrestricted mass migration. Indeed, in a Ricardian economy with a finite number
of goods, there is a simple theoretical argument that suggests that under free trade small migration flows
may have no effect on wages, while free labor mobility has a significant impact on wages (for details,
4

Taylor and Williamson (1997) find that international real wage dispersion declined by 28% from 1870 to 1910, but

that without the mass migrations that occurred during this period, wage dispersion would have increased by 7%. In the
same vein, O’Rourke (2004) reports that wages rose in emigration countries during the late 19th and early 20th centuries,
converging with countries of immigration (see also Hatton and Williamson, 2005). O’Rourke and Sinnott (2003) argue that
”One hundred years ago mass emigration raised living standards significantly in countries such as Ireland, Italy and Sweden,
enabling them to converge on the core countries of the day, Britain and the U.S. Indeed, mass migration can account for as
much as 70% of the convergence in living standards worldwide which occurred during the late 19th century.”
5
O’Rourke (2004) and Hatton and Williamson (2007) show that liberal policies on immigration during the 19th century
came to an end in the early 20th century, when many popular destination countries began imposing severe restrictions on
immigration. Moreover, they document that these restrictions have remained in place even after many restrictions on the
movement of goods have been eliminated. Freeman (2006) examines the degree of international economic integration in
labor compared with other factors and concludes that the labor market is the least developed facet of globalization. In line
with this view, see also Rodrik (2002) and Clements (2011).

6

see section 3.2). There is also evidence that large trade shocks have significant effects on wages and
employment (see, among others, Autor, Dorn and Hanson 2016), suggesting that large migration flows
also produce large effects on wages. Indeed, in a Heckscher-Ohlin model with country-specific total factor
productivity, the effect of trade and labor mobility on real wages is greater than the effect of trade alone
(see, section 4.1).
Fourth, although the political economy of labor mobility has not been fully explored, several works
have discussed different economic and political determinants of migration policies. Foreman-Peck (1992)
develops a simple political economy model of factor mobility focused on the receiving country. He
shows that if the government of the receiving country gives a great deal of weight to the interests
of landowners (workers) and if land and labor are complements, then immigration policies will tend
to be open (restrictive). Along the same lines, Benhabib (1996) shows that, under majority voting,
immigrants with skills that are complementary with those of the median voter will be selected. Razin
and Sadka (1999) study the political economy of immigration when the receiving country has a payas-you-go pension system, and Razin, Sadka, and Swagell (2000) investigate how unskilled immigration
affects redistribution policies in the host country. Hatton and Williamson (2007) emphasize that trade is
based on comparative advantage, while migration is based on absolute advantage. They also mention the
spread of democracy and the decline of empires as an explanation for the change in migration policies
in the 20th century. Mayda (2007), in line with our multifactor model with a non-tradeable sector,
attributes the observed differences in attitudes toward trade and immigration (today, people are more
pro-trade than pro-immigration) to the influence exerted by individuals working in non-tradeable sectors.
However, to the best of our knowledge, there is no formal international political economy model that
explains the existence of very few restrictions on international trade in conjunction with severe restrictions
on international labor mobility. In this paper we develop a simple but formal model of trade and labor
mobility policies.
Finally, our extension with an immigration fee used to finance transfers to domestic workers is related
to and Eichenberger and Stadelmann (2017), who explore labor mobility with residency fees, and Posner
and Weyl (2018), who propose a system for democratizing immigration visas that could generate benefits
for unskilled workers in developed countries.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents an international political economy
model for the determination of trade and labor mobility policies. Sections 3 and 4 characterize the
equilibrium of the model for different Ricardian economies and for factor proportions models, respectively.
Section 5 develops three extensions in which free trade and at least some labor mobility is a Nash
equilibrium. Section 5.1 introduces monopolistic competition, differentiated products and economies of
scale in one of the sectors of the simple Ricardian model. Section 5.2 introduces an extractive elite in
the political economy model. Section 5.3 introduces migration fees. Section 6 concludes.
7

2

A simple model of trade and labor mobility policies

In this section we present a simple model of international trade and labor mobility. All the models in
the paper are particular cases of this framework.

2.1

Countries, endowments, technologies and preferences

Consider a world integrated by J countries indexed by j = 1, ...,J. Each country
is characterized by

j
j
j
j
its labor endowment L̄ , its endowment of other factors F̄ = F̄1 , ..., F̄F and technologies for the
production of a set of goods Z. Let Qjz indicate the aggregate production of good z ∈ Z in country j

j
and Ljz (Ff,z
) the amount of labor (factor f ) employed in industry z in country j. All agents have the

same utility function u cj , where cj is the consumption plan of an agent in country j.

2.2

Factor mobility

Only a fraction m ∈ [0, 1] of the labor endowment of each country is mobile at zero cost. The rest of
the labor endowment and all other factors are completely immobile. Let JM be a partition of J. A
set JM ∈ JM is a subset of countries that allow labor mobility among them, but do not allow it with
the rest of the world. Then, for each j ∈ JM , the labor force of country j, denoted by Lj , is given by
P
Lj = (1 − m) L̄j + θ j m i∈JM L̄i , where θ j is the proportion of the mobile labor force in JM that selects
P
to locate in country j. Naturally, θ j ∈ [0, 1] and i∈JM θ i = 1. Mobile workers locate in the country

in which they get a higher utility. Thus, choice-of-location decisions come from selecting θ i i∈J in
M
P
order to maximize i∈JM θ i v i , where v i is the indirect utility of a worker located in country i. Although

all workers located in country j will earn the same utility v j , not all workers originally from country j

necessarily get the same utility. For this reason, we will denote by v j,m (v j,im ) the indirect utility of a
mobile (immobile) worker originally from country j.

2.3

Trade

Let ZT ⊂ Z be the set of tradeable goods and ZN ⊂ Z the set of non-tradeable goods. Logically,
ZT ∪ ZN = Z. Let JT be a partition of J. A set JT ∈ JT is a subset of countries that allow trade among
themselves, but do not allow it with the rest of the world. pjz denotes the price of good z in country j
and Czj indicates
the aggregate
consumption of good z in country j. Then, for z ∈ ZT , pjz = pz for j ∈ JT


P
and j∈JT pz Qjz − Czj = 0, and for z ∈ ZN , Qjz = Czj .

8

2.4

Politics

In each country there is a government which selects trade and migration policies in order to maximize the
welfare of its native worker (mobile and immobile workers of the country). When we refer to the “trade
and labor mobility policies” of a country, we are talking about whether the country allows international
trade and labor mobility with each of the other countries in the world or not. When we refer to the
“welfare of native workers”, we are saying that the government of each country selects its trade and labor
mobility policies with the aim of maximizing the utilitarian social welfare function
WGj = mv j,m + (1 − m) v j,im
that gives exactly the same weight to every native-born worker (mobile and immobile) and no weight
at all to foreign immigrants. The implicit assumption is that potential foreign immigrants do not have
political power to influence domestic decisions on trade and labor mobility.
The timing of events is as follows: 1) Governments simultaneously determine trade and labor mobility
policies. 2) Mobile workers choose their location. 3) Given the labor force of each country, countries
produce, trade and consume.

2.5

Equilibrium

We define the equilibrium as a combination of market equilibrium6 for the economy and Nash equilibrium
for policy decisions. Formally, an equilibrium is: (i) a pair of partitions of the set of countries (JT , JM ); (ii)

for each (JT , JM ), a distribution of the labor force into countries Lj j∈J ; and (iii) for each (JT , JM ) and



j
Lj j∈J , prices and an allocation of the labor force and other factors to sectors pjz , Ljz , Ff,z
z∈Z,f ∈F,j∈J

such that:





1. Collective decisions: For all j ∈ J, WGj (JT , JM ) ≥ WGj JjT , JjM for all JjT , JjM obtained by a
unilateral deviation of j ′ s policy decisions from (JT , JM ).

2. Labor mobility: For each pair of partitions (JT , JM ), Lj
be better off by changing his or her location.
3. Production, trade and consumption: For each Lj
librium.
6





j∈J

such that each mobile worker cannot



j
j
j
,
p
,
L
,
F
z
z
f,z
j∈J

z∈Z,f ∈F,j∈J

is a market equi-

For homogenous goods, market equilibrium equates with perfect competition, while in the case of differentiated goods,

it equates with monopolistic competition.

9

3

Trade and labor mobility policies in Ricardian economies

This section studies international trade and labor mobility in a Ricardian world.

3.1

A simple Ricardian economy

Consider an economy with two countries (J = 2), two tradeable goods (ZT = {1, 2}) and one nontradeable good (ZN = {3}). Production functions are Qjz = Ljz /ajL,z , where ajL,z > 0 is the unit labor
requirement in industry z ∈ Z = ZT ∪ ZN in country j ∈ J. Let Az = a2L,z /a1L,z and assume A1 > A2 ,
i.e., country 1 has a comparative advantage in good 1. Let L̄j and Lj be the labor endowment and the
labor force of country j, respectively. Onlya fraction
m ∈ [0, 1] of L̄j is mobile. All agents have the same


P
P
preferences, given by u cj = z∈Z αz ln cjz , with αz > 0 and z∈Z αz = 1. Let wj and pjz denote

the wage rate and the
country j, respectively. Thus, the indirect utility function is
 priceof good z in P
P
j
j
j
v = C + z∈Z αz ln w /pz , where C = z∈Z αz ln (αz ).
Lemma 1 characterizes the effects of trade and labor mobility on the relative well-being of workers

in both countries. Let v j (λT , λM ) be the utility of a worker located in country j, where λT = 1 if
JT = {{1, 2}} and λT = 0, otherwise, and λM = 1 if JM = {{1, 2}} and λM = 0, otherwise. Thus,
λT = 1 indicates that both countries accept free trade, while λT = 0 indicates that at least one country
refuses to trade and, hence, both countries operate under autarky. λM = 1 indicates that both countries
accept free labor mobility, while λM = 0 indicates that at least one country does not accept free labor
mobility and, hence, mobile workers are forced to remain in their own country.


P
Lemma 1 (simple Ricardian economy). Let T j = − z∈Z αz ln ajL,z be the average productivity


1 > T 2 . Define ∆ = (α + α ) ln α L̄2 /α L̄1 + T 1 − T 2 , where T j =
of country
j
and
assume
T
1
2
1
2
N
N
N


j
−α3 ln aL,3 is the productivity of country j in the production of non-tradeable goods. Suppose that
−α3
α1 (L̄2 +mL̄1 )
L̄2
A1 > α (1−m)L̄1 > (A3 ) α1 +α2 > αα1 (1−m)
> A2 .
1
2
L̄
+m
L̄
2
)
2(
1. If ∆ > T 1 − T 2 , then trade produces divergence in real wages, but trade and labor mobility undo the
divergence, inducing complete convergence. Formally: v 1 (1, 0) − v 2 (1, 0) > v 1 (0, 0) − v 2 (0, 0) >
v 1 (1, 1) − v 2 (1, 1) = 0.
2. If 0 < ∆ < T 1 − T 2 , then trade produces convergence in real wages, and trade and labor mobility
produces complete convergence. Formally: v 1 (0, 0) − v 2 (0, 0) > v 1 (1, 0) − v 2 (1, 0) > v 1 (1, 1) −
v 2 (1, 1) = 0.
3. If ∆ < 0, then trade produces a reversal of fortune but trade and labor mobility undo this reversal
inducing complete convergence in real wages. Formally: v 1 (0, 0) − v 2 (0, 0) > v 1 (1, 1) − v 2 (1, 1) =
0 > v 1 (1, 0) − v 2 (1, 0). Proof: see Appendix A.1. 
10

Under free trade, labor mobility induces complete convergence in real wages. The reason for this is
that mobile workers migrate from the poor country to the rich country until real wages are the same
in both places. There are two implicit assumptions behind this result. First, there must be a sufficient number of mobile workers. Otherwise, even if all mobile workers in the poor country migrate
to the rich country, real wages will not be fully equalized. Second, real wages must be equalized be
fore the rich country starts producing both tradeable goods. A1 > α1 L̄2 + mL̄1 /α2 (1 − m) L̄1 >
−α3

(A3 ) α1 +α2 > α1 (1 − m) L̄2 /α2 L̄1 + mL̄2 > A2 ensures that both conditions are satisfied. Trade

alone has a positive effect on the well-being of everybody, but an ambiguous effect in terms of convergence. While, under autarky, differences in real wages depend only on relative aggregate productivity
(real wages are higher in country 1 when T 1 > T 2 ), under free trade, they depend on relative la-

bor abundance, expenditure shares and relative levels of productivity in the non-tradeable sector, but
not on relative levels of productivity in the tradeable sector (real wages are higher in country 1 when


∆ = (α1 + α2 ) ln α1 L̄2 /α2 L̄1 + TN1 − TN2 > 0). That is, under free trade, country 1 is relatively richer

than country 2 if it is relatively labor-scarce, it specializes in a good with a relatively high expenditure
share and it is relatively more productive in the non-tradeable sector. Indeed, it is even possible for
trade to produce a reversal of fortunes if the country with higher aggregate productivity is relatively
labor-abundant, it specializes in a good with a low expenditure share and productivity differences in the
non-tradeable sector are small.
Let WGj (λT , λM ) denotes the social welfare function of country j when trade and migration policies

are (λT , λM ). Proposition 1 characterizes the political equilibrium.
Proposition 1 (simple Ricardian economy).
α1 (1−m)L̄2
α2 (L̄1 +mL̄2 )

Suppose that A1 >

α1 (L̄2 +mL̄1 )
α2 (1−m)L̄1

−α3

> (A3 ) α1 +α2 >

> A2 , T 1 > T 2 and ∆ 6= 0. Then, the trade and labor mobility game has three Nash

equilibrium outcomes: (i) neither trade nor labor mobility; (ii) no trade and free labor mobility; and (iii)
free trade and no labor mobility.7 Moreover:
1. WG1 (1, 0) > WG1 (0, 1) = WG1 (0, 0), i.e., for country 1, free trade and no labor mobility is better than
no trade and free labor mobility or no trade and no labor mobility;
2.

7



WG2 (1, 0) , WG2 (0, 1) > WG2 (0, 0), while WG2 (1, 0) > WG2 (0, 1) if and only if:



A1 α2 L̄1
α1 ln
> m T1 − T2 ,
2
α1 L̄

(1)

Note that some of the Nash equilibrium outcomes can be reached using different Nash equilibrium strategy profiles. For

example, the outcome free trade and no labor mobility can be reached by both countries accepting trade and blocking free
labor mobility or by both countries accepting trade and only the rich country under free trade blocking free labor mobility.
The same applies to all the propositions in the paper.

11

In other words, for country 2, free trade and no labor mobility and no trade and free labor mobility
are better than no trade and no labor mobility, while free trade and no labor mobility are better
than no trade and free labor mobility when productivity differences are not too large. Proof: see
Appendix A.1. 
No trade and no labor mobility is a Nash equilibrium outcome because if one country decides to isolate
itself, there is nothing that the other country can do to change the political equilibrium. This is a very
unlikely equilibrium, however. In fact, free trade and no labor mobility is also a Nash equilibrium outcome,
and it is strictly preferred to complete isolation by both countries.8 No trade and free labor mobility
is also a Nash equilibrium outcome. If one country decides to restrict trade, free trade is impossible
no matter what policy is chosen by the other country. In such circumstances, domestic workers in the
rich country and immobile workers in the poor country do not worry about immigration because real
wages are fully determined by domestic productivity and do not depend on labor endowments. Mobile
workers in the poor country are eager to migrate to the rich country because productivity and, hence, real
wages are higher there. For the rich country, this equilibrium outcome is always dominated by free trade
and no labor mobility. For the poor country, the comparison between the two equilibria is ambiguous
(condition (1)). On the one hand, free trade generates gains from trade for all citizens. On the other
hand, free labor mobility generates an increase in real wages for mobile workers equal to the aggregate
productivity differences between the countries. Note, however, that no trade and free labor mobility is
not a robust equilibrium outcome. For example, if workers in the rich country have a slight aversion to
immigration, then no trade and free labor mobility ceases to be a Nash equilibrium outcome. Finally,
free trade and free labor mobility is not a Nash equilibrium outcome. Under free trade, domestic workers
in a rich country (a labor-scarce country that specializes in the production of tradeable goods with a high
expenditure share and with high productivity in the non-tradeable sector) are opposed to labor mobility
because the flow of immigrants would reduce their real wages. Proposition 1, in conjunction with Lemma
1, suggests that part of the lack of convergence in real wages among countries can be attributed to a
political equilibrium that allows trade but bans migration.
8

Bagwell and Staiger (1999) study a two-country game in which governments simultaneously select their tariffs. They

show that Nash equilibrium tariffs are inefficient because neither government internalizes the negative terms-of-trade effect
that an increase in its import duties has on the other country. They also show how trade agreements could partially resolve
this problem, inducing a Pareto improvement from the Nash equilibrium. We can reinterpret autarky in our model as the
equilibrium without a trade agreement (high tariffs) and free trade as the equilibrium with a trade agreement (low tariffs).

12

A1

4
3.5
3
w1
w2

Free trade and
no labor mobility

2.5
w1
w2

2

=

α1 L¯2
α2 L¯1

w1
w2

1.5
w1
w2

1
0.5
0

−α3
α1 +α2

Free trade and
free labor mobility

α1 L2
α2 L1

= A3

(1−m)L¯1
L¯2 +mL¯1

0

=

L¯1
L¯2

0.5

L1
L2

1

L1
L2

α3

=

α1 α1 +α2
α2 A3

1.5

A2
L¯1 +mL¯2
(1−m)L¯2

2

Fig. 1. Trade and labor mobility in the simple Ricardian economy. Note: a1L,z = 1 for z = 1, 2, 3,
a1L,1 = 4, a1L,2 = 0.50, a1L,3 = 1.25, L̄1 = 1, L̄2 = 1.75, m = 0.75, α1 = α2 = 0.25, and α3 = 0.50.
Next we show that essentially the same results hold for more complex Ricardian Economies. In
particular, we explore three changes in the economy. First, we briefly discuss various changes in the set
of goods. Introducing more tradeable and/or non-tradeable goods does not affect the results regardless
of whether we are dealing with a continuum of goods with exogenous non-tradeable goods or endogenous
non-tradeable goods induced by iceberg transportation costs (Dornbusch, Fischer and Samuelson, 1977).
Second, we consider a Ricardian model with non-homothetic preferences, following Matsuyama (2000).
Finally, we study the determination of trade and labor mobility policies in a multi-country Ricardian
model with a continuum of goods, along the lines of Eaton and Kortum (2002).

3.2

Multiple goods (Dornbusch, Fischer and Samuelson, 1977)

The results obtained in section 3.1 can easily be extended to a finite set of tradeable and non-tradeable
goods (see Appendix A.2 for details). The key complication is that, under free trade, the marginal
tradeable good in the chain of comparative advantage may or may not be produced by both countries.
If, under no labor mobility in the trading equilibrium, each country produces a different set of tradeable
goods, then labor mobility increases real wages in the poor country and decreases them in the rich one.
As a consequence, workers in the rich country are opposed to free labor mobility. Conversely, if, under
no labor mobility in the trading equilibrium, both countries are producing the marginal good, then small
changes in the country-allocation of mobile workers do not affect either the set of goods produced by
each country or real wages in either country. As a consequence, the rich country will be willing to allow
some immigrants to enter. However, once the poor country stops producing the marginal good and that
good’s production is fully relocated to the rich country, real wages in the rich country start decreasing
and, hence, workers in the rich country no longer accept labor mobility. This could explain why several

13

empirical works find that small migration flows have no effect on domestic wages, while historical studies
that focus on mass migration suggest that there are significant effects on real wages and convergence.
A more elegant way of introducing multiple goods is to consider a continuum of goods as in Dornbusch,
Fischer and Samuelson (1977) (see Appendix A.2 for details). Indeed, in this setting, it is always the
case that, under free trade, any reallocation of mobile workers to other countries changes the marginal
industry and, as a consequence, increases real wages in one country and decreases them in the other.
This holds in the case of exogenous non-tradeable goods and also in the case of endogenous non-tradeable
goods induced by iceberg transportation costs. Hence, with a continuum of goods, under free trade, labor
mobility always reduces real wages in the rich country, which implies that workers in the rich country
are opposed to labor mobility.

3.3

Non-homothetic preferences (Matsuyama, 2000)

Until this point, we have assumed Cobb-Douglas preferences. It is well-known that many trade and
development patterns can be explained much more accurately when using non-homothetic preferences.
In order to verify that our results are consistent with those preferences, in this section we consider a
Ricardian economy with non-homothetic preferences as in Matsuyama (2000) (see Appendix A.3 for
details).
Consider an economy with two countries (J = {1, 2}) and a continuum of tradeable goods Z = [0, ∞)
indexed by z (in order to stress the role of non-homothetic preferences we assume that all goods are
tradeable.) Country 1 has a comparative advantage in higher indexed goods. Specifically, assume that
Az = a2L,z /a1L,z is a continuously differentiable strictly increasing function, A0 < 1 and limz→∞ Az > 1.
Each agent owns 1 unit of labor and is either mobile or immobile. Goods come in discrete units and
each agent can consume a unit or no unit of each good. Specifically, the utility function is given by
 R∞
u cj = 0 bz cjz dz, where bz > 0 is the utility weight of good z and cjz = 1 if good z is consumed and
cjz = 0 if it is not. Moreover, bz /ajL,z is a decreasing function of z for each j. Proposition 2 characterizes
the political equilibrium.

R v̄1
Proposition 2 (non-homothetic preferences). Let z̄, v̄ 1 , v̄ 2 be the unique solution to z̄ a1L,z dz =

 R v̄2


R z̄
1 − L̄2 /Az̄ L̄1 + L̄2 , z̄ a1L,z dz = L̄1 /Az̄ L̄1 + L̄2 and 0 a2L,z dz = L̄2 / L̄1 + L̄2 . Suppose that: (i)
R ẑ
Rz
L̄2
L̄2 +mL̄1
> a2 dz > (1−m)
, where Aẑ = 1; (ii) Az > 0 a2L,z dz for z ∈ [zL , zH ], where zL and zH are
L̄1 +L̄2 R 0 L,z
L̄1 +L̄2

Rz


z
given by 0 L a2L,z dz = (1 − m) L̄2 / L̄1 + L̄2 and 0 H a2L,z dz = L̄2 + mL̄1 / L̄1 + L̄2 , respectively; and
R ṽj
(iii) ṽ 1 > ṽ 2 , where 0 ajL,z dz = 1. Then, the trade and labor mobility game has three Nash equilibrium
outcomes: (i) neither trade nor labor mobility; (ii) no trade and free labor mobility; and (iii) free trade
and no labor mobility. Moreover:

14

1. WG1 (1, 0) > WG1 (0, 1) = WG1 (0, 0), i.e., for country 1, free trade and no labor mobility are better
than no trade and free labor mobility or no trade and no labor mobility;
2.



WG2 (1, 0) , WG2 (0, 1) > WG2 (0, 0), while WG2 (1, 0) > WG2 (0, 1) if and only if
R v̄2

ṽ2 bz dz

>m

R ṽ1
ṽ2

bz dz

(2)

i.e., for country 2, free trade and no labor mobility and no trade and free labor mobility are better
than no trade and no labor mobility, while free trade and no labor mobility are better than no trade
and free labor mobility when productivity differences are not too large. Proof: see Appendix A.3.

Proposition 2 suggests that our results continue to hold even when preferences are non-homothetic.
Free trade and free labor mobility is not a Nash equilibrium outcome because workers in the rich country
under free trade prefer to block labor mobility. All other outcomes are Nash equilibria. For the rich
country under autarky (country 1), free trade and no labor mobility prevail over all other possible
equilibrium outcomes. For the poor country under autarky (country 2), free trade and no labor mobility
prevail over no trade and free labor mobility when condition (2) holds, i.e., when the gains from trade
R v̄2
R ṽ1
( ṽ2 bz dz) are greater than the productivity gains under autarky for mobile workers (m ṽ2 bz dz).

3.4

Multiple countries (Eaton and Kortum, 2002)

In this section, we introduce multiple countries. We base our analysis on the Ricardian model developed
by Eaton and Kortum (2002) (see Appendix A.4 for details). Consider an economy with a finite set of
countries, J and a continuum of tradeable goods, ZT = [0, 1]. Assume there are no geographic barriers
that limit the mobility of tradeable goods, i.e., we consider the zero-gravity case. However, as in previous
sections, not all workers are mobile. Let L̄j and Lj be the labor endowment and the labor force of country
j, respectively. Only a fraction m ∈ [0, 1] of L̄j is mobile. Preferences are identical for all agents in every
hR  ρ i 1

ρ
1
country. Specifically, u cj = 0 cjz dz , where σ = (1 − ρ)−1 > 1. Let ajL,z be the unit labor

requirement of good z in country j. Labor productivity is a random
draw
distribution,

 from a Frechet
j aθ
j
j
−T
i.e., the cumulative distribution function of aL,z is given by Pr aL,z ≤ a = 1 − e
, where T j > 0
and θ > σ − 1. These distributions are independent across goods and countries.

Proposition 3 characterizes the political equilibrium when each country can decide to trade or not and
can decide to allow labor mobility or not with each other country. The only restriction that we impose
is that if country i accepts free trade (labor mobility) with country j and country j accepts free trade
(labor mobility) with country k, then country i must accept free trade (labor mobility) with country k.

15


P
P
Proposition 3 (multiple countries). Suppose that mini∈J T i / (1 − m) L̄i ≥ i∈J T i / i∈J L̄i and

assume that T j 6= T k and T j /L̄j 6= T k /L̄k for all j, k ∈ J and j 6= k. Then:

1. No trade and any pattern of labor mobility is a Nash equilibrium outcome. Moreover, among those
equilibria, no trade and complete free labor mobility prevail over the other equilibrium outcomes for
all countries.
2. No labor mobility and any pattern of trade is a Nash equilibrium outcome. Moreover, among those
equilibria, no labor mobility and complete free trade dominates the other equilibrium outcomes for
all countries.
3. WGj (1, 0) > WGj (0, 1) if and only if:

 1
 θ 
P
i
i
1+θ
L̄ 1+θ
T
 > m ln
ln  i∈J 1
 θ
j
j
1+θ
1+θ
(T )
L̄

!

maxi∈J T i
Tj

(3)

In other words, if the above condition holds, then for country j, complete free trade and no labor
mobility are better than complete free factor mobility and no trade.

4. Any pattern of trade policy other than complete autarky and any pattern of labor mobility policy
within the countries that trade with each other other than no labor mobility are not a Nash equilibrium outcome. In particular, complete free trade and any pattern of labor mobility policy other
than no mobility are not a Nash equilibrium outcome. Proof: see Appendix A.4. 
Proposition 3 confirms our main results in a multi-country setting. Although there are many equilibrium outcomes, note that complete free trade is incompatible with any form of labor mobility. The reason
for this is that, under free trade, workers in a relatively rich country always prefer to block labor mobility
from relatively poor countries. This produces a cascade effect. The richest country does not want to
accept labor mobility. Then, the second-richest country also prefers to block labor mobility and so on
until labor mobility is completely blocked. Moreover, it is not possible to divide the world into zones that
allow free trade and free labor mobility within the zone but do not allow trade or labor mobility with the
rest of world. The problem is that each free trade zone is a miniature version of the world under complete
free trade. Hence, the richer countries within the zone will prefer to block intra-zone labor mobility.
Proposition 3 also extends our results concerning how countries rank different equilibrium outcomes.
If there is no trade at all, then all countries will be at least as well off with full labor mobility as
with any other equilibrium outcome that restricts labor mobility. Mobile workers will relocate to the
most productive country in the world, while immobile workers all over the world and all workers in the
most productive country in the world will not be affected by migration flows, since their wages are only
16

determined by the level of productivity. If there is no labor mobility at all, then all countries are better
off with complete free trade rather than with any other equilibrium outcome that imposes restrictions
on trade. This is a standard gains-from-trade argument in a Ricardian model. The larger the set of
countries that engage in free trade, the larger the gains from comparative advantage and trade. Finally,
we can compare free trade and no labor mobility with no trade and free labor mobility. Equation (3)
is the key condition. The left-hand side of it represents the gains for country j associated with moving
from complete autarky to complete free trade. The right-hand side represents the gains for country j
associated with moving from no labor mobility to full labor mobility (all the while under autarky). Note
that, for the richest country in the world under autarky (the country with the highest T j ), condition (3)
always holds because the gains from trade are positive, while labor mobility under autarky does not have
any effect on the country. In general, in this model, gains from trade are relatively high for a sparsely
 1
 θ
populated country with low productivity ( T j 1+θ L̄j 1+θ low), while gains from labor mobility under
autarky are relatively high for a country with low productivity (T j low). Since some very poor countries

are also very populous, it is not clear which countries will prefer free trade and no labor mobility to no
trade and free labor mobility.

4

Trade and labor mobility policies in factor proportions models

In a Ricardian economy, trade policy is not a source of internal conflict because everybody gains when
countries engage in international trade. On the contrary, in a multiple factors economy, potentially, there
are winners and losers from international trade. This section studies trade and migration policies in
several models with multiple factors of production. First, we consider a Heckscher-Ohlin model with
country-specific total factor productivity. Second, we explore a Ricardo-Vinner specific factors model.
Finally, in the context of a single small open economy, Galiani, Schofield and Torrens (2014), Galiani,
Heymann and Magud (2017), and Galiani and Somaini (2018) develop several versions of multi-factors
models, in which workers employed in the non-tradeable sector do not support protectionist policies. We
build on these models, extending them to the case of two economies that could potentially engage in
trade of goods as well as into labor mobility between them.
In all cases, we assume that each government selects trade and migration policies to maximize the
utility of domestic workers. For example, this could be the case of two democracies, where workers
are the majority of the voters. Formally, the objective function of country j’s government is given by
WGj = mvLj,m + (1 − m) vLj,im , where vLj,m (vLj,im ) denotes the utility of a mobile (immobile) worker in
country j.9
9

Recall that λT = 1 indicates that both countries accept free trade, while λT = 0 indicates that at least one country

refuses to trade. λM = 1 indicates that both countries accept free labor mobility, while λM = 0 indicates that at least one

17

4.1

Heckscher-Ohlin economy

Consider an economy with two countries (J = 2), two tradeable goods (ZT = {1, 2}) and two factors of
 bz  1−bz
production (F and labor L). Production functions are given by Qjz = T j Fzj
Ljz
for z = 1, 2,

with 1 > b1 > b2 > 0 and T 1 > T 2 , where T j is total factor productivity in country j. Factor endowments
 αz

 Q
in country j are F̄ j , L̄j > (0, 0). All agents have the same preferences, given by u cj = z∈Z cjz
,
P
with αz > 0 and z∈Z αz = 1. In the appendix we fully characterize the equilibrium under autarky and

free trade. The following proposition characterizes the political equilibrium.


l1 =
Proposition 4 (Heckscher-Ohlin economy).
Let f¯1 = T 1 F̄ 1 / T 1 F̄ 1 + T 2 F̄ 2 and ¯




α̃
and f¯1 6= ¯l1 . Then:
T 1 L̄1 / T 1 L̄1 + T 2 L̄1 . Assume that T 1 > T 2 , T 1 /T 2 6= 1 − f¯1 ¯l1 /f¯1 1 − ¯l1
1. Suppose that under free trade and no labor mobility the country relatively well endowed with factor
F is diversified. Then, the trade and labor mobility game has a unique Nash equilibrium outcome:
no trade and no labor mobility.
2. Suppose that under free trade and no labor mobility the country relatively well endowed with factor
F specializes in the F -intensive good (i.e., good 1). Then, there is a set κ such that:

(a) If ¯l1 , f¯1 ∈ κ, then the trade and labor mobility game has two Nash equilibrium outcomes: (i)

no trade and no labor mobility; and (ii) free trade and no labor mobility. Moreover, WGj (1, 0) >

WGj (0, 0) for j = 1, 2.

(b) If ¯l1 , f¯1 ∈
/ κ, then the trade and labor mobility game has a unique Nash equilibrium outcome:
no trade and no labor mobility. Proof: see Appendix B.1. 

Proposition 4 extends the main result in Section 3 to a Heckscher-Ohlin economy. In a HeckscherOhlin economy free trade and free labor mobility is never a Nash equilibrium outcome (see Fig 2.a).
The reason is that domestic workers in the country with high real wages under free trade prefer to
block free labor mobility because the flow of immigrants would reduce their real wages. For example,
within the diversification cone, the utility of a worker in country j under free trade is vLj (1, λM ) =
α̃  T 1 F̄ 1 +T 2 F̄ 2 α̃
T j C 1−α̃α̃
. Thus, if mobile workers are allowed to choose their location, they will locate
T 1 L1 +T 2 L2
in country 1 (since T 1 > T 2 ), reducing the utility of workers in country 1 (note that vL1 (1, λM ) is
decreasing in L1 /L2 ).
There are also some differences between the political equilibria of the trade and labor mobility game
under a Heckscher-Ohlin and a Ricardian economy. First, in a Heckscher-Ohlin economy is more complicated than in a Ricardian economy to make free trade and no labor mobility a Nash equilibrium outcome.
country does not accept free labor mobility.

18

For example, within the diversification cone (regions a1 and a2 in Fig 2.b), the workers of the country
importing the labor-intensive good always prefer to block international trade. Indeed, the only way in
which workers in both countries are willing to support free trade is when the relative factors endowments
of the countries are very different (regions b2 , c2 , e2 and f2 in Fig. 2.b), inducing the country with high
real wages under free trade to fully specialized in the non-labor intensive good.
Second, unlike in a Ricardian economy, in a Heckscher-Ohlin economy, no trade and free labor mobility
is not a Nash equilibrium outcome. In a Ricardian economy, under autarky, real wages are not fully
determined by the productivity of the country and, hence, they are not affected by the size of the labor
force. On the contrary, in a Heckscher-Ohlin economy, under autarky, real wages depend on the country’s
total factor productivity, but also on factor endowments (ceteris paribus, real wages decrease with F̄ j /Lj ).
Therefore, workers in the country with high real wages under autarky oppose labor mobility.
Panel a: Labor mobility under autarky and free trade

1

0.8

0.6

f¯1
0.4

vL1 (1, 0) > vL1 (1, 1)

vL1 (0, 0) > vL1 (0, 1)

vL2 (1, 0)
>
vL2 (1, 1)

0.2

vL2 (0, 0) > vL2 (0, 1)
0

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

¯l1

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Fig. 2. Trade and labor mobility in the Heckscher-Ohlin model. a. Labor mobility under autarky
and free trade. b. Autarky versus free trade. In regions a1 , b1 , c1 , and d, vL1 (0, 0) > vL1 (1, 0); in
regions a2 , e1 , f1 , and g, vL2 (0, 0) > vL2 (1, 0); and, in regions b2 , c2 , e2 and f2 , vL1 (1, 0) > vL1 (0, 0) and
vL2 (1, 0) > vL2 (0, 0). In region a = a1 ∪ a2 both countries are diversified; in region b = b1 ∪ b2 country 1
19

is specialized in good 1 and country 2 is diversified; in region c = c1 ∪ c2 country 1 is specialized in good
1 and country 2 in good 2; in region d country 1 is diversified and country 2 is specialized in good 2; in
region e = e1 ∪ e2 country 1 is diversified and country 2 is specialized in good 1; in region f = f1 ∪ f2
country 1 is specialized in good 2 and country 2 is good 1; and, finally, in region g country 1 is specialized
in good 2 and country 2 is diversified.

4.2

Ricardo-Vinner specific factors economy

Consider an economy with two countries (J = 2), two tradeable goods (ZT = {1, 2}) and three factors of
 b  1−b
production (F1 , F2 and labor L). Production functions are given by Qjz = Fzj
Ljz
for z = 1, 2,


with b ∈ (0, 1). Factor endowments in country j are F̄1j , F̄2j , L̄j > (0, 0, 0). All agents have the same
 αz

Q
P
preferences, given by u cj = z∈Z cjz
, with αz > 0 and z∈Z αz = 1. In the appendix we fully
characterize the equilibrium under autarky and free trade. The following proposition characterizes the
political equilibrium.
Proposition 5 (Ricardo-Vinner specific factors economy). Assume that F̄11 /F̄21 > F̄12 /F̄22 ,
(1−α1 )




α
6= L̄1 /L̄2 and F̄11 F̄21 + (1 − α1 ) F̄12 F̄21 + α1 F̄22 F̄11 / F̄11 + F̄12 F̄21 + F̄22 6=
F̄11 /F̄12 1 F̄21 /F̄22

L̄1 / L̄2 + L̄2 . Then, the trade and labor mobility game has two Nash equilibrium outcomes: (i) no
trade and no labor mobility; and (ii) free trade and no labor mobility. Moreover, WGj (1, 0) > WGj (0, 0)
for j = 1, 2. Proof: see Appendix B.2. 
As in a Heckscher-Ohlin economy, in a Ricardo-Vinner specific factors economy, free trade and free
labor mobility is not a Nash equilibrium outcome. The intuition is analogous. Real wages under free
trade decline with the size of the labor force and, hence, workers in the country with high real wages
under free trade prefer to restrict labor mobility. Under autarky, real wages also fall as workers relocate
to the country with high real wages under autarky. Therefore, no trade and free labor mobility is not a
Nash equilibrium outcome, either. Finally, free trade and no labor mobility is always a Nash equilibrium
outcome. The reason is that we have assumed that both industries are equally labor-intensive. Otherwise,
the workers in the country with a comparative advantage in the non-labor-intensive industry might prefer
to block free trade.

4.3

Multiple factors and non-tradeable goods

Consider an economy with two countries (J = 2), two tradeable goods (a rural good F and manufactures
M ), one non-tradeable good (services N ) and three factors of production (capital K, natural resources F

b 
1−b
b  j 1−b j
j
j
and labor L). Production functions are given by QjF = TFj F j
KF
, QM = TM
LjM
KM
,
20

and QjN = TNj LjN , where Tzj is total factor productivity in sector z = F, M, N in country j, F j is the
quantity of natural resources employed in sector F in country j, Kzj is the quantity of capital employed
in sector z = F, M in country j, Ljz is the quantity of labor employed in sector z = M, N in country j,

and b ∈ (0, 1).10 Factor endowments 
in country
j are F̄ j , K̄ j , L̄j > (0, 0, 0). All agents have the same

αz

Q
P
preferences, given by u cj = z∈Z cjz
, with αz > 0 and z∈Z αz = 1. In the appendix we fully

characterize the equilibrium under autarky and free trade. Moreover, we find conditions under which

country 1 has a comparative advantage in manufactures and country 2 specializes in rural products. The
following proposition characterizes the political equilibrium.
Proposition 6 (multiple factors and non-tradeable goods).

There is a vector of thresholds

(κ̄1 , κ̄2 , κ̄3 ) such that, if K̄ 1 /K̄ 2 > κ̄1 , L̄1 F̄ 2 /L̄2 F̄ 1 > κ̄2 and TN1 /TN2 > κ̄3 , then, the trade and labor
mobility game has only two Nash equilibrium outcomes: no trade and no labor mobility and free trade
and no labor mobility. Moreover, WGj (1, 0) > WGj (0, 0) for j = 1, 2. Proof: see Appendix B.3. 
As in previous sections no trade and no labor mobility is a Nash equilibrium outcome. Nothing can be
done if one country decides to fully isolate itself. Free trade and no labor mobility is a Nash equilibrium
outcome because workers in both countries gain from free trade. Workers in country 1 are better off
accepting international trade than under autarky for two reasons. First, in country 1 free trade leads to
an expansion of the manufacturing sector and a contraction of the rural sector. This induces an increase
in the demand of labor. Second, free trade expands the aggregate income in the tradeable sectors, which
increases the demand of the non-tradeable good and, hence, the demand of labor. Both effects operate
in the same direction, pushing wages up. The situation for workers in country 2 is more complicated. On
the one hand, free trade produces a contraction in the manufacturing sector and an expansion in the rural
sector. This leads to a decrease in labor demand. On the other hand, free trade expands the demand
of the non-tradeable good and, therefore, labor demand. This effect is bigger the higher the equilibrium
terms of trade. The first condition in Proposition 6 assures that the equilibrium terms of trade are high
enough for the second effect to be dominant. The second condition in Proposition 6 implies that workers
in country 1 are richer than workers in country 2. Thus, if international labor mobility is allowed, there
will be migrations to country 1. This will lead to an increase in the labor supply of country 1, depressing
domestic wages. In addition, the increase in the labor supply will expand the production of manufactures,
inducing export-biased growth in country 1 and a corresponding decline in the terms of trade of country
1. In order to avoid these effects, workers in country 1 will oppose international labor mobility. As a
consequence, free trade and free labor mobility is not a Nash equilibrium outcome. No trade and free
10

We could have easily assumed different coefficients in the production function of each tradeable sector. Qualitative

results do not depend on this simplification.

21

labor mobility is not a Nash equilibrium outcome either. The workers in the high-wage country under
autarky will block migration flows because any increase in the domestic labor force depresses wages.
The logic behind Proposition 6 applies beyond the particular model we studied in this section. Workers
employed in the non-tradeable sector gain from free trade because the demand of non-tradeable goods is
maximized when the country engages in international trade. If workers in the non-tradeable sector are an
important proportion of the labor force, as it is the case in many postindustrial economies, in each country
there is a solid majority that supports free trade. International labor mobility, however, increases labor
supply in high-wage countries, pushing wages down. As a consequence, workers in high-wage countries
oppose massive immigration.

5

Inducing free trade and free labor mobility

In this section we study three ways to support free trade and free labor mobility as a Nash equilibrium
outcome of the trade and labor mobility game. First, we introduce product differentiation, monopolistic
competition and increasing returns to scale as in Krugman (1979) in one of the tradeable industries of
an, otherwise, simple Ricardian economy. This makes free trade more complicated, but it relaxes the
incentives to block international labor mobility. Second, keeping the economic environment of Section 3
fixed, we explore a change in the political game. Following Acemoglu and Robinson (2012), we introduce
an extractive elite in each country. Under the proper distribution of political power in each country, this
could induce a political equilibrium in which both countries agree to trade and allow free labor mobility.
Finally, we expand the policy instruments available to the governments, allowing the recipient country
to charge a migration fee to foreign workers that decide to locate in the country. If the revenue from
migration fees is used to pay transfers to domestic workers, free trade and free labor mobility could be
supported as a Nash equilibrium outcome.

5.1

Increasing returns to scale (Krugman, 1979)

Consider an economy with two countries (J = 2), two tradeable goods (ZT = {1, 2}) and one nontradeable good (ZN = {3}). Goods 2 and 3 are homogenous products, but good 1 is a differentiated
 
hR
i1
 P
ρ
n
product. All agents have the same preferences given by u cj = z∈Z αz ln cjz and cj1 = 0 cj1 (i)ρ di ,
P
where αz ∈ (0, 1), z∈Z αz = 1, ρ ∈ (0, 1), σ = (1 − ρ)−1 , and cj1 (i) indicates the quantity of variety

i ∈ [0, n] that is consumed. The production function in sector 1 is Lj1 (i) = ajL,1 Qj1 (i) + f , where Lj1 (i)

is the labor employed in the production of variety i of good 1, Qj1 (i) is the production of variety i of

good 1, f > 0 is the fixed cost of producing a variety of good 1. Production functions in sectors 2 and
3 are as in the simple Ricardian model, i.e., Lj2 = ajL,2 Qj2 , Lj3 = ajL,3 Qj3 . Let Az = a2L,z /a1L,z and assume
22

A1 > A2 , i.e., country 1 has a comparative advantage in good 1. As in previous sections, L̄j indicates
the labor endowment of country j and only a fraction m ∈ [0, 1] of L̄j is mobile. Contrary to previous
sections, suppose that countries can place partial restrictions on labor mobility. In particular, assume
that each country can choose among three migration policies. Let λM = 0 indicate that at least one
country does not accept labor mobility and, hence, mobile workers are forced to stay in their country,
while λM = 1 indicates that both countries accept complete free labor mobility. Let λM = λ̄M < 1
indicate that the recipient country accepts, at most, no more than a fraction λ̄M of the mobile workers
from the other country, while the country of origin allows at least some portion λ̄M of the mobile workers
of that country to emigrate. As in previous sections, trade policy can be no trade (λT = 0) or complete
free trade (λT = 1).
The following proposition characterizes the political equilibrium.
Proposition 7 (increasing returns to scale). Suppose that:
 2

L̄ + mL̄1
α1
1
2
T −T >
ln
σ−1
(1 − m) L̄1


−α3
α1 L̄2 + mL̄1
α1 1 − λ̄M m L̄2
α1 (1 − m) L̄2
α1 +α2

 > A2
A1 >
>
>
(A
)
>
3
α2 (1 − m) L̄1
α2 L̄1 + λ̄M mL̄2
α2 L̄1 + mL̄2
"
"
#
#
A1 α2 L̄1 + λ̄M mL̄2
α1
α1 L̄2


α1 ln
>
ln
σ−1
α1 1 − λ̄M m L̄2
(1 − α3 ) L̄1 + λ̄M mL̄2

(4)
(5)
(6)

Then11 :
11

go.

(4) ensures that, under autarky, country 1 is richer than country 2 no matter where mobile workers decide to
This allows us to avoid dealing with multiple economic equilibria.

If complete or partial labor mobility is al-

lowed, mobile workers will always decide to go to or stay in country 1. It is possible to relax this condition to


T 1 − T 2 > [α1 / (σ − 1)] ln (1 − m) L̄2 / L̄1 + mL̄2 , provided that we assume that, when there are two equilibria, all
mobile workers decide to go to or stay in country 1. In other words, the cost of relaxing this condition is the imposition of
an equilibrium selection assumption.
(5) deals with the effects of labor mobility under free trade. First, it ensures that there are enough mobile workers to
equalize real wages under free trade and that real wages are equalized before the rich country starts producing both tradeable
goods. Second, it rules out uninteresting cases in which partial labor mobility is not binding because even when λM = λ̄M ,
enough workers can move to equalize real wages in the countries. Finally, to simplify the analysis, (5) also rules out the
−α3

possibility of a reversal of fortune. Thus, under free trade, it is always the case that L2 /L1 ≥ (α2 /α1 ) (A3 ) α1 +α2 , which
implies that country 1 is never poorer than country 2.
(6) ensures that immobile workers in country 2 are better off under free trade and partial labor mobility than under
autarky and no labor mobility. Moving from autarky and no labor mobility to free trade and partial labor mobility has
two effects on immobile workers in country 2. The first term of (6) captures the standard gains from trade coming from
specialization in the sector with a comparative advantage. Moreover, migration to country 1 only reinforces this effect. The
second term of (6) captures the effects on the number of varieties produced in equilibrium. Under autarky and no labor

23

1. No trade and no labor mobility is a Nash equilibrium outcome.
2. No trade and partial
is a Nash equilibrium outcome if and only if
 labor mobility

1
1 +λ̄ mL̄2
L̄
α
α1
1
λ̄M T 1 − T 2 + σ−1
ln 1−λ̄ Mm L̄2
≥ − σ−1
ln 1 − λ̄M m m . Moreover, if no trade and partial
( M )

labor mobility is an equilibrium outcome, then WGj 0, λ̄M ≥ WGj (0, 0) for j = 1, 2.
3. No

trade and free labor mobility is



L̄1 +λ̄M mL̄2
α1
1
2
λ̄M T − T + σ−1 ln 1−λ̄ m L̄2
≤
( M )

a

Nash equilibrium
" outcome if and
# only if
1

(L̄1 +mL̄2 )(1−m) m
α1
T 1 − T 2 + σ−1
ln
.
More1
(1−m)L̄2 (1−λ̄M m) m
j
over,n if no trade and free
o labor mobility is an equilibrium outcome, then WG (0, 1) ≥

max WGj (0, 0) , WGj 0, λ̄M
for j = 1, 2.

4. Free trade and no labor mobility is a Nash equilibrium if and only if
5. Suppose that L̄1 + λ̄M mL̄2
α1 −α2 (σ−1)
,
σ−1

L1

=

φ 

α1 (L̄1 +L̄2 )

−α3



1−α3
α2

1

σ

(A1 )

σ−1
σ

>

α1 L̄2
.
α2 L̄1

n
 α
φ 2 α2
φ 2 α2 o
1 − λ̄M m L̄2 2 > max L̄1
L̄
, L1
L
,where φ =
−α3

and

L2

=

α2 (A3 ) α1 +α2 (L̄1 +L̄2 )
−α3

α1 +α2 (A3 ) α1 +α2

. Then, free trade and partial la-

α1 +α2 (A3 ) α1 +α2

bor mobility is a Nash equilibrium outcome, but free trade and free labor mobility is not a Nash
equilibrium outcome. Proof: see Appendix C.1. 
As in previous sections, no trade and no labor mobility is always a Nash equilibrium outcome because
there is no way that a country can change the world equilibrium with a unilateral move in policy. No
trade and partial (free) labor mobility is also a Nash equilibrium outcome. The intuition is as follows.
Under autarky, country 1 favors labor mobility because this brings more workers to the country and,
hence, more varieties of good 1 can be produced in equilibrium. Under autarky, immobile workers in
country 2 are opposed to labor mobility because mobile workers will leave the country, thereby reducing
the varieties of good that can be produced in equilibrium. Conversely, mobile workers in country 2
support labor mobility because they are better off if they relocate to country 1. The condition in part 2
(3) assures that the gains from partial (free) labor mobility enjoyed by mobile workers in country 2 more
than compensate for the losses sustained by immobile workers. Note also that, when these equilibria
exist, the less restrictive equilibrium outcome always dominates more restrictive one. Free trade and
no labor mobility is always a Nash equilibrium outcome. Since country 1 specializes in the sector that
operates under increasing returns to scale, in addition to the standard gains from trade coming from the
specialization in the sector with a comparative advantage, free trade allows country 1 to further exploits
mobility, country 2 produces n2 = α1 L̄2 /σf varieties of good 1, while under free trade and partial labor mobility in the

trading equilibrium, n = (1 − α3 ) L̄1 + λ̄M mL̄2 /σf varieties are produced. Note that, if n ≥ n2 , then (6) holds trivially;
while if n < n2 , (6) simply means that the comparative advantage effect always prevails over the variety effect.

24

economies of scale in sector 1. For country 2, free trade has two effects. First, country 2 also enjoys the
standard gains from trade. Second, under autarky, country 2 produces n2 = α1 L̄2 /σf varieties of good
1, while in the trading equilibrium n = (1 − α3 ) L̄1 /σf varieties are produced. The condition in part 4
ensures that the comparative advantage effect prevails over the variety effect.
The most interesting result in Proposition 7 is part 5. Free trade and partial labor mobility is a
Nash equilibrium outcome, but free trade and complete free labor mobility is not. The intuition is as
follows. Under free trade, labor mobility has two effects on country 1. First, there is a terms-of-trade
effect. As workers move to country 1, L1 increases and L2 decreases, which leads to a deterioration in the
terms of trade of country 1. Second, there is a scale effect. As L1 increases, more varieties of good 1 are
produced in the trading equilibrium. Thus, under free trade, labor mobility has an ambiguous effect on
the well-being of country 1. The condition in part 5 of the proposition simply states that the scale effect
prevails over the terms-of-trade effect when country 1 allows partial labor mobility, but the opposite is
true when there is completely free labor mobility.

5.2

Extractive elites (Acemoglu and Robinson, 2012)

Consider an economy with two countries (J = 2), two tradeable goods (ZT = {1, 2}) and one nontradeable good (ZN = {3}). Production functions, endowments and preferences are as in section 3. The
novelty is that each of the countries is populated by two types of agents: Lj workers, each of whom
owns one unit of labor, and E j elite members. The elite is a purely extractive one with no productive
role in society (Acemoglu and Robinson, 2012). The elite simply appropriates a fraction β j ∈ (0, 1) of
Lj . Moreover, expropriation is socially costly. A fraction δ ∈ (0, 1) of each unit expropriated by the

elite is lost in the process. Formally, after expropriation, each worker keeps 1 − β j units of labor and
each member of the elite gets δβ j Lj /E j units of labor. Thus, the effective labor force of country j is


L̃j = B j Lj = 1 − β j (1 − δ) Lj . As in previous sections, only a fraction m ∈ [0, 1] of the labor force of

each country is mobile at zero cost. The rest of the labor force and elite members are immobile.

Each government selects trade and migration policies in order to maximize an utilitarian welfare function WGj , whose weight depends on the size of each group as well as on how influential
they are in the political process. In particular, we assume that each government maximizes WGj =
L̄j [(1−m)vj,im +mvj,m ]+E j (1+ϕj )vj,e
, where v j,im , v j,m , v j,e are the indirect utility functions of an immobile
L̄j +E j (1+ϕj )
worker, a mobile worker and a member of the elite, respectively.12 ϕj ∈ [−1, ∞] is a measure of the
political power of the elite. If ϕj = −1 (ϕj = ∞), then the government is a perfect agent for domestic
workers (the elite). ϕj can also be considered a measure of how unequal political institutions are (Ace12

Grossman and Helpman (2001) provide several sets of micro-foundations for a welfare function of this type, including a

combination of a probabilistic voting model with a lobby model.

25

moglu and Robinson, 2012). Note also that WGj takes into account the welfare of emigrants, but not the
welfare of immigrants. The reason for this is that immigrants tend to have much less political influence
than domestic workers do, particularly with regard to immigration policies. The timing of events is as
in previous sections, and we assume that the elite groups collect their shares after migration has taken
place but before production, trade and consumption decisions have been made.
The following proposition characterizes the political equilibrium.
Proposition 8 (extractive elite). Suppose that:13


B1
B2



 
 1
 1
−α3
α1 L̄2 + mL̄1
α1 (1 − m) L̄2
B
1 − β 2 α1 +α2
α
+α
1
2
 > A2
A1 >
(A3 )
>
>
1
1
1
2
1−β
B2
α2 (1 − m) L̄
α2 L̄ + mL̄

α2 ln

"

B 2 Γ2
α3

A2 B 1 Γ1 (A3 ) α1 +α2
"
α1 ln

Assume that L̄2 /L̄1

6=

−α3

α2 Γ2 (A3 ) α1 +α2 (L̄1 +L̄2 )
−α3

(7)

β2 > β1



−α3

#
1
2
1
2
α1 +α2
α1 Γ + α2 Γ (A3 )

 L̄ + mL̄



> ln 

L̄1 + L̄2 α Γ1

(8)

(9)

1

A1 B 1 L1 Γ1

α3

B 2 Γ2 (A3 ) α1 +α2

−α3

α2 Γ2 /α1 Γ1 (A3 ) α1 +α2 .

#

> m ln



Let L1

1 − β1
1 − β2
=



(10)
α1 Γ1 (L̄1 +L̄2 )

−α3
α1 Γ1 +α2 Γ2 (A3 ) α1 +α2

and L2

=

. Then:

α1 Γ1 +α2 Γ2 (A3 ) α1 +α2

1. No trade and no labor mobility is always a Nash equilibrium outcome.
2. Free trade and no labor mobility is always a Nash equilibrium outcome. Moreover, WGj (1, 0) ≥
WGj (0, 0) for j = 1, 2.
3. No trade and free labor mobility is a Nash equilibrium outcome if and only if 1 + ϕ2 ≤
13



1
mL̄2 ln 1−β 2
1−β

−E 2 ln(1−m)

.

(7) implies that, regardless of migration flows, if countries trade, country j specializes in good z = j, and that, under

free trade, labor mobility induces full wage convergence. (8) simply means that the elite of country 1 is less extractive than
the elite of country 2, in the sense that it appropiates a lower fraction of its labor force. (9) ensures that the elite of the rich
country under autarky (country 1) prefers free trade and free labor mobility to autarky and free labor mobility. Intuitively,
for the elite of country 1, when there is free labor mobility, gains from trade prevail over the negative effect that trade
liberalization has on the size of the labor force of country 1. Finally, (10) states that workers in the poor country under
autarky (country 2) prefer free trade and free labor mobility to autarky and free labor mobility. Intuitively, the gains from
trade for all workers in country 2 are higher than the productivity gains under autarky for mobile workers.

26

−α3

4. If L̄2 /L̄1 > α2 Γ2 /α1 Γ1 (A3 ) α1 +α2 , free trade and free labor mobility is a Nash equilibrium outcome

if and only if:
(a) L


1 (1−α2 )

(b) L1

α1

L2

L


2 α2

1−α1

> L̄

> L̄1

 1 2
−L̄2 α1 ln L1 L̄2
L̄ L
.

(L1 )α1 (L2 )1−α1
E 2 ln
1−α1
α1
2
1
(L̄ ) (L̄ )


1 (1−α2 )

α1

L̄2

L̄


2 α2

1−α1

and 1 + ϕ1 > ϕ̄1 =

or L1

α1

L2

1−α1

 1 2
L̄1 α2 ln L1 L̄2
L̄ L

.
1 )(1−α2 ) (L2 )α2
L
(
E 1 ln
(L̄1 )(1−α2 ) (L̄2 )α2


1 α1
2 1−α1

< L̄

L̄

and 1 + ϕ2 < ϕ̄2 =

−α3

5. If L̄2 /L̄1 < α2 Γ2 /α1 Γ1 (A3 ) α1 +α2 , free trade and free labor mobility is a Nash equilibrium outcome

if and only if:
(a) L1
(b) L1

α1

L2

(1−α2 )

1−α1
L2

> L̄1

α2

α1

> L̄1

L̄2

1−α1

(1−α2 )

and 1 + ϕ2 > ϕ̄2 ;
α
(1−α2 ) 2 α2
(1−α2 ) 2 α2
L̄2 2 or L1
L
< L̄1
L̄
and 1 + ϕ1 <

ϕ̄1 . Proof: see Appendix C.2. 

No trade and no labor mobility is always a Nash equilibrium outcome because, if one country decides
to isolate itself, there is nothing that the other country can do to change the political equilibrium. This
is also a very unlikely equilibrium, however. In fact, free trade and no labor mobility is also always a
Nash equilibrium outcome which dominates complete isolation. No trade and free labor mobility is a
Nash equilibrium outcome when workers in the poor country under autarky (country 2) are politically
powerful (ϕ2 low). The intuition is straightforward. If one country decides to restrict trade, free trade is
impossible no matter what policy is chosen by the other country. Under autarky, workers in country 1
and immobile workers in country 2 do not worry about immigration because real wages do not depend on
labor endowments. Mobile workers in country 2 are eager to migrate to country 1 because real wages are
higher there. The elite in country 1 favors labor mobility because it brings more workers to the country.
The only group that will oppose free labor mobility is the elite in country 2, which would not be able to
extract resources from mobile workers anymore. As a consequence, autarky and free labor mobility is an
equilibrium if the elite in country 2 do not have sufficient political power.
Free trade and free labor mobility is a Nash equilibrium outcome when the elite of the high-wage
country under free trade and the workers in the low-wage country under free trade are politically powerful.14 The intuition behind this result is straightforward. Domestic workers in a high-wage country
14

α3

Real wages in country 1 are higher than in country 2 under free trade if and only if α1 Γ1 L̄2 /α2 Γ2 L̄1 (A3 ) α1 +α2 > 1,

i.e., when country 1 has a relative shortage of labor (L̄2 /L̄1 high), it has a relatively less extractive elite (Γ1 /Γ2 high),
it specializes in goods with a high expenditure share (α1 /α2 high) and it has relatively high level of productivity in nontradeable goods (A3 high).

27

under free trade are opposed to labor mobility because the flow of immigrants would reduce their wages.
The extractive elite is also hurt by the reduction in the wage rate, but immigrants are also a new source
of income (more workers to extract resources from). If the second effect outweighs the first, then the
elite is in favor of labor mobility. As a consequence, labor mobility will be allowed only when the elite
is powerful enough to impose its views. Domestic workers in a low-wage country under free trade are
in favor of labor mobility because the flow of emigrants would increase their wages. Higher wages also
benefit the extractive elite, but as mobile workers migrate to the other country, the elite has a smaller
domestic labor force to extract resources from. If the second effect outweighs the first one, the elite is
opposed to free labor mobility. Therefore, labor mobility will be allowed only when workers are powerful
enough to impose their views. Thus, labor mobility can be a major source of conflict between workers
and the elite. In the high-wage country, workers prefer to block labor mobility, while the elite prefer
to allow it. Conversely, in the low-wage country, workers prefer to allow labor mobility, while the elite
prefer to block it. Trade, on the other hand, is not a source of conflict between workers and the elite.
The main reason for this is that, in the Ricardian model, there is only one factor of production and,
hence, free trade makes it possible to exploit the gains from specialization and trade without generating
any redistributive effect. Recall, however, that labor mobility produces different effects under autarky
and free trade and, hence, the elite of country 1 and workers in country 2 might prefer autarky and free
labor mobility to free trade and free labor mobility, which is ruled out under Assumption 7.
An historical application of the model in this section is Argentina from 1875 to 1930, when the country
was ruled by a landowning-elite. With the pattern of land ownership determined by the political history
of the country, and the prices of exports, imports and capital set by international markets, total land rents
depended on the labor supply. Therefore, immigration policy became a critical variable under the control
of the government. Not surprisingly, the Argentine elite chose to promote immigration. This decreased
wages and increased the return on land. Indeed, Taylor (1997) calibrates a general equilibrium model
to estimate the impact on wages of the massive flow of immigration to Argentina up to the First World
War. His calibration suggests that the flow of immigration reduced real wages by approximately 20%
from what wage levels would have been if immigration had not taken place. During the same period,
Australian immigration policies were substantially different from those of Argentina. Despite having
similar factor endowments, land was more concentrated in Argentina than in Australia, where familyoperated, medium-sized farms were relatively more common. Therefore, landowners in Australia never
controlled the government as they did in Argentina (Hirst, 1979). Additionally, the Australian mining
sector significantly contributed to the emergence of a unionized labor force across the economy. Trade
unions and entrepreneurs involved with mining formed a powerful coalition that opposed the creation of
a ruling land-owning elite as well as free immigration (Diaz Alejandro, 1984).

28

5.3

Citizenship for sale

Proposition 8 shows that, if we introduce a powerful elite that cares about aggregate income (wL), then
free trade and free labor mobility could be a Nash equilibrium outcome. More generally, all we need is a
mechanism through which the payoff for each citizen in the rich country depends on aggregate income.
Next, we eliminate the extractive elite and assume that rich countries charge an entry fee to foreign
mobile workers, which is then distributed among domestic workers.
Consider an economy with two countries (J = 2), two tradeable goods (ZT = {1, 2}) and one nontradeable good (ZN = {3}). Production functions, endowments and preferences are as in the simple
Ricardian economy. Let τ j ∈ [0, 1] be the income tax rate that country j charges to foreign mobile workers
that decide to locate in j. Since there is no tax imposed on domestic workers, τ j can be interpreted as
an entry or immigration fee. The revenue from immigration fees is used to pay transfers to domestic
workers. Let T f j ≥ 0 indicates the transfer per capita received by country j’s workers. The government
of country j selects its trade and migration policies in order to maximize WGj = mvLj,m + (1 − m) vLj,im

subject to T f j L̄j = τ j max Lj − L̄j , 0 , government j’s budget constraint. As in previous sections,

trade policy is λT ∈ {0, 1}, where λT = 1 indicates that both countries accept free trade and λT = 0 that
at least one country refuses to trade. Migration policy is slightly more complicated. Let λM ∈ {0, (1, τ )}
with τ ∈ [0, 1], where λM = 0 indicates that at least one country does not accept free labor mobility and
λM = (1, τ ) indicates that both countries accept labor mobility with the recipient country charging a
proportional income tax τ ∈ [0, 1] to foreign mobile workers.
The following proposition characterizes the political equilibrium.
Proposition 9 (citizenship for sale).
α1 (1−m)L̄2
α2 (L̄1 +mL̄2 )

Suppose that A1 >

α1 (L̄2 +mL̄1 )
α2 (1−m)L̄1

>

α1 L̄2
α2 L̄1

−α3

> (A3 ) α1 +α2 >

> A2 and T 1 > T 2 . Then:

1. (i) Neither trade nor labor mobility; (ii) no trade and immigration fee τ̂ = 1 − e−(T1 −T2 ) > 0; and
(iii) free trade and no labor mobility are always Nash equilibrium outcomes. Moreover:

(a) WG1 (1, 0) , WG1 (0, (1, τ̂ ))
α2
1
α1 L̄2
mL̄2
> L̄ +τ̂
.
1
A α L̄
L̄1

> WG1 (0, 0) while WG1 (1, 0) > WG1 (0, (1, τ̂ )) if and only if

2 2

(b)

WG2 (1, 0)

> WG2 (0, (1, τ̂ )) = WG2 (0, 0).

2. (iv) Free trade and immigration fee

τ∗

= arg max0≤τ ≤τ̄

29

h

1−ψ(τ )
ψ(τ )

iα2 

1+τ

ψ(τ )(L̄1 +L̄2 )−L̄1
L̄1



> 0 is

a Nash equilibrium outcome if and only if
"
#

α1 (1 − ψ (τ ∗ ))
L̄1 + τ̂ mL̄2


α2 ln
≥ ln
A2 α2 ψ (τ ∗ )
L̄1 + τ ∗ ψ (τ ∗ ) L̄1 + L̄2 − L̄1



A1 α2 ψ (τ ∗ )
≥ m max ln (1 − τ ∗ ) + T 1 − T 2 , 0
α1 ln
∗
α1 (1 − ψ (τ ))


where ψ (τ ) =

α1 (1−τ )1/1−α3
1/1−α3
α1 (1−τ )
+α2 (A3 )−α3 /1−α3

and τ̄ = 1 − α2 L̄1 /α1 L̄2

1−α3

(11)
(12)

(A3 )−α3 .15 Moreover:

(a) WG1 (1, (1, τ ∗ )) ≥ WG1 (1, 0) > WG1 (0, 0) and WG1 (1, (1, τ ∗ )) ≥ WG1 (0, (1, τ̂ )).
(b) WG2 (1, (1, τ ∗ )) ≥ WG2 (1, 0) > WG2 (0, (1, τ̂ )) = WG2 (0, 0).
1

  L̄2 − L̄1 +L̄2 α  1−α
−α3

3
(
) 2
α1 L̄2
1−α3
>
(A
)
(c) If α L̄1
, then τ ∗ < τ̄ , L1 = ψ (τ ∗ ) L̄1 + L̄2 > L̄1 , and
3
2
L̄
2

WGj (1, (1, τ ∗ ))

> WGj (1, 0) for j = 1, 2. Proof: see Appendix C.3. 

As in Proposition 1 and, for exactly the same reasons, no trade and no labor mobility is always a Nash
equilibrium outcome. It is also an outcome dominated by other Nash equilibrium outcomes. Indeed, as
in Proposition 1, free trade and no labor mobility is always a Nash equilibrium outcome and it is strictly
preferred to no trade and no labor mobility by both countries. There are also important differences
between Propositions 1 and 9.
First, when the recipient country cannot charge an immigration fee, no trade and free labor mobility
is a Nash equilibrium outcome (Proposition 1). Under autarky, domestic workers in the rich country
(country 1) and immobile workers in the poor country (country 2) are indifferent with any migration
policy because real wages are fully determined by domestic productivity, while mobile workers in the
poor country are better off migrating to the rich country because real wages are higher there. When
the recipient country can charge an immigration fee, no trade and free labor mobility with immigration
fee τ̂ = 1 − e−(T1 −T2 ) > 0 is a Nash equilibrium outcome (Proposition 9 - Part 1). Under autarky,
domestic workers in the rich country are better off allowing immigration because their real wages are
fully determined by domestic productivity and they receive the transfers from immigration fees, while
workers from the poor country are indifferent with any migration policy. For immobile workers in the
poor country, real wages are fully determined by domestic productivity. Mobile workers from the poor
country locate in the rich country and, hence, earn a high real wage. However, they must also pay an
immigration fee equal to the difference between real wages in the rich and the poor country.
Second, when the recipient country cannot charge an immigration fee, free trade and free labor
mobility is not a Nash equilibrium outcome (Proposition 1). Under free trade, domestic workers in a
15

τ̄ = 1 − α2 L̄1 /α1 L̄2

1−α3

(A3 )−α3 is the prohibitive immigration fee. That is, τ ≥ τ̄ implies L1 = L̄1 and L2 = L̄2 .

30

rich country are opposed to labor mobility because the flow of immigrants would reduce their real wages.
On the contrary, when the recipient country can charge an immigration fee, free trade and free labor
mobility with immigration fee τ ∗ > 0 is a Nash equilibrium outcome provided that conditions (11) and
(12) hold (Proposition 9 - Part 2). Moreover, whenever (λT , λM ) = (1, (1, τ ∗ )) is a Nash equilibrium
outcome, it is strictly preferred to all other Nash equilibrium outcomes by both countries. Under free
trade, the flow of immigrants reduces real wages in the rich country (country 1), but it increases the
revenue from immigration fees and, hence, the transfer received by each worker in the rich country.
1

  L̄2 − L̄1 +L̄2 α  1−α
−α3
3
(
) 2
α1 L̄2
1−α3
>
(A
)
, the second effect dominates the first one for high values
When α L̄1
3
2
L̄
2

of the immigration fee and, hence, workers from the rich country are better off charging an immigration

fee that induces positive migration flows rather than imposing the prohibitive immigration fee. Mobile
workers in the poor country (country 2) are also better off if they are allowed to migrate to country 1,
while immobile workers from the poor country benefit from the rise in real wages caused by the outflow
of workers.
Note, however, that (λT , λM ) = (1, (1, τ ∗ )) is not always a Nash equilibrium outcome. There are two
potential complications. First, it is possible that the rich country prefers to deviate to no trade and free
labor mobility with immigration fee τ̂ . The advantage of doing so is that the revenue from immigration
fees could be higher under (λT , λM ) = (0, (1, τ̂ )) than under (λT , λM ) = (1, (1, τ ∗ )). The disadvantage is
that gains from trade are lost. (11) assures that gains from trade are high enough, so this deviation is
not profitable. Second, it is possible that the poor country prefers to deviate to (λT , λM ) = (0, (1, τ ∗ )).
The advantage of doing so is that for mobile workers from the poor country, when τ ∗ < τ̂ and countries
do not trade, migration leave a positive rent. The disadvantage is that gains from trade are lost. (12)
assures that gains from trade for workers in country 2 are high enough, so they do not have an incentive
to deviate from (λT , λM ) = (1, (1, τ ∗ )).

6

Conclusions

We have shown that, by combining a Ricardian economy with a simple international political economy
model, we can explain the salient stylized facts about international trade and labor mobility. In a
Ricardian world, countries use different technologies and, as a consequence, there is no wage equalization
under free trade. This wedge in real wages opens the door to migration flows, which, combined with
free trade, induce full wage convergence. However, workers in rich countries block immigration in order
to protect their high wages. In contrast, nobody is willing to block free trade because, in a Ricardian
world, everybody gains from international trade. Thus, our model naturally explains the present world
equilibrium: few restrictions on international trade in goods and very restrictive barriers to international

31

labor mobility.
We have also shown that several multifactor models lead to an analogous result. In particular, we
have studied a version of the standard two-sector Heckscher-Ohlin model, the Ricardo-Vinner specific
factors model, and a three-sector model (two tradeable goods and one non-tradeable good). In all cases,
we have shown that, although it is always possible to find conditions under which free trade and no labor
mobility is a Nash equilibrium outcome of the political economy game, free trade and free labor mobility
is never a Nash equilibrium outcome.
Given this rather negative result, we have explored three extensions of our model in which free trade
and, at least, some migration flows, can be sustained as a Nash equilibrium outcome. One possibility
is to introduce increasing returns to scale. Then, workers in a sparsely populated rich country might
prefer, at least during one phase in the development process, to allow immigration because a bigger labor
force increases the number of varieties of the differentiated good that can be produced in equilibrium,
which can offset the negative effect of immigration flows on wages. Another possibility is to introduce an
extractive elite that prefers to have a bigger labor force to extract resources from. A third alternative is
to introduce an immigration fee in rich countries, implemented as an income tax on immigrants, and use
the revenue generated to pay transfers to domestic workers, which formally backs some recent proposals
to reform immigration policies in developed countries (see, for example, Eichenberger and Stadelmann
2017 and Posner and Weyl 2018).
Apart from explaining broad patterns of trade and migration policies, this study points to profound
implications for the political economy of development. First, according to our model, workers in rich
countries constitute a very conservative force worldwide. Does this imply that less inclusive political
institutions in rich countries could be beneficial for the world as a whole? A naive interpretation of
our extension involving an extractive elite would lead us to conclude that this is the case. Indeed, as
the extractive elite in the rich country becomes more powerful (ϕ increases), it is more likely that, in
equilibrium, there will be free trade and free labor mobility, which would induce full convergence in the
levels of well-being of workers across the world. An important limitation of this interpretation, however,
is that it fails to take into account the endogenous link between political and economic institutions.
As the extractive elite in the rich country becomes more powerful, we should expect to see economic
institutions deteriorate (β increases). In other words, our model highlights the fact that a socioeconomic
group can play a very progressive internal role by favoring inclusive domestic economic institutions and,
at the same time, a very conservative role in terms of worldwide equilibrium by supporting policies that
restrict cross-country convergence in levels of well-being.
Second, the model illustrates a more general principle. Institutional differences combined with no
factor mobility induce large differences in economic development across locations, while institutional
differences and free factor mobility are associated with smaller or no differences in economic development
32

across locations and a greater concentration of resources in locations that have properly functioning
institutions. Thus, institutional differences point to a theory of differential development under no factor
mobility, while they point to a theory of concentration of economic activity under free factor mobility.
However, it is worth noting that, even when there is free factor mobility, better institutions in any location
induce better economic outcomes. In other words, under free factor mobility, the quality of institutions
does not account for differences in economic development across locations, but institutional change could
still be a key determinant of global economic development over time.

References
[1] Acemoglu, D., and J. Robinson. 2012. Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity and
Poverty. New York, NY: Crown.
[2] Autor, D., D. Dorn and G. Hanson. 2016. The China Flow: Learning from Labor Market Adjustment
to Large Changes in Trade. Annual Review of Economics 205-240.
[3] Bagwell, K., and R. W. Staiger. 1999. An Economic Theory of GATT. American Economic Review
89:215–248.
[4] Benhabib, J. 1996. On the Political Economy of Immigration. European Economic Review 40:1737–
43.
[5] Clements, M. A. 2011. Economics and Emigration: Trillion-Dollar Bills on the Sidewalk? Journal
of Economic Perspectives 25(3):83–106.
[6] Dı́az-Alejandro, Carlos F. 1984. No Less Than One Hundred Years of Argentine Economic History
Plus Some Comparisons. In: Trade, Comparative Development Perspectives, ed. by G. Ranis, R.
West, M. Leirsenson and C. Taft Morris. Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press.
[7] Dornbusch, R., S. Fischer and P. Samuelson. 1977. Comparative Advantage, Trade and Payments
in a Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods. American Economic Review 67(5):823-839.
[8] Eaton, J., and S. Kortum. 2002. Technology, Geography and Trade. Econometrica 70(5):1741-1779.
[9] Eichenberger, R., and David Stadelmann. 2017. Free movement of Persons with Residency Fees.
In: Integration Index 2017, ed. by R. Damodaran, C. Kolmer and R. Schatz. Hanoi, New York:
InnoVatio.
[10] Facchini, G. 2004. Political Economy of International Trade and Factor Mobility. Journal of Economic Surveys 18(1):1-31.
33

[11] Facchini, G., A. M. Mayda and P. Mishra. 2007. Do interest groups affect immigration? IZA Discussion Paper No 3183.
[12] Foreman-Peck, J. 1992. A Political Economy of International Migration, 1815–1914. The Manchester
School 60:359–376.
[13] Freeman, R. 2006. People Flows in Globalization. Journal of Economic Perspectives 20(2):145-170.
[14] Galiani, S., D. Heymann, and N. Magud. 2017. On the distributive effects of terms of trade shocks:
The role of non-tradable goods. Journal of Globalization and Development 8:1-20.
[15] Galiani, S. and P. Somaini. 2018. Path dependent import substitution policies: The case of Argentina
in the XX century. Latin American Economic Review 27 (Special Issue).
[16] Galiani, S., N. Schofield and G. Torrens. 2014. Factor endowments, democracy and trade policy
convergence. Journal of Public Economic Theory 16:119-156.
[17] Grossman, G. 1983. Partially Mobile Capital. Journal of International Economics 15:1-17.
[18] Grossman, G., and E. Helpmam. 2001. Special Interest Politics. Cambridge: MIT Press.
[19] Hirst, J. 1979. La sociedad rural y la politica en Australia, 1859-1930. In: Argentina y Australia,
ed. by J. Fogarty, E. Gallo and H. Dieguez. Buenos Aires, Argentina: Instituto Torcuato Di Tella.
[20] Markusen, J. 1983. Factor Movements and Commodity Trade as Complements. Journal of International Economics 14:314-356.
[21] Markussen, J., and L. Svensson. 1985. Trade in Goods and Factors with International Differences in
Technology. International Economic Review 9:395-410.
[22] Matsuyama, K. 2000. A Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods under Nonhomothetic Preferences: Demand Complementarities, Income Distribution, and North-South Trade. Journal of Political Economy 108(6):1093-1120.
[23] Mitra, D., and V. Trindade. 2005. Inequality and Trade. Canadian Journal of Economics 38(4):12531271.
[24] Mundell, R. 1957. International Trade with Factor Mobility. American Economic Review 67:321-335.
[25] Nickell, S. and J. Saleheen. 2009. The impact of immigration on occupational wages: evidence from
Britain. SERC Discussion Paper 34.

34

[26] Hatton, T. 2007. Should We Have a WTO for International Migration? Economic Policy 22(50):339383.
[27] Hatton, T., and J. Williamson. 2005. Global Migration and the World Economy: Two Centuries of
Policy and Performance. Cambridge: MIT Press.
[28] Helpman, E. 1981. International Trade in the Presence of Product Differentiation, Economies of
Scale, and Monopolistic Competition: A Chamberlin–Heckscher–Ohlin Approach. Journal of International Economics 11:305–340.
[29] Krugman, P. 1979. Increasing Returns, Monopolistic Competition and International Trade. Journal
of International Economics 9:469-479.
[30] Mayda, A. M. 2003. Who is Against Immigration? A Cross-Country Investigation of Individual
Attitudes Towards Immigrants. Unpublished paper.
[31] O’Rourke, K. 2004. The Era of Free Migration: Lessons for Today. IIIS Discussion Paper 18.
[32] O’Rourke, K., and R. Sinnott. 2002. What Determines Attitudes Towards Protection? Some CrossCountry Evidence. In Brookings Trade Forum, ed. by Susan Collins and Dani Rodrik.
[33] Posner, E., and E. Weyl. 2018. Radical Markets: Uprooting Capitalism and Democracy for a Just
Society. New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
[34] Razin, A., and E. Sadka. 1999. Migration and Pension with International Capital Mobility. Journal
of Public Economics 74:141–150.
[35] Razin, A., E. Sadka and P. Swagell. 2000. Tax Burden and Migration: A Political Economy Theory
and Evidence. (mimeo), Stanford University.
[36] Reimer, J., and T. W. Hertel. 2010. Non-Homothetic Preferences and International Trade. Review
of International Economics 18(2):408–425.
[37] Rodrik, D. 2002. Feasible Globalization. NBER Working Paper 9129.
[38] Taylor, A. 1997. Peopling the pampa: On the impact of mass migration to the River Plate, 1870-1914.
Explorations in Economic History 34(1):100-132.
[39] Taylor, A., and J. Williamson. 1997. Convergence in the Age of Mass Migration. European Review
of Economic History 1(1):27-63.
[40] Wong, K. 1995. International Trade in Goods and Factor Mobility. Cambridge: MIT Press.

35

Online Appendix to “The Political Economy of Trade and International
Labor Mobility”
Sebastian Galiani ∗
University of Maryland and NBER

Gustavo Torrens†
Indiana University

August 2018

In this appendix we prove all the lemmas, propositions and results discussed in the paper.

A. Trade and labor mobility policies in Ricardian economies
Appendix A presents the proofs of all the results in Section 3. It also develops the details of the results
discussed in Section 3.2 (multiple goods).

A.1 A simple Ricardian economy
Consider an economy with two countries (J = 2), two tradeable goods (ZT = {1, 2}) and one nontradeable good (ZN = {3}). Production functions are Qjz = Ljz /ajL,z , where ajL,z > 0 is the unit labor
requirement in industry z in country j. Let Az = a2L,z /a1L,z and assume A1 > A2 . Let L̄j and Lj be the
labor endowment and the labor force of country j, respectively. Only a 
fraction m ∈ [0, 1] of L̄j is mobile.

P
P
All agents have the same preferences, given by u cj = z∈Z αz ln cjz , with αz > 0 and z∈Z αz = 1.

Under autarky all goods must be produced domestically and, hence, pjz = wj ajL,z for all z ∈ Z and
j = 1, 2. The indirect
of a worker who owns one unit of labor in country j is v j = C + T j , where
 utility

P
j
j
T = − z∈Z αz ln aL,z is a measure of the aggregate productivity of country j. If labor mobility is
allowed, all mobile workers go to or stay in the country with the highest aggregate productivity T j .
Under free trade, if A1 > α1 L2 /α2 L1 > A2 , then country j specializes in good z = j ∈ {1, 2}. Thus,
p1 = w1 a1L,1 , p2 = w2 a2L,2 , pj3 = wj ajL,3 and the balanced trade condition is α2 w1 L1 = α1 w2 L2 . Therefore,

the indirect utility of a worker who owns one unit of labor is v 1 = C + T 1 + α2 ln α1 L2 /A2 α2 L1 in
country 1 and v 2 = C + T 2 + α1 ln A1 α2 L1 /α1 L2 in country 2. If labor mobility is not allowed, then
Lj = L̄j . If labor mobility is allowed, mobile workers will go to or stay in the country with the highest
v j . Since v 1 is decreasing in L1 /L2 while v 2 is increasing in L1 /L2 , if there are enough mobile workers,
−α3

they will relocate until v 1 = v 2 . This implies L2 /L1 = (α2 /α1 ) (A3 ) α1 +α2 and, hence, v 1 = v 2 = C + T 2 +
α1 ln (A1 ) + [α1 α3 / (α1 + α2 )] ln (A3 ). Moreover, there will be migrations to country 1 whenever L̄2 /L̄1 >
∗
†

E-mail: galiani@umd.edu
E-mail:gtorrens@indiana.edu

1

−α3

−α3

α1 +α2
(α2 /α1 ) (A3 ) α1 +α2 and migrations to country 2 whenever L̄2 /L̄1 < (α2 /α1 ) (A
. Finally, the
 3)
j
distribution of mobile workers between the countries does not violate either L ∈ (1 − m) L̄j , L̄j + mL̄−j
or A1 > α1 L2 /α2 L1 > A2 , provided that the following assumption holds.
Assumption 1 (simple Ricardian economy). Regardless of migration flows, if countries trade,
country j specializes in good z = j for j = 1, 2. Moreover, under free trade labor mobility induces full
−α3
α1 (L̄2 +mL̄1 )
L̄2
wage convergence. Formally A1 > α (1−m)L̄1 > (A3 ) α1 +α2 > αα1 (1−m)
> A2 .
1 +mL̄2
L̄
2
(
)
2
Lemma 1 characterizes the effects of trade and labor mobility on the relative well-being of workers in
both countries.


P
Lemma 1 (simple Ricardian economy). Let T j = − z∈Z αz ln ajL,z and assume T 1 > T 2 .




Define ∆ = (α1 + α2 ) ln α1 L̄2 /α2 L̄1 + TN1 − TN2 , where TNj = −α3 ln ajL,3 . Suppose that assumption
1 holds.

1. If ∆ > T 1 − T 2 , then v 1 (1, 0) − v 2 (1, 0) > v 1 (0, 0) − v 2 (0, 0) > v 1 (1, 1) − v 2 (1, 1) = 0.
2. If 0 < ∆ < T 1 − T 2 , then v 1 (0, 0) − v 2 (0, 0) > v 1 (1, 0) − v 2 (1, 0) > v 1 (1, 1) − v 2 (1, 1) = 0.
3. If ∆ < 0, then v 1 (0, 0) − v 2 (0, 0) > v 1 (1, 1) − v 2 (1, 1) = 0 > v 1 (1, 0) − v 2 (1, 0).
Proof: Under autarky, regardless of the mobile workers’ location decision, v j (0, λM ) = C + T j .
Thus, v 1 (0, 0) − v 2 (0, 0) = T 1 − T 2 , which is positive
by assumption. Under free trade, assumption

 1
implies v 1 (1, λM ) = C + T 1 + α2 ln α1 L2 /A2 α2 L1 and v 2 (1, λM ) = C + T 2 + α1 ln A1 α2 L1 /α1 L2 . If
λM = 0, then L2 /L1 = L̄2 /L̄1 and, hence, v 1 (1, 0) − v 2 (1, 0) = TN1 − TN2 + (α1 + α2 ) ln α1 L̄2 /α2 L̄1 .
−α3

If λM = 1, then L2 /L1 = α2 /α1 (A3 ) α1 +α2 (by assumption 1 L̄2 + mL̄1 / (1 − m) L̄1 > L2 /L1 >
(1 − m) L̄2 / L̄1 + mL̄2 ), which implies v 1 (1, 1) − v 2 (1, 1) = 0. Simple comparisons complete the proof
of the lemma. 
Proposition 1 (simple Ricardian economy). Suppose that assumption 1 holds, T 1 > T 2 and
∆ 6= 0. Then, the trade and labor mobility game has three Nash equilibrium outcomes: (i) (λT , λM ) =
(0, 0); (ii) (λT , λM ) = (0, 1); and (iii) (λT , λM ) = (1, 0). Moreover:
1. WG1 (1, 0) > WG1 (0, 1) = WG1 (0, 0).

2. WG2 (1, 0) , WG2(0, 1) >
WG2 (0, 0), while
1
2
α1 ln A1 α2 L̄ / α1 L̄
> m T1 − T2 .

WG2 (1, 0)

>

WG2 (0, 1)

if

and

only

if

Proof: Government 1 payoffs are given by WG1 (0, 0) = WG1 (0, 1) = C + T 1 , WG1 (1, 0) = C +
α1 L̄2 /A2 α2 L̄1 , and WG1 (1, 1) = C + T 1 − α2 ln A2 − [α2 / (α1 + α2 )] TN1 − TN2 . Government
2
2
2
= C + mT 1 + (1 − m) T 2 , WG2 (1, 0) = C +
2 payoffs are
 0) = C2 + T , WG (0, 1)
 given1 by WG 2(0,
2
2
and WG (1, 1) = C + T + α1 ln A1 + [α1 / (α1 + α2 )] TN1 − TN2 . (These
T + α1 ln A1 α2 L̄ / α1 L̄
calculations are implicitly based on Assumption 1.)
(λT , λM ) = (0, 0) is always a Nash equilibrium outcome because, if both countries are selecting no
trade and no labor mobility, then, conditionally on the decision of the other country, there is no policy
that can move the economy toward free trade or toward free labor mobility. Thus, any unilateral deviation
will not change the payoff for any player.
T 1 + α2 ln

2

(λT , λM ) = (1, 0) is a Nash equilibrium outcome
when WG1 (1, 0) ≥ WG1 (0, 0) and WG2 (1, 0) ≥

2
1
1
1
(0, 0).
From assumption 1 α1 L̄ /α2 L̄
0) =
> A2 , which
 implies WG (1,2 0) − WG (0,
2
1
2
1
2 (0, 0) =
α2 ln α1 L̄ /A2 α2 L̄ > 0.
From
assumption
1
A
>
α
L̄
/α
L̄
,
which
implies
W
(1,
0)
−
W
1
1
2
G
G


WG2

α1 ln A1 α2 L̄1 /a1L,1 α1 L̄2 > 0.

1
2
(λT , λM ) = (0, 1) is a Nash equilibrium outcome when WG1 (0, 1) ≥ W
 G (0, 0) and WG (0, 1) ≥
1
1
2
2
1
2
(0, 0). WG (0, 0) = WG (0, 1), while WG (0, 1) − WG (0, 0) = m T − T , which is positive by assumption.

(λT , λM ) = (1, 1) is not a Nash equilibrium outcome, provided that ∆ = (α1 + α2 )−1 TN1 − TN2 −
ln α2 L̄1 /α1 L̄2 6= 0. Note that WG1 (1, 1) − WG1 (1, 0) = −α2 ∆ and WG2 (1, 1) − WG2 (1, 0) = α1 ∆, which
implies that either WG1 (1, 1) − WG1 (1, 0) < 0 (when ∆ > 0) or WG1 (1, 1) − WG1 
(1, 0) < 0 (when ∆ < 0).
2
WG2 (1, 0) , W
>
We have already proved that WG1 (1, 0) > WG1 (0, 1) = WG1 (0, 0) and
G (0, 1)


2
2
1
2
1
2
2
WG (0, 0). Finally, note that
 G (0, 1) = α1 ln A1 α2 L̄ /α1 L̄ − m T − T > 0 if and
 WG (1, 0) − W
only if α1 ln A1 α2 L̄1 /α1 L̄2 > m T 1 − T 2 , which completes the proof of the proposition. 

WG2

A.2 Multiple goods

A.2.1 A finite set of goods
Assume that ZT = {1, 2, ...zT }, ZN = {zT +1 , ..., zT +N } and Qjz = Ljz /ajL,z . Let Az = a2L,z /a1L,z be strictly
decreasing for z ∈ ZT with A1 > 1 and AzT < 1. Under autarky, pjz = wj ajL,z for all z ∈ Z and
j = 1, 2. The indirect
of a worker who owns one unit of labor in country j is v j = C + T j , where
 utility

P
j
j
T = − z∈Z αz ln aL,z . If labor mobility is allowed, all mobile workers will go to or stay in the country
with the highest T j .
Under free trade, there exists z̄

∈

ZT , such that pz
pjz

w2 a2L,z

=

w1 a1L,z for z

=

1, ..., z̄ −

wj ajL,z

1, pz =
for z = z̄ + 1, ..., zT , and
=
for z ∈ ZN .
In or1
2
der to hdetermine z̄ and w /w , iit is useful to
F (x) =
i
hPdefine thePfollowing  function.
Pk=z−1
Pk=zT 
k=zT
k=z
αz Az , while F (x) =
αz /
αk /
αk Az
≤ x ≤
Az if

i
 P
 k=1i
hk=z+1
 P
 k=z hP
 k=1
P
P
P
k=zT
k=zT
k=zT
k=z
k=z
k=z
α
A
α
/
α
A
<
x
<
α
/
α
x
if
α
/
z+1 .
z
k=1 k
k=1 k
k=1 k
k=z+1 k
k=z+1 k
k=z+1 k

F (x) is a decreasing and continuous function of x. In the trading equilibrium w1 /w2 = F (L1 /L2 )
and z̄ is such that Az̄ ≥ w1 /w2 > Az̄+1 . Moreover, 1 <hz̄ < zT if
and only if A1 >
Pk=z̄−1  Pk=zT  i
F (L1 /L2 ) > AzT , which we assume holds. Also note that if
≤
k=1 αk /
k=z̄ αk Az̄
 i
 P
hP

k=z̄
k=zT
1
2
1
2 =
L1 /L2 ≤
k=1 αk /
k=z̄+1 αk Az̄ , then both countries produce good z̄, w /w = F L /L
 i
 P
hP
k=z̄
k=zT
Az̄ , and pz̄ = w1 a1L,z̄ = w2 a2L,z̄ ; while if
< L1 /L2 <
k=1 αk /
k=z̄+1 αk Az̄

i
 P
hP

k=z̄
k=zT
1
2 = F L1 /L2
=
k=1 αk /
k=z̄+1 αk Az̄+1 , then only country 1 produces good z̄, w /w
 P
i
hP

k=zT
k=z̄
L2 /L1 and pz̄ = w1 a1L,z̄ . The indirect utility of a worker who owns
k=1 αk /
k=z̄+1 αk


P T
one unit of labor is given by v 1 = C + T 1 + z=z
αz ln F L1 /L2 /Az in country 1 and v 2 =
z=z̄+1


P
1
2
C +T 2 + z=z̄
in country 2, where z̄ is such that Az̄ ≥ w1 /w2 = F L1 /L2 > Az̄+1
z=1 αz ln Az /F L /L
 .
If labor mobility is not allowed, then Lj = L̄j , which implies z̄ is such that Az̄ ≥ w1 /w2 = F L̄1 /L̄2 >
Az̄+1 . If labor mobility is allowed, mobile workers will go to or stay in the country with the highest v j .
3


If there are enough mobile workers, they will relocate untilv 1 = v 2 . As a consequence, ln w1 /w2 =

P
− (1 − αN )−1 TN1 − TN2 , where TNj = − z∈ZN αz ln ajL,z is the productivity of country j in nonP
tradeable goods and αN = z∈ZN αz is the expenditure share in non-tradeable goods. Thus:
 Pz=zT
 Pz=zT
v 1 = v 2 = C + T 1 − (1 − αN )−1 TN1 − TN2
αz ln (Az )
z=ẑ+1 αz −
P z=ẑ+1

P
−1
z=ẑ
= C + T 2 + z=ẑ
TN1 − TN2
z=1 αz ln (Az ) + (1 − αN )
z=1 αz

In order to determine the marginal industry ẑ and the labor allocation L1 /L2 under free labor mobility,
we need to consider two possible cases.

a. Suppose there exists z ∈ (1, zT ), such that ln (Az ) = − (1 − αN )−1 TN1 − TN2 . Then, the

marginal industry is determined
byln (Aẑ ) = − (1 −
αN )−1 TN1 −
TN2 , both
countries produce
ẑ,
hP
i
h
 i
Pz=zT 
Pz=ẑ  Pz=zT
z=ẑ−1
1
2
1
2
and L /L is such that
z=1 αz /
z=1 αz /
z=ẑ αz Aẑ ≤ L /L ≤
z=ẑ+1 αz Aẑ and


L̄2 + mL̄1 / (1 − m) L̄1 ≤ L1 /L2 ≤ (1 − m) L̄2 / L̄1 + mL̄2 .

b. Suppose there is no z ∈ (1, zT ), such that ln (Az ) = − (1 − αN )−1 TN1 − TN2 . Then, the marginal

−1
1 − T 2 > ln (A
industry is ẑ such
that
ln
(A
)
>
−
(1
−
α
)
T
N
ẑ
ẑ+1 ) and the labor allocation is given
N
N
hP
 P
i





z=ẑ
z=z
2 /w 1 where ln w 1 /w 2 = − (1 − α )−1 T 1 − T 2 .
T
by L1 /L2 =
α
w
z
N
N
N
z=1 αz /
z=ẑ+1


Finally, the distribution
of mobile workers between the countries does not violate either Lj ∈

j
j
−j
(1 − m) L̄ , L̄ + mL̄
or A1 > F (L1 /L2 ) > AzT , provided that the following assumption holds.

Assumption
set of goods). Labor 
mobility induces full wage convergence. Formally:

1 (finite
−αz
Q
(1−m)L̄1
L̄1 +mL̄2
1−αN
A1 > F L̄2 +mL̄1 > z∈ZN (Az )
> F (1−m)L̄2 > AzT .

Lemma 1 characterizes the effects of trade and labor mobility on the countries’ relative wages.


P
Lemma 1 (finite set of goods). Let T j = − z∈Z αz ln ajL,z and assume T 1 > T 2 . Define




P
∆ = (1 − αN ) ln F L̄1 /L̄2 + TN1 − TN2 , where TNj = − z∈ZN αz ln ajL,z . Suppose that Assumption
1 holds.
1. If ∆ > T 1 − T 2 , then v 1 (1, 0) − v 2 (1, 0) > v 1 (0, 0) − v 2 (0, 0) > v 1 (1, 1) − v 2 (1, 1) = 0.
2. If 0 < ∆ < T 1 − T 2 , then v 1 (0, 0) − v 2 (0, 0) > v 1 (1, 0) − v 2 (1, 0) > v 1 (1, 1) − v 2 (1, 1) = 0.
3. If ∆ < 0, then v 1 (0, 0) − v 2 (0, 0) > v 1 (1, 1) − v 2 (1, 1) = 0 > v 1 (1, 0) − v 2 (1, 0).
Proof: Under autarky, regardless of mobile workers’ location decisions, v j (0, λM ) = C + T j .
Thus, v 1 (0, 0) − v 2 (0, 0) = T 1 − T 2 , which is positive
by assumption.
no la Pz=z
 Pz=zTUnder free trade and
2 (1, 0) =
T
bor mobility, v 1 (1, 0) = C + T 1 + ln F L̄1 /L̄2
α
−
α
ln
(A
),
and
v
z
z
z
z=z̄+1
z=z̄+1
 Pz=z̄ 

P
1
2
1 /L̄2 > A
C +T 2 + z=z̄
α
,
where
z̄
is
such
that
A
≥
F
L̄
z
z̄
z̄+1 . Thus,
z=1 αz ln (Az )−ln F L̄ /L̄
z=1


v 1 (1, 0) − v 2 (1, 0) = (1 − αN ) ln F L̄1 /L̄2 + TN1 − TN2 . Under free trade and free labor mobility, as Pz=zT
 Pz=zT
sumption 1 implies v 1 (1, 1) = v 2 (1, 1) = C+T 1 −(1 − αN )−1 TN1 − TN2
z=ẑ+1 αz − z=ẑ+1 αz ln (Az ).
Simple comparisons complete the proof of the lemma. 
Proposition 1 characterizes the political equilibrium.

4

Proposition 1 (finite set of goods). Suppose that Assumption 1 holds, T 1 > T 2 and ∆ 6= 0.
Then, the trade and labor mobility game has three Nash equilibrium outcomes: (i) (λT , λM ) = (0, 0); (ii)
(λT , λM ) = (0, 1); and (iii) (λT , λM ) = (1, 0). Moreover:
1. WG1 (1, 0) > WG1 (0, 1) = WG1 (0, 0).

2. PWG2 (1, 0) , WG2 (0, 1)
>
WG2 (0, 0),  while

z=z̄
1
2
> m T1 − T2 .
z=1 αz ln Az /F L̄ /L̄

WG2 (1, 0)

>

WG2 (0, 1)

if

and

only

if

Government 1 payoffs  are
given by P
WG1 (0, 0) = WG1 (0, 1) = C + T 1 ,
Pz=z
z=zT
1
1
2
1
T
= C + T + ln F L̄ /L̄
z=z̄+1 αz ln (Az ), and WG (1, 1) = C +
z=z̄+1 αz −


P
P
z=zT
z=zT
αN )−1 TN1 − TN2
Government 2 payoffs are given by
z=ẑ+1 αz −
z=ẑ+1 αz ln (Az ).
P
1
2
2
2
2
2
−
WG (0, 0) = C + T , WG (0, 1) = C + mT + (1 − m) T , WG (1, 0) = C + T 2 + z=z̄
z=1 αz ln (Az ) 
 Pz=ẑ
 Pz=z̄ 
Pz=ẑ
−1
2
1
2
1
2
2
ln F L̄ /L̄
TN − TN
z=1 αz and WG (1, 1) = C + T +
z=1 αz ln (Az ) + (1 − αN )
z=1 αz .
(These calculations are implicitly based on Assumption 1).
(λT , λM ) = (0, 0) is always a Nash equilibrium outcome.
1
1
(λT , λM ) = (1, 0) is a Nash equilibrium
WG2 (1, 0) ≥
 WG(1, 0) ≥ WG (0, 0) and
Pz=zT outcome when
1
2
1
2 > A
2
1
1
WG (0, 0). WG (1, 0) − WG (0, 0) =
z̄+1 .
z=z̄+1 αz ln F L̄ /L̄ /Az , where Az̄ ≥ F L̄ /L̄
1
2
Since F L̄ /L̄ > Az for all z = z̄ + 1, ..., zT , and since Assumption
1 implies 1 < z̄ < zT
, it must
Pz=z̄
2 (0, 0) =
1 /L̄2 , where
be the case that WG1 (1, 0) − WG1 (0, 0) > 0. WG2 (1,
0)
−
W
α
ln
A
/F
L̄
z
G
z=1 z

Az̄ ≥ F L̄1 /L̄2 > Az̄+1 . Since Az > F L̄1 /L̄2 for all z = 1, ..., z̄, and since Assumption 1 implies
1 < z̄ < zT , it must be the case that WG2 (1, 0) − WG2 (0, 0) > 0.
1
2
(λT , λM ) = (0, 1) is a Nash equilibrium outcome when WG1 (0, 1) ≥ W
G (0, 0) and WG (0, 1) ≥

WG2 (0, 0). WG1 (0, 0) = WG1 (0, 1), while WG2 (0, 1) − WG2 (0, 0) = m T 1 − T 2 , which is positive by assumption.
(λT , λM ) = (1, 1) is not a Nash equilibrium outcome, provided that ∆ 6= 0. Note that:
Proof:

WG1 (1, 0)
T 1 − (1 −

!
!
1 /L2
1 /L̄2
P
F
L
F
L̄
z=z
T
WG1 (1, 1) − WG1 (1, 0) = z=ẑ+1 αz ln
αz ln
− z=z̄+1
Az
Az
!


P
P
A
A
z
z

− z=z̄
WG2 (1, 1) − WG2 (1, 0) = z=ẑ
z=1 αz ln
z=1 αz ln
F (L1 /L2 )
F L̄1 /L̄2
Pz=zT

where L1 /L2 is the labor allocation under free trade and free labor mobility. Suppose
 that ∆ > 0. Then
v 1 (1, 0) > v 2 (1, 0) and L1 /L2 > L̄1 /L̄2 . Since F is decreasing and ∆ > 0, F L̄1 /L̄2 > F L1 /L2 and,
hence, ẑ ≥ z̄. Finally, F L̄1 /L̄2 > Az for z = z̄ +1, ..., zT . Thus, WG1 (1, 1)−WG1 (1, 0) < 0. Suppose that

1 (1, 0) < v 2 (1, 0) and L /L < L̄1 /L̄2 . Since F is decreasing and ∆ < 0, F L̄1 /L̄2 <
∆ < 0. Then
v
1
2


F L1 /L2 . Hence, ẑ ≤ z̄. Finally,
F L̄1 /L̄2 < Az for z = 1, ....z̄. Thus, WG2 (1, 1) − WG2 (1, 0) < 0.

Note, however, that if F L̄1 /L̄2 = Az̄ , a small reallocation of mobile workers does not change the
marginal industry and, as consequence, there is no effect on w1 /w2 . In
 other words, ∆ 6= 0 implies that
(λT , λM ) = (1, 1) is not a Nash equilibrium outcome, but if F L̄1 /L̄2 = Az̄ free trade and partial labor
mobility can be a Nash equilibrium outcome.
5

 2
1 (0, 0) and
We have already proved that WG1 (1, 0) > WG1 (0,
1)
=
W
WG (1, 0) , WG2 (0, 1) >
G

Pz=z̄
2
2
2
1
2
WG (0, 0).
Finally, note that WG(1, 0) − WG (0, 1)
> m T 1 − T 2 if and
 = z=1 αz ln Az /F L̄ /L̄
Pz=z̄
1
2
1
2
only if z=1 αz ln Az /F L̄ /L̄
> m T − T , which completes the proof of the proposition. 
A.2.2 A continuum of goods

Assume that ZT = [0, k), ZN = [k, 1] and Qjz = Ljz /ajL,z . Let Az = a2L,z /a1L,z be a continuously
differentiable strictly decreasing function for z ∈ [0,k)that satisfies A0 > 1 and Ak < 1. All agents
 R1
R1
have the same preferences, given by u cj = 0 αz ln cjz dz, with 0 αz dz = 1. Thus, the indirect utility


R1
R1
function is given by v j = C + 0 αz ln wj /pjz dz, where C = 0 αz ln (αz ) dz.

Under autarky, all goods must be produced domestically and, hence, pjz = wj ajL,z for all z ∈ Z and
j ∈ J. The indirect
utility of a worker who owns one unit of labor in country j is v j = C + T j , where


R
1
j
T j = − 0 αz ln aL,z dz is a measure of the productivity of country j. If labor mobility is allowed, all

mobile workers go to or stay in the country with the higher T j .
Under free trade, in the trading equilibrium country 1 produces lower-indexed tradeable goods z ∈
[0, z̄] ⊂ ZT and non-tradeable goods z ∈ ZN = [k, 1] and country 2 produces higher-indexed tradeable
goods z ∈ [z̄, k) and non-tradeable goods z ∈ ZN = [k, 1]. The marginal tradeable industry z̄is given
by Az̄ = w1 /w2 . The balanced trade condition is w1 /w2 = [α (z̄) / (1 − αN − α (z̄))] L2 /L1 , where
R1
Rz
αN = k αz dz is the portion of income spent on non-tradeable goods and α (z) = 0 αz dz is the portion of
world income spent on tradeable goods in the range [0, z]. There exists a unique z̄, w1 /w2 , with z̄ ∈ (0, k)
and w1 /w2 > 0, that simultaneously satisfies the marginal tradeable industry condition and the balanced
trade condition.1 Since pz = w1 a1L,z for z ∈ [0, z̄], pz = w2 a2L,z for [z̄, k), pjz = wj ajL,z for z ∈ [k, 1] and
 
Rk
Az̄
dz in
j = 1, 2, the indirect utility of a worker who owns one unit of labor is v 1 = C + T 1 + z̄ αz ln A
z



R
z̄
Az
dz in country 2, where Az̄ = [α (z̄) / (1 − αN − α (z̄))] L2 /L1 .
country 1 and v 2 = C +T 2 + 0 αz ln A
z̄
If labor mobility is not allowed, then Lj = L̄j . If labor mobility is allowed, mobile workers will go to
or stay in the country with higher v j . If v 1 > v 2 , then mobile workers will move from country 2 to
1, v 1 will decrease and v 2 will increase. Analogously, if v 2 > v 1 , then mobile workers will move from
country 1 to 2, v 2 will decrease and v 1 will increase. Therefore, and, provided
that there are enough


1 = v 2 , which implies ln w 1 /w 2 = − (1 − α )−1 T 1 − T 2 ,
mobile workers, they will
relocate
until
v
N
N
N


R1
where TNj = − k αz ln ajL,z dz is the average productivity of country j in the production of nontradeable goods. This expression determines the ratio w1 /w2 which makes mobile workers indifferent to
the possibility of settling in one country or the other. It depends only on the productivity differences in
the non-tradeable industries. Once we know w1 /w2 , we can use Aẑ = w1 /w2 to determine the marginal
tradeable industry ẑ. Then, the balanced trade condition implies L2 /L1 = Aẑ (1 − αN − α (ẑ)) /α (ẑ).
The utility of a worker who owns one unit of labor is given by:
 
 
Rk
R z̄
Aẑ
Az
2
1
2
1
v = v = C + T + ẑ αz ln
dz = C + T + 0 αz ln
dz,
Az
Aẑ
1


It is simple to verify that there exists a unique z̄ ∈ (0, k) that satisfies Az̄ = [α (z̄) / (1 − αN − α (z̄))] L2 /L1 . Az is
2
1
a continuous and strictly decreasing function and A0 > 0. B (z) = [α (z) / (1 − αN − α (z))] L /L is a continuous and
strictly increasing function, B (0) = 0 and limz→k B (z) = ∞.

6


where (1 − αN ) ln (Aẑ ) = − TN1 − TN2 .
Moreover, there will be migration to country 1
whenever L̄2 /L̄1 > Aẑ (1 − αN − α (ẑ)) /α (ẑ) and migration to country 2 whenever L̄2 /L̄1 <
Aẑ (1 − αN − α (ẑ)) /α (ẑ). Finally,
verify that the distribution of mobile workers between the
 we must
j
j
countries does not violate L ∈ (1 − m) L̄ , L̄j + mL̄−j . In order to avoid such a situation, we impose
the following assumption.
Assumption 1 (continuum of goods). Labor mobility induces full wage convergence. Formally:

L̄2
N −α(ẑ))
> (1−m)
, where ẑ is implicitly given by (1 − αN ) ln (Aẑ ) = − TN1 − TN2 .
> Aẑ (1−α
α(ẑ)
L̄1 +mL̄2

L̄2 +mL̄1
(1−m)L̄1

Lemma 1 characterizes the effects of trade and labor mobility on relative wages.


R1
Lemma 1 (continuum of goods). Let T j = − 0 αz ln ajL,z dz be the average productiv
ity of country j and assume T 1 > T 2 . Define ∆z̄ = (1− αN ) ln (Az̄ ) + TN1 − TN2 , where Az̄ =

R1
[α (z̄) / (1 − αN − α (z̄))] L̄2 /L̄1 and TNj = − k αz ln ajL,z dz is the average productivity of country
j in the production of non-tradeable goods. Suppose that assumption 2 holds. Then:

1. If ∆z̄ > T 1 − T 2 , then v 1 (1, 0) − v 2 (1, 0) > v 1 (0, 0) − v 2 (0, 0) > v 1 (1, 1) − v 2 (1, 1) = 0.

2. If 0 < ∆z̄ < T 1 − T 2 , then v 1 (0, 0) − v 2 (0, 0) > v 1 (1, 0) − v 2 (1, 0) > v 1 (1, 1) − v 2 (1, 1) = 0.
3. If ∆z̄ < 0, then v 1 (0, 0) − v 2 (0, 0) > v 1 (1, 1) − v 2 (1, 1) = 0 > v 1 (1, 0) − v 2 (1, 0).

Proof : Under autarky, regardless of mobile workers’ location decisions, v j (0, λM ) = C + T j . Thus,
− v 2 (0, 0) = T 1 − T 2 , which is positive by assumption. Under free trade, if there is no labor
Rk
R z̄
mobility v 1 (1, 0) = C + T 1 + z̄ αz ln (Az̄ /Az ) dz and v 2 (1, 0) = C + T 2 + 0 αz ln (Az /Az̄ ) dz. Hence,
v 1 (1, 0) − v 2 (1, 0) = TN1 − TN2 + (1 − αN ) ln (Az̄ ). Under free trade, if there is free labor mobility
Rk
R ẑ
v 1 (1, 1) = C + T 1 + ẑ αz ln (Aẑ /Az ) dz and v 2 (1, 1) = C + T 2 + 0 αz ln (Az /Aẑ ) dz. Hence v 1 (1, 1) −
v 2 (1, 1) = TN1 −TN2 +(1 − αN ) ln (Aẑ ). Provided that assumption 1 holds, we have ln (Aẑ ) = ln w1 /w2 =

− (1 − αN )−1 TN1 − TN2 and, hence, v 1 (1, 1) − v 2 (1, 1) = 0. Simple comparisons complete the proof of
the lemma. 
v 1 (0, 0)

As in the simple Ricardian model, under free trade, labor mobility leads to a complete convergence in
real wages. The reason for this is that mobile workers move from the poor country to the rich country until
they equalize real wages (with Assumption 1 ensuring that there are enough mobile workers to make this
happen). Trade alone has an ambiguous effect on convergence. While, under autarky, the wage difference
depends on the average productivity differential (real wages are higher in country 1 when T 1 > T 2 ), under
free trade, it depends on the productivity differential in the marginal tradeable industry as well as on
the average productivity differential in non-tradeable industries (real wages are higher in country 1 when
∆z̄ = (1 − αN ) ln (Az̄ ) + TN1 − TN2 > 0). In turn, the productivity differential in the marginal industry
(Az̄ ) is high when country 1 is relatively labor-scarce and expenditure shares in low-indexed tradeable
goods are high. Note that we can interpret ∆z̄ as a measure of the productivity differential under free
trade. When it is higher than the average productivity differential, free trade induces divergence; when
it is positive but lower than the average productivity differential, free trade induces partial convergence;
and when it is negative, free trade leads to a reversal of fortune.
Proposition 1 characterizes the political equilibrium.

7

Proposition 1 (continuum of goods). Suppose that Assumption 1 holds, T 1 > T 2 , and ∆z̄ 6= 0.
Then, the trade and labor mobility game has three Nash equilibrium outcomes: (i) (λT , λM ) = (0, 0); (ii)
(λT , λM ) = (0, 1); and (iii) (λT , λM ) = (1, 0). Moreover:
1. WG1 (1, 0) > WG1 (0, 1) = WG1 (0, 0).

R z̄
2. WG2 (1, 0) , WG2 (0, 1) > WG2 (0, 0), while WG2 (1, 0) > WG2 (0, 1) if and only if 0 αz ln (Az /Az̄ ) dz >
m T1 − T2 .

Proof : Government 1 payoffs are given by WG1 (0, 0) = WG1 (0, 1) = C + T 1 , WG1 (1, 0) = C +
Rk
Rk
T 1 + z̄ αz ln (Az̄ /Az ) dz, and WG1 (1, 1) = C + T 1 + ẑ αz ln (Aẑ /Az ) dz. Government 2 payoffs are given
R z̄
WG2 (0, 0) = C + T 2 , WG2 (0, 1) = C + mT 1 + (1 − m) T 2 , WG2 (1, 0) = C + T 2 + 0 αz ln (Az /Az̄ ) dz and
R ẑ
WG2 (1, 1) = C + T 2 + 0 αz ln (Az /Aẑ ) dz. (These calculations are implicitly based on Assumption 1.)
(λT , λM ) = (0, 0) is always a Nash equilibrium outcome.
(λT , λM ) = (0, 1) is a Nash equilibrium outcome when WG1 (0, 1) ≥ WG1 (0, 0) and WG2 (0, 1) ≥
2
WG (0, 0). WG1 (0, 1) = WG1 (0, 0) = C + T 1 , while WG2 (0, 1) − WG2 (0, 0) = m T 1 − T 2 > 0, which
is positive by assumption.
(λT , λM ) = (1, 0) is a Nash equilibrium outcome when WG1 (1, 0) ≥ WG1 (0, 0) and WG2 (1, 0) ≥
2
WG (0, 0). Az > Az̄ for z ∈ [0, z̄] while Az < Az̄ for z ∈ [z̄, k]. Then WG1 (1, 0) − WG1 (0, 0) =
Rk
R z̄
2
2
z̄ αz ln (Az̄ /Az ) dz > 0 and WG (1, 0) − WG (0, 0) = 0 αz ln (Az /Az̄ ) dz > 0.

not a Nash
equilibrium outcome (provided that ∆z̄ = (1 − αN )−1 TN1 − TN2 −
 (λT , λM ) = (1, 1) is

ln (1 − αN − α (z̄)) L̄1 /α (z̄) L̄2
6= 0).
In order to prove this, note that WG1 (1, 1) −
R
R
R ẑ
k
k
WG1 (1, 0) = ẑ αz ln (Aẑ /Az ) dz − z̄ αz ln (Az̄ /Az ) dz and WG2 (1, 1) − WG2 (1, 0) = 0 αz ln (Az /Aẑ ) dz −
R z̄
If ẑ > z̄, then Aẑ < Az̄ and, hence, ln (Aẑ /Az ) < ln (Az̄ /Az ). Therefore,
0 αz ln (Az /Az̄ ) dz.
WG1 (1, 1) − WG1 (1, 0) < 0. If ẑ < z̄, then Aẑ > Az̄ and, hence, ln (Az /Aẑ ) < ln (Az /Az̄ ). Therefore,
WG2 (1, 1) − WG2 (1, 0) < 0. If ẑ = z̄, then Aẑ = Az̄ and, hence, WG1 (1, 1) = WG1 (1, 0) and WG2 (1, 1) =
R1


WG2 (1, 0). However, ẑ = z̄ if and only if (1 − αN )−1 k αz ln (Az ) dz + ln (1 − αN − α (z̄)) L̄1 /α (z̄) L̄2 =
0, i.e., whenever ∆z̄ = 0, which we rule out by assumption.

We have already proved that WG1 (1, 0) > WG1 (0, 1) = WG1 (0, 0) and WG2 (1, 0) , WG2 (0, 1) >
R z̄

WG2 (0, 0). Finally, note that WG2 (1, 0) − WG2 (0, 1) = 0 αz ln (Az /Az̄ ) dz − m T 1 − T 2 > 0 if and

R z̄
only if 0 αz ln (Az /Az̄ ) dz > m T 1 − T 2 , which completes the proof of the proposition. 
Proposition 1 (continuum of goods) is the analogous of Proposition 1 (finite set of goods) when there
is a continuum of goods. Other than free trade and free labor mobility, any other outcome is a Nash
equilibrium outcome. As in the previous section, free trade and free labor mobility are not a Nash
equilibrium outcome because workers in the rich country under free trade prefer to block labor mobility
(since the inflow of labor reduces real wages). Free trade and no labor mobility always dominates other
Nash equilibria for the rich country
R z̄ under autarky (country 1). The
 same is true for the poor country
under autarky (country 2) when 0 αz ln (Az /Az̄ ) dz > m T 1 − T 2 holds. The logic behind this result
is as follows. Under autarky, labor mobility does not affect workers in country 1 because their wages
are fully determined by the aggregate productivity of the country and they will not relocate even if they
have the chance to do so. Since all workers in country 1 gain from trade, free trade and no labor mobility
dominates other equilibria for country 1. Under autarky, mobile workers in country 2 will relocate to
country 1. Compared with a situation in which there is no trade and no labor mobility, this will produce
8


a gain of T 1 − T 2 per mobile worker. Compared with a situation in which there is no trade and no
R z̄
labor mobility, free trade will produce a gain of 0 αz ln (Az /Az̄ ) dz for each worker in country 2. Thus,
country 2 prefers free trade and no labor mobility to autarky and free labor mobility when gains from
trade for all (mobile and immobile) workers are higher than the productivity gains for mobile workers.
A.2.3 Endogenous non-tradeable goods (iceberg trade costs)
As in the case of exogenous non-tradeable goods, consider an economy with two countries (J = 2) and
a continuum of goods (Z = [0, 1]). The production functions are Qjz = Ljz /ajL,z , where ajL,z > 0 is
the unit labor requirement in industry z in country j. Let Az = a2L,z /a1L,z and assume that country
1 has a comparative advantage in lower-indexed goods. Specifically, for z ∈ [0, 1] Az is a continuously
differentiable strictly decreasing function. In contrast with the previous section, all goods are assumed to
be tradeable, but there are transportation costs. A fraction g < 1 of each good shipped from one country
to the other is lost.
Under autarky, the analysis is the same as in the previous section. Under free trade, in a trading
equilibrium, country 1 produces low-indexed goods z ∈ [0, z̄L ], country 2 produces high-indexed goods z ∈
[z̄H , 1] and both countries produce goods z ∈ [z̄L , z̄H ]. Goods in the ranges [0, z̄L ] and [z̄H , 1] are tradeable,
while goods in the range [z̄L , z̄H ] are non-tradeable. The marginal industries 0 < z̄L < z̄H < 1 are given by

gAz̄L = w1 /w2R= Az̄H /g. The balanced trade condition implies
w1 /w2 = [α (z̄L ) / (1 − α (z̄H ))] L2 /L1 ,

z
where α (z) = 0 αz dz. There is a unique tuple z̄L , z̄H , w1 /w2 with 0 < z̄L < z̄H < 1 and w1 /w2 > 0 that
simultaneously satisfies the two marginal industry conditions and the balanced
trade condition. Then, the
R1
indirect utility of a worker who owns one unit of labor is v 1 = C + T 1 + z̄H αz ln (Az̄H /Az ) dz in country 1
R z̄

and v 2 = C +T 2 + 0 Lαz ln(Az /Az̄L ) dz in country 2, where gAz̄L = [α (z̄L ) /1 − α (z̄H )] L2 /L1 = Az̄H /g
R1
and T j = − 0 αz ln ajL,z dz. If labor mobility is not allowed, then Lj = L̄j . If labor mobility is
allowed, mobile workers will go to or stay in the country with higher v j . If v 1 > v 2 , then mobile
workers will move from country 2 to 1, v 1 will decrease and v 2 will increase. Analogously, if v 2 > v 1 ,
then mobile workers will move from country 1 to 2, v 2 will decrease and v 1 will increase. Therefore,
1
2
and,
that

h R there are enough mobile workers, they
i will relocate until v = v , which implies:
 1provided
ẑH
1
1
2
ln w
w 2 = α(ẑL ) − ẑL αz ln (Az ) dz − [1 − α (ẑH )] ln (AẑH ) + ln g, where gAẑL = w /w = AẑH /g. Once

we have determined ẑL , ẑH , w1 /w2 , the balanced trade condition determines the country allocation of
mobile workers, which is given by L2 /L1 = w1 /w2 [1 − α (ẑH ) /α (ẑL )]. Then, indirect utilities are given
by:


R1
AẑH
1
2
1
v = v = C + T + ẑH αz ln
dz
Az

Finally,
we must verify that the distribution of mobile workers between countries does not violate Lj ∈

(1 − m) L̄j , L̄j + mL̄−j . In order to avoid such a situation, we impose the following assumption.
Assumption 1 (continuum of goods
and
h
i iceberg2 trade costs) Labor mobility induces full
1−α(ẑH )
L̄
L̄2 +mL̄1
convergence. Formally: (1−m)L̄1 > gAẑL α(ẑL ) > (1−m)
.
L̄1 +mL̄2
Lemma 1 characterizes the effects of trade and labor mobility on relative wages.

Lemma 1 (continuum of goods and iceberg trade costs). Let T j = −



j
α
ln
a
z
L,z dz
0

R1

be the average productivity of country j and assume T 1 > T 2 . Define ∆z̄L ,z̄H = α (z̄L ) ln (Az̄L ) +
9


1 − T 2 , where gA
2 /L̄1
[1 − α (z̄H)] ln (A
)
+
T
=
[α
(z̄
)
/1
−
α
(z̄
)]
L̄
= Az̄H /g and TNj =
z̄
z̄
L
H
H
L
N
N

R z̄H
j
z̄L αz ln aL,z dz is the average productivity of country j in the production of non-tradeable goods.
Suppose that Assumption 1 holds. Then:

1. If ∆z̄L ,z̄H > T 1 − T 2 , then v 1 (1, 0) − v 2 (1, 0) > v 1 (0, 0) − v 2 (0, 0) > v 1 (1, 1) − v 2 (1, 1) = 0.

2. If 0 < ∆z̄L ,z̄H < T 1 − T 2 , then v 1 (0, 0) − v 2 (0, 0) > v 1 (1, 0) − v 2 (1, 0) > v 1 (1, 1) − v 2 (1, 1) = 0.
3. If ∆z̄L ,z̄H < 0, then v 1 (0, 0) − v 2 (0, 0) > v 1 (1, 1) − v 2 (1, 1) = 0 > v 1 (1, 0) − v 2 (1, 0).

Proof : Under autarky, regardless of mobile workers’ location decisions, we have v j,im (0, µ) = C +
Thus, v 1,im (0, 0) − v 2,im (0, 0) = A1 − A2 , which is positive
 by
 assumption. Under free trade,
R1
Az̄H
1,im
1
if there is no factor mobility, v
(1, 0) = C + A + z̄H αz ln Az dz and v 2,im (1, 0) = C + A2 +


h
i
R z̄L
R
Az
1,im (1, 0) − v 2,im (1, 0) = z̄H α ln (A ) + ln (A )α(z̄L ) (A )1−α(z̄H ) . If
α
ln
dz.
Hence,
v
z
z
z
z̄L
z̄H
0
Az̄L
 A z̄L


R
R
1
ẑ
ẑ
L
A
there is free factor mobility, v 1 = C +A1 + ẑH αz ln AzH dz and v 2 = C +A2 + 0 αz ln Aẑz dz. Hence,
L
h
i
R ẑH
α(ẑL )
1−α(ẑH )
1,im
2,im
v
(1, 1)−v
(1, 1) = ẑL αz ln (Az )+ln (AẑL )
(AẑH )
. Provided that assumption 1 holds,
h
i
R
ẑ
in equilibrium it must be that ln (AẑL )α(ẑL ) (AẑH )1−α(ẑH ) = − ẑLH αz ln (Az ). Therefore, v 1,im (1, 1) −
Aj .

v 2,im (1, 1) = 0. Simple comparisons complete the proof of the lemma. 

Free trade and free labor mobility lead to full convergence in real wages, and trade has an ambiguous
effect on relative wages. Trade can produce, divergence,
partial convergence, or even a reversal of fortune,

depending on the values of ∆z̄L ,z̄H and T 1 − T 2 . Once again, we can interpret ∆z̄L ,z̄H as a measure of
the productivity differential between the countries under free trade. There are, however, two novelties.
First, since there are two marginal industries, we must average these productivity differentials. Second,
the average productivity of country j in the production of non-tradeable goods is now endogenous.
Proposition 1 characterizes the political equilibrium.
Proposition 1 (continuum of goods and iceberg trade costs). Suppose that Assumption 3
holds, T 1 > T 2 and ∆z̄L ,z̄H 6= 0. Then, the trade and labor mobility game has three Nash equilibria: (i)
(λT , λM ) = (0, 0); (ii) (λT , λM ) = (0, 1); and (iii) (λT , λM ) = (1, 0). Moreover:
1. WG1 (1, 0) > WG1 (0, 1) = WG1 (0, 0).

>
WG2 (0, 0),
2. WG2 (1, 0) , WG2 (0, 1)
R z̄L

1
2
0 αz ln (Az /Az̄L ) dz > m T − T .

while

WG2 (1, 0)

>

WG2 (0, 1)

if

and

only

if

Proof : Government 1 payoffs are given by WG1 (0, 0) = WG1 (0, 1) = C + A1 , WG1 (1, 0) = C + A1 +
R1
1
1
are given
z̄H αz ln (Az̄H /Az ) dz, and WG (1, 1) = C + A + ẑH αz ln (AẑH /Az ) dz. Government 2 payoffs


R
z̄
WG2 (0, 0) = C + A2 , WG2 (0, 1) = C + mA1 + (1 − m) A2 , WG2 (1, 0) = C + A2 + 0 L αz ln AAz̄z dz and
L


R ẑ
WG2 (1, 1) = C + A2 + 0 L αz ln AAẑz dz. (These calculations are implicitly based on Assumption 2).
L
(λT , λM ) = (0, 0) is always a Nash equilibrium.
R1

10

2
2
(λT , λM ) = (0, 1) is a Nash equilibrium when WG1 (0, 1) ≥ WG1 (0, 0) and
 WG (0, 1) ≥ WG (0, 0).
1
1
2
2
1
2
(0, 1) = WG (0, 0) = C + T , while WG (0, 1) − WG (0, 0) = m T − T > 0, which is positive by
assumption.
(λT , λM ) = (1, 0) is a Nash equilibrium when WG1 (1, 0) ≥ WG1 (0, 0) and WG2 (1, 0) ≥ WG2 (0, 0). Az >
R1
Az̄L for z ∈ [0, z̄L ) while Az < Az̄H for z ∈ (z̄H , 1]. Then WG1 (1, 0)−WG1 (0, 0) = z̄H αz ln (Az̄H /Az ) dz > 0
R z̄
and WG2 (1, 0) − WG2 (0, 0) = 0 L αz ln (Az /Az̄L ) dz > 0.
(λ , λ ) = (1, 1) is not a Nash equilibrium. In order to prove this, note that WG1 (1, 1) − WG1 (1, 0) =
R1 T M
R1
R ẑ
αz ln (AẑH /Az ) dz − z̄H αz ln (Az̄H /Az ) dz and WG2 (1, 1) − WG2 (1, 0) = 0 L αz ln (Az /AẑL ) dz −
ẑ
H
R z̄L
2
0 αz ln (Az /Az̄L ) dz. Since, in equilibrium, Az̄H = g Az̄L , either ẑL > z̄L and ẑH > z̄H or ẑL < z̄L
and ẑH < z̄H , or ẑL = z̄L and ẑH = z̄H . If ẑL > z̄L and ẑH > z̄H , then AẑH < Az̄H . Thus,
2
WG1 (1, 1) − WG1 (1, 0) < 0. If ẑL < z̄L and ẑH < z̄H , then AhẑL > Az̄L . Thus, WG2 (1, 1)
i −RWG (1, 0) < 0. Fiz̄
nally, note that ẑL = z̄L and ẑH = z̄H only if ∆z̄L ,z̄H = ln (Az̄L )α(z̄L ) (Az̄H )1−α(z̄H ) + z̄LH αz ln (Az ) = 0,
which we rule out by assumption.

We have already proved that WG1 (1, 0) > WG1 (0, 1) = WG1 (0, 0) and WG2 (1, 0) , WG2 (0, 1) >
R z̄

WG2 (0, 0). Finally, note that WG2 (1, 0) − WG2 (0, 1) = 0 L αz ln (Az /Az̄L ) dz − m T 1 − T 2 > 0 if and
R z̄L

only if 0 αz ln (Az /Az̄L ) dz > m T 1 − T 2 , which completes the proof of the proposition. 

WG1

Proposition 1 shows that iceberg transportation costs do not affect the political economy of trade and
labor mobility. Free trade and free labor mobility are not a Nash equilibrium. All the other outcomes
are Nash equilibria, but free trade and no labor mobility always dominate other equilibria for the rich
country
 same is true for the poor country under autarky (country 2)
R z̄under autarky (country 1), while the
when 0 L αz ln (Az /Az̄L ) dz > m T 1 − T 2 holds, i.e., when aggregate productivity differentials between
the countries are lower than the gains from trade for country 2.

A.3 Non-homothetic preferences
Consider an economy with two countries (J = {1, 2}) and a continuum of tradeable goods Z = [0, ∞)
indexed by z. Assume that Az = a2L,z /a1L,z is a continuously differentiable strictly increasing function,
A0 < 1 and limz→∞ Az > 1. Each agent owns 1 unit of labor and is either mobile or immobile. Goods
come in discrete
each agent can consume a unit or no unit of each good. The utility function is
 units
R ∞ and
j
j
given by u c = 0 bz cz dz, where bz > 0 is the utility weight of good z and cjz = 1 if good z is consumed
and cjz = 0 if it is not. Moreover, bz /ajL,z is a decreasing function of z for each j.

Under autarky, all goods must be produced domestically. Hence, if good z is produced, pjz = ajL,z wj ,

R∞
where wj is the wage rate in country j. A worker in country j tries to maximizes u cj = 0 bz cjz dz
R∞ j j


subject to 0 pz cz dz = wj . Since bz /ajL,z is decreasing, the worker selects cjz = 1 for z ∈ 0, ṽ j and

R ṽj
cjz = 0 for z ∈ v j , ∞ , where ṽ j is the unique solution of 0 ajL,z dz = 1. Therefore, the indirect utility
R ṽj
function of a worker in country j is v j (0, 0) = 0 bz dz. If labor mobility is allowed mobile workers will
j
go to or stay in the country with
n the highest v o.
Under free trade pz = min a1L,z w1 , a2L,z w2 . Since Az is continuous and strictly increasing, in the
trading equilibrium country 1 produces high-indexed goods z ∈ [z̄, ∞) and country 2 produces lowindexed goods z ∈ [0, z̄]. The marginal industry is given by Az̄ = w1 /w2 . A worker in country j tries

11


R∞
R∞
to maximizes u cj = 0 bz cjz dz subject to 0 pz cjz dz = wj . Since bz /ajL,z is decreasing for each j,
it must be the case that
any w1 and w2 , bz /pz is decreasing in z. Hence, a worker in country j
 for

j
selects cz = 1 for z ∈ 0, v̄ j and cjz = 0 for z ∈ v̄ j , ∞ , where v̄ 1 and v̄ 2 are given by (assuming that
R z̄
R v̄1
R z̄
R v̄2
v̄ j > z̄) (Az̄ )−1 0 a2L,z dz + z̄ a1L,z dz = 1 = 0 a2L,z dz + Az̄ z̄ a1L,z dz. The supply of good z ∈ [0, z̄] is
Q2z = L2z /a2L,z . Since v̄ j > z̄, each agent demands 1 unit of z ∈ [0, z̄], which implies that the aggregate
R z̄
R z̄

demand of z is Cz1 + Cz2 = L1 + L2 . Since 0 L2z dz = L2 , we obtain 0 a2L,z dz = L2 / L1 + L2 . Once
we have determined z̄, relative wages are given by w1 /w2 = Az̄ , while v̄ 1 and v̄ 2 are the solutions of
 2


R v̄1 1
R v̄2
1
2
and z̄ a1L,z dz = L1 /Az̄ L1 + L2 , respectively. Note that v̄ 2 > z̄
z̄ aL,z dz = 1 − L /Az̄ L + L

because L1 /Az̄ L1 + L2 > 0, v̄ 1 > z̄ if and only if Az̄ > L2 / L1 + L2 . The indirect utility of a worker
R v̄j
is v j = 0 bz dz. If labor mobility is not allowed, then Lj = L̄j . If labor mobility is allowed, then
mobile workers will go to or stay in the country with the highest v j (equivalently the highest v̄ 1 ). If
Az̄ > 1, then v̄ 1 > v̄ 2 and, hence, mobile workers will move from country 2 to 1. As a consequence, v̄ 1
will decrease and v 2 will increase. Conversely, if Az̄ < 1, then v̄ 1 > v̄ 2 and, hence, mobile workers will
move from country 1 to 2. As a consequence, v 2 will decrease and v 1 will increase. Therefore, provided
that there are enough mobile workers, they will relocate until v 1 = v 2 , which implies v̄ 1 = v̄ 2 = v̂ and
Aẑ = w1 /w2 = 1. Once we have determined ẑ, the country-allocation of mobile workers is given by
 R ẑ
R v̂
L2 = L̄1 + L̄2 0 a2L,z dz. The indirect utility of a worker is v 1 = v 2 = 0 bz dz, where v̂ and ẑ are
R v̂
R ẑ
implicitly given by ẑ a1L,z dz = 1 − 0 a2L,z dz and Aẑ = 1. Finally, we must verify that the distribution of


mobile workers between the countries does not violate Lj ∈ (1 − m) L̄j , L̄j + mL̄−j . This holds when
R ẑ
L̄2
L̄2 +mL̄1
> 0 a2L,z dz > (1−m)
, where Aẑ = 1. We must also verify that v̄ 1 > z̄, which holds when
L̄1 +L̄2R
L̄1 +L̄2

Rz
z 2
Az > 0 aL,z dz for z ∈ [zL , zH ], where zL and zH are given by 0 L a2L,z dz = (1 − m) L̄2 / L̄1 + L̄2 and
R zH 2


2
1
1
2
0 aL,z dz = L̄ + mL̄ / L̄ + L̄ , respectively. Thus, we impose the following assumption.
Assumption 2 (non-homothetic preferences). Labor mobility induces full wage converRz 2
R ẑ 2
2
(1−m)L̄2
L̄1
gence. Formally: L̄L̄1+m
dz
>
A
=
1.
Moreover,
A
>
a dz for
>
,
where
a
z
ẑ
2
1
2
L,z
0
+L̄
L̄ R+L̄

R z0H L,z
zL 2
2
1
2
z ∈ [zL , zH ], where zL and zH are give by 0 aL,z dz = (1 − m) L̄ / L̄ + L̄ and 0 a2L,z dz =


L̄2 + mL̄1 / L̄1 + L̄2 , respectively.
Lemma 2 characterizes the effects of trade and labor mobility on relative wages in the countries.
Lemma 2 (non-homothetic preferences). Suppose that Assumption 2 holds and ṽ 1 > ṽ 2 , where
R ṽj j
0 aL,z dz = 1. Then:
1. If Az̄ > 1 and
v 2 (1, 1) = 0.

R v̄1

>

R v̄2

then v 1 (1, 0) − v 2 (1, 0) > v 1 (0, 0) − v 2 (0, 0) > v 1 (1, 1) −

2. If Az̄ > 1 and
v 2 (1, 1) = 0.

R v̄1

<

R v̄2

bz dz then, v 1 (0, 0) − v 2 (0, 0) > v 1 (1, 0) − v 2 (1, 0) > v 1 (1, 1) −

ṽ1 bz dz

ṽ1 bz dz

ṽ2 bz dz,

ṽ2

3. If Az̄ < 1, then v 1 (0, 0) − v 2 (0, 0) > v 1 (1, 1) − v 2 (1, 1) = 0 > v 1 (1, 0) − v 2 (1, 0).
R ṽj
Proof : Under autarky, the indirect utility of a worker in country j is given by v j (0, 0) = 0 bz dz,
R ṽj
where 0 ajL,z dz = 1. Since ṽ 1 > ṽ 2 and bz > 0 for all z ∈ Z, it must be the case that v 1 (0, 0) −v 2 (0, 0) =
12

R ṽ1

bz dz > 0. Under free trade and no labor mobility, the indirect utility of a worker in country j is given

 R v̄2

R v̄j
R v̄1
by v j (1, 0) = 0 bz dz, where z̄ a1L,z dz = 1 − L̄2 /Az̄ L̄1 + L̄2 , z̄ a1L,z dz = L̄1 /Az̄ L̄1 + L̄2 and
R z̄ 2

R 1
2 / L̄1 + L̄2 . Since b > 0 for all z ∈ Z, v 1 (1, 0) − v 2 (1, 0) = v̄ b dz > 0 if and only if
a
dz
=
L̄
z
0 L,z
v̄2 z
R v̄1 1
1
2
1
1
2
v̄ > v̄ . Since v̄2 aL,z dz = 1 − 1/Az̄ and aL,z > 0 for all z ∈ Z, v̄ > v̄ if and only if Az̄ > 1. We have
already seen that, under free trade and free labor mobility, the indirect utility of a worker is the same in
both countries, i.e., v 1 (1, 1) − v 2 (1, 1) = 0. Finally, v 1 (1, 0) − v 2 (1, 0) > v 1 (0, 0) − v 2 (0, 0) if and only
R v̄1
R ṽ1
R v̄1
R v̄2
if v̄2 bz dz > ṽ2 bz dz or, which amounts to the same thing, ṽ1 bz dz > ṽ2 bz dz. 
ṽ2

Trade and labor mobility induce full convergence because workers move from the poor country under
free trade to the rich country under free trade until the level of well-being in the two countries is equalized.
When Az̄ > 1, under free trade, country 1 is richer than country 2 and, hence, some workers will migrate
to country 2. Since we are assuming that country 1 is the rich country under autarky, Az̄ > 1 implies
that free trade will no alter the countries’ relative positions. However, it is possible that free trade will
reduce or amplify the difference between the countries’ levels of well-being. Without specifying bz , it is
difficult to determine when trade will induce convergence beyond the general condition that the gains
R v̄1
R v̄2
from trade in the rich country must be lower than in the poor country ( ṽ1 bz dz < ṽ2 bz dz).2
Proposition 2 characterizes the political equilibrium.
Proposition 2 (non-homothetic preferences). Suppose that Assumption 2 holds and ṽ 1 > ṽ 2 ,
R ṽj
where 0 ajL,z dz = 1. Then, the trade and labor mobility game has three Nash equilibrium outcomes: (i)
(λT , λM ) = (0, 0); (ii) (λT , λM ) = (0, 1); and (iii) (λT , λM ) = (1, 0). Moreover:
1. WG1 (1, 0) > WG1 (0, 1) = WG1 (0, 0).
2.



WG2 (1, 0) , WG2 (0, 1) > WG2 (0, 0), while WG2 (1, 0) > WG2 (0, 1) if and only if

R v̄2

ṽ2 bz dz

>m

R ṽ1
ṽ2

bz dz.

R ṽ1
R ṽ2
Proof: Since ṽ 1 > ṽ 2 implies v 1 = 0 bz dz > 0 bz dz = v 2 , under autarky and free labor mobility,
all mobile workers go to or stay in country 1. Due
R v̂to assumption 2, under free trade and free labor
mobility, mobile workers relocate until v 1 = v 2 = 0 bz dz. The payoffs of government 1 are given by:
R ṽ1
R ṽ1
R v̄1
WG1 (0, 0) = WG1 (0, 1) = 0 bz dz, where ṽ 1 is given by 0 a1L,z dz = 1; WG1 (1, 0) = 0 bz dz, where
R z̄
R v̄1
R v̂
R v̂
v̄ 1 is given by A1z̄ 0 a2L,z dz + z̄ a1L,z dz = 1; and WG1 (1, 1) = 0 bz dz, where v̂ is given by ẑ a1L,z dz =
R ẑ
R ṽ2
1 − 0 a2L,z dz. The payoffs of government 2 are given by: WG2 (0, 0) = 0 bz dz, where ṽ 2 is given by
R ṽ2 2
R ṽ1
R ṽ2
R v̄2
2
2
2
0 aL,z dz = 1; WG (0, 1) = m 0 bz dz + (1 − m) 0 bz dz; WG (1, 0) = 0 bz dz, where v̄ is given by
R z̄ 2
R v̄2 1
R
v̂
1
0 aL,z dz + Az̄ z̄ aL,z dz = 1; and WG (1, 1) = 0 bz dz.
(λT , λM ) = (0, 0) is a always a Nash equilibrium outcome.
2

For example, if bz = 1/z, then there will be convergence whenever v̄ 1 /ṽ 1 < v̄ 2 /ṽ 2 , i.e., if free trade leads to a higher
percentage increase in the range of goods consumed by the poor country than it does in the rich country. If we also specify
z
a1L,z and a2L,z , we can characterize the conditions for convergence in greater detail. Let a2L,z = 1 for all z, a1L,z = γ/e

z
1
2
2
1
2
1
z̄
z̄
with 1 < γ < e/ (e − 1). Then Az = e /γ, ṽ = ln [γ/ (γ − 1)], ṽ = 1, z̄ = L̄ / L̄ + L̄ , v̄ = ln γe / γ (1 + z̄) − e ,
v̄ 2 = ln ez̄ /z̄ , ẑ = ln (γ),v̂ = ln (γ/ẑ). Thus, free trade will induce convergence in real wages if and only if γ < ez̄
and ln γez̄ / γ (1 + z̄) − ez̄
< ln [γ/ (γ −1)] ln ez̄ /z̄ (γ) < zH and z < ez /γ < 1 + z for z ∈ [zL , zH ], where zL =
(1 − m) L̄/ L̄1 + L̄2 and zH = L̄2 + mL̄1 / L̄1 + L̄2 .

13

(λT , λM ) = (0, 1) is a Nash equilibrium outcome when WGj (0, 1) ≥ WGj (0, 0) for j = 1, 2. WG1 (0, 1) =
R ṽ1
WG1 (0, 0), while WG2 (0, 1) − WG2 (0, 0) = m ṽ2 bz dz > 0 because bz > 0 for all z and ṽ 1 > ṽ 2 .
(λT , λM ) = (1, 0) is a Nash equilibrium outcome when WGj (1, 0) ≥ WGj (0, 0) for j = 1, 2. The
R ṽ1
indirect utility of a worker in country 1 under autarky is v 1 (0, 0) = 0 bz dz, where ṽ 1 is given by
R ṽ1 1
0 aL,z dz = 1. The indirect utility of a worker in country 1 under free trade and no labor mobility is
R v̄1
R z̄
R v̄1
R z̄
v 1 (1, 0) = 0 bz dz, where v̄ 1 is given by (Az̄ )−1 0 a2L,z dz + z̄ a1L,z dz = 1. Therefore, (Az̄ )−1 0 a2L,z dz +
R v̄1 1
R ṽ1 1
R z̄ 1
R v̄1 1
R ṽ1 1
z̄ aL,z dz = 0 aL,z dz. This implies 0 aL,z (Az /Az̄ ) dz+ z̄ aL,z dz = 0 aL,z dz, which, after some simple
R v̄1
R z̄
algebra, implies ṽ1 a1L,z dz = 0 a1L,z [1 − (Az /Az̄ )] dz. Since Az < Az̄ for z ∈ [0, z̄) and a1L,z > 0 for all
R v̄1
R z̄
z, it must be the case that 0 a1L,z [1 − (Az /Az̄ )] dz > 0. Since a1L,z > 0 for all z, ṽ1 a1L,z dz > 0 implies
R v̄1
v̄ 1 > ṽ 1 . Finally, since bz > 0 for all z, v̄ 1 > ṽ 1 implies WG1 (1, 0) − WG1 (0, 0) = ṽ1 bz dz > 0. The indirect
R ṽ2
R ṽ2
utility of a worker in country 2 under autarky is v 2 (0, 0) = 0 bz dz, where ṽ 2 is given by 0 a2L,z dz =
1. The indirect utility of a worker in country 2 under free trade and no labor mobility is v 2 (1, 0) =
R v̄2
R z̄ 2
R v̄2 1
R z̄ 2
R v̄2 1
2 is given by
b
dz,
where
v̄
a
dz
+
A
a
dz
=
1.
Therefore,
a
dz
+
A
z
z̄
z̄
L,z
L,z
L,z
0
0
z̄
0
z̄ aL,z dz =
R ṽ2 2
R z̄ 2
R v̄2
R ṽ2 2
2
0 aL,z dz. This implies 0 aL,z dz + z̄ (Az̄ /Az ) aL,z dz = 0 aL,z dz, which, after some simple algebra,
R v̄2
R ṽ2
implies z̄ (Az̄ /Az ) a2L,z dz = z̄ a2L,z dz. Since Az > Az̄ > 0 for z > z̄ and a2L,z > 0 for all z, it must be
R v̄2
the case that v̄ 2 > ṽ 2 . Finally, since bz > 0 for all z, v̄ 2 > ṽ 2 implies WG2 (1, 0) − WG2 (0, 0) = ṽ2 bz dz > 0.
(λT , λM ) = (1, 1) is not a Nash equilibrium outcome. Given L1 and L2 , the equilibrium v̄ 1 , v̄ 2 , z̄
 R v̄2

R v̄1
R z̄
is determined by z̄ a1L,z dz = 1 − L2 /Az̄ L1 + L2 , z̄ a1L,z dz = L1 /Az̄ L1 + L2 , and 0 a2L,z dz =


L2 / L1 + L2 . Differentiating these expressions with respect to L1 / L1 + L2 , we obtain
−A′z̄ L2
∂v̄ 1
<0
=
∂ [L1 / (L1 + L2 )]
(Az̄ )2 (L1 + L2 ) a1L,v̄1 a2L,z̄
∂v̄ 2
A′z̄ L1
=
>0
2
∂ [L1 / (L1 + L2 )]
(Az̄ ) (L1 + L2 ) a1L,v̄2 a2L,z̄
Thus, as the proportion of the labor force that decides to relocate to country 1 increases (decreases), v̄ 1
decreases (increases) and v̄ 2 increases (decreases). We have already shown that v̄ 1 > v̄ 2 if and only if
Az̄ > 1. Therefore, when Az̄ > 1, if there is free labor mobility, L1 > L̄1 and L2 < L̄2 . Then, v̄ 1 < v̂ < v̄ 2 ,
R v̄1
R v̂
which implies WG1 (1, 0) − WG1 (1, 1) = v̂ bz dz > 0 and WG2 (1, 1) − WG2 (1, 0) = v̄2 bz dz > 0. Conversely,
when Az̄ < 1, if there is free labor mobility, L1 < L̄1 and L2 > L̄2 . Then, v̄ 2 < v̂ < v̄ 1 , which implies
R v̂
R v̄2
WG1 (1, 1) − WG1 (1, 0) = v̄1 bz dz > 0 and WG2 (1, 0) − WG2 (1, 1) = v̂ bz dz > 0. Thus, provided that
Az̄ 6= 1, free trade and free labor mobility will never be a Nash equilibrium outcome.
We have already shown that WG1 (1, 0) > WG1 (0, 0) = WG1 (0, 1) and WG2 (1, 0) > WG1 (0, 0) and
R v̄2
R ṽ1
WG2 (0, 1) > WG2 (0, 0). The last step is to compare WG2 (1, 0) = 0 bz dz and WG2 (0, 1) = m 0 bz dz +
R ṽ2
R v̄2
R ṽ1
(1 − m) 0 bz dz. WG2 (1, 0) > WG2 (0, 0) if and only if ṽ2 bz dz > m ṽ2 bz dz. This completes the proof of
the proposition. 

14

A.4 Multiple countries
Consider an economy with a finite set of countries J countries, indexed by j = 1, ..., J, and a continuum
of tradeable goods, ZT = [0, 1] indexed by z. Assume there are no geographic barriers that limit the
mobility of tradeable goods. Let L̄j and Lj be the labor endowment and the labor force of country j,
 hR 1  ρ i ρ1
respectively. Only a fraction m ∈ [0, 1] of L̄j is mobile. Preferences are given by u cj = 0 cjz dz ,
with σ = (1 − ρ)−1 > 1, for all agents in every countries. Let ajL,z be the unit labor requirement of good


j θ
z in country j. The cumulative distribution function of ajL,z is given by Pr ajL,z ≤ a = 1 − e−T a ,

where T j > 0 and θ > σ − 1. These distributions are independent across goods and countries.
Given ajL,z , if good z is produced in country j, its price will be pjz = ajL,z wj , where wj is the wage rate in


country j. Thus, if good z is produced in country j, its price distribution will be Gjz (p) = Pr pjz ≤ p =
−T j

1−e



p
wj

θ

. Under autarky, all goods can only be produced domestically and, hence, the price
−T j

p

θ

wj
. For the CES utility function, the exact price
distribution of good z in country j is Gjz (p) = 1−e
hR  ρ i 1 hR
i1
1

 1−σ
− 1
ρ
ρ
1
∞
index is given by P j = 0 pjz dz = 0 (p)ρ dGjz (p) = γ T j θ wj , where γ = Γ θ+1−σ
,
θ
1

Γ is the Gamma function and 1 + θ > σ. Hence, the real wage rate in country j is wj /P j = T j θ /γ
or, equivalently, the indirect utility function of a worker in country j is v j = − ln (γ) + 1θ ln T j . As a
consequence, if migration is allowed, all mobile workers will go to or stay in the country with the highest
T j.
Under complete free trade, consumers will buy from the less expensive producer. The lowest price
is lower than p unless each country is selling at a higher price. Therefore, the price-distribution
that
 θ
PJ
i
p
j
QJ h
−
T
j=1
wj
consumers actually face for good z is Gz (p) = 1 − j=1 1 − Gjz (p) = 1 − e
. The


R
∞Q
j
i
probability that country j is the lowest cost supplier of good z is qz = 0
i6=j 1 − Gz (p) dGz (p) =
 j −θ
hR
i1


− θ1
R ∞
1

PJ
ρ
1
ρ
ρ
j w j −θ
ρ
where
P
=
T j γw
,
(p
)
dz
=
(p)
dG
(p)
=
γ
T
is the exact
z
z
j=1
P
0
0

price index. Since there is a continuum of goods, qzj is also the fraction ofPgoods that each country
buys from j. Thus, the balanced trade conditions are given by wj Lj = qzj Ji=1 wi Li for j = 1, ..., J.
 k j 1
1+θ
Solving these equations, we obtain wk /wj = TLk / TLj
. Hence, the real wage rate in country j is
1
 1 hPJ
 1
 θ i
i 1+θ Li 1+θ θ or, equivalently, the indirect utility of a worker in
wj /P = (1/γ) T j /Lj 1+θ
T
i=1
 j
hP
 1
 θ i
1
j
i 1+θ Li 1+θ . If migration is not allowed,
ln TLj + 1θ ln
T
country j is v = − ln (γ) + 1+θ
i∈J

then Lj = L̄j for all j ∈ J. If migration
 P andi  enough workers are mobile, the equilibrium
P is allowed
allocation of workers will be Lj = T j / i∈J T i
i∈J L̄ . Then, regardless of the location of a given
worker, the indirect utility
of
that
worker
under
free
trade and free labor mobility will be given by

P
1
j
i
v = − ln (γ) + θ ln
i∈J T . Finally, we must verify that the distribution of mobile workers across
countries satisfies Lj ≥ (1 − m) L̄j for all j ∈ J, i.e., we need to impose the following assumption.
Assumption
countries).
Complete labor mobility induces full wage convergence. For i3 (multiple
P
P
i
i
mally: mini∈J T / (1 − m) L̄ ≥ i∈J T / i∈J L̄i .
15

Lemma 3 characterizes the effects of trade and labor mobility on the relative wages.
Lemma 3 (multiple countries). Suppose that Assumption 3 holds and T j > T k . Then:


1. If ln L̄j /L̄k < (θ)−1 ln T k /T j , then trade induces divergence in real wages between countries j
and k, but trade and labor mobility undo the divergence, inducing complete convergence. Formally:
v j (1, 0) − v k (1, 0) > v j (0, 0) − v k (0, 0) > v j (1, 1) − v k (1, 1) = 0.



2. If (θ)−1 ln T k /T j < ln L̄j /L̄k < ln T j /T k , then trade induces convergence in real wages
between countries j and k and trade and labor mobility induce complete convergence. Formally:
v j (0, 0) − v k (0, 0) > v j (1, 0) − v k (1, 0) > v j (1, 1) − v k (1, 1) = 0.


3. If ln L̄j /L̄k > ln T j /T k , then trade induces a reversal of fortune between countries j and k but
trade and labor mobility undo this reversal, inducing complete convergence in real wages. Formally:
v j (0, 0) − v k (0, 0) > v j (1, 1) − v k (1, 1) = 0 > v j (1, 0) − v k (1, 0).
Proof : Under autarky, regardless of mobile workers’
location decisions, we have v j (0, µ) = − ln (γ) +

j
j
k
j
k
(1/θ) ln T . Thus, v (0, 0) − v (0, 0) = θ ln T /T , which is positive by assumption. Under free trade,
hP

 1
 θ i
i 1+θ L̄i 1+θ .
if there is no labor mobility, v j (1, 0) = − ln (γ) + (1 + θ)−1 ln T j /L̄j + (1/θ) ln
T
i∈J


−1 
j
k
j
j
k
k
Hence, v (1, 0) − v (1, 0) = (1 + θ)
ln T /L −Pln T /L
. If there is free labor mobility and

i . Hence, v j (1, 1) − v k (1, 1) = 0. Simple
Assumption 3 holds, v j (1, 1) = − ln (γ) + (1/θ) ln
T
i∈J
comparisons complete the proof of the lemma. 
Under free trade, labor mobility induces full convergence in real wages in all of the countries in the
world. The reason is that mobile workers migrate from the relatively poor countries under free trade
(those with low T i /L̄i ) to the relatively rich countries under free trade (those with high T i /L̄i ) until real
wages are the same in all locations. There is only one implicit condition behind this result: There must
be enough mobile workers in poor countries so that migration from poor to rich countries is sufficient
to fully equalize T i /Li in all countries. Assumption 3 ensures that this is the case even for the poorest
country in the world (lowest T i /L̄i ). Formally, Assumption 3 implies that, if all the mobile workers in
the poorest country in the world decide to migrate to other countries, the real wage of a worker in that
country will be higher than in the rest of world. Trade alone has an ambiguous effect on convergence.
While, under autarky, differences in real wages depend only on relative levels of productivity (real wages
are higher in country j than in country k when T j > T k ), under free trade, they also depend on relative
labor abundance (real wages are higher in country j than in country k when T j /L̄j > T k /L̄k ). Since it
is perfectly possible that T j > T k , but T j /L̄j < T k /L̄k , trade can lead to a reversal of fortune if the
country with a higher aggregate level of productivity is relatively labor-abundant.
So far, we have considered polar cases, i.e., “free trade” means that all countries are allowing free
trade and “autarky” means that there is no trade at all. The same is true of our consideration of labor
mobility. However, it is possible that countries are trading only with some countries. Similarly, countries
may accept labor mobility only with a restricted group of countries. Proposition 3 characterizes the
political equilibrium when each country can decide to trade or not and can decide to allow labor mobility
or not with each other country. The only restriction that we impose is that if country i accepts free trade
(labor mobility) with country j and country j accepts free trade (labor mobility) with country k, then
country i must accept free trade (labor mobility) with country k.
16

Proposition 3 (multiple countries). Suppose that assumption 3 holds and assume that T j 6= T k
and T j /L̄j 6= T k /L̄k for all j, k ∈ J and j 6= k. Then:
1. No trade and any pattern of labor mobility policy is a Nash equilibrium outcome. Moreover, among
those equilibria, no trade and complete free labor mobility prevail over the other equilibrium outcomes
for all countries.
2. No labor mobility and any pattern of trade policy is a Nash equilibrium outcome. Moreover, among
those equilibria, no labor mobility and complete free trade prevail over the other equilibrium outcomes
for all countries.
3. WGj (1, 0) > WGj (0, 1) if and only if:

 1
 θ 
P
i
i
1+θ
T
L̄ 1+θ
 > m ln
ln  i∈J 1
 θ
j
j
1+θ
1+θ
L̄
(T )

!

maxi∈J T i
Tj

In other words, if the above condition holds, for country complete free trade and no labor mobility
are better than complete free factor mobility and no trade.

4. Any pattern of trade policy other than complete autarky and any pattern of labor mobility policy
within the countries that trade with each other other than no labor mobility are not a Nash equilibrium outcome. In particular, complete free trade and any pattern of labor mobility policy other
than no mobility are not a Nash equilibrium outcome.
Proof : No trade and any pattern of labor mobility policy is a Nash equilibrium outcome. Suppose
that no country allows free trade and consider any partition JM of the set of countries J. Each element
of JM is a set of countries that allow factor mobility among them, but do not allow it with the rest of
world. Arbitrarily select j ∈ JM ∈ JM . Since all countries are blocking trade, there is no unilateral
move by j that can induce trade. Since countries in J − JM do not accept labor mobility with countries
in JM , there is no unilateral move by j that can induce labor mobility outside JM . Therefore, the
only relevant decision for j is about labor mobility with countries in JM . In fact, given that mobile
workers can move from one country to another at no cost, j must decide between accepting free labor
mobility with all countries in JM or with none of them. Regardless of j’s decision, immobile workers
in country j get v j = − ln γ + (1/θ) ln T j . If j does not allow labor mobility, then mobile workers in j
also get v j = − ln γ + (1/θ) ln T j . Conversely, if j allows labor mobility, mobile workers
in j will relocate

in the richest country in JM . Thus, they will get v j = − ln γ + (1/θ) maxi∈JM ln T i . Since WGj =
mv j,m + (1 − m) v j,im , it follows that WGj when j allows labor mobility will be higher than or equal to WGj
when j blocks labor mobility. Finally, since j ∈ JM ∈ JM were also selected arbitrarily, the same analysis
applies to any j ∈ JM ∈ JM , which completes the proof that no trade and any pattern
of labor mobility are

a Nash equilibrium outcome. Finally, note that WGj = − ln γ + (m/θ) maxi∈JM ln T i + [(1 − m) /θ] ln T j
j
is nondecreasing in JM . Indeed, W
G is strictly increasing in JM for all countries except the one with

the highest T j , for which maxi∈JM ln T i does not change with JM . Thus, under complete autarky, the
pattern of labor mobility that maximizes WGj for all j ∈ J is JM = J. This completes the proof of part
1.
17

No labor mobility and any pattern of trade policies is a Nash equilibrium outcome. Suppose that no
country allows migration and consider any partition JT of the set of countries J. Each element of JT
is a set of countries that allows free trade within that group, but does not allow it with the rest of the
world. Arbitrarily select j ∈ JT ∈ JT . Since no country is offering free labor mobility, there is nothing
that country j can do to bring about labor mobility. Suppose that country j decides
to trade only with
hP

 1
 θ i
j
−1
j
j
j
i 1+θ L̄i 1+θ .
a subset J˜T ⊂ JT . Then, W = v = − ln (γ) + (1 + θ) ln T /L̄ + (1/θ) ln
T
˜
G

i∈JT

WGj

Since
increases with the number of countries in JT , the best response for country j is to set J˜T = JT .
Since we have picked an arbitrary country, the same analysis applies to all j ∈ JT ∈ JT . Therefore,
complete free trade and any pattern of labor mobility policy
equilibrium
outcome. Finally,
hP are a Nash

 1
 θ i
j
−1
i
i
j
j
1+θ
1+θ
note that WG = − ln γ + (1 + θ) ln T /L̄ + (1/θ) ln
L̄
is increasing in JT .
i∈JT T

Thus, when there is no labor mobility, the pattern of trade that maximizes WGj for all j ∈ J is JT = J.
This completes the proof of part 2.
The payoff of the government of
j under autarky and free factor mobility is given by
 country
j
i
WG (0, 1) = − ln γ + (m/θ) maxi∈J ln T + [(1 − m) /θ] ln T j , while, under complete free trade and
hP

 1
 θ i
i 1+θ L̄i 1+θ . Thereno labor mobility, it is WGj (1, 0) = − ln γ + (1 + θ)−1 ln T j /L̄j + θ1 ln
T
i∈JT
"P
#


1
θ
maxi∈J {Ai }
(Ai ) 1+θ (L̄i ) 1+θ
j
j
i∈J
fore, WG (1, 0) > WG (0, 1) if and only if ln
> m ln
. This completes
θ
1
Aj
(Aj ) 1+θ (L̄j ) 1+θ
the proof of part 3.
Free trade and any pattern of labor mobility other than no mobility is not a Nash equilibrium outcome.
Assume that all countries are allowing free trade and consider any arbitrary labor mobility partition JM
for which at least one set JM has more than one country. Among the countries in JM , let j be the one
with the highest T j /L̄j ratio. Next, we show that, if country j blocks labor mobility with countries in
JM , then WGj increases. The utility of a worker in country j ∈ JM ∈ JM is given by:
1
v = − ln (γ) +
ln
1+θ
j



Tj
Lj





 1
 1
 θ
 θ
P
P
1
i 1+θ
i 1+θ
i 1+θ
i 1+θ
+ ln
L
+ i∈J−JM T
L
,
i∈JM T
θ

where Li is the labor force of country i. Let us reorder the countries in JM in such a way that
T 1 /L̄1 > T 2 /L̄2 > ... > T nM /L̄nM , where nM = #JM ≥ 2 is the number of countries in JM . Mobile worker will go to or stay in the country with the highest T j /Lj . Thus, mobile workers in JM
will first relocate to country 1 until T 1 /L1 = T 2 / (1 − m) L̄2 . Then, they will relocate to countries
1 and 2 until T 1 /L1 = T 2 /L2 = T 3 / (1 − m) L̄3 . The relocation of mobile
when (a)
Pl workers
Pl willi endP
1
1
l
l
l+1
2
n
n
i
M
M
M
T /L = ... = T /L > T / (1 − m) L̄ > ... > T / (1 − m) L̄
and i=1 L = i=1 L̄ +m ni=l+1
L̄i ;
P
P
n
n
1
1
2
2
n
n
i
i
j
M
M
M and
(b) T /L = T /L = ... = T M /L
In case (a), we obtain L =
i=1 L =
i=1 L̄ .


P
P
P
n
l
l
i
i for j = 1, ..., l and Lj = (1 − m) L̄j for j = l + 1, ..., n . In
M
T j / i=1 T i
M
i=1 L̄ + m i=l+1 L̄
order for this to be the equilibrium allocation of mobile workers we must verify that Lj ≥ (1 − m) L̄j for
j = 1, ..., n
and T 1 /L1 = ... = Tl /Ll > T l+1 / (1 − m) L̄l+1 , which holds if and only if T l / (1 − m) L̄l ≥
M
Pl
P
Pn M
l
i
i
i > T l+1 / (1 − m) L̄l+1 . We must also check that there is not another
i=1 T /
i=1 L̄ + m i=l+1 L̄
P M i  Pn M i 
l′ < l for which the above condition holds. In case (b), we obtain Lj = T j / ni=1
T
for
i=1 L̄
j = 1, ..., nM . In order for this to be the equilibrium allocation of mobile workers we must verify that
18

P M i Pn M i
Lj ≥ (1 − m) L̄j for j = 1, ..., nM , which holds if and only if T nM /(1 − m) L̄nM ≥ ni=1
T / i=1 L̄ . Sum
Pl
Pl
P
j
j
i
i + m nM L̄i
ming up, the equilibrium allocation of mobile workers is L = T / i=1 T
L̄
i=1
i=l+1
for j = 1, ..., l (JM ) and Lj = (1− m) L̄j for j = l (JM ) +
 1, ..., nM , where l (JM ) is given by the first time
Pl
Pl
PnM
l
l
i
i
i
that T / (1 − m) L̄ ≥ i=1 T /
> T l+1 / (1 − m) L̄l+1 holds .
i=1 L̄ + m i=l+1 L̄
P

P
P
l
i + m nM L̄i >
Result 1: l (JM − {1}) ≥ l (JM ). Proof: It suffices to show that li=1 T i /
L̄
i=1
i=l+1
P

Pl
Pn M
l
i
i
i
for each l.
i=2 T /
i=2 L̄ + m i=l+2 L̄
Pl
Pl
i
i
T1
T1
i=2 T
i=2 T
⇒
>
>
P
P
P
l
l
nM
i
i
i
L̄1
L̄1
i=2 L̄
i=2 L̄ + m i=l+2 L̄
P
Pl
i
T 1 + li=2 T i
i=2 T
⇔
>
P
P
P
P
nM
l
M
i
i
L̄1 + li=2 L̄i + m ni=l+2
L̄i
i=2 L̄ + m i=l+2 L̄
Pl
Pl
i
i
i=1 T
i=2 T
⇔ Pl
>
P
P
P
nM
nM
l
i
i
i
i
i=1 L̄ + m i=l+1 L̄
i=2 L̄ + m i=l+1 L̄

The first line relies on the fact that we have reordered countries in such a way that T 1 /L̄1 > T 2 /L̄2 >
... > T nM /L̄nM . The other lines are simple algebra.
Result 2: L̄1 < L1 (JM ) and Lj (JM − {1}) ≥ Lj (JM ) for j = 2, ..., nM . Proof:
Pl
Pl
i
i
T1
T1
i=1 T
i=1 T
>
>
⇒
Pl
Pl
PnM
i
i
i
L̄1
L̄1
i=1 L̄
i=1 L̄ + m i=l+1 L̄
!
P

Pn M
T1
l
i
i
⇒ Pl
L̄
+
m
L̄
> L̄1
i=1
i=l+1
i
i=1 T
⇒ L1 (JM ) > L̄1

The first line relies on the fact that we have reordered countries in such a way that T 1 /L̄1 >
AnM
. The last line introduces the equilibrium value of L1 (JM ).
L̄nM
Pl
Pl
i
i
T1
T1
i=2 T
i=2 T
>
⇒
>
P
P
P
l
l
nM
i
i
i
L̄1
L̄1
i=2 L̄
i=2 L̄ + m i=l+1 L̄
!
P

P M
Tj
l
⇒ Pl
L̄i + m ni=l+1
L̄i >
i=2
i
i=2 T

Tj
Pl

i=1 T

⇒ Lj (JM − {1}) ≥ Lj (JM ) for j ≤ l (JM − {j})

i

!

P
l

i=1 L̄

i

+m

Pn M

A2
L̄2

> ... >

i=l+1 L̄

i



The first line relies on the fact that we have reordered countries in such a way that T 1 /L̄1 > T 2 /L̄2 >
... > T nM /L̄nM . The last line introduces the equilibrium values of Lj (JM − {1}) and Lj (JM ) for j ≤
l (JM − {j}). Finally, for l > l (JM − {j}), we have Lj (JM ) = (1 − m) L̄j . Thus, it must be the case
that Lj (JM − {1}) ≥ (1 − m) L̄j for l > l (JM − {j}).

19

Result 3: v j is decreasing in Lj and increasing in Li . Proof: v j is given by:
 j


 1
 θ
 1
 θ
P
P
T
1
1
i 1+θ
j
i 1+θ
i 1+θ
i 1+θ
ln
+ ln
L
+ i∈J−JM T
L
v = − ln (γ) +
i∈JM T
1+θ
Lj
θ

Taking the derivative of v j with respect to Lj and Li , we obtain:


 1
 θ
T j 1+θ Lj 1+θ
1
∂v j
−1 +
<0
=
θ
1
P
∂Lj
(1 + θ) Lj
(T i ) 1+θ (Li ) 1+θ
i∈JM

1
1+θ

 θ
T
Li 1+θ
∂v j
1
=
> 0 i 6= j, i ∈ JM
θ
1
∂Li
(1 + θ) Li P
i 1+θ (Li ) 1+θ
i∈JM (T )

i

Thus, v j is decreasing in Lj and increasing in Li .
Results 1-3 imply that v 1 prefers to block labor mobility. Thus, under complete free trade, the richest
country in a set of countries that are allowing free labor mobility within that set prefers to deviate and
block labor mobility. This completes the proof that complete free trade and any pattern of labor mobility
policy other than no mobility is not a Nash equilibrium outcome. This result can also be used to prove
that any pattern of trade policy except complete autarky and any pattern of labor mobility policy within
the trading-partner countries other than no labor mobility is not a Nash equilibrium outcome. Take any
partition JT and consider any arbitrary set JT ∈ JT . Then, any pattern of labor mobility within JT
other than no mobility is not part of a Nash equilibrium outcome. The proof arises immediately from
the previous results because each JT can be treated as a world economy with JT countries among which
there is complete free trade. This completes the proof of part 4. 

20

B Trade and labor mobility policies in factor proportions models
Appendix B presents the proofs of all the results in Section 4. Throughout Appendix B we employ the
following notation: v j (λT , λM ), vLj,m (λT , λM ) and vLj,im (λT , λM ) denote the utility of a worker located in
country j, the utility of a mobile worker from country j and the utility of an immobile worker from country
j, respectively, under trade and labor mobility regime (λT , λM ). WGj (λT , λM ) = mvLj,m (λT , λM ) +
(1 − m) vLj,im (λT , λM ) indicates the welfare of domestic workers in country j under trade and labor
mobility regime (λT , λM ).

B.1 Heckscher-Ohlin economy
Consider an economy with two countries (J = 2), two tradeable goods (ZT = {1, 2}) and two factors of
 bz  1−bz
production (F and labor L). Production functions are given by Qjz = T j Fzj
Ljz
for z = 1, 2,

with 1 > b1 > b2 > 0 and T 1 > T 2 , where T j is total factor productivity in country j. Factor endowments
 αz
 Q

,
in country j are F̄ j , L̄j > (0, 0). All agents have the same preferences, given by u cj = z∈Z cjz
P
with αz > 0 and z∈Z αz = 1.
Lemma 4 characterizes the equilibrium of a Heckscher-Ohlin economy under autarky.

Lemma 4 (Heckscher-Ohlin economy under autarky). Assume there is no trade in goods, i.e.,
λT = 0.
1. Suppose there is no labor mobility, i.e., λM = 0. Then, vLj (0, 0) = CT j
C = (α1 )

α1

α2

(α2 )

(b1 )

α1 b1

α1 (1−b1 )

(1 − b1 )

(b2 )

α2 b2

α2 (1−b2 )

(1 − b2 )


1−α̃ α̃
α̃



F̄ j
L̄j

and α̃ = α1 b1 + α2 b2 .

α̃

where

2. Suppose there is free labor mobility, i.e., λM = 1.
T1
T2



F̄ 2 (L̄1 +mL̄2 )
F̄ 1 (1−m)L̄2

α̃


L̄1 + mL̄2 , L2 = (1 − m) L̄2 , vL1 (0, 1) =
α̃  F̄ 1 α̃
 h F̄ 2 iα̃
2 (0, 1) = CT 2 1−α̃ α̃
CT 1 1−α̃α̃
v
and
.
1
2
L
α̃
L̄ +mL̄
(1−m)L̄2

α̃
h
iα̃
1/α̃
2
F̄ 2 (L̄1 +mL̄2 )
(T 1 ) F̄ 1 (L̄1 +L̄2 )
L̄1
T1
1 =
(b) If F̄ 1 L̄F̄2 +(1−m)
≤
≤
,
then
L
, L2 =
T2
F̄ 1 (1−m)L̄2
F̄ 1 (1−m)L̄1
(T 1 )1/α̃ F̄ 1 +(T 2 )1/α̃ F̄ 2

α̃
1/α̃
1 1/α̃ F̄ 1 + T 2 1/α̃ F̄ 2

(T 2 ) F̄ 2 (L̄1 +L̄2 )
( )
1−α̃ α̃ (T )
1
2
and vL (0, 1) = vL (0, 1) = C α̃
.
1 1/α̃ 1
2 1/α̃ 2
L̄1 +L̄2
(a) If

(T )

(c) If

F̄ +(T )

T1
T2

CT 1
3. If

T1
T2

>

>



, then L1 =

F̄

iα̃
2
L̄1
< F̄ 1 L̄F̄2 +(1−m)
, then L1 = (1 − m) L̄1 , L2 = L̄2 + mL̄1 , vL1 (0, 1) =
F̄ 1 (1−m)L̄1
 h F̄ 1 iα̃
 h F̄ 2 iα̃
1−α̃ α̃
2 (0, 1) = CT 2 1−α̃ α̃
and
v
.
L
α̃
α̃
(1−m)L̄1
L̄2 +mL̄1

F̄ 2 L̄1
F̄ 1 L̄2

h

α̃

, then vL1 (0, 0) > vL1 (0, 1), while if

21

T1
T2

<



F̄ 2 L̄1
F̄ 1 L̄2

α̃

then vL2 (0, 0) > vL2 (0, 1).

Proof. Let pjz denotes the price of good z = 1, 2 in country j, r j the return of factor F in country j
and wj the wage rate in country j. Under autarky the equilibrium conditions in country j are:






(1 − b2 ) b1 wj /r j Lj − (1 − b1 ) F̄ j
(1 − b1 ) (1 − b2 ) F̄ j − wj /r j b2 Lj
j
j
, L2 =
L1 =
(b1 − b2 ) (wj /r j )
(b1 − b2 ) (wj /r j )






b1 (1 − b2 ) F̄ j − wj /r j b2 Lj
b2 b1 wj /r j Lj − (1 − b1 ) F̄ j
j
j
F1 =
, F2 =
(b1 − b2 )
(b1 − b2 )

j
j
j
j
j
b1
1−b1 (1 − b2 ) F̄ − w /r b2 L
j
Q1 = T (b1 ) (1 − b1 )
(wj /r j )1−b1 (b1 − b2 )
 j
j j
j
j
b2
1−b2 b1 w /r L − (1 − b1 ) F̄
j
Q2 = T (b2 ) (1 − b2 )
(wj /r j )1−b2 (b1 − b2 )
!bz
!1−bz
wj
Fzj
rj
Ljz
j
j
= (1 − bz ) T
, j = bz T
for z = 1, 2
pjz
Ljz
pz
Fzj
 b −b
pj2
(b1 )b1 (1 − b1 )1−b1 wj 1 2
=
pj1
(b2 )b2 (1 − b2 )1−b2 r j


αz pj1 Qj1 + pj2 Qj2 = pjz Qjz for z = 1, 2

j
Therefore, in equilibrium, wj /r
α̃) F̄ j /α̃Lj and, hence, the utility of a worker in country j
α1 = (1
α−
α̃
2
is vLj = (α1 )α1 (α2 )α2 wj / pj1
pj2
= T j C [(1 − α̃) /α̃]α̃ F̄ j /Lj , where α̃ = α1 b1 + α2 b2 and

C = (α1 )α1 (α2 )α2 (b1 )α1 b1 (1 − b1 )α1 (1−b1 ) (b2 )α2 b2 (1 − b2 )α2 (1−b2 ) .
When there is no labor mobility, Lj = L̄j . When there is free labor mobility, mobile workers locate
in the country with the highest vLj . We must distinguish three possible cases.
 2 1


1 /T 2 >
2 / (1 − m) F̄ 1 L̄2 α̃ .
a.
Suppose
that
T
F̄
L̄
+
m
L̄
Then, vL1 > vL2 for all L1 ∈




1
1
2
2
2
2
1
(1 − m) L̄ , L̄ + mL̄ and L ∈ (1 − m) L̄ , L̄ + mL̄ . Therefore, in equilibrium, L1 = L̄1 + mL̄2
and L2 = (1 − m) L̄2 .
 α̃
 2

T1
≤
b.
Suppose
that
F̄ (1 − m) L̄1 / F̄ 1 L̄2 + F̄ 1 (1 − m) L̄1
≤
2
T
 2 1
 1
α̃
2
2
1
2
1
1
2
2
1
1
F̄ L̄ + mL̄ /F̄ (1 − m) L̄ . Then, vL ≥ vL for L = (1 − m) L̄ and L = L̄ +mL̄ , while vL ≤ vL2
for L1 = L̄1 + mL̄2 and L2 = (1 − m) L̄2 . Moreover, vLj is decreasing in Lj . hTherefore, in equilibrium,i
1/α̃ 1 1

1/α̃ 1
1/α̃ 2
it must be the case that vL1 = vL2 , which implies L1 = T 1
F̄ L̄ + L̄2 / T 1
F̄ + T 2
F̄
h
i




1/α̃ 2
1/α̃ 1
1/α̃ 2
and L2 = T 2
F̄ L̄1 + L̄2 / T 1
F̄ + T 2
F̄ .



1 /T 2 < F̄ 2 (1 − m) L̄1 / F̄ 1 L̄2 + F̄ 1 (1 − m) L̄1 α̃ . Then, v 2 > v 1 for all L1 ∈
c.
Suppose
that
T
L
L




(1 − m) L̄1 , L̄1 + mL̄2 and L2 ∈ (1 − m) L̄2 , L̄2 + mL̄1 . Therefore, in equilibrium L1 = (1 − m) L̄1
and L2 = L̄2 + mL̄1 . Summing up, the utility of a worker in country j under autarky and free labor

22

mobility is given by:
 
α̃
1/α̃

(T 1 ) F̄ 1



 L̄1 +mL̄2
 

α̃ 


1/α̃ 1
1/α̃ 2 α̃
1 − α̃
F̄ +(T 2 )
F̄
T 1)
(
1
vL (0, 1) = C
L̄1 +L̄2

α̃



α̃

1/α̃


(T 1 ) F̄ 1

 (1−m)L̄1
 

1/α̃ 2 α̃

T 2)
F̄
(



 (1−m)L̄2

α̃ 

α̃
  1 1/α̃ 1
1/α̃
1 − α̃
(T ) F̄ +(T 2 ) F̄ 2
2
vL (0, 1) = C
L̄1 +L̄2

α̃

 
α̃

1/α̃


(T 2 ) F̄ 2

 L̄2 +mL̄1

if
if

T1
T2

h

T1
T2

if

T1
T2

if
if

F̄ 2 (L̄1 +mL̄2 )
F̄ 1 (1−m)L̄2

α̃

iα̃
F̄ 2 (1−m)L̄1
1
2
1
1
F̄ L̄ +F̄ (1−m)L̄

if

h

>



<
>

h



<

h

≤



F̄ 2 (L̄1 +mL̄2 )
F̄ 1 (1−m)L̄2

α̃

≤



F̄ 2 (L̄1 +mL̄2 )
(1−m)F̄ 1 L̄2

α̃

iα̃
F̄ 2 (1−m)L̄1
F̄ 1 L̄2 +F̄ 1 (1−m)L̄1
F̄ 2 (L̄1 +mL̄2 )
(1−m)F̄ 1 L̄2

α̃

iα̃
F̄ 2 (1−m)L̄1
F̄ 1 L̄2 +F̄ 1 (1−m)L̄1

T1
T2

≤

T1
T2

<

T1
T2

F̄ 1 L̄2 +F̄ 1 (1−m)L̄1

iα̃

F̄ 2 (1−m)L̄1

α̃
Finally, note that T 1 /T 2 > F̄ 2 L̄1 /F̄ 1 L̄2
implies vL1 (0, 0) > vL1 (0, 1), while T 1 /T 2 <

α̃
F̄ 2 L̄1 /F̄ 1 L̄2 implies vL2 (0, 0) > vL2 (0, 1). This completes the proof of the lemma. 
Lemma 5 characterizes the equilibrium of a Heckscher-Ohlin economy under free trade.

Lemma 5 (Heckscher-Ohlin economy under free trade). Assume there is free trade in goods,
i.e., λT = 1.


1. Let f¯1 = T 1 F̄ 1 / T 1 F̄ 1 + T 2 F̄ 2 , l1 = T 1 L1 / T 1 L1 + T 2 L2 and

 (1 − α̃) b2 l1
 −α2 (b1 − b2 ) + b1 (1 − α̃) l1
η1 l1 =
, η2 l1 =
α̃ (1 − b2 )
α̃ (1 − b1 )
1
 (1 − α̃) b1 l
 α1 (b1 − b2 ) + b2 (1 − α̃) l1
η3 l1 =
, η4 l1 =
α̃ (1 − b1 )
α̃ (1 − b2 )

1

1
1−b1

 1−b2
α1 B11 b1
α1 B12 b2
1 b1
1 b2
1
−
l
1
−
l


α2 B21
α2 B22
η5 l1 =
, η6 l1 =
h
i1

1
1−b1
1−b1
1−b2
1−b2
B11 b1
1 ) b1
1 ) b2 + α1 B12 b2 (1 − l1 ) b2
(l1 ) b1 + αα21 B
(1
−
l
(l
α
B
21
2 22

1

1
1−b2

 1−b1
α2 B22 b2
α2 B21 b1
1 − l1 b2
1 − l1 b1


α
B
α
B
1
12
1
11
η7 l1 =
, η8 l1 =

1

1
1−b2
1−b2
1−b1
1−b1
b
B22
2
1 ) b2
1 ) b1 + α2 B21 b1 (1 − l1 ) b1
(l1 ) b2 + αα12 B
(l
(1
−
l
α1 B11
12

where B11 = (b1 )b1 (1 − b1 )1−b1 , B12 = (b1 )b2 (1 − b1 )1−b2 , B21 = (b2 )b1 (1 − b2 )1−b1 , and B22 =
(b2 )b2 (1 − b2 )1−b2 . Then:
(a) If
T jC




max η1 l1 , η2 l1
α̃
 
1−α̃ α̃ T 1 F̄ 1 +T 2 F̄ 2
α̃

T 1 L1 +T 2 L2

<

f¯1

<

.

23




min η3 l1 , η4 l1 ,

then,

vLj (1, λM )

=

h
i  2 α2 (b1 −b2 )


1 b1
1 )F̄
r
(b) If η3 l1 ≤ f¯1 < η5 l1 , then, vL1 (1, λM ) = T 1 C (1−b
and vL2 (1, λM ) =
1
b1 L
w2
 2 α̃
b
1−b1
2
α2 T 1 (F̄ 1 ) 1 (L1 )
α̃T 2 (w 2 /r 2 )L2 −(1−α̃)T 2 F̄ 2
T 2 C wr2 , where wr2 is the unique solution to
=
.
2 2 1−b1
B11


(c) If η5 l1 ≤ f¯1 ≤ η6 l1 , then, vL1 (1, λM ) =
C

and vL2 (1, λM ) =



α2
α1

α1

C



α1
α2

α2

(w /r )
(b1 −b2 )
h
i h
i
b1
(1−b1 ) α1
b
1−b2 α2
1
1
1
2
(1−b1 ) T (F̄ ) (L )
T (F̄ 2 ) 2 (L2 )

(B11 )αi1 (B22 )α2 L1
h
iα1 h
b
(1−b
)
b
1−b2 α2
1
(1−b2 ) T 1 (F̄ 1 ) 1 (L1 )
T 2 (F̄ 2 ) 2 (L2 )
(B11 )α1 (B22 )α2 L2



.

1 α̃



(d) If f¯1 ≥ η4 l1 and f¯1 > η6 l1 , then, vL1 (1, λM ) = T 1 C wr1
and vL2 (1, λM ) =
 1 α1 (b1 −b2 ) h
ib
T 1 [(1−α̃)F̄ 1 −α̃(w 1 /r 1 )L1 ]
(1−b2 )F̄ 2 2
w1
where
the
unique
solution
to
T 2 C wr1
,
is
=
2
1
1 1 1−b2
b2 L
r
(w /r )

b

(b1 −b2 )

1−b2

α1 T 2 (F 2 ) 2 (L2 )
B22

.

 1 α̃


η8 l1
< f¯1 ≤ η2 l1 , then, vL1 (1, λM ) = T 1 C wr1
and vL2 (1, λM ) =
h
i  1 α2 (b1 −b2 )
b
1−b1
2 b1
α2 T 2 (F̄ 2 ) 1 (L2 )
1 )F̄
r
w1
=
T 2 C (1−b
where
the
unique
solution
to
,
is
B11
b1 L2
w1
r1
1
1
1
1
1
T [α̃(w /r )L −(1−α̃)F̄ ]
.
1 1 1−b1

(e) If

(b1 −b2 )(w /r )

(f) If η7

l1



≤

f¯1

≤

and vL2 (1, λM ) =

 α1
h
i h
i
b
1−b1 α1
b
1−b2 α2
α
C α2
T 1 (F̄ 1 ) 2 (L1 )
(1−b2 ) T 2 (F̄ 2 ) 1 (L2 )
1
1
η8
, then, vL (1, λM ) =
(B11 )iα1 (B22 )α2 L1
 α2 h
iα1 h
b
1−b
b
1−b2 α2
α1
1
C(1−b1 ) α
T 2 (F̄ 2 ) 1 (L2 )
T 1 (F̄ 1 ) 2 (L1 )

l1



2

.

(B11 )α1 (B22 )α2 L2

i  2 α1 (b1 −b2 )

1 b2
2 )F̄
w
and f¯1 < η7 l1 , then, vL1 (1, λM ) = T 1 C (1−b
b2 L1
r2
 2 α̃
1 F̄ 1 b2 L1 1−b2
2
α
T
( ) ( )
1
and vL2 (1, λM ) = T 2 C wr2 , where wr2 is the unique solution to
=
B22
2
2
2
2
2
2
(1−α̃)T F̄ −α̃(w /r )T L
.
2 2 1−b2

(g) If f¯1 ≤ η1 l1

(w /r )

h



(b1 −b2 )


2. Let ¯l1 = T 1 L̄1 / T 1 L̄1 + T 2 L̄2 and

η9 l1 =

α1



T1
T2

 1−b2
b2

(1 − α̃) b2 l1

(b1 − b2 ) l1 + (1 − α̃) b2 l1 + α̃



T1
T2

1

b2

(1 − b2 ) (1 − l1 )
 T1
1

α̃ (1 − b1 ) l1 − (b1 − b2 ) α2 1 − l
T2
 
 1
1
1
b
α̃ (1 − b1 ) l1 − (b1 − b2 ) α2 TT 2 (1 − l1 ) + b1 (1 − α̃) (1 − l1 ) TT 2 1
 1
T
T 2 α2 (1 − b2 )
¯l =
 
1
α1 (1 − b1 ) + TT 2 α2 (1 − b2 )


η10 l1 =

Assume that and T 1 > T 2 . Then:


(a) Suppose that f¯1 > η9 ¯l1 for ¯l1 < ¯l; or f¯1 > η10 ¯l1 for ¯l1 ≥ ¯l. Then vL1 (1, 0) > vL1 (1, 1).
24


(b) Suppose that f¯1 < η9 ¯l1 for ¯
l1 < ¯l; or f¯1 < η10

(c) Suppose that f¯1 = η9 ¯l1 for l1 < ¯l; or f¯1 = η10
¯ Then, v 1 (1, 0) = v 1 (1, 1) = v 2 (1, 0) = v 2
l1 = l.
L

L


¯l1 for l1 ≥ ¯l. Then, v 2 (1, 0) > v 2 (1, 1).
L
L




¯l1 for l1 > ¯l; or f¯1 ∈ η9 ¯l1 , η10 ¯l1 for
L (1, 1).

L

Proof of Part 1: Under free trade the equilibrium conditions in country j are:
(


 )
j − w j /r j b Lj
(1
−
b
)
(1
−
b
)
F̄
1
2
2
Lj1 = max
,0
(b1 − b2 ) (wj /r j )
(


 )
j /r j Lj − (1 − b ) F̄ j
(1
−
b
)
b
w
2
1
1
Lj2 = max
,0
(b1 − b2 ) (wj /r j )
( 
( 

 )

 )
b1 (1 − b2 ) F̄ j − wj /r j b2 Lj
b2 b1 wj /r j Lj − (1 − b1 ) F̄ j
j
j
F1 = max
, 0 , F2 = max
,0
(b1 − b2 )
(b1 − b2 )
(
)

(1 − b2 ) F̄ j − wj /r j b2 Lj
j
j
Q1 = max T B11
,0
(wj /r j )1−b1 (b1 − b2 )
(
)

j /r j Lj − (1 − b ) F̄ j
b
w
1
1
j
,0
Q2 = max T j B22
(wj /r j )1−b2 (b1 − b2 )
!bz
!1−bz
Ljz
wj
Fzj
rj
j
j
= (1 − bz ) T
= bz T
,
for z = 1, 2 and Fzj > 0 and Ljz > 0
j
j
pz
p
z
Lz
Fz


b
1−b
z
z
rj
wj
pz ≥
for z = 1, 2 and j = 1, 2
T j (bz )bz (1 − bz )1−bz


α2 p1 Q11 + Q21 = α1 p2 Q12 + Q22

We must consider seven possible cases.
a.
Suppose
that
both
countries
are
diversified.
Then,
in
equilib

rium,
Lj1
=
(1 − b1 ) (1 − b2 ) F̄ j − (w/r) b2 Lj / (b1 − b2 ) (w/r)
and
Lj2
=


j
j
j
(1 − b2 ) b1 (w/r) L − (1 − b1 ) F̄ / (b1 − b2 ) (w/r)
for
j
=
1, 2,
F1
=




j
j
j
j
j
b1 (1 − b2 ) F̄ − (w/r) b2 L / (b1 − b2 )
and
F2
=
b2 b1 (w/r) L − (1 − b1 ) F̄ / (b1 − b2 )


j
j
j
j
=
for j
=
1, 2, Q1
=
T B11 (1 − b2 ) F̄ − (w/r) b2 L / (w/r)1−b1 (b1 − b2 ) and Qj2

bz


j
j
1−b
T j B22 b1 (w/r) Lj − (1 − b1 ) F̄ j / (w/r) 2 (b1 − b2 ) for j = 1, 2, wj /pz = (1 − bz ) T j Fz /Lz

1−bz
b −b
and r j /pz = bz T j Ljz /Fzj
for j = 1, 2 and z = 1, 2, p2 /p1 = (B11 /B22 ) wr 1 2 ,


and w/r = (1 − α̃) T 1 F̄ 1 + T 2 F̄ 2 /α̃ T 1 L1 + T 2 L2 . For this to be an equilibrium we need
(1 − b1 ) F̄ j /b1 Lj < w/r < (1 − b2 ) F̄ j /b2 Lj for j = 1, 2. Since b1 > b2 , we require [F̄ 1 /L1 ≥ F̄ 2 /L2
and (1 − b1 ) F̄ 1 /b1 L1 < w/r < (1 − b2 ) F̄ 2 /b2 L2 ] or [F̄ 1 /L1 ≤ F̄ 2 /L2 and (1 − b1 ) F̄ 2 /b1 L2 <
2
2
w/r < (1 − b2 ) F̄ 1 /b2 L1 ]. [F̄ 1 /L1 ≥ F̄ 2 /L2 and (1 − b1 )F̄ 1 /b1 L1 < w/r < (1 −
 b2 ) F̄ /b2 L ]
1
1
1
1
is equivalent to l ≤ f¯ < min (1 − α̃) b1 l /α̃ (1 − b1 ) , α1 (b1 − b2 ) + b2 (1 − α̃) l /α̃ (1 − b2 ) ,
while [F̄1 /L1 ≤ F̄ 2 /L2 and (1 − b1 ) F̄ 2 /b1 L2 < w/r
< (1 − b2 ) F̄ 1 /b2 L1 ] is equivalent

1
1
to max (1 − α̃) b2 l /α̃ (1 − b2 ) , −α2 (b1 − b2 ) + b1 (1 − α̃) l /α̃ (1 − b1 )
< f¯1 ≤ l1 , where
25



f¯j = T j F̄ j / T 1 F̄ 1 + T 2 F̄ 2 and lj = T j Lj / T 1 L1 + T 2 L2 . Thus, we require
max



(1 − α̃) b2 l1 −α2 (b1 − b2 ) + b1 (1 − α̃) l1
,
α̃ (1 − b2 )
α̃ (1 − b1 )



< f¯1 < min



(1 − α̃) b1 l1 α1 (b1 − b2 ) + b2 (1 − α̃) l1
,
α̃ (1 − b1 )
α̃ (1 − b2 )



Then, the utility of a worker in country j is vLj (1, λM ) = (α1 )α1 (α2 )α2 wj / (p1 )α1 (p2 )α2 =


α̃
T j C [(1 − α̃) /α̃]α̃ T 1 F̄ 1 + T 2 F̄ 2 / T 1 L1 + T 2 L2 . Finally, note that vL1 (1, λM ) > vL2 (1, λM ) if and
only if T 1 > T 2 .
b. Suppose that country 1 is specialized in good
1 and country 2 is diversified. Then,


in equilibrium, L11 = L1 , L12 = 0, L21 = (1 − b1 ) (1 − b2 )F̄ 2 − w2 /r 2 b2 L2 / (b1 − b2 ) w2 /r 2 ,
L22 = (1 − b2 ) b1 w2/r 2 L2 − (1 − b1 ) F̄ 2 / (b1 − b2) w2 /r 2 , F11 = F̄ 1 , F21 = 0, F12 =
b1 (1 − b2 ) F̄ 2 − w2 /r 2 b2 L2 / (b1 − b2 ), F22 = b2 b1 w2 /r 2 L2 − (1 − b1 ) F̄ 2 / (b1 − b2 ), Q11 =
b
1−b1



1−b1
T 1 F̄ 1 1 L1
, Q21 = T 2 B11 (1 − b2 ) F̄ 2 − w2 /r 2 b2 L2 / w2 /r 2
(b1 − b2 ), Q12 = 0, Q22 =




b
1−b
2
A2 B22 b1 w2 /r 2 L2 − (1 − b1 ) F̄ 2 / w2 /r 2
(b1 − b2 ), w1 /p1 = (1 − b1 ) T 1 F̄ 1 /L1 1 , r 1 /p1 =
1−b1
b
1−bz
b1 T 1 L1 /F̄ 1
, w2 /pz = (1 − bz ) T 2 Fz2 /L2z z , r 2 /pz = bz T 2 L2z /Fz2
for z = 1, 2,
b1 −b2
b1 1 1−b1
2
2
2
2
1
1
p2 /p1 = (B11 /B22 ) w /r
, and w /r is the unique solution to α2 T F̄
L
/B11 =
1−b1

 2 2 2 2
2
2
2
2
(b1 − b2 ).
For this to be an equilibrium we need
α̃T w /r L − (1 − α̃) T F̄ / w /r
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
w /r
≥ w /r and (1 − b1 ) F̄ /b1 L
< w /r
< (1 − b2 ) F̄ 2 /b2 L2 .
w1 /r 1 ≥ w2 /r 2
1
1
2
2
2
2
¯
if
≥ b1 (1 − α̃) l /α̃
(1 − b1 ).
w /r
> (1 − b1 ) F̄ /b1 L if and only if
h and only if f
b1 2 1−b1 i
b1
1−b1
1
1
1
2
2
T F̄
L
/T F̄
L
(b1 − b2 ) > (b2 − b1 ), which always holds.
w2 /r 2 <
b
1−b1
b

(1 − b2 ) F̄ 2 /b2 L2 if and only if α2 T 1 F̄ 1 1 L1
/B11 < α1 T 2 F̄ 2 1 L2 /1−b1 B21 . Thus, we require

1
 1−b1
α1 B11 b1
1 b1
1
1
−
l
α
B
b1 (1 − α̃) l
2 21
≤ f¯1 <

1
1−b1
1−b1
α̃ (1 − b1 )
b1
11
1 ) b1
(l1 ) b1 + αα12 B
(1
−
l
B21
Then, the utility of a worker in country 1 is vL1 (1, λM ) = (α1 )α1 (α2 )α2 w1 / (p1 )α1 (p2 )α2 =

b
α (b −b )
CT 1 (1 − b1 ) F̄ 1 /b1 L1 1 r 2 /w2 2 1 2 and the utility of a worker in country 2 is vL2 (1, λM ) =
α̃
(α1 )α1 (α2 )α2 w2 / (p1 )α1 (p2 )α2 = CT 2 w2 /r 2 . Finally, note that vL1 (1, λM ) > vL2 (1, λM ) if and only if

b
b
T 1 (1 − b1 ) F̄ 1 /b1 L1 1 > T 2 w2 /r 2 1 . Since in this region w1 /r 1 = (1 − b1 ) F̄ 1 /b1 L1 ≥ w2 /r 2 , T 1 > T 2
implies vL1 (1, λM ) > vL2 (1, λM ).
c. Suppose that country 1 is specialized in good 1 and country 2 is specialized in good
2.
Then, in equilibrium, L11 = L1 , L12 = 0, L21 = 0, L22 = L2 , F11 = F̄ 1 , F21 = 0,
b
1−b1
b
1−b2
F12 = 0, F22 = F̄ 2 , Q11 = T 1 F̄ 1 1 L1
, Q12 = 0, Q21 = 0, Q22 = T 2 F̄ 2 2 L2
,
1−b1
b2
b1
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
, w /p2 = (1 − b2 ) T F̄ /L
,
w /p1 = (1 − b1 ) T F̄ /L
, r /p1 = b1 T L /F̄





1−b
b
1−b
b
1−b
2
1
1
2
2
r 2 /p2 = b2 T 2 L2 /F̄ 2
and p2 /p1 = α2 T 1 F̄ 1
L1
/α1 T 2 F̄ 2
L2
. For this to




b1 1 1−b1 1
b
1−b
b
1−b
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
2
2
2
1
be an equilibrium we need r
w
/T ≥ r
w
/T and r
w
/T ≤
b1 2 1−b1 2
b2 1 1−b2 1
b2 2 1−b2 2
b2 2 1−b2
2
1
2
2
2
r
w
/T . r
w
/T ≥ r
w
/T if and only if T F̄
L
/B22 ≥
b1 2 1−b1 2
b2 1 1−b2
b1 1 1−b1 1
1
2
1
1
/T
≤
r
w
/T if and only if
L
/α1 B12 , while r
w
α2 T F̄
26

α1 T 2 F̄ 2

b1

L2

1−b1

(l1 )



/B21 ≤ α2 T 1 F̄ 1

1−b1
b1

L1

1−b1

/B11 . Thus, we require


1
 1−b1
 1−b2
α1 B12 b2
1 b2
1 − l1 b1
1
−
l
α
B
2 22
≤ f¯1 ≤

1

1
1−b2
1−b1
1−b2
b
1
11
1 ) b2 + α1 B12 b2 (1 − l1 ) b2
1 ) b1
+ αα12 B
(1
(l
−
l
B21
α2 B22

α1 B11
α2 B21

1

b1

b1

Then, the utility of
in country
1 is vL1 (1, λM ) i= (α1 )α1 (α2 )α2 w1 / (p1 )α1 (p2 )α2 =
i
h
h a worker
b
(1−b1 ) α1 2 2 b2 2 1−b2 α2
T F̄
L
/ (B11 )α1 (B22 )α2 L1
and
C (α1 /α2 )α2 (1 − b1 ) T 1 F̄ 1 1 L1

the utility of a hworker in countryi 2 h is vL2 (1, λM ) =i (α1 )α1 (α2 )α2 w2 / (p1 )α1 (p2 )α2 =
b
(1−b1 ) α1 2 2 b2 2 1−b2 α2
C (α2 /α1 )α1 (1 − b2 ) T 1 F̄ 1 1 L1
T F̄
L
/ (B11 )α1 (B22 )α2 L2 .
Finally,

note that vL1 (1, λM ) > vL2 (1, λM ) if and only if T 1 1 − l1 α1 (1 − b1 ) /α2 (1 − b2 ) > T 2 l1 . Since in this
region l1 < α1 (1 − b1 ) / (1 − α̃), T 1 > T 2 implies vL1 (1, λM ) > vL2 (1, λM ).
d.
Suppose that country 1 is diversified  and country 2 is specialized
in good


1
1 − w 1 /r 1 b L1 / (b − b ) w 1 /r 1 ,
2.
Then, in
equilibrium,
L
=
(1
−
b
)
(1
−
b
)
F̄
1
2
2
1
2
1




L12 = (1 − b2 ) b1 w1/r 1 L 1 − (1 − b1 ) F̄ 1 / (b1 − b2 ) w1 /r 1 , L21 = 0, L22 = L2 , F11 =
b1 (1 − b2 ) F̄ 1 − w1 /r 1 b2 L1 / (b1 − b2 ),
F21
=
b2 b1 w1 /r 1 L1 − (1 − b1 ) F̄ 1 / (b1 − b2 ),



1−b1
F12 = 0, F22 = F̄ 2 , Q11 = T 1 B11 (1 − b2 ) F̄ 1 − w1 /r 1 b2 L1 / w1 /r 1
(b1 − b2 ), Q21 = 0,




b
1−b2
1−b
2
Q12
=
T 1 B22 b1 w1 /r 1 L1 − (1 − b1 ) F̄ 1 / w1 /r 1
(b1 − b2 ), Q22
=
T 2 F 2 2 L2
,
bz 1
1−bz
b2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
w /pz = (1 − bz ) T Fz /Lz , r /pz = bz T Lz /Fz
for z = 1, 2, w /p2 = (1 − b2 ) T F /L
,
b1 −b2
1−b2
2
2
1
1
1
1
2
2
, and w /r is the unique solution
r /p2 = b2 T L /F
, p2 /p1 = (B11 /B22 ) w /r

 1
1−b2
b
1−b2
1
1
1
1
1
1
to T (1 − α̃) F̄ − α̃ w /r L / w /r
(b1 − b2 ) = α1 T 2 F 2 2 L2
/B22 . For this to
1
1
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
be an equilibrium we need w /r ≥ w
 /r and (1 − b1 ) F̄ /b11L < w /r < (1 − b2 )1 F̄ /b12 L .
1
1
2
2
1
¯
w /r ≥ w /r if and only if f ≥ α1 (b1 − b2 ) + b2 (1 − α̃) l /α̃ (1 − b2 ). (1 − b1 ) F̄ /b1 L <
b
1−b2
b
1−b2
w1 /r 1
if and only if α1 T 2 hF 2 2 L2
/B22
<
α2 T 1 Fi1 2 L1
/B12 . w1 /r 1
<




1−b
1−b
b
b
2
2
2
2
L1
(b1 − b2 ) > (b2 − b1 ), which
L2
/T 1 F̄ 1
(1 − b2 ) F̄ 1 /b2 L1 if and only if T 2 F̄ 2
always holds. Thus, we require
α1 (b1 − b2 ) + b2 (1 −
f¯1 ≥
α̃ (1 − b2 )

α̃) l1

and f¯1 >
(l1 )



1−b2
b2

1

 1−b2
1 − l1 b2

1
1−b2
B12 b2
1 ) b2
+ αα21 B
(1
−
l
22

α1 B12
α2 B22

b2

Then, the utility of a worker in country 1 is vL1 (1, λM ) = (α1 )α1 (α2 )α2 w1 / (p1 )α1 (p2 )α2 =
α̃
T 1 C w1 /r 1 and the utility of a worker in country 2 is vL2 (1, λM ) = (α1 )α1 (α2 )α2 w2 / (p1 )α1 (p2 )α2 =
α (b −b ) 
b
T 2 C w1 /r 1 1 1 2 (1 − b2 ) F̄ 2 /b2 L2 2 . Finally, note that vL1 (1, λM ) > vL2 (1, λM ) if and only if
b

b
T 1 w1 /r 1 2 > T 2 (1 − b2 ) F̄ 2 /b2 L2 2 . Since in this region w1 /r 1 ≥ w2 /r 2 = (1 − b2 ) F̄ 2 /b2 L2 , T 1 > T 2
implies vL1 (1, λM ) > vL2 (1, λM ).
e.
Suppose that country 1 is diversified  and country 2 is specialized
in good


1
1 − w 1 /r 1 b L1 / (b − b ) w 1 /r 1 ,
1.
Then, in
equilibrium,
L
=
(1
−
b
)
(1
−
b
)
F̄
1
2
2
1
2
1




L12 = (1 − b2 ) b1 w1/r 1 L 1 − (1 − b1 ) F̄ 1 / (b1 − b2 ) w1 /r 1 , L21 = L2 , L22 = 0, F11 =
b1 (1 − b2 ) F̄ 1 − w1 /r 1 b2 L1 / (b1 − b2 ) , F21
=
b2 b1 w1 /r 1 L1 − (1 − b1 ) F̄ 1 / (b1 − b2 ),
27




1−b1
= F̄ 2 , F22 = 0, Q11 = T 1 B11 (1 − b2 ) F̄ 1 − w1 /r 1 b2 L1 / w1 /r 1
(b1 − b2 ), Q21 =






b
1−b
1−b
1
2
T 2 F̄ 2 1 L2
, Q12 = T 1 B22 b1 w1 /r 1 L1 − (1 − b1 ) F̄ 1 / w1 /r 1
(b1 − b2 ), Q22 = 0,


b
b
1−b
z
w1 /pz = (1 − bz ) T 1 Fz1 /L1z z , r 1 /pz = bz T 1 L1z /Fz1
for z = 1, 2, w2 /p1 = (1 − b1 ) T 2 F̄ 2 /L2 1 ,
1−b1
b −b
, p2 /p1 = (B11 /B22 ) w1 /r 1 1 2 , and w1 /r 1 is the unique sor 2 /p1 = b1 T 2 L2 /F̄ 2
b
1−b1



1−b1
lution to α2 T 2 F̄ 2 1 L2
/B11
=
T 1 α̃ w1 /r 1 L1 − (1 − α̃) F̄ 1 / (b1 − b2 ) w1 /r 1
.
1
1
2
2
1
1
1
1
For this to be an equilibrium we need w /r ≤ w /r  and (1 − b1 ) F̄ /b1 L < w /r <
1
¯1
(1 − b2 ) F̄ 1 /b2 L1 . w1 /r 1 ≤ w2 /r 2 if and only
α2 (b1 − b2 ) /α̃ (1 − b1 ).
h if f ≤  b1 (1 − α̃) l −
b1 1 1−b1 i
b1
1−b1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
1
1
(1 − b1 ) F̄ /b1 L
< w /r if and only if T F̄
L
/T F̄
L
(b1 − b2 ) >
(b2 − b1 ), which always holds.
w1 /r 1
<
(1 − b2 ) F̄ 1 /b2 L1 if and only if f¯1
>

1−b1
1−b1
1
1


 1−b1
1
1
1
(α2 B21 /α1 B11 ) b1 1 − l b1 / l b1 + (α2 B21 /α1 B11 ) b1 1 − l b1 . Thus, we require
F12

(l1 )



1−b1
b1

1

 1−b1
1 − l1 b1
1
¯1 ≤ b1 (1 − α̃) l − α2 (b1 − b2 )
<
f

1
1−b1
α̃ (1 − b1 )
B21 b1
1 ) b1
+ αα12 B
(1
−
l
11

α2 B21
α1 B11

b1

Then, the utility of a worker in country 1 is vL1 (1, λM ) = (α1 )α1 (α2 )α2 w1 / (p1 )α1 (p2 )α2 =
α̃
T 1 C w1 /r 1 and the utility of a worker in country 2 is vL2 (1, λM ) = (α1 )α1 (α2 )α2 w2 / (p1 )α1 (p2 )α2 =

b
α (b −b )
T 2 C (1 − b1 ) F̄ 2 /b1 L2 1 r 1 /w1 2 1 2 . Finally, note that vL1 (1, λM ) > vL2 (1, λM ) if and only if
b

b
T 1 w1 /r 1 1 > T 2 (1 − b1 ) F̄ 2 /b1 L2 1 or, which is equivalent
 2 1
1
  T 2  1−b
b1
b1
T
1
1
(1 − b1 ) l − (b1 − b2 ) α2 1 − l
α̃ T 1
1
T
f¯1 >   1
  1−b1
2
2
b
b1
α̃ TT 1 1 (1 − b1 ) l1 − (b1 − b2 ) α2 TT 1
(1 − l1 ) + b1 (1 − α̃) (1 − l1 )
f.
Suppose that country 1
in equilibrium, L11 = 0, L12 =
F22 = 0, Q11 = 0, Q21 =
b
w1 /p2 = (1 − b2 ) T 1 F̄ 1 /L1 2 ,
1−b1
r 2 /p1
=
b1 T 2 L2 /F̄ 2
,

is specialized in good 2 and country 2 is good 1.
Then,
L1 , L21 = L2 , L22 = 0, F11 = 0, F21 = F̄ 1 , F12 = F̄ 2 ,
b
1−b2
b
1−b1
, Q22 = 0,
T 2 F̄ 2 1 L2
, Q12 = T 1 F̄ 1 2 L1

b
1−b2
r 1 /p2 = b2 T 1 L1 /F̄ 1
, w2 /p1 = (1 − b1 ) T 2 F̄ 2 /L2 1 ,
b
1−b1
b
1−b2
and p2 /p1
=
α2 T 2 F̄ 2 1 L2
/α1 T 1 F̄ 1 2 L1
.




b
1−b
b
1−b
1
1
1
1
For this to be an equilibrium we need r 1
w1
/T 1 ≥
r2
w2
/T 2 and








b
1−b
b
1−b
b
1−b
b
1−b
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
r1
w1
/T 1
≤
r2
w2
/T 2 .
r1
w1
/T 1 ≥
r2
w2
/T 2 if

1−b
1−b
1
1
 1
 1
 1−b1
and
only
f¯1
≤
(α2 B21 /α1 B11 ) b1 1 − l1 b1 / l1 b1 + (α2 B21 /α1 B11 ) b1 1 − l1 b1 .
b
1−b2 2
b
1−b2 2
/T
≤ 
r 2 2 w2
/T
if
and  only
if
f¯1
≥
r 1 2 w1
1−b2
1−b2
1−b2
1
1



(α2 B22 /α1 B12 ) b2 1 − l1 b2 / l1 b2 + (α2 B22 /α1 B12 ) b2 1 − l1 b2 . Thus, we require

(l1 )




1
 1−b2
 1−b1
α2 B21 b1
1 b1
1 − l1 b2
1
−
l
α1 B11
≤ f¯1 ≤

1

1
1−b2
1−b1
1−b1
b2
22
1 ) b2
1 ) b1 + α2 B21 b1 (1 − l1 ) b1
+ αα21 B
(1
−
l
(l
B12
α1 B11

α2 B22
α1 B12

1−b2
b2

1

b2

28

Then, the utility of a worker in country 1 is vL1 (1, λM ) = (α1 )α1 (α2 )α2 w1 / (p1 )α1 (p2 )α2 =
α
α
α b
α (1−b1 ) 1 α2 b2 1 α2 (1−b2 )
C T 2 1 T 1 2 (α2 /α1 )α1 (1 − b2 ) F̄ 2 1 1 L2 1
F̄
L
/ (B11 )α1 (B22 )α2 L1
and the utility of a worker in country 2 is vL2 (1, λM ) = (α1 )α1 (α2 )α2 w2 / (p1 )α1 (p2 )α2 =
α
α
α b
α (1−b2 ) 2 α1 b1 2 α1 (1−b1 )
C T 2 1 T 1 2 (1 − b1 ) (α1 /α2 )α2 F̄ 1 2 2 L1 2
F̄
L
/ (B11 )α1 (B22 )α2 L2 .
1
2
2
Finally, note that vL (1, λM ) > vL (1, λM ) if and only if L α2 (1 − b2 ) > α1 (1 − b1 ) L1 or, which is
equivalent
T 1 α2 (1 − b2 )
l1 < 2
T α1 (1 − b1 ) + T 1 α2 (1 − b2 )
g. Suppose that country 1 is specialized in good
2 and country 2 is diversified. Then,


in equilibrium, L11 = 0, L12 = L1 , L21 = (1 − b1 ) (1 − b2 )F̄ 2 − w2 /r 2 b2 L2 / (b1 − b2 ) w2 /r 2 ,
L22 = (1 − b2 ) b1 w2/r 2 L2 − (1 − b1 ) F̄ 2 / (b1 −b2 ) w2 /r 2 , F11 = 0, F21 = F̄ 1 , F12 =
b1 (1 − b2 ) F̄ 2 − w2 /r 2 b2 L2 / (b1 − b2 ), F22 = b2 b1 w2 /r 2 L2 − (1 − b1 ) F̄ 2 / (b1 − b2 ), Q11 = 0,



1−b1
b
1−b2
Q21 = T 2 B11 (1 − b2 ) F̄ 2 − w2 /r 2 b2 L2 / w2 /r 2
(b1 − b2 ), Q12 = T 1 F̄ 1 2 L1
, Q22 =





1−b2
b
T 2 B22 b1 w2 /r 2 L2 − (1 − b1 ) F̄ 2 / w2 /r 2
(b1 − b2 ), w1 /p2 = (1 − b2 ) T 1 F̄ 1 /L1 2 , r 1 /p2 =



1−b2
b
1−bz
b2 T 1 L1 /F̄ 1
, w2 /pz = (1 − bz ) T 2 Fz2 /L2z z , r 2 /pz = bz T 2 L2z /Fz2
for z = 1, 2,

b2 1 1−b2
b1 −b2
2
2
2
2
1
1
p2 /p1 = (B11 /B22 ) w /r
, and w /r is the unique solution to α1 T F̄
L
/B22 =

 2 2
1−b2
2
2
2
2
2
2
(1 − α̃) T F̄ − α̃ w /r T L / w /r
(b1 − b2 ). For this to be an equilibrium it must be
the case that w1 /r 1 ≤ w2 /r 2 and (1 − b1 ) F̄ 2 /b1 L2 < w2 /r 2 < (1 − b2 ) F̄ 2 /b2 L2 . w1 /r 1 ≤ w2 /r 2
if and only if f¯1 ≤ b2 (1 −α̃) l1 /α̃ (1 − b2 ). w2 /r 2 > (1 − b1 ) F̄ 2/b1 L2 if and only if f¯1 <
1
1
 1−b2
 1−b2
 1−b2
(α2 B22 /α1 B12 ) b2 1 − l1 b2 / l1 b2 + (α2 B22 /α1 B12 ) b2 1 − l1 b2 . w2 /r 2 < (1 − b2 ) F̄ 2 /b2 L2 if
h
b
1−b2 2 2 b2 2 1−b2 i
and only if T 1 F̄ 1 2 L1
/T F̄
L
(b1 − b2 ) > α1 (b2 − b1 ), which always holds. Thus,
we need
1

 1−b2
α2 B22 b2
1 b2
1
1
−
l
α1 B12
b2 (1 − α̃) l
f¯1 ≤
and f¯1 <

1
1−b2
1−b2
α̃ (1 − b2 )
b2
22
(1 − l1 ) b2
(l1 ) b2 + αα21 B
B12
Then, the utility of a worker in country 1 is vL1 (1, λM ) = (α1 )α1 (α2 )α2 w1 / (p1 )α1 (p2 )α2 =

b
α (b −b )
T 1 C (1 − b2 ) F̄ 1 /b2 L1 2 w2 /r 2 1 1 2 and the utility of a worker in country 2 is vL2 (1, λM ) =
α̃
(α1 )α1 (α2 )α2 w2 / (p1 )α1 (p2 )α2 = T 2 C w2 /r 2 . Finally, note that vL1 (1, λM ) > vL2 (1, λM ) if and only if

b
b
T 1 (1 − b2 ) F̄ 1 /b2 L1 2 > T 2 w2 /r 2 2 or, which is equivalent
(1 − α̃) b2 l1

f¯1 >

α1



T1
T2



1−b2
b2

(b1 − b2 ) l1 + (1 − α̃) b2 l1 + α̃

Proof of Part 2. From part 1:
a. vL1 (1, λM ) > vL2 (1, λM ) if and only if:



T1
T2

1

b2

(1 − b2 ) (1 − l1 )

(1 − α̃) b2 l1

f¯1 >
α1 (T 1 /T 2 )

1−b2
b2

1

(b1 − b2 ) l1 + (1 − α̃) b2 l1 + α̃ (T 1 /T 2 ) b2 (1 − b2 ) (1 − l1 )
29



for l1 < T 1 α2 (1 − b2 ) / T 2 α1 (1 − b1 ) + T 1 α2 (1 − b2 ) ; or
f¯1 >

α̃ T 2 /T 1
1

1

b1

(1 − b1 ) l1 − (b1 − b2 ) α2 1 − l1

α̃ (T 2 /T 1 ) b1 (1 − b1 ) l1 − (b1 − b2 ) α2 (T 2 /T 1 )


for l1 ≥ T 1 α2 (1 − b2 ) / T 2 α1 (1 − b1 ) + T 1 α2 (1 − b2 ) .
b. vL1 (1, λM ) < vL2 (1, λM ) if and only if

1−b1
b1

T 2 /T 1



 1−b1
b1

(1 − l1 ) + b1 (1 − α̃) (1 − l1 )

(1 − α̃) b2 l1

f¯1 <

1−b2

1

α1 (T 1 /T 2 ) b2 (b1 − b2 ) l1 + (1 − α̃) b2 l1 + α̃ (T 1 /T 2 ) b2 (1 − b2 ) (1 − l1 )


for l1 < T 1 α2 (1 − b2 ) / T 2 α1 (1 − b1 ) + T 1 α2 (1 − b2 ) ; or
f¯1 <

α̃ T 2 /T 1
1

1

b1

(1 − b1 ) l1 − (b1 − b2 ) α2 1 − l1

α̃ (T 2 /T 1 ) b1 (1 − b1 ) l1 − (b1 − b2 ) α2 (T 2 /T 1 )


for l1 ≥ T 1 α2 (1 − b2 ) / T 2 α1 (1 − b1 ) + T 1 α2 (1 − b2 ) .
c. vL1 (1, λM ) = vL2 (1, λM ) if and only if

1−b1
b1

T 2 /T 1



 1−b1
b1

(1 − l1 ) + b1 (1 − α̃) (1 − l1 )

(1 − α̃) b2 l1

f¯1 =

1−b2

1

α1 (T 1 /T 2 ) b2 (b1 − b2 ) l1 + (1 − α̃) b2 l1 + α̃ (T 1 /T 2 ) b2 (1 − b2 ) (1 − l1 )


for l1 < T 1 α2 (1 − b2 ) / T 2 α1 (1 − b1 ) + T 1 α2 (1 − b2 ) ; or
f¯1 =

α̃ T 2 /T 1
1

1

b1

(1 − b1 ) l1 − (b1 − b2 ) α2 1 − l1

α̃ (T 2 /T 1 ) b1 (1 − b1 ) l1 − (b1 − b2 ) α2 (T 2 /T 1 )


for l1 > T 1 α2 (1 − b2 ) / T 2 α1 (1 − b1 ) + T 1 α2 (1 − b2 ) ; or

1

1−b1
b1

T 2 /T 1



 1−b1

(1 − l1 ) + b1 (1 − α̃) (1 − l1 )

(1−α̃)b2 l



f¯1 ∈ 


1−b2
α1 (T 1 /T 2 ) b2

α̃(

)

,

1

(b1 −b2 )l1 +(1−α̃)b2 l1 +α̃(T 1 /T 2 ) b2 (1−b2 )(1−l1 )

1
T 2 /T 1 b1

1
α̃(T 2 /T 1 ) b1

b1

1−b1
T 2 /T 1 b1

(1−b1 )l1 −(b1 −b2 )α2 (1−l1 )(

1−b1
(1−b1 )l1 −(b1 −b2 )α2 (T 2 /T 1 ) b1

)

(1−l1 )+b1 (1−α̃)(1−l1 )









for l1 = T 1 α2 (1 − b2 ) / T 2 α1 (1 − b1 ) + T 1 α2 (1 − b2 ) .
Next we prove three results that will allow us to compare vLj (1, 0) and vLj (1, 1).
Result 1: vL1 (1, λM ) and vL2 (1, λM ) are continuous functions of L1 and L2 for any T 1 ,
T 2 , F̄ 1 and F̄ 2 .
From a simple inspection of vL1 (1, λM ) and vL2 (1, λM ), it is clear that,
in the interior of each of the seven regions, vL1 (1, λM ) and vL2 (1, λM ) are continuous.
It
is also easy to prove that vL1 (1, λM ) and vL2 (1, λM ) are continuous in the boundary of
each
For example, the intersection between the boundaries of regions a and b is
 1 region.

l , f¯1 : l1 ∈ [0, (1 − b1 ) α1 / (1 − α̃) (1 − α2 b2 )] , f¯1 = b1 (1 − α̃) l1 /α̃ (1 − b1 ) or, which is equivalent,
30




L1 = ψ L̄1 + L̄2 , with ψ  = α̃ (1 − b1 ) T 2 F̄ 1 / α2 (b1 − b2 ) T 1 F̄ 1 + T 2 F̄ 2 b1 (1 − α̃) + α̃ (1 − b1 ) T 2 F̄ 1
and
T 1 F̄ 1
=
∈
0, (α1 b1 /α2 b2 ) T 2 F̄ 2 .
In
region
a,
vL1 (1, λM )



α̃
α̃
1
1
1
2
2
1
1
2
2
1
T C [(1 − α̃) /α̃]
T F̄ + T F̄ / T L + T L
,
while in region b,
vL (1, λM )
=

b1 2 2 α2 (b1 −b2 )
1
1
1
2
2
CT (1 − b1 ) F̄ /b1 L
r /w
,
where
w /r
is
the
unique
solution
to
b1 1 1−b1
 2 2 2 2

1−b1
1
1
2
2
2
2
α2 T F̄
L
/B11 = α̃T w /r L − (1 − α̃) T F̄ / w /r
(b1 − b2 ).
Therefore,
in the boundary we have:
α̃ "

T 1 F̄ 1 + T 2 F̄ 2


lim
= CT
T 1 ψ L̄1 + L̄2 + T 2 (1 − ψ) L̄1 + L̄2
L1 →ψ(L̄1 +L̄2 )
"
#α̃
1
(1
−
b
)
F̄
1

lim
v 1 (1, λM ) = vL1 (1, λM ) = CT 1
− L
b1 ψ L̄1 + L̄2
L1 →ψ(L̄1 +L̄2 )
v 1 (1, λM )
+ L

1



1 − α̃
α̃

#α̃

1
1
1
+ v (1, λM ) = lim 1
− v (1, λM ) = v (1, λM ). Thus,
L
L
L →ψ(L̄1 +L̄2 )
(L̄1 +L̄2 ) L
vL1 (1, λM ) is continuous at L1 = ψ L̄1 + L̄2 .

Result 2:
vL1 (1, λM ) is decreasing in L1 / L̄1 + L̄2 .
In region a, vL1 (1, λM ) =




α̃
T 1 C [(1 − α̃) /α̃]α̃ T 1 F̄ 1 + T 2 F̄ 2 / T 1 L1 + T 2 L2 , which is decreasing in L1 / L̄1 + L̄2 .
In

b1 2 2 α2 (b1 −b2 )
1
1
1
1
2
2
region b, vL (1, λM ) = CT (1 − b1 ) F̄ /b1 L
r /w
, where w /r is the unique solub1 1 1−b1
 2 2 2 2

1−b1
1
1
tion to α2 T F̄
L
/B11 =  α̃T w /r L − (1 − α̃) T 2 F̄ 2 / w2 /r 2
 (b1 − b2 ). Since
2
2
1
1
2
1
1
1
2
w /r is increasing in L / L̄ + L̄ , vL (1, λM ) is decreasing in L / L̄ + L̄ .
In region c,
h
b1 1 (1−b1 ) iα1 h 2 2 b2 2 1−b2 iα2
α1
α2
1
1
1
/ (B11 ) (B22 )α2 L1 ,
L
L
T F̄
vL (1, λM ) = C (α1 /α2 ) (1 − b1 ) T F̄
α̃

which is decreasing in L1 / L̄1 + L̄2 .
In region d, vL1 (1, λM ) = CT 1 w1 /r 1 , where

 
1−b2
w1 /r 1 is the unique solution to T 1 (1 − α̃) F̄ 1 − α̃ w1 /r 1 L1 / w1 /r 1
(b1 − b2 )
=
b2 2 1−b2
 1
2
2
1
1
1
1
2
α1 T F
L
/B22 . Since w /r is decreasing in L / L̄ + L̄ , vL (1, λM ) is also decreas
α̃
1
1
2
ing in L / L̄ + L̄ . In region e, vL1 (1, λM ) = T 1 C w1 /r 1 , where w1 /r 1 is the unique solution
b
1−b1



1−b1
to α2 T 2 F̄ 2 1 L2
/B11 = T 1 α̃ w1 /r 1 L1 − (1 − α̃) F̄ 1 / (b1 − b2 ) w1 /r 1
. Since w1 /r 1 is
decreasing in L1 / L̄1 + L̄2 , vL1 (1, λM ) is also decreasing in L1 / L̄1 + L̄2 . In region f, vL1 (1, λM ) =
h
b
1−b1 iα1 h 1 1 b2 1 1−b2 iα2
C (α2 /α1 )α1 (1 − b2 ) A2 F̄ 2 1 L2
A F̄
L
/ (B11 )α1 (B22 )α2 L1 , which is de

b
α (b −b )
creasing in L1 / L̄1 + L̄2 . In region g, vL1 (1, λM ) = T 1 C (1 − b2 ) F̄ 1 /b2 L1 2 w2 /r 2 1 1 2 ,
b
1−b2
where
w2 /r 2
is
the
unique
solution
to
α1 T 1 F̄ 1 2 L1
/B22
=

 2 2
1−b2

2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
2
(1 − α̃) T F̄ − α̃ w /r T L / w /r
(b
−
b
).
Since
w
/r
is
decreasing
in
L
/
L̄
+
L̄
,
1
2

1
1
1
2
1
vL (1, λM ) is also decreasing in L / L̄ + L̄ . Finally, due
to Result 1, vL (1, λM ) is a continuous

function and, hence, it must be decreasing in L1 / L̄1 + L̄2 not only in each region, but everywhere.
Result 3:
Following the same steps we employed
in Result 2, it is easy to

prove that vL2 (1, λM ) is decreasing in L2 / L̄1 + L̄2 .
For example, in region e,

b1 1 1 α2 (b1 −b2 )
w1
2
2
2
2
vL (1, λM ) = CT (1 − b1 ) F̄ /b1 L
r /w
, where r1 is the unique solution to
b1 2 1−b1

 1

1−b1
2
2
1
1
1
α2 T F̄
L
/B11  = T α̃ w /r L − (1 − α̃) F̄ 1 / (b1 −b2 ) w1 /r 1
. Since w1 /r 1 is
increasing in L2 / L̄1 + L̄2 , vL2 (1, λM ) is decreasing in L2 / L̄1 + L̄2 .

Moreover, note that when limL1 →ψ

31

From Results 1-3, if vL1 (1, 0) > vL2 (1, 0), then vL1 (1, 0) > vL1 (1, 1); if vL2 (1, 0) > vL1 (1, 0), then
(1, 0) > vL2 (1, 1); and if vL1 (1, 0) = vL2 (1, 0), then vL1 (1, 0) = vL2 (1, 0) = vL1 (1, 0) = vL2 (1, 0). This
completes the proof of the lemma. 
Proposition 4 characterizes the equilibrium trade and labor mobility policies in a Heckscher-Ohlin
economy.
α̃

(1−f¯1 )l̄1
T1
1
2
and
Proposition 4 (Heckscher-Ohlin economy). Assume that T > T , T 2 6= f¯1 1−l̄1
(
)
f¯1 6= ¯l1 .
vL2

1. Suppose that under free trade and no labor mobility the country relatively well endowed with factor
F is diversified. Then, the trade and labor mobility game has a unique Nash equilibrium outcome:
no trade and no labor mobility.
2. Suppose that under free trade and no labor mobility the country relatively well
F specializes in the F -intensive good (i.e., good 1). Define:


¯l1 , f¯1 ∈ [0, 1]2 such that:





 ¯1 ¯

 l < lb and f¯1 ≥ ηb ¯l1 when η3 ¯l1  ≤ f¯1 < η5 ¯l1 
ηcL ¯l1 ≤ f¯1 ≤ ηcH ¯l1  when η5 ¯l1  ≤ f¯1 ≤ η6 ¯l1 
κ=


¯l1 > ¯l and f¯1 < ηe ¯l1 when η8 ¯l1 < f¯1 ≤ η2 ¯l1





 L ¯1e
when η7 ¯l1 ≤ f¯1 ≤ η8 ¯l1
η l ≤ f¯1 ≤ η H ¯l1
f

f

endowed with factor













(a) If ¯l1 , f¯1 ∈ κ, then the trade and labor mobility game has two Nash equilibrium outcomes: (i)
no trade and no labor mobility; and (ii) free trade and no labor mobility. Moreover, WGj (1, 0) >
WGj (0, 0) for j = 1, 2.

(b) If ¯l1 , f¯1 ∈
/ κ, then the trade and labor mobility game has a unique Nash equilibrium outcome:
no trade and no labor mobility.

Proof :
No trade and no labor mobility is always a Nash equilibrium outcome.
Free trade and no labor mobility could be a Nash equilibrium outcome only if, under free trade and no
labor mobility, the country relatively well endowed with factor F specializes in good 1. In order to prove
α̃
this we must consider seven possible cases. From Lemma 4 Part 1, vLj (0, 0) = CT j [(1 − α̃) /α̃]α̃ F̄ j /L̄j
for j = 1, 2.






a. Suppose that max η1 ¯l1 , η2 ¯l1
< f¯1 < min η3 ¯l1 , η4 ¯l1 . Then, from Lemma 5 Part


α̃
1-a, both countries are diversified and vLj (1, 0) = T j C [(1 − α̃) /α̃]α̃ T 1 F̄ 1 + T 2 F̄ 2 / T 1 L̄1 + T 2 L̄2 .
Moreover, f¯1 > ¯l1 implies WG1 (0, 0) = vL1 (0, 0) > vL1 (1, 0) = WG1 (1, 0), while f¯1 < ¯l1 implies WG2 (0, 0) =
vL2 (0, 0) > vL1 (1, 0) = WG2 (1, 0). Thus, free trade and no labor mobility is not a Nash equilibrium
outcome.


b. Suppose that η3 ¯l1 ≤ f¯1 < η5 ¯l1 , which implies f¯1 > ¯l1 (i.e., country 1 is relatively well
endowed with factor F ). Then, from Lemma 5 Part 1-b, country 1 specializes in good 1, vL1 (1, 0) =

b
α (b −b )
α̃
T 1 C (1 − b1 ) F̄ 1 /b1 L̄1 1 r 2 /w2 2 1 2 and vL2 (1, 0) = T 2 C w2 /r 2 , where w2 /r 2 is the unique
b
1−b1
 2 2 2 2

1−b1
solution to α2 T 1 F̄ 1 1 L̄1
/B11 =
α̃T w /r L̄ − (1 − α̃) T 2 F̄ 2 / w2 /r 2
(b1 − b2 ).
32

Moreover

WG1 (1, 0)

[(1 − b1 ) /b1 ]

b1
α2 (b1 −b2 )

vL1 (1, 0)

=

[α̃/ (1 − α̃)]

vL1 (0, 0) = WG1 (0, 0) if

F̄ 1 /L̄1 or, which is equivalent:

≥

α̃
α2 (b1 −b2 )

B11 α̃

¯l1 < ¯lb =
B11 α̃



1−b1
b1



b1 b1
α2 (b1 −b2 )

B11

B11 (1 − α̃)

 b1 b1

1−α̃
α̃

α2 (b1 −b2 )

1−b1
b1

1−b1
b1



1−α̃
α̃

α̃
2 (b1 −b2 )



α



only

if

w2 /r 2

≤

b1 b1
α2 (b1 −b2 )

+ α2 (b1 − b2 )

1−α̃
α̃

B11 (1 − α̃)


f¯1 ≥ ηb ¯l1 =



and

α̃
α2 (b1 −b2 )


1 − ¯l1 − α2





b1
1−b1

b1
1−b1
1−α̃
α̃





α̃b1
2 (b1 −b2 )

α

b1 (1−b1 )
α2 (b1 −b2 )

b1 (1−b1 )
α2 (b1 −b2 )

α̃b1
α2 (b1 −b2 )

¯l1

¯l1 +
(b1 − b2 ) ¯l1

WG2 (1, 0) = vL2 (1, 0) > vL1 (0, 0) = WG2 (0, 0) if and only if w2 /r 2 > (1 − α̃) F̄ 2 /α̃L̄2 , which always holds.

Thus, free trade and no labormobility is a Nashequilibrium outcome if and only if ¯l1 < ¯lb and f¯1 ≥ ηb ¯l1 .
c. Suppose that η5 ¯l1 ≤ f¯1 ≤ η6 ¯l1 , which implies f¯1 > ¯l1 (i.e., country 1 is relatively
well endowed with factor F ). h Then, from Lemma
5 Part 1-c, country 1 specializes in good 1,
b1 1 (1−b1 ) iα1 h 2 2 b2 2 1−b2 iα2
α2
1
1
1
vL (1, 0) = C (α1 /α2 ) (1 − b1 ) T F̄
L̄
T F̄
L̄
/ (B11 )α1 (B22 )α2 L̄1 and
h
i
h
b
(1−b1 ) α1 2 2 b2 2 1−b2 iα2
vL2 (1, 0) = C (α2 /α1 )α1 (1 − b2 ) T 1 F̄ 1 1 L̄1
T F̄
L̄
/ (B11 )α1 (B22 )α2 L̄2 .
Moreover, WG1 (1, 0) = vL1 (1, 0) ≥ vL1 (0, 0) = WG1 (0, 0) if and only if

¯1

f ≤

ηcH

¯1
l





=
¯l1

α1
α2

 1−b2
b2

1 
b2

+



α1
α2

(1−b1 )
(B11 )α1 (B22 )α2

1 
b2



α̃
1−α̃

(1−b1 )
(B11 )α1 (B22 )α2

while WG2 (1, 0) = vL2 (1, 0) ≥ vL2 (0, 0) = WG2 (0, 0) if and only if
f¯1 ≥ ηcL


¯l1 =

¯l1



 1−b1
b1

α1
α2

+

1 h
b1



α1
α2

(B11 )α1 (B22 )α2
(1−b2 )

1 h
b1

α̃  α21b2


α̃
1−α̃


1−α̃ α̃
α̃

(B11 )α1 (B22 )α2
(1−b2 )

i

1 − ¯l1

α̃  α21b2

1
α1 b1


1−α̃ α̃
α̃

i

1 − ¯l1
1
α1 b1

 1−b2
b2

1 − ¯l1

 1−b1

,
 1−b2
b2

b1

1 − ¯l1

 α1 (1−b1 )

.

α1 b1



Thus, free trade and no labor mobility
is a Nash equilibrium
outcome if and only if ηcL ¯l1 ≤ f¯1 ≤ ηcH ¯l1 .


d. Suppose that f¯1 ≥ η4 l1 and f¯1 > η6 l1 , which implies f¯1 > ¯l1 (i.e., country 1 is
relatively well endowed with factor F ). Then, from Lemma 5 Part 1-d, country 1 is diversified,
α̃
α (b −b ) 
b
vL1 (1, 0) = T 1 C w1 /r 1 and vL2 (1, 0) = T 2 C w1 /r 1 1 1 2 (1 − b2 ) F̄ 2 /b2 L̄2 2 , where w1 /r 1 is the

 
1−b2
b
1−b2
unique solution to T 1 (1 − α̃) F̄ 1 − α̃ w1 /r 1 L̄1 / w1 /r 1
(b1 − b2 ) = α1 T 2 F 2 2 L̄2
/B22 .
Moreover, WG1 (0, 0) = vL1 (0, 0) > vL1 (1, 0) = WG1 (1, 0) if and only w1 /r 1 < (1 − α̃) F̄ 1 /α̃L̄1 , which
always holds. Thus, free trade
outcome.
 and1 no labor1 mobility is not a Nash equilibrium
1
1
1
¯
¯
¯
¯
¯
e. Suppose that η8 l < f ≤ η2 l , which implies 1 − f > 1 − l (i.e., country 2 is relatively well endowed with factor F ). Then, from Lemma 5 Part 1-e, country 2 specializes in good 1,
33


b
α (b −b )
and vL2 (1, 0) = T 2 C (1 − b1 ) F̄ 2 /b1 L̄2 1 r 1 /w1 2 1 2 , where w1 /r 1 is the
b
1−b1



1−b1
unique solution to α2 T 2 F̄ 2 1 L̄2
/B11 = T 1 α̃ w1 /r 1 L̄1 − (1 − α̃) F̄ 1 / (b1 − b2 ) w1 /r 1
.
Moreover, WG1 (1, 0) = vL1 (1, 0) > vL1 (0, 0) = WG1 (0, 0) if and only if w1 /r 1 > (1 − α̃) F̄ 1 /α̃L̄1 ,
which always holds. WG2 (1, 0) = vL2 (1, 0) ≥ vL2 (0, 0) = WG2 (0, 0) if and only if w1 /r 1 ≤
b1
α̃

[(1 − b1 ) /b1 ] α2 (b1 −b2 ) [α̃/ (1 − α̃)] α2 (b1 −b2 ) F̄ 2 /L̄2 or, which is equivalent
vL1 (1, 0) = T 1 C w1 /r 1

α̃

¯l1 > ¯le =

B11 α̃



1−b1
b1



(b1 − b2 ) α2

 α̃b1

b1 b1
α2 (b1 −b2 )

B11 α̃
f¯1 < ηe


¯l1 =

α2 (b1 −b2 )

α̃
1−α̃



− (b1 − b2 ) α2

1−b1
b1





1−b1
b1

+ (b1 − b2 ) α2

b1
α2 (b1 −b2 )





b1 (1−b1 )
α2 (b1 −b2 )

α̃
1−α̃





α̃
1−α̃

α̃
α2 (b1 −b2 )



¯l1

α̃(1−b1 )
α2 (b1 −b2 )

1 − ¯l1
α̃






 b1

α2 (b1 −b2 )
α2 (b1 −b2 ) 1
α̃
1
¯l
B11 (1 − α̃) 1 − ¯l1 + α̃B11 1−b
b1
1−α̃
 b1 (1−b1 ) 
 α̃(1−b1 )


α2 (b1 −b2 )
α2 (b1 −b2 )
α̃
1
1 − ¯l1
− (b1 − b2 ) α2 1−b
b1
1−α̃


¯l1 > ¯le and f¯1 < ηe ¯l1 .
Thus, free trade and no labor
mobility
is
a
Nash
equilibrium
outcome
if
and
only
if


f. Suppose that η7 ¯l1 ≤ f¯1 ≤ η8 ¯l1 , which implies 1 − f¯1 > 1 − ¯l1 (i.e., country 2 is relatively well endowed with factor F ). h Then, from Lemma
5 Part 1-e, country 2 specializes in good
b1 2 1−b1 iα1 h 1 1 b2 1 1−b2 iα2
α1
1
2
2
1, vL (1, 0) = C (α2 /α1 ) (1 − b2 ) T F̄
L̄
T F̄
L̄
/ (B11 )α1 (B22 )α2 L̄1
h
i
h
i
b
1−b1 α1 1 1 b2 1 1−b2 α2
and vL2 (1, 0) = C (1 − b1 ) (α1 /α2 )α2 T 2 F̄ 2 1 L̄2
T F̄
L̄
/ (B11 )α1 (B22 )α2 L̄2 .
Moreover, WG1 (1, 0) = vL1 (1, 0) ≥ vL1 (0, 0) = WG1 (0, 0) if and only if


f¯1 ≤ ηfH ¯l1 =



¯l1

α2
α1

 1−b1

1 
b1

+

b1



α2
α1

(1−b2 )
(B11 )α1 (B22 )α2

1 
b1



α̃
1−α̃

(1−b2 )
(B11 )α1 (B22 )α2

α̃  α11b1


α̃
1−α̃

1 − ¯l1

α̃  α11b1

 1−b1
b1

1 − ¯l1

while WG2 (1, 0) = vL2 (1, 0) ≥ vL2 (0, 0) = WG2 (0, 0) if and only if
f¯1 ≥ ηfL


¯l1 =

¯l1



α2
α1

 1−b2
b2

1 h

+

b2



α2
α1

(B11 )α1 (B22 )α2
(1−b1 )

1 h
b2


1−α̃ α̃
α̃

(B11 )α1 (B22 )α2
(1−b1 )

i

1
α2 b2


1−α̃ α̃
α̃

1 − ¯l1
i

1
α2 b2

,

 1−b2

 1−b1
b1

b2

1 − ¯l1

 1−b2
b2



Thus, free trade and no labor mobility is a Nash equilibrium outcome if and only if ηfL l¯1 ≤ f¯1 ≤ ηfH ¯l1 .


g. Suppose that f¯1 ≤ η1 ¯l1 and f¯1 < η7 ¯l1 , which implies 1− f¯1 > 1 − ¯l1 (i.e., country 2 is relatively well endowed with factor F ). Then, from Lemma 5 Part 1-g, country 2 is diversified, vL1 (1, 0) =

b
α (b −b )
α̃
T 1 C (1 − b2 ) F̄ 1 /b2 L̄1 2 w2 /r 2 1 1 2 and vL2 (1, 0) = T 2 C w2 /r 2 , where w2 /r 2 is the unique solub
1−b2



1−b2
tion to α1 T 1 F̄ 1 2 L̄1
/B22 = (1 − α̃) T 2 F̄ 2 − α̃ w2 /r 2 T 2 L̄2 / w2 /r 2
(b1 − b2 ). Moreover,
34

WG2 (0, 0) = vL2 (0, 0) > vL2 (1, 0) = WG2 (1, 0) if and only if w2 /r 2 < (1 − α̃) F̄ 2 /α̃L̄2 , which always holds.
Thus, free trade and no labor mobility is not a Nash equilibrium outcome.
Free trade
outcome. From Lemma 5 Part 2-a, if
 and1 free labor1mobility 1is not a1 Nash equilibrium
1
1
1
¯
¯
¯
¯
¯
¯
¯
¯
f > η9 l for l < l; or f > η10 l for l ≥ l, then WG (1, 0) = vL1 (1, 0) > vL1 (1, 1) = WG1 (1, 1).
Therefore, workers in country
to block labor mobility. From Lemma 5 Part 2-b, if f¯1 < η9 ¯
l1
 1 prefer
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
for ¯l < ¯l; or f¯ < η10 ¯l for ¯l ≥ ¯l, then WG (1, 0) = vL (1, 0) > vL (1, 1) = WG (1, 1).  Therefore,
workers in country
2 prefer to block
Lemma 5 Part 2-c, if f¯1 = η9 ¯l1 for ¯l1 < ¯l;

 labor
 mobility.
 From
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
or f¯ = η10 ¯l for ¯l > ¯l; or f¯ ∈ η9 ¯l , η10 ¯l
for l = ¯l, then, WG1 (1, 0) = WG1 (1, 1) = WG2 (1, 0) =
2
¯1
¯1
¯l1 < ¯l implies f¯1 ≤ η1 ¯
WG2 (1, 1) = vL1 (1, 0) = vL1 (1, 1) = vL2 (1,
l1
 0) =1 vL (1, 1). Since f = η9 l and
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
¯
¯
¯
¯
¯
¯
and f < η7 l , whenever f = η9 l and l < l, it must be the case that vL (0, 0) > vL (1, 0) = vL (1, 1).
Thus, free trade and free labor mobility is not a Nash equilibrium. Since
f¯1 = η10 ¯l1 and ¯l1 > ¯l implies

that η8 ¯l1 < f¯1 ≤ η2 ¯l1 . Thus, if in addition ¯l1 > ¯le and f¯1 < ηe ¯l1
1
f¯1 >   1 l̄
just proved that either vL1 (0, 0) > vL1 (1, 0) or vL2 (0, 0) > vL1 (1, 0).
1
α̃
T
1 +l̄1
1−
l̄
(
)
T2
No trade and free labor mobility is not a Nash equilibrium outcome. From Lemma 4 Part 3, T 1 /T 2 >
α̃
α̃
F̄ 2 L̄1 /F̄ 1 L̄2 implies that WG1 (0, 0) = vL1 (0, 0) > vL1 (0, 1) = WG1 (0, 1), while T 1 /T 2 < F̄ 2 L̄1 /F̄ 1 L̄2
implies WG2 (0, 0) = vL2 (0, 0) > vL2 (0, 1) = WG2 (0, 1). Thus, no trade and free labor mobility is not a Nash
equilibrium outcome.

B.2 Ricardo-Vinner specific factors economy
Consider an economy with two countries (J = 2), two tradeable goods (ZT = {1, 2}) and three factors of
 b  1−b
production (F1 , F2 and labor L). Production functions are given by Qjz = Fzj
Ljz
for z = 1, 2,


with b ∈ (0, 1). Factor endowments in country j are F̄1j , F̄2j , L̄j > (0, 0, 0). All agents have the same
 αz
 Q
P
preferences, given by u cj = z∈Z cjz
, with αz > 0 and z∈Z αz = 1.
Lemma 6 characterizes the equilibrium of a Ricardo-Vinner specific factors economy under autarky.
Lemma 6 (Ricardo-Vinner specific factors economy under autarky). Assume there is no
trade in goods, i.e., λT = 0.
 bα1  b(1−α1 )
b
1. Suppose there is no labor mobility, i.e., λM = 0. Then, vLj (0, 0) = C F̄1j
F̄2j
/ L̄j ,
i1−b
h
(1 − b).
where C = (α1 )α1 (1 − α1 )1−α1
2. Suppose there is free labor mobility, i.e., λM = 1.
(a) If



F̄11
F̄12

α1 

bα1

C (F̄11 )

F̄21
F̄22

(1−α1 )

b(1−α1 )

(F̄21 )

b

(L̄1 +mL̄2 )
(b) If

(1−m)L̄1
L̄2 +mL̄1
α

≤



F̄11
F̄12

1−α

>

L̄1 +mL̄2
,
(1−m)L̄2

and vL2 (0, 1) =

α1 

F̄21
F̄22

(1−α1 )

(F̄12 ) 1 (F̄22 ) 1 (L̄1 +L̄2 )
1−α
α
1−α
( ) (F̄22 ) 1 +(F̄11 ) 1 (F̄21 ) 1
α
F̄12 1

then L1 =

C (F̄12 )

bα1


L̄1 + mL̄2 , L2 = (1 − m) L̄2 , vL1 (0, 1) =

b(1−α1 )

(F̄22 )

b

[(1−m)L̄2 ]

.

α

1−α

(F̄11 ) 1 (F̄21 ) 1 (L̄1 +L̄2 )
2
α
1−α
α
1−α , L =
(F̄12 ) 1 (F̄22 ) 1 +(F̄11 ) 1 (F̄21 ) 1

b
α
1−α
α
1−α
(F̄11 ) 1 (F̄21 ) 1 +(F̄12 ) 1 (F̄22 ) 1
1
2
.
and vL (0, 1) = vL (0, 1) =
L̄1 +L̄2
≤

L̄1 +mL̄2
,
(1−m)L̄2

35

then L1 =

(c) If



F̄11
F̄12

α1 

bα1

C (F̄11 )

F̄21
F̄22

(1−α1 )

b(1−α1 )

(F̄21 )

b
(1−m)L̄1

[
3. If



F̄11
F̄12

]


F̄21 (1−α1 )
F̄22
2
vL (0, 1).

α1 

vL2 (0, 0) >

<

(1−m)L̄1
,
L̄2 +mL̄1

and vL2 (0, 1) =
L̄1
,
L̄2

>

then L1 = (1 − m) L̄1 , L2 = L̄2 + mL̄1 , vL1 (0, 1) =

C (F̄12 )

bα1

b(1−α1 )

(F̄22 )

.

b

(L̄2 +mL̄1 )

then vL1 (0, 0) > vL1 (0, 1), while if



F̄11
F̄12

α1 

F̄21
F̄22

(1−α1 )

<

L̄1
,
L̄2

then

Proof : Let pjz denotes the price of good z = 1, 2 in country j, rfj the return of factor f = 1, 2 and
wj the wage rate. Under autarky, the equilibrium conditions in country j are:
pj1 (1 − b)
pj1 b

Lj1
F̄1j

F̄1j
Lj1

!1−b

!b

= wj = pj2 (1 − b)

= r1j , pj1 b

Lj1
F̄1j

!1−b

F̄2j
Lj2

!b

, Lj1 + Lj2 = Lj

= r2j , α2 pj1 Qj1 = α1 pj2 Qj2

b

Therefore, in equilibrium, Lj1 = α1 Lj , Lj2 = α2 Lj , pj1 /pj2 =
F̄2j α1 /F̄1j α2 , wj /pj1 =

b

b
(1 − b) F̄1j /α1 Lj , wj /pj2 = (1 − b) F̄2j /α2 Lj
and, hence, the utility of a worker in coun α1  α2

bα1 
b(1−α1 )
try j is vLj (0, λM ) = (α1 )α1 (α2 )α2 wj / pj1
pj2
= C F̄1j /Lj
F̄2j /Lj
, where C =
h
i1−b
(α1 )α1 (1 − α1 )1−α1
(1 − b).

When there is no labor mobility, Lj = L̄j . When there is free labor mobility, mobile workers locate
in the country with the highest vLj . We must distinguish three possible cases.
α
(1−α1 )

a. Suppose that F̄11 /F̄12 1 F̄21 /F̄22
> L̄1 +
mL̄2 / (1 − m) L̄2 .  Then, vL1 (0, λM ) >


1
1
2
2
2
2
1
vL2 (0, λM ) for all L1 ∈ (1
 − m) 2L̄ , L̄ + mL̄ 2 and L ∈ (1 − m) L̄ , L̄ + mL̄ . Therefore, in equi1
1
2
librium, L = L̄ + mL̄ and L = (1 − m) L̄ .

α
(1−α1 )

b. Suppose that (1 − m) L̄1 / L̄2 + mL̄1 ≤ F̄11 /F̄12 1 F̄21 /F̄22
≤ L̄1 + mL̄2 / (1 − m) L̄2 .
Then, vL1 (0, λM ) ≥ vL2 (0, λM ) for L1 = (1 − m) L̄1 and L2 = L̄2 + mL̄1 , while vL1 (0, λM ) ≤
vL2 (0, λM ) for L1 = L̄1 + mL̄2 and L2 = (1 − m) L̄2 .
Moreover, vLj (0, λM ) is decreasing
2
in Lj .
Therefore, in equilibrium, it must
be the case that vL1 (0, 1) =
h
i vL (0, 1), which im






α
1−α
α
1−α
α
1−α
1
1
1
plies L1 / L̄1 + L̄2 = F̄11 1 F̄21
/ F̄12 1 F̄22
+ F̄11 1 F̄21
and L2 / L̄1 + L̄2 =
h
i
α
1−α1
α
1−α1
α
1−α1
F̄12 1 F̄22
/ F̄12 1 F̄22
+ F̄11 1 F̄21
.



α
(1−α1 )
c. Suppose
that F̄11 /F̄12 1 F̄21 /F̄22
< (1 − m) L̄1 / L̄2 + mL̄1 . Then, vL2 (0, λM ) > vL1 (0, λM )

for all L1 ∈ (1 − m) L̄1 , L̄1 + mL̄2 and L2 ∈ (1 − m) L̄2 , L̄2 + mL̄1 . Therefore, in equilibrium L1 =
(1 − m) L̄1 and L2 = L̄2 + mL̄1 . Summing up, the utility of a worker in country j under autarky and

36

free labor mobility is given by:
 
bα1 
b(1−α1 )
F̄11
F̄21



1
2
1
2
L̄ +mL̄
L̄ +mL̄



  1 α1 1 1−α1
α
1−α1 b
F̄
F̄
+(F̄12 ) 1 (F̄22 )
(
(
1
1)
2)
vL (0, 1) = C
L̄1 +L̄2



h
i
h
ib(1−α1 )

bα
1
1

F̄21
F̄1

1
1
(1−m)L̄
(1−m)L̄
 h
ibα1 h
ib(1−α1 )
2
F̄1
F̄22



(1−m)L̄2
(1−m)L̄2



  1 α1 1 1−α1
α
1−α1 b
+(F̄12 ) 1 (F̄22 )
(F̄1 ) (F̄2 )
vL2 (0, 1) = C
L̄1 +L̄2





b(1−α1 )

bα1 

F̄12
F̄22

L̄2 +mL̄1

if
if
if
if
if
if

L̄2 +mL̄1



F̄11
F̄12

α1 

F̄21
F̄22

(1−α1 )

L̄1 +mL̄2
(1−m)L̄2
 1 α1  1 (1−α1 )
F̄
F̄

(1−m)L̄1
L̄2 +mL̄1
 1 α1
F̄

≤ F̄12
1
 1 (1−α1 )

(1−m)L̄1
L̄2 +mL̄1
 1 α1
F̄

≤ F̄12
1
 1 (1−α1 )

1

F̄12



F̄11
F̄12

1

F̄12

F̄2
F̄22

α1 

F̄21
F̄22

(1−α1 )

>

2

F̄22

<

L̄1 +mL̄2
(1−m)L̄2

≤

L̄1 +mL̄2
(1−m)L̄2

(1−m)L̄1
L̄2 +mL̄1

L̄1 +mL̄2
(1−m)L̄2
 1 α1  1 (1−α1 )
F̄
F̄

F̄2
F̄22

≤

>

2

F̄22

<

(1−m)L̄1
L̄2 +mL̄1

α
(1−α1 )
Finally, note that F̄11 /F̄12 1 F̄21 /F̄22
> L̄1 /L̄2 implies vL1 (0, 0) > vL1 (0, 1), while L̄1 /L̄2 <


α
(1−α
)
1
F̄11 /F̄12 1 F̄21 /F̄22
implies vL2 (0, 0) > vL2 (0, 1). This completes the proof of the lemma. 
Lemma 7 characterizes the equilibrium of a Ricardo-Vinner specific factors economy under free trade.

Lemma 7 (Ricardo-Vinner specific factors economy under free trade). Assume there is free
F̄ 1
F̄ 2
trade of goods, i.e., λT = 1. Suppose that F̄11 > F̄12 and let
2

BT



p1
L1
, 2
p2 L̄ + L̄2



2

= (1 − α1 )



p1
p2

where pz is the price of good z = 1, 2.
1. Suppose

there

C [(α1 )α1 (α2 )α2 ]b





Q11 + Q21 − α1 Q12 + Q22

labor mobility, i.e., λM
=
0.
Then, vLj (1, 0)

b
1


1
F̄2j +(p̄e ) b F̄1j
where pp12 = p̄e is the unique solution to BT pp12 , L̄2L̄+L̄2 = 0.
α1

is


no

(p̄e )

b

=

L̄j

2. Suppose there is free labor mobility, i.e., λM = 1.
(a) If

F̄11 F̄21 +(1−α1 )F̄12 F̄21 +α1 F̄22 F̄11
(F̄11 +F̄12 )(F̄21 +F̄22 )
α1

C [(α1 )

α2 b

(α2 ) ]

0.

"

>
1

F̄2j +(peL ) b F̄1j

(peL )

α1
b

Lj

L̄1 +mL̄2
,
L̄1 +L̄2
#b

then, L1 = L̄1 + mL̄2 , L2 = (1 − m) L̄2 and vLj (1, 1) =

, where

p1
p2

= peL is the unique solution to BT

1
F̄11 F̄21 +(1−α1 )F̄12 F̄21 +α1 F̄22 F̄11
L̄2
, then, L1
≤ L̄L̄1+m
+L̄2
(F̄11 +F̄12 )(F̄21 +F̄22 )

F̄11 F̄21 +(1−α1 )F̄12 F̄21 +α1 F̄22 F̄11
(1 − ψ) L̄1 + L̄2 , where ψ =
and
(F̄11 +F̄12 )(F̄21 +F̄22 )


b
α
1−α
(F̄11 +F̄12 ) 1 (F̄21 +F̄22 ) 1

(b) If

C

(1−m)L̄1
L̄1 +L̄2

≤

(L̄1 +L̄2 )

.

37



p1 L̄1 +mL̄2
p2 , L̄1 +L̄2



=


= ψ L̄1 + L̄2 , L2 =

vL1 (1, 1) = vL2 (1, 1) =

(c) If

F̄11 F̄21 +(1−α1 )F̄12 F̄21 +α1 F̄22 F̄11
(F̄11 +F̄12 )(F̄21 +F̄22 )

vLj (1, 1)

α1

<
"

α2 b

= C [(α1 ) (α2 ) ]


L̄1
BT pp12 , (1−m)
= 0.
2
1
L̄ +mL̄

(1−m)L̄1
,
L̄1 +L̄2
1

then, L1 = (1 − m) L̄1 , L2 = L̄2 + mL̄1 and,
#b

F̄2j +(peH ) b F̄1j

(peH )

α1
b

Lj

, where

p1
p2

= peH is the unique solution to

Proof : Let pz denote the price of good z = 1, 2, rfj the return of factor f = 1, 2, and wj the wage
rate. Under autarky, the equilibrium conditions in country j are:
!b
!
j b
F̄1j
F̄
2
p1 (1 − b)
= wj = p2 (1 − b)
, Lj1 + Lj2 = Lj for j = 1, 2
j
j
L1
L2
!1−b
!1−b
Lj1
Lj1
j
= r1 , p 1 b
= r2j for j = 1, 2
p1 b
j
j
F̄1
F̄1


1
2
α2 p1 Q1 + Q1 = α1 p2 Q12 + Q22
h
i
h
 i
1
1
1
Therefore, in equilibrium, Lj1 = (p1 /p2 ) b F̄1j Lj / F̄2j + (p1 /p2 ) b F̄1j , Lj2 = F̄2j Lj / F̄2j + (p1 /p2 ) b F̄1j ,
nh
i
ob
nh
 i
ob
1
1
1
wj /p1 = (1 − b) F̄2j + (p1 /p2 ) b F̄1j / (p1 /p2 ) b Lj , wj /p2 = (1 − b) F̄2j + (p1 /p2 ) b F̄1j /Lj

and p1 /p2 is the unique solution to BT p1 /p2 , L1 / L̄1 + L̄2 = 0, where


 


p1
L1
p1
BT
, 1
= (1 − α1 )
Q11 + Q21 − α1 Q12 + Q22
2
p2 L̄ + L̄
p2
1−b
  1
 1
 1−b
p1 b 1
p1 b




1 + L̄2 − L1
L
L̄
1
1
p2
p1
p1
L
L



 p2
Q11
, Q21
, 1
= F̄11 
, 1
= F̄12 


1
1




2
2
p2 L̄ + L̄
p2 L̄ + L̄
p1 b
p1 b
1
1
2
2
F̄2 + p2
F̄1
F̄2 + p2
F̄1


1−b
1−b





1
2
1
p1
L1
L1
L1

1
2  L̄ + L̄ − L 
2 p1
Q12
, 1
=
F̄
,
=
F̄
,
Q




1
2
2
2


 1
p2 L̄ + L̄2
p2 L̄1 + L̄2
b
b
F̄21 + pp12
F̄11
F̄22 + pp12
F̄12


In order to prove this, note that p1 /p2 ≤ pA,1 , implies BT p1 /p2 , L1 / L̄1 + L̄2
< 0, while

 1
b
1
A,2
1
1
2
A,1
p1 /p2 ≥ p
implies BT p1 /p2 , L / L̄ + L̄
> 0, where p
= F̄2 α1 /F̄1 (1 − α1 ) < pA,2 =
 2


b
F̄2 α1 /F̄12 (1 − α1 ) . Moreover, BT p1 /p2 ,L1 / L̄1 + L̄2 is strictly increasing
 in p1 /p2 . Thus, there
e
A,1
A,2
e
1
1
2
exists a unique p1 /p2 = p ∈ p , p
such that BT p , L / L̄ + L̄
= 0. Therefore, in
equilibrium, the utility of a worker in country j is vLj (1, λM ) = (α1 )α1 (α2 )α2 wj / (p1 )α1 (p2 )α2 =
nh
i
ob
α1
1
C [(α1 )α1 (α2 )α2 ]b F̄2j + (pe ) b F̄1j / (pe ) b Lj .
is no labor mobility,
Lj
=
L̄j and,
hence,
vLj (1, 0)
=
i
o
nh
b
α
1
1
b
j
j
C [(α1 )α1 (α2 )α2 ]
F̄2 + (p̄e ) b F̄1 / (p̄e ) b L̄j , where p1 /p2 = p̄e is the unique solution to

BT p1 /p2 , L̄1 / L̄1 + L̄2
= 0. When there is free labor mobility, mobile workers locate in the
When

there

38

country with the highest vLj . Next, we prove three results that will allow us to characterize the
equilibrium under free labor mobility.

Result 1:
pe is decreasing in L1 / L̄2 + L̄2 .
From the implicit function theorem,
e ,L1 / L̄2 +L̄2
e ,L1 / L̄2 +L̄2


∂BT
p
∂BT
p
(
(
))
(
(
))
We also already proved
d (pe ) /d L1 / L̄2 + L̄2
= − ∂ L1 / L̄2 +L̄2
/
.
∂pe
[
(
)]

 

that ∂BT pe , L1 / L̄2 + L̄2 /∂pe
>
0.
∂BT pe , L1 / L̄2 + L̄2 /∂ L1 / L̄2 + L̄2
=

 2
2 1 2
e
1
1
2
e
1
1
(1 − b) (1 − α1 ) p Q1 − α1 Q2 L̄ + L̄ /L L > 0 if and only if (1 − α1 ) p Q1 > α1 Q2 , which

b
always holds because pe > pA,1 = α1 F̄21 / (1 − α1 ) F̄11 .


1 / L̄2 + L̄2 . ∂v 1 (1, λ ) /∂ L1 / L̄2 + L̄2
Resultn2: vL1 (1, λM
)
is
decreasing
in
L
< 0 if and only
M
L
h
i
o



1
1
if (1/bpe ) (pe ) b F̄11 / F̄21 + (pe ) b F̄11 − α1 d (pe ) /d L1 / L̄2 + L̄2 − L̄2 + L̄2 /L1 < 0, which holds
h
i


1
1
because d (pe ) /d L1 / L̄2 + L̄2 < 0 and pe > pA,1 implies (pe ) b F̄11 > α1 F̄21 + (pe ) b F̄11 .



1 / L̄2 + L̄2 . ∂v 2 (1, λ ) /∂ L1 / L̄2 + L̄2
Resultn3: vL2 (1, λM
)
is
increasing
in
L
> 0 if and only
M
L
h
i
o



1
1
if (1/bpe ) (pe ) b F̄12 / F̄22 + (pe ) b F̄12 − α1 d (pe ) /d L1 / L̄2 + L̄2 + L̄2 + L̄2 /L2 > 0, which holds
h
i


1
1
because d (pe ) /d L1 / L̄2 + L̄2 < 0 and pe > pA,1 implies (pe ) b F̄12 < α1 F̄22 + (pe ) b F̄12 .
We must distinguish three possible cases.



a.
Suppose
that
F̄11 F̄21 + (1 − α1 ) F̄12 F̄21 + α1 F̄22 F̄11 / F̄11 + F̄12 F̄21 + F̄22
>


L̄1 + mL̄2 / L̄1 + L̄2 . Then, L1 = L̄1 + mL̄2 and L2 = (1 − m) L̄2 and, hence,


j
α2 b  F̄2

vLj (1, 1) = C [(α1 )α1 (α2 ) ]

+

1

(peL ) b

peL

 α1
b

b
j
F̄1 

,

Lj



where p1 /p2 = peL is the unique solution to BT p1 /p2 , L̄1 + mL̄2 / L̄1 + L̄2
= 0. To prove
1 / L̄1 + L̄2 , while v 2 (1, λ ) is increasing
this, from Results 2 and 3 vL1 h(1, λM ) is decreasing
in
L
M
L i
i
h


1
1
1
1
2
1
e
e
1
1
2
2
2
b
b
Thus, if F̄2 + (pL ) F̄1 / L̄ + mL̄
in L / L̄ + L̄ .
> F̄2 + (pL ) F̄1 / (1 − m) L̄2 , then




vL1 (1, λM ) > vL2 (1, λM ) for all L1 ∈ (1 − m) L̄1 , L̄1 + mL̄2 andh L2 = (1 − m)
L̄h2 , L̄2 + mL̄1 . iNote
i


1
1
= 0 if and only if F̄21 + (peL ) b F̄11 / F̄22 + (peL ) b F̄12 =
that BT peL , L̄1 + mL̄2 / L̄1 + L̄2
nh
i h
io 1 


1
1
1−b
e
1
1
2
e
2
b
b
(1 − α1 ) (pL ) F̄1 − α1 F̄2 / α1 F̄2 − (1 − α1 ) (pL ) F̄1
L̄1 + mL̄2 / (1 − m) L̄2 .
h
i
h
i

1
1
Therefore,
F̄21 + (peL ) b F̄11 / L̄1 + mL̄2
>
F̄22 + (peL ) b F̄12 / (1 − m) L̄2 implies peL
>




b
α1 F̄22 + F̄21 / (1 − α1 ) F̄11 + F̄12 .
Due to Result 1, pe is decreasing in L1 / L̄1 + L̄2 and,


b
if and only if L̄1 + mL̄2 < L1 , where
hence, peL > peM = α1 F̄22 + F̄21 / (1
− α1 ) F̄11 + F̄12

1
e
1
1
2
L
pM , L / L̄ + L̄
= 0.
It is easy to prove that if L1
/ L̄1 + L̄2 =
 1 is1 such that BT
2 1
2 1
1
2
1
2
peM , L1 / L̄1 + L̄2 = 0. Thus,
F̄11 F̄21 + (1 − α1 ) F̄12 F̄21 + α1 F̄22 F̄11  / F̄11 + F̄12  F̄21 + F̄22 , then BT
1
F̄1 F̄2 + (1 − α1 ) F̄1 F̄2 + α1 F̄2 F̄1 / F̄1 + F̄1 F̄2 + F̄2  > L̄ +mL̄2 / L̄1 + L̄2 , implies
that

1 , L̄1 + mL̄2 and L2 = (1 − m) L̄2 , L̄2 + mL̄1 .
vL1 (1, λM ) > vL2 (1, λM ) for all L1 ∈ (1 −m) L̄




b. Suppose
that (1 −
m) L̄1 / L̄1 + L̄2 ≤ F̄11 F̄21 + (1 −
α1 ) F̄12 F̄21 + α1 F̄22 F̄11 / F̄11 +
F̄12 F̄21 + F̄22 ≤




L̄1 + mL̄2 / L̄1 + L̄2 .
Then, L1 = ψ L̄1 + L̄2 , L2 = (1 − ψ) L̄1 + L̄2 , where ψ =
39






F̄11 F̄21 + (1 − α1 ) F̄12 F̄21 + α1 F̄22 F̄11 / F̄11 + F̄12 F̄21 + F̄22 and, hence,
vL1 (1, 1) = vL2 (1, 1) = C

"

F̄11 + F̄12

α1

F̄21 + F̄22

L̄1 + L̄2

1−α1 #b

.



b
Moreover, the equilibrium relative price is p1 /p2 = peM = α1 F̄21 + F̄22 /(1 − α1 ) F̄11 + F̄12 .
It is easy to show that, when L1 = ψ L̄1 + L̄2 and L2 = (1 − ψ) L̄1 + L̄2 , then, p1 /p2 = peM
1
1
2
is
to BT (p 1 /p2 , ψ) = 0.
Moreover,
note that (1 − m)
≤
 1the1 unique solution

 L̄ /1 L̄ +
L̄
2
1
2
1
1
2
1
2
1
2
2
F̄1 F̄2 + (1 − α1 ) F̄1 F̄2 + α1 F̄2 F̄1 / F̄1 + F̄1 F̄2 + F̄2
≤
L̄
+
m
L̄
/
L̄
+
L̄
im

plies
that L1 = ψ
L̄1 + L̄2
∈
(1 − m) L̄1 , L̄1 + mL̄2 and L2 = (1 − ψ) L̄1 + L̄2
∈


(1 − m) L̄2 , L̄2 + mL̄1 .
Thus, we only need to prove that, in equilibrium,  the allocation of
force is given by L1 = ψ L̄1 + L̄2 and L2 = (1 − ψ) L̄1 + L̄2 .  From case a,
the1 labor
1
F̄1 F̄2 + (1 − α1 ) F̄12 F̄21 + α1 F̄22 F̄11 / F̄11 + F̄12 F̄21 + F̄22
≤
L̄1 + mL̄2 / L̄1 + L̄2 implies that
1
2
1
1
2
2
vL (1, λM ) ≤ vL (1, λM ) for L = L̄ + mL̄ and L = (1− m) L̄2 . From case  c (see bellow),
(1 − m) L̄1 / L̄1 + L̄2
≤
F̄11 F̄21 + (1 − α1 ) F̄12 F̄21 + α1 F̄22 F̄11 / F̄11 + F̄12 F̄21 + F̄22 implies that
1
1
1
2
vL (1, λM ) ≥ vL (1, λM ) for L  = (1 − m) L̄1 and L2 = L̄2 + mL̄1 . From Results
 2 and 3, vL (1, λM )
1
1
2
1
1
2
2
is decreasing in L / L̄ + L̄ , while vL (1, λM ) is increasing in L / L̄ + L̄ h. Therefore, in equii
1

librium, it must be the case that vL1 (1, 1) = vL2 (1, 1), which implies L1 / F̄21 + (p1 /p2 ) b F̄11 =
h
i

1
L2 / F̄22 + (p1 /p2 ) b F̄12 . Since, in equilibrium, p1 /p2 = peM , we have L1 = ψ L̄1 + L̄2 and



 1

2
2 1
2 1
1
2
L2 = (1 − ψ) L̄1 + L̄
ψ = F̄11 F̄21 + (1 − α1 ) F̄
F̄2 + F̄22 .
1 F̄2 + α1 F̄2F̄1 / F̄1 + F̄1
 1, where


c. Suppose that F̄1 F̄21 + (1 − α1 ) F̄12 F̄21 + α1 F̄22 F̄11 / F̄11 + F̄12 F̄21 + F̄22 < (1 − m) L̄1 / L̄1 + L̄2 .
Then, L1 = (1 − m) L̄1 and L2 = L̄2 + mL̄1 and, hence,


j
α2 b  F̄2

vLj (1, 1) = C [(α1 )α1 (α2 ) ]

1

+ (peH ) b
peH

 α1
b

b

F̄1j 

Lj

,


p1 /p2 = peH is the unique solution to BT p1 /p2 , (1 − m) L̄1 / L̄2 + mL̄1
= 0. To prove this,
1
1
1
2
2
from Results 2 and 3 vL (1, hλM ) is decreasing
in L / L̄ + hL̄ , while vL (1,
i
i λM ) is increasing


1
1
1
1
2
1
e
1
1
2
e
2
in L / L̄ + L̄ . Thus, if F̄2 + (pH ) b F̄1 / (1 − m) L̄ < F̄2 + (pH ) b F̄1 / L̄2 + mL̄1 , then




2 , L̄2 + mL̄1 .
vL2 (1, λM ) > vL1 (1, λM ) for all L1 ∈ (1 − m) L̄1 , L̄1 + mL̄2 h and L2 = (1
−
m)
L̄
i h
i

1
1
Note that BT peH , (1 − m) L̄1 / L̄1 + L̄2
= 0 if and only if F̄21 + (peH ) b F̄11 / F̄22 + (peH ) b F̄12 =
nh
i h
io 1 

1
1
1−b
(1 − m) L̄1 /L̄2 + mL̄1 .
There(1 − α1 ) (peH ) b F̄11 − α1 F̄21 / α1 F̄22 − (1 − α1 ) (peH ) b F̄12
h
i
i
h

1
1
implies peH
fore,
F̄21 + (peH ) b F̄11 / (1 − m) L̄1
<
F̄22 + (peH ) b F̄12 / L̄2 + mL̄1
<




b
α1 F̄22 + F̄21 / (1 − α1 ) F̄11 + F̄12 .
Due to Result 1, pe is decreasing in L1 / L̄1 + L̄2 and,


b
hence, peH < peM = α1 F̄22 + F̄21 / (1
− α1 ) F̄11 + F̄12
if and only if L̄1 (1 − m) > L1 , where


1 is such that BT pe , L1 / L̄1 + L̄2
1 / L̄1 + L̄2
L
=
0.
As
we
have
already
shown,
if
L
=
M
 1 1

 1


2 F̄ 1 + α F̄ 2 F̄ 1 / F̄ 1 + F̄ 2
2 , then BT pe , L1 / L̄1 + L̄2
F̄
F̄
+
(1
−
α
)
F̄
F̄
+
F̄
=
0.
Thus,
1
1
1 2
2 1
1
1
2
2
M
 11 21

F̄1 F̄2 + (1 − α1 ) F̄12 F̄21 + α1 F̄22 F̄11 / F̄11 + F̄12 F̄21 + F̄22
< (1 − m) L̄1 / L̄1 + L̄2 , implies that
40





vL1 (1, λM ) > vL2 (1, λM ) for all L1 ∈ (1 − m) L̄1 , L̄1 + mL̄2 and L2 = (1 − m) L̄2 , L̄2 + mL̄1 . This
completes the proof of the lemma. 

Proposition 5 characterizes trade and labor mobility policies in a Ricardo-Vinner specific factors
economy.
F̄ 1

F̄ 2

Proposition 5 (Ricardo-Vinner specific factors economy).
Assume that F̄11 > F̄12 ,
2
2
 1 α1  1 (1−α1 )
F̄1
F̄2
F̄11 F̄21 +(1−α1 )F̄12 F̄21 +α1 F̄22 F̄11
L̄1
L̄1
6= L̄2 and
6= L̄2 +L̄2 . Then, the trade and labor mobility
F̄12
F̄22
(F̄11 +F̄12 )(F̄21 +F̄22 )
game has two Nash equilibrium outcomes: (i) no trade and no labor mobility; and (ii) free trade and no
labor mobility. Moreover, WGj (1, 0) > WGj (0, 0) for j = 1, 2.
Proof :
No trade and no labor mobility is always a Nash equilibrium outcome.
Free trade and no labor mobility is a Nash equilibrium outcome.
From Lemma
 bα1  b(1−α1 )

b
j
j
j
6 Part 1, vL (0, 0) = C F̄1
F̄2
/ L̄j
or, which is equivalent, vLj (0, 0) =
i

b
nh
 α1 ob
1
C [(α1 )α1 (α2 )α2 ]b F̄2j + pA,j b F̄1j / pA,j b L̄j , where pA,j = F̄2j α1 /F̄1j α2 . From Lemma 7 Part
h
ib nh
i
ob
α1
1
1, vLj (1, 0) = C (α1 )α1 (1 − α1 )1−α1
F̄2j + (p̄e ) b F̄1j / (p̄e ) b L̄j where p1 /p2 = p̄e is the unique soh
i
α1

1
lution to BT p1 /p2 , L̄1 / L̄2 + L̄2 = 0. vL1 (1, 0) > vL1 (0, 0) if and only if F̄21 + (p̄e ) b F̄11 / (p̄e ) b >
i
h
i
h
α1
1
 α1
1
F̄21 + pA,1 b F̄11 / pA,1 b . Note that F̄21 + (p1 /p2 ) b F̄11 / (p1 /p2 ) b is increasing in p1 /p2 when-

We have already proved that p̄e > pA,1 , which himplies that iWG1 (1, 0) =
α1
1
vL1 (1, 0) > vL1 (0, 0) = WG1 (0, 0). vL2 (1, 0) > vL2 (0, 0) if and only if F̄22 + (p̄e ) b F̄12 / (p̄e ) b >
i
h
i
h
α1
1
 α1
1
F̄22 + pA,2 b F̄12 / pA,2 b . Note that F̄22 + (p1 /p2 ) b F̄12 / (p1 /p2 ) b is decreasing in p1 /p2 whenever p1 /p2 > pA,1 .

ever p1 /p2 < pA,2 . We have already proved that p̄e < pA,2 , which implies that WG2 (1, 0) = vL2 (1, 0) >
vL2 (0, 0) = WG2 (0, 0).
Free trade and free labor mobility is not a Nash equilibrium outcome.
From Lemma
nh
i
ob
α1
1
j
j
j
α1
α2 b
e
e
j
7 Part 1, vL (1, 0) = C [(α1 ) (α2 ) ]
F̄2 + (p̄ ) b F̄1 / (p̄ ) b L̄ where p1 /p2 = p̄e

is
to BT p1 /p2 , L̄1 / L̄2 + L̄2  = 0.
From Lemma
7 Part
 1the1 unique solution

 2-a, if
F̄1 F̄2 + (1 − α1 ) F̄12 F̄21 + α1 F̄22 F̄11 / F̄11 + F̄12 F̄21 + F̄22
>
L̄1 + mL̄2 / L̄1 + L̄2 ,
then
nh
i
ob
α1
1
L1 = L̄1 + mL̄2 , L2 = (1 − m) L̄2 and vLj (1, 1) = C [(α1 )α1 (α2 )α2 ]b F̄2j + (peL ) b F̄1j / (peL ) b Lj ,


2
where p1 /p2 = peL is the unique solution to BT p1 /p2 , L̄1h+ mL̄2 / L̄1 +
L̄
= 0.
i
α1
1
WG1 (1, 0) = vL1 (1, 0) > vL1 (1, 1) = WG1 (1, 1) if and only if F̄21 + (p̄e ) b F̄11 / (p̄e ) b L̄1 >
i
h
α1

1
From Lemma 7
F̄21 + (peL ) b F̄11 / (peL ) b L̄1 + mL̄2 , which always holds because p̄e > peL .

 1 1



1
1
2
2
1
2
1
1
Part 2-b, if (1 − m) L̄ / L̄ + L̄
≤ F̄1 F̄2 + (1 − α1 ) F̄1 F̄2 + α1 F̄2 F̄1 / F̄1 + F̄12 F̄21 + F̄22 ≤
h
ib nh
i
ob
α1


1
L̄1 + mL̄2 / L̄1 + L̄2 , then vLj (1, 1) = C (α1 )α1 (1 − α1 )1−α1
F̄2j + (peM ) b F̄1j / (peM ) b Lj ,


where L1 = ψ L̄2 + L̄2 , L2 = (1 − ψ) L̄2 + L̄2 and p1 /p2 = peM is the unique solution
to BT (pi1 /p2 , ψ) = 0. hWG1 (1, 0) = viL1 (1, 0) > vL1 (1, 1) = WG1 (1, 1) if and only if
h
α1
α1

1
1
F̄21 + (p̄e ) b F̄11 / (p̄e ) b L̄1 > F̄21 + (peM ) b F̄11 / (peM ) b ψ L̄2 + L̄2 , which always holds when41

i
h
α1

1
ever ψ > L̄1 / L̄2 + L̄2 .
vL2 (1, 0) > vL2 (1, 1) if and only if F̄22 + (p̄e ) b F̄12 / (p̄e ) b L̄2 >
h
i
α1


1
F̄22 + (peM ) b F̄12 / (peM ) b (1 − ψ) L̄2 + L̄2 , which always holds whenever ψ < L̄1 / L̄2 + L̄2 .
 1 1



From Lemma 7 Part 2-c, if
F̄1 F̄2 + (1 − α1 ) F̄12 F̄21 + α1 F̄22 F̄11 / F̄11 + F̄12 F̄21 + F̄22
<

j
1
1
2
1
1
2
2
1
(1 − m) L̄ / L̄ + L̄ , then L
= (1 − m) L̄ , L
= L̄ + (1 − m) L̄ and vL (1, 1) =
i
ob
nh
α1
1
C [(α1 )α1 (α2 )α2 ]b F̄2j + (peH ) b F̄1j / (peH ) b Lj , where p1 /p2 = peH is the unique solution to

1 / L̄1 + L̄2
2
2
2
2
BTh p1 /p2 , (1 − m)
L̄
i
h = 0. WG1 (1, 0)
i = vLα1(1, 0) > vL(1, 1) = WG (1, 1) if and only
α1
1
if F̄22 + (p̄e ) b F̄12 / (p̄e ) b L̄2 > F̄22 + (peH ) b F̄12 / (peH ) b L̄2 + mL̄1 , which always holds because
p̄e < peH .
No trade and free labor mobility is not a Nash equilibrium outcome. From Lemma 6 Part 2-c, if
(1−α1 )
α
1
> L̄1 /L̄2 , then WG1 (0, 0) = vL1 (0, 0) > vL1 (0, 1) = WG1 (0, 1) and, hence, workF̄1 /F̄12 1 F̄21 /F̄22
α
(1−α1 )
ers in country 1 prefer to block labor mobility. From Lemma 6 Part 2-c, if F̄11 /F̄12 1 F̄21 /F̄22
<
1
2
2
2
2
2
L̄ /L̄ , then WG (0, 0) = vL (0, 0) > vL (0, 1) = WG (0, 1) and, hence, workers in country 2 prefer to block
labor mobility. This completes the proof of the proposition. 

B.3 Multiple factors and non-tradeable goods
Consider an economy with two countries (J = 2), two tradeable goods (a rural good F and manufactures
M ), one non-tradeable good (services N ) and three factors of production (capital K, natural resources F

b 
1−b
b  j 1−b j
j
j
KF
, QM = TM
LjM
KM
,
and labor L). Production functions are given by QjF = TFj F j

and QjN = TNj LjN , where Tzj is total factor productivity in sector z = F, M, N in country j, F j is the
quantity of natural resources employed in sector F in country j, Kzj is the quantity of capital employed
in sector z = F, M in country j, Ljz is the quantity of labor employed
in sector z = M, N in country j,

j
j
j
and b ∈ (0, 1). Factor endowments in country j are F̄ , K̄ , L̄ > (0, 0, 0). All agents have the same
 αz
 Q
P
preferences, given by u cj = z∈Z cjz
, with αz > 0 and z∈Z αz = 1.
Lemma 8 characterizes the equilibrium under autarky.
Lemma 8 (multiple factors and non-tradeable goods under autarky). Assume there is no
trade in goods, i.e., λT = 0.
1. Suppose there is no labor mobility, i.e., λM = 0. Then, in equilibrium, utilities in country j are
given by:
bαF  j (1−b)(αF +αM )
F̄ j
K̄
= B (αN + bαM )
T
,
j
L̄
L̄j
"
# 
bαF  j αN +bαM
B (1 − b) (αF + αM )
F̄ j
L̄
j
j
vK (0, 0) =
T
,
j
b(1−αF )
K̄
K̄ j
(αN + bαM )
"
# 

 j αN +bαM
j (1−b)(αF +αM )
Bα
b
L̄
F
j
j K̄
T
vF (0, 0) =
.
αN +bαM
j
F̄
F̄ j
(αN + bαM )
αF +(1−b)αM

vLj (0, 0)

where B =



(b)bαM
(αF )bαF (αF +αM )(1−b)(αF +αM )



j



 αF  αM  αN
j
and T j = TFj
TM
TNj
.
42

2. Suppose there is free labor mobility, i.e., λM = 1. Then, in equilibrium, the labor force in country
j is
Lj =
P

where T̄ =
are given by:

k=1,2

h

Tk



h

Tj



bα
F̄ k F

F̄ j

bαF

K̄ j

1
(1−b)(αF +αM ) i αF +(1−b)α
M

(1−b)(αF +αM )
K̄ k

i

1
αF +(1−b)αM

T̄

−1

L̄,

. Moreover, utilities in country j = 1, 2

 bαF +(1−b)(αF +αM )
T̄
,
=
= B (αN + bαM )
L̄
"
#
bαF
 j  α +(1−b)α
 αN +bαM
1

F
M
F̄
B
(1
−
b)
(α
+
α
)
L̄
F
M
j
j αF +(1−b)αM
vK (0, 1) =
T
,
j
b(1−αF )
K̄
T̄
(αN + bαM )
"
#
(αF +αM )  
 j  (1−b)
α +bαM
αF +(1−b)αM
1

BαF b
K̄
L̄ N
j
j αF +(1−b)αM
vF (0, 1) =
T
.
F̄ j
T̄
(αN + bαM )αN +bαM
vL1 (0, 1)

vL2 (0, 1)

αF +(1−b)αM

Proof. Let pjz denotes the price of good z = F, M, N in country j, rfj the return of factor f = F, K
in country j, wj the wage rate in country j and vLj the utility of workers in country j. Under autarky
the equilibrium conditions in country j are:

j
rK


1−b
rFj = pjF TFj b KFj /F̄ j
,

b

b
j
j
= pjF TFj (1 − b) F̄ j /KFj
= pjM TM
(1 − b) LjM /KM
,

1−b
j
j
wj = pjN TNj = pjM TM
b KM
/LjM
,

j
KFj + KM
= K̄ j , LjM + LjN = Lj ,


(1 − αN ) pjN QjN = αN pjF QjF + pjM QjM , αM pjF QjF = αF pjM QjM ,

Lj = L̄j (when there is no labor mobility),

vL1 = vL2 , L1 + L2 = L̄ = L̄1 + L̄2 (when there is free labor mobility).
j
Equilibrium quantities: KM
= [αM / (αF + αM )] K̄ j , KFj = [αF / (αF + αM )] K̄ j , LjM =
b
1−b j
j
j
1−b j
j
j
TF F̄ j
K̄ j
, QM =
N / (αN + bαM )] L , QF = [αF / (αF + αM )]
h[bαM / (αN + bαM )] L i, LN = [α
b
1−b
j
j
j j
b
j
j
(b) αM / (αN + bαM ) TM L
K̄
and QN = [αN / (αN + bαM )] TN L .


b
j
Equilibrium prices:
pjF /pjM
= [bαF / (αN + bαM )]b TM
/TFj Lj /F̄ j
and pjN /pjM
=



1−b
j
j
b
1−b
(b) [(αN + bαM ) / (αF + αM )]
TM /TN K̄ j /Lj
.
h
i
b
1−b
Equilibrium factor prices: wj /pjF = (αN + bαM ) / (αF )b (αF + αM )1−b TFj F̄ j /Lj
K̄ j /Lj
,

1−b
j
j
j
j
j
j
wj /pM
= (b)b [(αN + bαM ) / (αF + αM )]1−b TM K̄ j /Lj
, wj /pN
= TN .
rK /pF
=

b
b
j
j
b j
b j
j
j
j
j
(1 − b) [(αF + αM ) /αF ] TF F̄ /K̄ , rK /pM = (1 − b) [b (αF + αM ) / (αN + bαM )] TM L /K̄ ,

43


1−b
j
rK
/pjN = (1 − b) h[(αF + αM ) / (αN + bαM )] TNj Lj /K̄ j i, rFj /pjF = b [αF / (αF + αM )]1−b TFj K̄ j /F̄ j
,
b
1−b
j
j
j
j
j
b
1−b
b
j
j
j
j
rF /pM
=
αF b (b) / (αF + αM )
(αN + bαM ) TM L /F̄
K̄ /F̄
and rF /pN
=

j
[αF b/ (αN + bαM )] TN Lj /F̄ j .
 αN
 αN
j
j
Utilities: vLj (0, λM ) = wj / (pF )αF (pM )αM pjN
, vK
(0, λM ) = rK
/ (pF )αF (pM )αM pjN
and
 αN
vFj (0, λM ) = rFj / (pF )αF (pM )αM pjN
. Then:
(1−b)(αF +αM )
K̄ j
(0, λM ) = B (αN + bαM )
T
,
Lj

bαF  j αN +bαM
B (1 − b) (αF + αM ) j F̄ j
L
j
vK (0, λM ) =
T
,
j
b(1−αF )
K̄
K̄ j
(αN + bαM )
 j (1−b)(αF +αM )  j αN +bαM
BbαF
L
j
j K̄
T
vF (0, λM ) =
.
αN +bαM
j
F̄
F̄ j
(αN + bαM )
αF +(1−b)αM

vLj

h

where B = (b)

bαM

bαF

/ (αF )

(1−b)(αF +αM )

(αF + αM )

When there is no labor mobility
Lj =
where T̄ =

P

k=1,2

h

Tj

h

Tk

=

vL2 (0, 1)





Lj

F̄ j

bα
F̄ k F

=

L̄j .

bαF

i

j



and

F̄ j
Lj

Tj

j
vK
(0, 1) =

K̄ j

1
(1−b)(αF +αM ) i αF +(1−b)α
M

(1−b)(αF +αM )
K̄ k

vFj

(0, 1) =


2

i

1
αF +(1−b)αM


1 bαF

αF +(1−b)αM

= B (αN + bαM )

B (1 − b) (αF + αM )
(αN + bαM )b(1−αF )
BbαF
(αN + bαM )αN +bαM

This completes the proof of the lemma. 

Tj

T

 αF  αM  αN
j
= TFj
TM
TNj
.

When there is free labor mobility, vL1 = vL2 , which implies

grations to country 1 if and only if T 1 /T > F̄ 2 /F̄
Finally, utilities under autarky and free labor mobility are:

vL1 (0, 1)

bαF 

j

1
F +(1−b)αM

α

1
F +(1−b)αM

α

T̄

−1

L̄,

. Thus, under autarky, there are mi(1−b)(αF +αM ) 1 2 αF +(1−b)αM
K̄ 2 /K̄ 1
L̄ /L̄
.

 bαF +(1−b)(αF +αM )
T̄
,
L̄
bαF
 αN +bαM
 j  α +(1−b)α
F
M
L̄
F̄
,
K̄ j
T̄


K̄ j
F̄ j

(αF +αM )  
 (1−b)
α +bαM
αF +(1−b)αM
L̄ N
.
T̄

Lemma 9 characterizes the equilibrium under free trade.
Lemma 9 (multiple factors and non-tradeable goods under free trade). Assume there is

44

free trade of goods, i.e., λT = 1, and the following conditions hold: .
1
2 b  1
TF1 TM
F̄
αN αF
> (1 − αN ) (αN + bαM )
,
1 T2
TM
F̄ 2
F

 1 2  1  2 1 1−b
b
T T
b
L̄ F̄
 2   2 b
αM [(1 − αN ) b + αN ] αN + (1 − αN ) b TF1 TM2
L̄1 F̄ 2
TM
M F
L̄
>
.

 1 2 1 

1
TM
L̄1
TF TM b L̄2 F̄ 1
αN αF − (1 − αN ) (αM b + αN ) T 1 T 2
L̄1 F̄ 2





K̄ 1
K̄ 2

1−b

L̄1
L̄2





M

F

1. Suppose there is no labor mobility , i.e., λM = 0. Then, in equilibrium, country
 1 is diversified,
1
country 2 specializes in good F and (pF /pM ) = p̌ is the unique solution to BT p̌, L̄ = 0.
2. Suppose there is free labor mobility i.e., λM = 1. Assume the following condition holds.
 1
 1 2 1  1 
TF TM b F̄
N
L̄
 1  α α+α
α
α
−
(α
+
α
b)
(1
−
α
)
N F L̄2
N
M
N
1 T2
M
F
TN
F̄ 2
TM
F
>
2
αM [(1 − αN ) b + αN ]
TN
Then, in equilibrium, country 1 is diversified, country 2 specializes in good F , pF /pM = p̂, and L1 are
given by the solution to BT p̂, L1 = 0 and F M p̂, L1 = 0. Moreover, p̂ > p̌ and L1 > L̄1 .
3. Utilities are given by:
i(αM +αF )
h b
(1−b)(αM +αF )
(b) [(1−αN )b+αN ](1−b)
α
 1
T 1 K̄ 1
(1−b)
TM pM F
(1−αN )
1
,
vL (1, λM ) =

(1−b)(αM +αF )

1
TF1 pF
1
b
p
T
L1 + p F TF1
F̄ 1
M

T 1 (1 − b)
1
αF
vK
(1, λM ) = 
1
pF TF
1
pM TM

T1
vF1 (1, λM ) =



TF1
1
TM

M





 αN 
b

M


 αN +b(αF +αM )


1
b
pF TF1

1+
1 


[(1
−
α
)
b]
L
F̄
N


p T1
M

[(1 − αN ) b + αN ] K̄ 1

pF
pM

 αN +bαM 
b

[(1 − αN ) b + αN





] K̄ 1



pF TF1
1
pM TM

,

 1 (αM +αF )(1−b)
b



(αM +αF )(1−b)

1
b
pF TF1
−(αM +αF )
1
1
(b)
b (1 − αN ) L + p T 1
F̄
M

2 b(αM +αF ) 

,

M

2 (1−b)(αM +αF ) 

αM


TF2
pF αM
2
T
,
2
pM
TM

 
b(αF +αM )  2 αN


L
pF αM F̄ 2
αN
2
2 αN
2 αF +αM
vK (1, λM ) = (1 − b) (1 − αN )
TN
TF
,
2
pM
K̄
K̄ 2


 2 (1−b)(αF +αM )  2 αN 

α
α +α
1 − αN αN
K̄
pF αM
L
vF2 (1, λM ) = b
TN2 N TF2 F M
,
αN
pM
F̄ 2
F̄ 2

where if λM = 0, L1 = L̄1 and pF /pM is the unique
solution to BT p, L̄1 = 0, while if λM = 1,

pF /pM , and L1 are given by the solution to BT p, L1 = 0 and F M p, L1 = 0.
vL2 (1, λM ) =



αN
1 − αN

αF +αM 

F̄
L2

45

K̄
L2

Proof. Under free trade equilibrium conditions are:

j
rK


1−b
rFj = pF AjF b KFj /F̄ j

b

b
j
j
j
rK
= pM TM
(1 − b) LjM /KM
= pF TFj (1 − b) F̄ j /KFj
for LjM > 0,

b
 −1
b  j 1−b  −j −1 −j b  −j 1−b
j
= pF TFj (1 − b) F̄ j /KFj
and TM
wj
rK
> TM
w
rK
for LjM = 0,

1−b
j
j
wj = pjN TNj = pM TM
b KM
/LjM
for LjM > 0,
 −1
b  j 1−b  −j −1 −j b  −j 1−b
j
for LjM = 0,
wj
rK
> TM
w
rK
wj = pjN TNj and TM
j
KFj + KM
= K̄ j , LjM + LjN = Lj ,


(1 − αN ) pjN QjN = αN pjF QjF + pjM QjM ,


αM pF Q1F + Q2F = αF pM Q1M + Q2M ,

Lj = L̄j (when there is no labor mobility),
vL1 = vL2 , L1 + L2 = L̄ = L̄1 + L̄2 (when there is free labor mobility),
There are two possible cases to consider: either both countries are diversified or one country is diversified
and other specializes in good F . We focus on the second case and, without lose of generality, we assume
that country 1 is diversified and country 2 specialized in good F .
1
1
Equilibrium
quantities: n Let hp̃
=
Then,
KF1
=
iopF TF /pM TM .
1

1

1
{[(1 − αN ) b + αN ] / (1 − αN ) b} (p̃) b F̄ 1 / L1 + (p̃) b F̄ 1 K̄ 1 ,
KM
=
nh
i
h
io
1
1
(1 − αN ) bL1 − (p̃) b αN F̄ 1 / L1 + (p̃) b F̄ 1 K̄ 1 / (1 − αN ) b,
L1M
=
i
h
i
h
1
1
αN L1 + αN (p̃) b F̄ 1 / [(1 − αN ) b + αN ],
(1 − αN ) bL1 − αN (p̃) b F̄ 1 / [(1 − αN ) b + αN ], L1N =

Q1M =



1
1 K̄ 1 1−b
(1−αN )bL1 −αN (p̃) b F̄ 1 TM
( )

1−b ,
1
[(1−αN )b+αN ]b (1−αN )1−b (b)1−b L1 +(p̃) b F̄ 1

2
KF2 = K̄ 2 , KM
= 0, L2N = L2 , L2M = 0,

b
1−b
Q2F = TF2 F̄ 2
K̄ 2
, Q2M = 0, and Q2N = TN2 L̄2 . For this to be an equilibrium we must
verify that country 1 exports M or, which is equivalent, that the equilibrium relative price of
A
F is lower under free than under autarky in country 1. Formally, (pF /pM ) < p1F /p1M
=
 1 1 b
b
1
1
{bαF / [αN + bαM ]} TM /TF L /F̄ . We must also verify that country 2 specializes in good






2 −1 w 2 b r 2 1−b >
1 −1 w 1 b r 1 1−b or, which is equivalent, (p /p ) >
F . Formally, TM
TM
F
M
K
K
S
 2 2 b
b
2
2
2
2
pF /pM = [(1 − αN ) b/αN ] TM /TF L /F̄ . Thus, we need the following condition


(1 − αN ) b
αN

b 

2
TM
TF2



L2
F̄ 2

Note that (pF /pM ) < p1F /p1M

A

b

=



p2F
p2M

S

pF
<
<
pM



p1F
p1M

A

=



bαF
αN + bαM

b 

1
TM
TF1



L1
F̄ 1

b

1 > 0. Also note that p2 /p2
immediately implies L1M > 0 and KM
F
M

46

S

<

p1F /p1M

A

if and only if
αN αF



L1
L2



> (1 − αN ) (αN + bαM )



2
TF1 TM
1 T2
TM
F

 1b 

F̄ 1
F̄ 2



.

n
1 h
1
1 b / p T 1 b L1 + p T 1
Equilibrium good prices: p1N /pM = (b)b {[(1 − αN ) b + αN ] / (1 − αN )}1−b pM TM
M M
F F
 2 2 b
1−b
2
2
2
2
2
and pN /pF = [αN / (1
K̄ /L
. (pF /pM ) = p̌ is implicitly given by the
 − αN )] TF /TN F̄ /L
1
solution to BT p̌, L = 0, where
b

(1 − αN )
BT p, L

1



1
TM

=
αM (b)

1−b

1−b
K̄ 1



b

[(1 − αN ) b + αN ]

αF

bL1

TF2

− (αM b + αN )

b
F̄ 2

1−b
K̄ 2



L1



TF1
1
TM

+



1
b

TF1
1
TM

(p)

1
b

1
b

F̄ 1

(p)

1
b



F̄ 1

1−b − p.


(We obtain BT p, L1
= 0 introducing
Q1M , Q1F , Q2F into the balanced trade equation

1
2
1
2
that BT p, L1 is strictly
hαM pF QF + QF = αiF pM QM + QM ). Note

 decreasing in p for p ∈

S
A
A
S
p2F /p2M , p1F /p1M
, BT p1F /p1M , L1 < 0 and BT p2F /p2M , L1 > 0 if and only if


1 1−b

K̄
K̄ 2

b

b





2
TF1 TM
1 T2
TM
F

1 
b

L2 F̄ 1
L1 F̄ 2

1−b 

αM [(1 − αN ) b + αN ] (D) αN + D (1 − αN ) b
>

 1 2 1 

TF TM b L2 F̄ 1
αN αF − D (1 − αN ) (αM b + αN ) T 1 T 2
L1 F̄ 2
M

2
TM
1
TM



L2
L1

b

.

F

h

S
A i
.
Thus, when this condition holds BT p, L1 = 0 has a unique solution p̌ ∈ p2F /p2M , p1F /p1M

1 .
Equilibrium factor prices:
Let p̃
=
p TF1 /pM TM
Then,
w1 /pF
=
h
in
h
ioF1−b

1
1−b
b
1−b
1
1
1
1
1
TM (b) / (1 − αN )
[(1 − αN ) b + αN ] / L + (p̃) b F̄
K̄
(pM /pF ),
w /pM
=
h
in
h
io

1
1−b
1 (b)b / (1 − α )1−b
TM
[(1 − αN ) b + αN ] / L1 + (p̃) b F̄ 1
K̄ 1
, w1 /p1N = TN1 , w2 /pF =
N


b
1−b
b
1−b
[αN / (1 − αN )] TF2 F̄ 2 /L2
K̄ 2 /L2
, w2 /pM = [αN / (1 − αN )] TF2 F̄ 2 /L2
K̄ 2 /L2
(pF /pM ),
n
h
i
ob
1
1
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
b
b
w /pN
= TN , rK /pF
= TF (1 − b) (1 − αN ) b L + (p̃) F̄ / [(1 − αN ) b + αN ] (p̃) K̄
,
n
h
i
ob
1
1 /p1
1 /p
=
T 1 (1 − b) (1 − αN ) b L1 + (p̃) b F̄ 1 / [(1 − αN ) b + αN ] K̄ 1 ,
rK
=
rK
M
N
h M
i

1
b
2 /p
(1 − αN ) TN1 (1 − b) L1 + (p̃) b F̄ 1 / [(1 − αN ) b + αN ] K̄ 1 ,
rK
=
(1 − b) TF2 F̄ 2 /K̄ 2 ,
F
b
2 /p
2 /p2
rK
=
(pF /pM ) (1 − b) TF2 F̄ 2 /K̄ 2 ,
rK
=
(1 − αN ) (1 − b) TN2 L2 /K̄ 2 ,
M
n 1N
h
io1−b
1
rF1 /pF
=
TF1 b {[(1 − αN ) b + αN ] / (1 − αN ) b}1−b (p̃) b K̄ 1 / L1 + (p̃) b F̄ 1
,
rF1 /pM
=
n 1
h
io
1−b
1
1
(pF /pM ) TF1 b {[(1 − αN ) b + αN ] / (1 − αN ) b} (p̃) b K̄ 1 / L1 + (p̃) b F̄ 1
, rF1 /p1N
=
TN1 (p̃) b ,
1−b 2
1−b
rF2 /pF = bTF2 K̄ 2 /F̄ 2
, rF /pM = (pF /pM ) bTF2 K̄ 2 /F̄ 2
, and rF2 /p2N = (1 − αN ) bTN2 L2 /αN F̄ 2 .

47

 αN
 αN
j
j
Utilities: vK
(1, λM ) = rK
/ (pF )αF (pM )αM pjN
, vFj (1, λM ) = rFj / (pF )αF (pM )αM pjN
, and
 αN
vL1 (1, λM ) = wj / (pF )αF (pM )αM pjN
. Then:
vL1

(1, λM ) =

h

(b)b [(1−αN )b+αN ](1−b)
(1−αN )(1−b)



L1 +



i(αM +αF )

pF TF1
1
pM TM

1
b

F̄ 1

T 1 K̄ 1

(1−b)(αM +αF )



(1−b)(αM +αF )

1 p
TM
M
TF1 pF

αF

,


 αN +b(αF +αM )


1
b
pF TF1

1
1


F̄ 

1 (1 − b)  [(1 − αN ) b] L + pM T 1
T
M
1

vK (1, λM ) = 
,
α
F
pF TF1


[(1 − αN ) b + αN ] K̄ 1



1

pM T
M

T1

vF1 (1, λM ) =



TF1
1
TM

 αN 
b

pF
pM

 αN +bαM 
b



[(1 − αN ) b + αN


(b)−b(αM +αF ) (1 − αN ) L1 +
b(αM +αF ) 



pF TF1
1
pM TM

] K̄ 1
1
b



pF TF1
1
pM TM

F̄ 1

 1 (αM +αF )(1−b)
b

(αM +αF )(1−b)

,

(1−b)(αM +αF ) 

αM


TF2
pF αM
2
,
T
(1, λM ) =
2
pM
TM

 
b(αF +αM )  2 αN


pF αM F̄ 2
L
αN
2
2 αN
2 αF +αM
vK (1, λM ) = (1 − b) (1 − αN )
TN
TF
,
2
pM
K̄
K̄ 2
 2 (1−b)(αF +αM )  2 αN 





K̄
L
pF αM
1 − αN αN
2 αF +αM
2 αN
2
TF
TN
.
vF (1, λM ) = b
αN
pM
F̄ 2
F̄ 2


vL2

αN
1 − αN

αF +αM 

F̄ 2
L2

K̄ 2
L2

When there his no labor mobility Lij = L̄j . The required conditions for the existence of a unique
S
A
equilibrium p̌ ∈ p2F /p2M , p1F /p1M
become
αN αF





K̄ 1
K̄ 2

L̄1
L̄2



1−b

1
2 b  1 
TF1 TM
F̄
> (1 − αN ) (αN + bαM )
,
1 T2
TM
F̄ 2
F

 1 2  1  2 1 1−b  2   2 b
b
T T
TM
b
L̄ F̄
L̄
αM [(1 − αN ) b + αN ] αN + (1 − αN ) b TF1 TM2
1
1 F̄ 2
L̄
TM
L̄1
M F
>
.

 1 2 1 

b
T T
L̄2 F̄ 1
αN αF − (1 − αN ) (αM b + αN ) TF1 TM2
L̄1 F̄ 2



M

Furthermore,

vL1 (1, 0)

vL2 (1, 0)
 αN
2 α +α

>

1
(α
h M b/αN) [(1 − αN ) b +i αN ] TN /TN
S
A
p2F /p2M , p1F /p1M
when



TN1
TN2



αN

(αM +αF )

>

(

M

αN αF



if

F)

L̄1
L̄2

and

L̄2



>

only

if

αF bL̄1 ,

F

1
(αM b + αN ) TF1 /TM

which

− (αM b + αN ) (1 − αN )



αM [(1 − αN ) b + αN ]
48

2
TF1 TM
1 T2
TM
F

holds

1 
b

F̄ 1
F̄ 2

for



.

1
b

1

(p) b F̄ 1 +

all

p

∈

When the above condition holds, if allowed, workers will have an incentive to migrate from country
2
2 to country 1. This willh increase L1 and decrease
i L and, hence, the conditions for the existence of a


S
A
unique equilibrium p̌ ∈ p2F /p2M , p1F /p1M
will continue to hold. Moreover, as L1 increases, the

equilibrium p̌ also increases. In order to prove this, we use the implicit function theorem to BT p, L1 = 0

−∂BT (p,L1 ) ∂BT (p,L1 )
to obtain dp̌/dL1 =
/
. We have already shown that BT p, L1 is decreasing in p.
1
∂p
∂L


Thus, ∂BT p, L1 /∂p > 0. Differentiating BT p, L1 with respect to L1 we obtain
∂BT p, L
∂L1


1

(1 − αN )

b

1
TM

=
1−b

αM (b)

1−b
K̄ 1



αF

b2 L 1

[(1 − αN ) b + αN ]

b

+ [αF b + (αN + αM b) (1 − b)]
TF2

b
F̄ 2

1−b
K̄ 2



L1

+



TF1
1
TM



1
b

TF1
1
TM

1
b

(p)

1
b

(p)

F̄ 1

1
b

F̄ 1

2−b



>0

Since vL1 (1, λM ) is decreasing in L1 and pF /pM , as workers move from country 2 to country 1, vL1 (1, λM )
decreases. Since vL2 (1, λM ) is decreasing in L2 and increasing in pF /pM , as workers move from country
2 to country 1, vL2 (1, λM) increases. Under labor mobility, workers will move until vL1 (1, 1) = vL2 (1, 1),
which implies F M p, L1 = 0, where
F M p, L

1



αM [(1 − αN ) b + αN ]



1
TN
2
TN



αN



(αM +αF )

L̄ + αN (αM b + αN )
 1  αN
α +α
T
αN αF b + αM [(1 − αN ) b + αN ] TN2 M F

=

TF1
1
TM

1
b

1

(p) b F̄ 1
− L1 .

N



Thus, the equilibrium under free labor mobility is the solution to BT p, L1 = 0 and F M p, L1 = 0.
This completes the proof of the lemma. 
Proposition 6 characterizes trade and labor mobility policies.

Proposition 6 (multiple factors and non-tradeable goods). Suppose that governments maximize the welfare of domestic workers. Assume K̄ 1 /K̄ 2 > κ̄1 , L̄1 F̄ 2 /L̄2 F̄ 1 > κ̄2 and TN1 /TN2 > κ̄3 ,
where

 1 2  1  2 1 1−b  2   2 b
b
T T
TM
b
b
L̄ F̄
L̄
αM [(1 − αN ) b + αN ] (D) αN + D (1 − αN ) b TF1 TM2
1
1 F̄ 2
L1
L̄
TM
M F
1−b
(κ̄1 )
=


 1 2 1 

b
T T
L̄2 F̄ 1
αN αF − D (1 − αN ) (αM b + αN ) TF1 TM2
L̄1 F̄ 2
M



 αF 

 αF +(1−b)αM

αM b
αN + bαM
αN
1

2 b
(1 − αN ) (αN + bαM ) TF1 TM
κ̄2 =
1 T2
αN αF
TM
F
 1
 1 2 1  1 
TF TM b F̄
αN αF L̄
−
(α
b
+
α
)
(1
−
α
)
αN
M
N
N
1
2
2
L̄
T
F̄ 2
M TF
(κ̄3 ) αM +αF =
αM [(1 − αN ) b + αN ]

D=

αF + αM
αF

αM

49

F

Then, the trade and labor mobility game has only two Nash equilibrium outcomes: no trade and no labor
mobility and free trade and no labor mobility. Moreover, WGj (1, 0) > WGj (0, 0) for j = 1, 2.
Proof :
No trade and no labor mobility is always a Nash equilibrium outcome.
Free trade and no labor mobility is a Nash equilibrium outcome if and only if vLj (1, 0) > vLj (0, 0) for
j = 1, 2. vL1 (1, 0) > vL1 (0, 0) if and only if
bαF

(αF b) αM +αF [(1 − αN ) b + αN ](1−b)



αF +(1−b)αM
αM +αF

1
TM
TF1



F̄ 1

αF
αM +αF



L̄1

bαF
αM +αF

M
 αFα+(1−b)α
+α

(

M

F)

>

(αN + bαM )
#1−b

 αF "
1
 1
TF pF b 1
pF αM +αF
1
>
F̄
L̄ +
1 p
pM
TM
M

The left hand side is increasing in (pF /pM ). Under the conditions in the proposition, (pF /pM ) <
A
 1 1 b
1 /T 1
p1F /p1M
= [bαF / (αN + bαM )]b TM
L /F̄ . Finally, when we evaluate the right hand side at
F
A
1
1
pF /pM , the inequality becomes an equality. vL2 (1, 0) > vL2 (0, 0) if and only if


α +α
b Fα M

b

αF +(1−b)αM
αM

M
(b) (1 − αN )
(αN + bαM )
pF
> p̌ =
bαF
αF +αM
pM
(αF ) αM (αN ) αM

(pF /pM ) > p̌ if and only if B p̌, L̄1 > 0 or, which is equivalent,




1 1−b

K̄
K̄ 2

b

b





2
TF1 TM
1 T2
TM
F



2
TM
TF2

1 
b



L̄2 F̄ 1
L̄1 F̄ 2

L̄2
F̄ 2

1−b 

αM [(1 − αN ) b + αN ] (D) αN + D (1 − αN ) b
>

 1 2 1 

TF TM b L̄2 F̄ 1
αN αF − D (1 − αN ) (αM b + αN ) T 1 T 2
L̄1 F̄ 2
M

 αF 
 αF +(1−b)αM

αM
αM b
αN +bαM
M
> 1.
where D = αFα+α
αN
F
Free
trade
and
free
labor
mobility

is

not

b

2
TM
1
TM



L̄2
L1

b

,

F

a

Nash

equilibrium
 αN
2 α +α

out-

come.
We
have
already
proved
that
when
TN1 /TN ( M F )
>
h
i
1



1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
αN αF L̄ /L̄ − (αM b + αN ) (1 − αN ) TF TM /TM TF b F̄ /F̄
/αM [(1 − αN ) b + αN ], vL (1, 0) >

vL2 (1, 0) and as workers move from country 2 to country 1, vL1 (1, λM ) decreases. Therefore, it must be
the case that vL1 (1, 0) > vL1 (1, 1).
No trade and free labor mobility is not a Nash equilibrium outcome.
Suppose that
1
h
i




−1
bα
(1−b)(αF +αM ) αF +(1−b)αM
T̄
L̄ > L̄1 .
Then, under no trade and
L1 =
T 1 F̄ 1 F K̄ 1
free labor mobility, workers will migrate from country 2 to country 1. Moreover vL1 (0, 0) >
1
h

bα
(1−b)(αF +αM ) i αF +(1−b)α
M
vL1 (0, 1).if and only if
T 1 F̄ 1 F K̄ 1
L̄ > T̄ L̄1 . Suppose that L1 =
50

h

T1



F̄ 1

bαF

K̄ 1

1
(1−b)(αF +αM ) i αF +(1−b)α
M

T̄

−1

L̄ < L̄1 , then under no trade and free labor mobil-

ity, workers will migrate from country 1 to country 2. Moreover, vL2 (0, 0) > vL2 (0, 1).if and only if
1
h

bα
(1−b)(αF +αM ) i αF +(1−b)α
M
T 1 F̄ 2 F K̄ 1
L̄ > T̄ L̄1 . This completes the proof of the proposition. 

51

C Inducing free trade and free labor mobility
Appendix C presents the proofs of all the results in Section 5.

C.1 Increasing returns to scale
Consider an economy with two countries (J = 2), two tradeable goods (ZT = {1, 2}) and one non

P
tradeable good (ZN = {3}). All agents have the same preferences given by u cj = z∈Z αz ln cjz
i1
hR
P
ρ
n
and cj1 = 0 cj1 (i)ρ di , where αz ∈ (0, 1), z∈Z αz = 1, ρ ∈ (0, 1), σ = (1 − ρ)−1 , and cj1 (i) indicates
the quantity of variety i ∈ [0, n] that is consumed. The production function in sector 1 is Lj1 (i) =
ajL,1 Qj1 (i) + f , where Lj1 (i) is the labor employed in the production of variety i of good 1, Qj1 (i) is the
production of variety i of good 1, f > 0 is the fixed cost of producing a variety of good 1. Production
functions in sectors 2 and 3 are Lj2 = ajL,2 Qj2 , Lj3 = ajL,3 Qj3 . Let Az = a2L,z /a1L,z and assume A1 > A2 ,
i.e., country 1 has a comparative advantagein good 1.
σ−1 j
Demands functions are C1j (i) = α1 Gj
p1 (i)−σ Y j for i ∈ [0, n], pj2 C2j = α2 Y j , pj3 C3j = α3 Y j ,
hR
i 1
1−σ
n
where Y j is aggregate income and Gj = 0 pj1 (i)1−σ
is the exact price index for good 1, pj1 (i) is the

j
price of variety i, pjz is the price of good z and σ = (1 − ρ)−1 . Let w
rate. The profits
i
h denote the wage
j
j
j
j
j
of a firm that produces variety i of good 1 are given by π1 (i) = p1 (i) − w aL,1 Q1 (i) − wj f , which

implies that the price that maximizes profits is pj1 (i) = σ (σ − 1)−1 wj ajL,1 . Moreover, free entry implies


j
j
j
j
j
that in equilibrium π1 (i) = 0 and, hence, L1 (i) = σf . Therefore, the labor allocation n , L2 , L3 is the


P
solution of maximizing (σ − 1) pj1 nj f /aL,1 + z=2,3 pjz Ljz /ajL,z subject to nj σf + Lj2 + Lj3 = Lj and the
n
o
wage rate is given by wj = max (σ − 1) pj1 /σajL,1 , pj2 /ajL,2 , pj3 /ajL,2 .
Under autarky all goods must be produced domestically. Hence, pj1 = wj ajL,1 σ/ (1 − σ), pjz = wj ajL,z

for z = 2, 3, nj σf = α1 Lj , Lj2 = α2 Lj and Lj3 = α3 Lj . Then, the indirect utility of a worker
in country ij
h

P
−1
σ
j
j
j
is v = C + T + [α1 / (σ − 1)] ln α1 L /f , where C = z αz ln (αz ) − α1 (σ − 1) ln (σ) (σ − 1)(σ−1)


P
and T j = − z∈Z αz ln ajL,z . If labor mobility is not allowed, then Lj = L̄j . Note that v j

is increasing in Lj . As a consequence,
 2 if labor
 mobility is1 allowed, there are three possible situa1
2
1
tions. If T − T > [α1 / (σ − 1)] ln L̄ + mL̄ / (1 − m) L̄ , then all mobile workers will go to or
stay in country 1 because, for any allocation
of mobile workers to countries,
we have v 1 > v 2 . If

 2
2
1
2
1
2
< T − T < [α1 / (σ − 1)] ln L̄ + mL̄1 / (1 − m) L̄1 , then
[α1 / (σ − 1)] ln (1 − m) L̄ / L̄ + mL̄
there are two equilibria, ineach of which all mobileworkers go to or stay in only one country. Finally, if
T 1 − T 2 < [α1 / (σ − 1)] ln (1 − m) L̄2 / L̄1 + mL̄2 , then all mobile workers go to or stay in country 2
because v 2 > v 1 for any allocation of mobile workers to countries. The intuition is straightforward. Due
to the existence of increasing returns to scale in sector 1, under autarky the indirect utility of workers
increases in step with the labor endowment of the country (a higher labor endowment implies that more
varieties of good 1 are produced in the autarky equilibrium). As a consequence, once mobile workers start
moving to one country, the indirect utility of workers in the recipient country goes up, which reinforces
migration flows in the same direction.
52

Suppose there is free trade and A1 > α1 L2 /α2 L1 > A2 . Then, country 1 specializes in good 1
and country 2 specializes in good 2. Thus, w1 = (σ − 1) p1 /σa1L,1 = p3 /a1L,3 , w2 = p2 /a2L,1 = p3 /a2L,3 ,
1 1
2 2
n1 = n = (1 − α3 ) L1 /σf , n2 = 0 and the balanced trade condition implies
 α2 w L = α1 L w . Then, the
utility of a worker is given by v 1 = C + T 1 + α2 ln a1L,2 α1 L2 /a2L,2 α2 L1 + [α1 / (σ − 1)] ln (1 − α3 ) L1 /f




in country 1 and v 2 = C + T 2 + α1 ln a2L,1 α2 L1 /a1L,1 α1 L2 + [α1 / (σ − 1)] ln (1 − α3 ) L1 /f in country 2. If labor mobility is not allowed, then Lj = L̄j . Under free labor mobility, mobile workers
will go to or stay in the country with higher v j . Note that, although v 1 can be increasing or decreasing in L1 , v 1 − v 2 is always decreasing in L1 and increasing in L2 , as in the simple Ricardian
model. Therefore, and, provided that there is enough mobile workers, they will relocate until v 1 = v 2 ,
−α3

which implies L2 /L1 = (α2 /α1 ) (A3 ) α1 +α2 . Moreover, there will be migration to country 1 whenever
−α3

−α3

L̄2 /L̄1 > (α2 /α1 ) (A3 ) α1 +α2 and migration to country 2 whenever L̄2 /L̄1 < (α2 /α1 ) (A3 ) α1 +α2 . The intuition is straightforward. Under free trade, country 1 specializes in the production of good 1, the sector
that operates under increasing returns to scale. Therefore, the number of varieties of good 1 produced
in the trading equilibrium and consumed by both countries only depends on the size of country 1’s labor
force. This implies that the effect that the allocation of mobile workers has on the varieties of good 1 that
are produced affects both countries symmetrically.
Finally, the distribution
of mobile workers between


the countries does not violate either Lj ∈ (1 − m) L̄j , L̄j + mL̄−j or A1 > α1 L2 /α2 L1 > A2 , provided
−α3
α1 (L̄2 +mL̄1 )
L̄2
> A2 .
that A1 > α (1−m)L̄1 > (A3 ) α1 +α2 > αα1 (1−m)
1
2
2
2 (L̄ +mL̄ )
Proposition 7 characterizes trade and labor mobility policies.
Proposition 7 (increasing returns to scale). Suppose that:
 2

α1
L̄ + mL̄1
1
2
T −T >
ln
σ−1
(1 − m) L̄1


2
1
2
−α3
α1 L̄ + mL̄
α1 1 − λ̄M m L̄
α1 (1 − m) L̄2
α1 +α2

 > A2
A1 >
>
>
>
(A
)
3
α2 (1 − m) L̄1
α2 L̄1 + λ̄M mL̄2
α2 L̄1 + mL̄2
"
#
"
#
A1 α2 L̄1 + λ̄M mL̄2
α1
α1 L̄2


>
ln
α1 ln
σ−1
α1 1 − λ̄M m L̄2
(1 − α3 ) L̄1 + λ̄M mL̄2

Then:

1. No trade and no labor mobility is a Nash equilibrium outcome.
2. No 
trade and partial labor
mobility

( λM = λ̄M ) is a Nash equilibrium outcome if and only if
1
L̄1 +λ̄M mL̄2
α1
α1
1
2
λ̄M T − T + σ−1 ln 1−λ̄ m L̄2
≥ − σ−1
ln 1 − λ̄M m m . Moreover, if no trade and partial
( M )

labor mobility is an equilibrium outcome, then WGj 0, λ̄M ≥ WGj (0, 0) for j = 1, 2.
3. No

trade and free labor mobility is



L̄1 +λ̄M mL̄2
α1
1
2
λ̄M T − T + σ−1 ln 1−λ̄ m L̄2
≤
( M )

a

Nash equilibrium
" outcome if and
#
1
1 +mL̄2 (1−m) m

L̄
(
)
α1
T 1 − T 2 + σ−1
ln
.
1
(1−m)L̄2 (1−λ̄M m) m

53

only

if

More-

over,n if no trade and free
labor mobility is an equilibrium outcome, then WGj (0, 1)
o

max WGj (0, 0) , WGj 0, λ̄M
for j = 1, 2.
4. Free trade and no labor mobility is a Nash equilibrium if and only if
5. Suppose that L̄1 + λ̄M mL̄2
α1 −α2 (σ−1)
,
σ−1

L1

=

φ 

α1 (L̄1 +L̄2 )



1−α3
α2

1

σ

(A1 )

σ−1
σ

>

≥

α1 L̄2
.
α2 L̄1

n
 α
φ 2 α2
φ 2 α2 o
1 − λ̄M m L̄2 2 > max L̄1
L̄
, L1
L
, where φ =

−α3

−α3

and

L2

=

α1 +α2 (A3 ) α1 +α2

α2 (A3 ) α1 +α2 (L̄1 +L̄2 )
−α3

. Then, free trade and partial

α1 +α2 (A3 ) α1 +α2

labor mobility is a Nash equilibrium outcome, but free trade and free labor mobility is not a Nash
equilibrium outcome.
Proof:
(λT , λM ) = (0, 0) is a always a Nash equilibrium outcome.

(λT , λM ) = 0, λ̄M is a Nash equilibrium outcome if and only if WGj 0, λ̄M ≥ WGj (0, 0) for
−α3


j = 1, 2. If λT = 0 and λM = λ̄M , then α1 1 − λ̄M m L̄2 /α2 L̄1 + λ̄M mL̄2 > (A3 ) α1 +α2 implies

1 0, λ̄
that a proportion
λ̄
m
of
mobile
workers
in
country
2
will
relocate
to
country
1.
Then
W
=
M
M
G






v 1 0, λ̄M and WG2 0, λ̄M = λ̄M mv1 0, λ̄M + 1 − λ̄M m v 2 0, λ̄M , where v 1 0, λ̄M = C + T 1 +

[α1 / (σ − 1)] ln α1 L̄1 + λ̄M mL̄2 /f and v 2 0, λ̄M = C + T 2 + [α1 / (σ − 1)] ln α1 1 − λ̄M m L̄2 /f .

If λT = 0 and λM = 0, then WGj (0, 0) = v j (0, 0) = C +
T j + [α1 / (σ − 1)] ln α1 L̄j /f
.


1
1
1
2
1
2
Note that WG 0, λ̄M − WG (0, 0) = [α1 / (σ − 1)] ln L̄ + λ̄M m
 L̄ /L̄ > 0,
 while WG 0, λ̄M −
WG2 (0, 0) ≥ 0 if and only if λ̄M T 1 − T 2 + [α1 / (σ − 1)] ln L̄1 + λ̄M mL̄2 / 1 − λ̄M m L̄2
≥

1
− [α1 / (σ − 1)] ln 1 − λ̄M m m . Thus, 0, λ̄M is a Nash equilibrium if and only if



 
1
λ̄M T 1 − T 2 + [α1 / (σ − 1)] ln L̄1 + λ̄M mL̄2 / 1 − λ̄M m L̄2 ≥ − [α1 / (σ − 1)] ln 1 − λ̄M m m .

(λnT , λM )
=
(0, 1) ois a Nash equilibrium outcome if and only if WGj (0, 1)
≥


j
j
max WG 0, λ̄M , WG (0, 0) for j = 1, 2. If λT = 0 and λM = 1, then α1 L̄2 + mL̄1 /α2 (1 − m) L̄1 >
−α3

(A3 ) α1 +α2 implies that all mobile workers will relocate to country 1.
Then, WG1 (0, 1) =
1
2
1
1
v 1 (0, 1) and WG2 (0, 1) = mv
 (0, 1) 2 + (1 − m) v (0, 1), 2 where v (0, 1) = C + T2 +

1
2
[α1 / (σ − 1)] ln α1 L̄ + mL̄ /f and v (0, 1) = C + T  + [α
1 / (σ − 1)] ln α
1 (1 − m) L̄ /f .


1
Note that WG1(0, 1) − WG1 (0,0) =
[α1 / (σ − 1)] ln L̄1 + mL̄2 /L̄1 > WG1 0, λ̄M − W
G (0, 0) =


[α1 / (σ − 1)] ln L̄1 + λ̄M mL̄2 /L̄1
> 0.
Also note that WG2 (0, 1) − WG2 0, λ̄M
≥ 0 if
h


1i
1
2
1
2
1
2
≥
and only if
T −T
+ [α1 / (σ − 1)] ln L̄ + mL̄ (1 − m) m / (1 − m) L̄ 1 − λ̄M m m
 1




λ̄M T − T 2 + [α1 / (σ − 1)] ln L̄1 + λ̄M mL̄2 / 1 − λ̄M m L̄2
and WG2 (0, 1) − WG2 (0, 0) ≥ 0
h


1i
1
if and only if T 1 − T 2 + [α1 / (σ − 1)] ln L̄1 + mL̄2 (1 − m) m / (1 − m) L̄2 1 − λ̄M m m
≥
 1

 2
1
2
2
0.
But note that T − T +  [α1 / (σ − 1)] ln L̄ + λ̄M mL̄ / 1 − λ̄M m L̄
>
0
1
2
1
2
2
1
2
>
T
− T
+
because T − T
+ [α1 / (σ − 1)] ln L̄ + λ̄M mL̄ / 1 − λ̄M m L̄
[α1 / (σ − 1)] ln 1 − λ̄M m L̄2 / L̄1 + λ̄M mL̄2
> 0. Thus, (0, 1) is a Nash equilibrium outcome
54

if and only if
h
1i


1
T 1 − T 2 + [α1 / (σ − 1)] ln L̄1 + mL̄2 (1 − m) m / (1 − m) L̄2 1 − λ̄M m m ≥



 
≥ λ̄M T 1 − T 2 + [α1 / (σ − 1)] ln L̄1 + λ̄M mL̄2 / 1 − λ̄M m L̄2

j
j
(λT , λM ) = (1, 0) is a Nash equilibrium outcome
 if and only if WG(1, 0) ≥ WG (0, 0)for j = 1, 2. If
λT = 1 and λM = 0, then v 1 (1, 0) = C +T 1 +α2 ln a1L,2 α1 L̄2 /a2L,2 α2 L̄1 +[α1 / (σ − 1)] ln (1 − α3 ) L̄1 /f




and v 2 (1, 0) = C + T 2 + α1 ln a2L,1 α2 L̄1 /a1L,1 α1 L̄2 + [α1 / (σ − 1)] ln (1 − α3 ) L̄1 /f . Since there is no


labor mobility, WGj (1, 0) = v j (1, 0). Note that WG1 (1, 0) − WG1 (0, 0) = α2 ln a1L,2 α1 L̄2 /a2L,2 α2 L̄1 +

2
1
2
2
[α1 / (σ
 − 1)] ln [(1 − α3 ) /α
1 ] > 0, because α1L̄ /α2 L̄ > A2 . Also note that WG (1, 0) − WG (0, 0) =
α1 ln a2L,1 α2 L̄1 /a1L,1 α1 L̄2 + [α1 / (σ − 1)] ln (1 − α3 ) L̄1 /α1 L̄2 > 0 if and only if α1 L̄2 /α2 L̄1 <
h
i1
σ
A1 (1 − α3 )σ−1 / (α2 )σ−1 , which also holds. Thus, (1, 0) is a Nash equilibrium outcome.


(λnT , λM ) =
1, λ̄M
is a Nash
equilibrium outcome if and only if WGj 1, λ̄M
≥
o

j
j
j
max WG (1, 0) , WG 0, λ̄M , WG (0, 0) for j = 1, 2.
If λT = 1 and λM = λ̄M , then
−α3

λ̄M m of mobile
α1 L̄2 + mL̄1 /α2 (1 − m) L̄1
>
(A3 ) α1 +α2 implies that a proportion

1 1, λ̄
workers in country 2 will relocate
to
country
1.
Thus,
W
=
v 1 1, λ̄M and
M
G




WG2 1,
= λ̄M mv 1 1, λ̄M + 1 −λ̄M m v 2 1, λ̄M , where v 1 1, λ̄M
= C + T1 +
 λ̄M2
1
2
1
2
α2 ln α1 L̄ 1 − λ̄M m /A2 α2 L̄ + λ̄M mL̄
+
 [α1 / (σ 1− 1)] ln (12−
 α3 ) 2L̄ + λ̄M mL̄ /f
2
2
and
v 1, λ̄M
=
C + T
+ α1 ln A1 α2 L̄ + λ̄M mL̄ /α1 L̄ 1 − λ̄M m
+
1
2
1
1
[α1 / (σ
Note  that
WG 1,
=
 − 1)] ln (1 − α3 ) L̄ + λ̄M mL̄
 /f
 .
 λ̄M  − WG (1, 0)
α2 ln L̄2 1 − λ̄M m / L̄1 + λ̄M mL̄2 L̄2 + [α1 / (σ − 1)] ln L̄1 + λ̄M mL̄2 /L̄1 ≥ 0 if and only if
 2 α2
 α1 −α2 (σ−1) 2 α2

 α1 −α2 (σ−1) 
1
2
σ−1
σ−1
1
−
λ̄
m
L̄
≥
L̄
L̄
. Also note that WG1 1, λ̄M −
L̄1 + λ̄M m
L̄
M




WG1 0, λ̄M = α2 ln α1 L̄2 1 − λ̄M m /A2 α2 L̄1 + λ̄M mL̄2 + [α1 / (σ − 1)] ln [(1 − α3 ) /α1] > 0 because
1
1
α1 L̄2 1 − λ̄M m /α2 L̄1 + λ̄M mL̄2 > A2 . Since we have
already proved

 1 that WG1 0, λ̄M  > W1 G (0, 0)
1
1
1
and WG (1, 0)
>
WG (0, 0), then WG 1, λ̄M
≥
max WG (1, 0) , WG 0, λ̄M , WG (0, 0)
α1 −α2 (σ−1) 


α
 α1 −α2 (σ−1) 2 α2
σ−1
σ−1
if
and
only
if
L̄1 + λ̄M mL̄2
1 − λ̄M (
m L̄2 2
≥
L̄1
L̄
.

(α1 +α2 ) )

α1 (1−λ̄M m)L̄2
WG2 1, λ̄M − WG2 (1, 0) ≥ 0 if and only if λ̄M m TN1 − TN2 + ln α L̄1 +λ̄ mL̄2
+
)
2(
M


h 1
i
2
L̄1 +λ̄M mL̄2
which holds because TN1 −
α1 ln L̄1 1−λ̄ m
+ [α1 / (σ − 1)] ln L̄ +λ̄L̄M1 mL̄
>
0,
( M )





1
2 α1 +α2
2
TN2 + ln α1 1− λ̄M m L̄2 /α
>  0.
W
− WG2 0, λ̄M  =
2 L̄ + λ̄M mL̄ 
G 1, λ̄M

λ̄M m v 1  1, λ̄M − v 1  0, λ̄M
+
1 − λ̄M m v 2 1, λ̄M 
− v 2 0, λ̄M ,
where
v 1 1, λ̄M
−
1
2
1
2
v 0, λ̄M
= α2 ln α1 L̄ 1 − λ̄M m /A2 α2 L̄ + λ̄M mL̄
+ [α1 / (σ − 1)] ln[(1 − α3 ) /α1 ] > 0


α1 L̄2 (1−λ̄M m)
A1 α2 (L̄1 +λ̄M mL̄2 )
because α L̄1 +λ̄ mL̄2
> A2 and v 2 1, λ̄M − v 2 0, λ̄M
= α1 ln
+
α L̄2 (1−λ̄M m)
)
2(
 M



 1

(1−α3 )(L̄1 +λ̄M mL̄2 )
A1 α2 (L̄1 +λ̄M mL̄2 )
α1
α1 L̄2
ln (1−α ) L̄
[α1 / (σ − 1)] ln
> 0 because α1 ln
> σ−1
.
1 +λ̄ mL̄2
α1 (1−λ̄M m)L̄2
α1 (1−λ̄M m)L̄2
(
)
3
M





WG2 1, λ̄M − WG2 (0, 0)
=
λ̄M m v 1 1, λ̄M − v 2 1, λ̄M
+ v 2 1, λ̄M − v 2 (0, 0) , where

55


(α1 +α2 )



α1 (1−λ̄M m)L̄2
v 1 1, λ̄M − v 2 1, λ̄M = TN1 − TN2 + ln α L̄1 +λ̄ mL̄2
> 0 and v 2 1, λ̄M − v 2 (0, 0) =
(
)
M

 2



 2
1
aL,1 α2 (L̄1 +λ̄M mL̄2 )
(1−α3 )(L̄ +µ̄mL̄2 )
A1 α2 (L̄1 +λ̄M mL̄2 )
> 0 because α1 ln
>
α1 ln a1 α 1−λ̄ m L̄2 + [α1 / (σ − 1)] ln
α1 L̄2
α1 (1−λ̄M m)L̄2
( M )
 L,1 1

α1
α1 L̄2
σ−1 ln (1−α3 )(L̄1 +λ̄M mL̄2 ) .
Finally,
(λT , λM )
=
(1, 1)
is
not
a
Nash
equilibrium
outcome
when
α1 −α2 (σ−1) 
α1 −α2 (σ−1)






α
α
2
2
σ−1
σ−1
L̄1 + λ̄M mL̄2
1 − λ̄M m L̄2
> L1
L2
if and only if WG1 1, λ̄M >
WG1 (1, 1). This completes the proof of the proposition. 

C.2 Extractive elites
Consider an economy with two countries (J = 2), two tradeable goods (ZT = {1, 2}) and one nontradeable good (ZN = {3}). Production functions, endowments and preferences are as in the simple
Ricardian economy. Each of the countries is populated by two types of agents: Lj workers, each of
whom owns one unit of labor, and E j elite members. The elite appropriates a fraction β j ∈ (0, 1) of
Lj . A fraction δ ∈ (0, 1) of each unit
expropriated by the elite is lost in the process. After expro
priation, each worker keeps 1 − β j units of labor and each member of the elite gets δβ j Lj /E j units


of labor. The effective labor force of country j is L̃j = B j Lj = 1 − β j (1 − δ) Lj . Only a fraction
m ∈ [0, 1] of the labor force of each country is mobile at zero cost. The rest of the labor force and
elite members are immobile. Each government selects trade and migration policies in order to maximize
L̄j [(1−m)vj,im +mvj,m ]+E j (1+ϕj )vj,e
WGj =
, where v j,im , v j,m , v j,e are the indirect utility functions of an
L̄j +E j (1+ϕj )
j
immobile worker, a mobileworker
 and a member of the elite, respectively, and ϕ ∈ [−1, ∞].
P
Let T j = − z∈Z αz ln ajL,z be the productivity of country j. In order to highlight the role of the

elite, assume T 1 = T 2 = T . Then, under autarky, the utility of a worker is vj,h = C + T + ln 1 − β j
and the utility of a member of the elite is v j,e = C + T + ln δβ j + ln Lj /E j . If labor mobility is not
allowed, then Lj = L̄j . If labor mobility is allowed, then all mobile workers go to or stay in the country
with the lowest β j .
Under free trade, if A1 > α1 L̃2 /α2 L̃1 > A2 , then country j specializes in good z = j ∈ {1,2}.
Therefore, the utility of a worker is given by v 1,h = C + T+ α2 ln α1 B2 L2 /A2 α2 B 1 L1 + ln 1 − β 1 in
country 1 and v 2,h = C + T + α1 ln A1 α2 B 1 L1 /α1 B 2 L2 + ln 1 − β 2 in country 2, while the utility

of an elite member is given by v 1,e = C + T + α2 ln α1 B2 L2 /A2 α2 B1 L1 + ln δβ1 + ln L1 /E 1 in
country 1 and v 2,e = C + T + α1 ln A1 α2 B 1 L1 /α1 B 2 L2 + ln δβ 2 + ln L2 /E j in country 2. If
labor mobility is not allowed, then Lj = L̄j . If labor mobility is allowed, mobile workers will go to
or stay in the country with the highest v j . Since v 1 is decreasing in L1 /L2 while v 2 is increasing in
L1 /L2 , if there are enough mobile workers, they will relocate until v 1 = v 2 . This implies L2 /L1 =
−α3

 1


α2 Γ2 /α1 Γ1 (A3 ) α1 +α2 , where Γj = 1 − β j α1 +α2 / 1 − β j (1 − δ) . Moreover, there will be migration
−α3

to country 1 whenever L̄2 /L̄1 > α2 Γ2 /α1 Γ1 (A3 ) α1 +α2 and migration to country 2 whenever L̄2 /L̄1 <
−α3

α2 Γ2 /α1 Γ1 (A3 ) α1 +α2 . Finally, the distribution of mobile workers between the countries does not violate

56



either Lj ∈ (1 − m) L̄j , L̄j + mL̄−j or A1 > α1 L̃2 /α2 L̃1 > A2 , provided that


B1
B2



 
 1
 1
−α3
α1 L̄2 + mL̄1
α1 (1 − m) L̄2
1 − β 2 α1 +α2
B
α1 +α2

(A3 )
>
> A2
A1 >
>
1
1
1
2
1
−
β
B2
α2 (1 − m) L̄
α2 L̄ + mL̄

In order to simplify the characterization of the political equilibrium, we also assume that

α2 ln

"

B 2 Γ2
α3

A2 B 1 Γ1 (A3 ) α1 +α2
"
α1 ln

β2 > β1



−α3

#
1
2
1
2
α1 +α2
α1 Γ + α2 Γ (A3 )
 L̄ + mL̄



> ln 


1
2
1
L̄ + L̄ α Γ
1

A1 B 1 L1 Γ1

α3

B 2 Γ2 (A3 ) α1 +α2

#

> m ln



1 − β1
1 − β2



The first inequality simply means that the elite of country 1 is less extractive than the elite of country 2,
in the sense that it appropiates a lower fraction of its labor force. The second inequality ensures that the
elite of the rich country under autarky (country 1) prefers free trade and free labor mobility to autarky
and free labor mobility. Intuitively, for the elite of country 1, when there is free labor mobility, gains
from trade prevail over the negative effect that trade liberalization has on the size of the labor force of
country 1. The third inequality states that workers in the poor country under autarky (country 2) prefer
free trade and free labor mobility to autarky and free labor mobility. Intuitively, the gains from trade
for all workers in country 2 are higher than the productivity gains under autarky for mobile workers.
Proposition 8 characterizes trade and labor mobility policies.
Proposition 8 (extractive elite). Suppose that


B1
B2



 
 1
 1
2
−α3
α1 L̄2 + mL̄1
1 − β 2 α1 +α2
α
(1
−
m)
L̄
B
1
 > A2
>
(A3 ) α1 +α2 >
A1 >
1
1
1−β
B2
α2 (1 − m) L̄
α2 L̄1 + mL̄2
α2 ln

"

B 2 Γ2
α3

A2 B 1 Γ1 (A3 ) α1 +α2
"
α1 ln

Assume
Then:

L̄2 /L̄1

6=

α2 Γ2 /α1 Γ1



(A3 )

β2 > β1



−α3

#
1
2
1
2
α
+α
1
2
α1 Γ + α2 Γ (A3 )
 L̄ + mL̄



> ln 


L̄1 + L̄2 α Γ1
1

A1 B 1 L1 Γ1

α3

B 2 Γ2 (A3 ) α1 +α2

−α3
α1 +α2

. Let

L1

#

> m ln



1 − β1
1 − β2

α1 Γ1 (L̄1 +L̄2 )

=

−α3



−α3

and

α1 Γ1 +α2 Γ2 (A3 ) α1 +α2

1. No trade and no labor mobility is always a Nash equilibrium outcome.
57

L2

=

α2 Γ2 (A3 ) α1 +α2 (L̄1 +L̄2 )
−α3

α1 Γ1 +α2 Γ2 (A3 ) α1 +α2

.

2. Free trade and no labor mobility is always a Nash equilibrium outcome. Moreover, WGj (1, 0) ≥
WGj (0, 0) for j = 1, 2.
3. No trade and free labor mobility is a Nash equilibrium outcome if and only if 1 + ϕ2 ≤
mL̄2 ln[(1−β 1 )/(1−β 2 )]
.
−E 2 ln(1−m)
−α3

4. If L̄2 /L̄1 > α2 Γ2 /α1 Γ1 (A3 ) α1 +α2 , free trade and free labor mobility is a Nash equilibrium outcome
if and only if:

(a)

(1−α2 )
L1

α
L2 2

>

(1−α2 )
L̄1

1−α1
α
> L̄1 1
 1 2
−L̄2 α1 ln L1 L̄2
L̄ L
.

(L1 )α1 (L2 )1−α1
E 2 ln
(L̄1 )α1 (L̄2 )1−α1

(b) L1

α1

L2

L̄2

α
L̄2 2

1−α1

and 1 +

or L1

α1

ϕ1
L2

>

ϕ̄1

1−α1

=

 1 2
L̄1 α2 ln L1 L̄2
L̄ L

.
(L1 )(1−α2 ) (L2 )α2
1
E ln
(L̄1 )(1−α2 ) (L̄2 )α2


α
1 1
2 1−α1

< L̄

L̄

and 1+ϕ2 < ϕ̄2 =

−α3

5. If L̄2 /L̄1 < α2 Γ2 /α1 Γ1 (A3 ) α1 +α2 , free trade and free labor mobility is a Nash equilibrium outcome
if and only if:
α
1−α1
α
1−α1
(a) L1 1 L2
> L̄1 1 L̄2
and 1 + ϕ2 > ϕ̄2 ;
(1−α2 ) 2 α2
(1−α2 ) 2 α2
(1−α2 ) 2 α2
(1−α2 ) 2 α2
or L1
L
< L̄1
L̄
and 1+ϕ1 <
(b) L1
L
> L̄1
L̄
1
ϕ̄ .

Proof : Note that:




L̄j ln 1 − β j + E j 1 + ϕj ln δβ j + ln Lj /E j
=C+T +
L̄j + E j (1 + ϕj )
!


2 (1 − δ) L2
α
1
−
β
1
WG1 (1, λM ) = C + T + α2 ln
+
A2 α2 [1 − β 1 (1 − δ)] L1



L̄1 ln 1 − β 1 + E 1 1 + ϕ1 ln δβ 1 L1 /E 1
+
L̄1 + E 1 (1 + ϕ1 )

 !
1 (1 − δ) L1
A
α
1
−
β
1
2
WG2 (1, λM ) = C + T + α1 ln
+
α1 [1 − β 2 (1 − δ)] L2



L̄2 ln 1 − β 2 + E 2 1 + ϕ2 ln δβ 2 L2 /E 2
+
L̄2 + E 2 (1 + ϕ2 )

WGj (0, λM )

(λT , λM ) = (0, 0) is a always a Nash equilibrium outcome.
(λT , λM ) = (0, 1) is a Nash equilibrium
outcome
if and only if WGj (1, 0) ≥ WGj (0,0), which holds


2 2
1 1
because: WG1 (1, 0) − WG1 (0, 0) = α2 ln Aαα1 BBL̄1 L̄1 > 0 and WG1 (1, 0) − WG1 (0, 0) = α1 ln Aα1 αB2 B2 L̄L̄2
>0
2 2
1
 1
 1
2
L̄
B
because B
A1 > αα1 L̄
.
1 > A2
B2
B2
2

58

WG1

(λT , λM ) = (0, 1) is a Nash equilibrium outcome if and only if WGj (0,
1) ≥
WGj (0, 0). WG1 (0, 1) −


(0, 0) =

 1

L̄2
E 1 (1+ϕ1 ) ln L̄ +m
1
L̄
L̄1 +E 1 (1+ϕ1 )

> 0 and
2
1
mL̄ ln[(1−β )/(1−β 2 )]
.
only if 1 + ϕ2 ≤
−E 2 ln(1−m)

WG2 (0, 1)

−

WG2 (0, 0)

L̄2 m ln

=

1−β 1
1−β 2

+E 2 (1+ϕ2 ) ln(1−m)

L̄2 +E 2 (1+ϕ2 )

if and

n
o
(λT , λM ) = (1, 1) is a Nash equilibrium outcome if and only if WGj (1, 1) ≥ max WGj (1, 0) , WGj (0, 1) .
Note that
 



E 1 1 + ϕ1 ln L1 / L̄1 + mL̄2
α1 B 2 L2
1
1
WG (1, 1) − WG (0, 1) = α2 ln
+
A2 α2 B 1 L1
L̄1 + E 1 (1 + ϕ1 )
 

 1

1
1
E 1 + ϕ ln L1 / L̄1 + mL̄2
L̄ + mL̄2
> ln
+
L1
L̄1 + E 1 (1 + ϕ1 )
 1

1
L̄ + mL̄2
L̄
= 1
ln
> 0,
L1
L̄ + E 1 (1 + ϕ1 )
!

−α3
1
2
1
2
α
+α


(L̄ +mL̄ ) α1 Γ +α2 Γ (A3 ) 1 2


B 2 Γ2
where we have used that α2 ln
> ln 
α3
 or, which is
L̄1 +L̄2 )α1 Γ1
(
α
+α
1
1
1
2
A2 B Γ (A3 )


 1

2 2
L̄2
equivalent, that α2 ln Aα2 α1 B2 BL1 L1 > ln L̄ +m
. Also note that
1
L







−L̄2 m ln 1 − β 1 / 1 − β 2 + E 2 1 + ϕ2 ln L2 /L̄2 (1 − m)
A1 α2 B 1 L1
2
2
+
WG (1, 1) − WG (0, 1) = α1 ln
α1 B 2 L2
L̄2 + E 2 (1 + ϕ2 )







−L̄2 m ln 1 − β 1 / 1 − β 2 + E 2 1 + ϕ2 ln L2 /L̄2 (1 − m)
1 − β1
> m ln
+
1 − β2
L̄2 + E 2 (1 + ϕ2 )






E 2 1 + ϕ2
E 2 1 + ϕ2
1 − β1
L2
= 2
m ln
+ 2
ln 2
>0
1 − β2
L̄ + E 2 (1 + ϕ2 )
L̄ + E 2 (1 + ϕ2 )
L̄ (1 − m)




1−β 1
A1 B 1 L1 Γ1
where we have used that α1 ln
>
m
ln
or, which is equivalent, that
α3
1−β 2
2 Γ2 (A ) α1 +α2
B
3




1 1
1−β 1
α1 ln Aα1 α1 B2 B2 LL2
> m ln 1−β
2 .
 1 2  E 1 1+ϕ1 ln L1 /L̄1


) (
)
(
L
2 (1, 1)−W 2 (1, 0) = α ln L̄2 L1 +
WG1 (1, 1)−WG1 (1, 0) = α2 ln L̄
+
,
while
W
1
G
G
L1 L̄2
L̄1 +E 1 (1+ϕ1 )
L2 L̄1
E 2 (1+ϕ2 ) ln(L2 /L̄2 )
. Thus, we must consider several possible cases.
L̄2 +E 2 (1+ϕ2 )
−α3

(i) Suppose L̄2 /L̄1 > α2 Γ2 /α1 Γ1 (A3 ) α1 +α2 . Then L1 > L̄1 and L2 < L̄2 . WG1 (1, 1) − WG1 (1, 0) > 0




(1−α2 )
α

( L1 )
(L2 ) 2
2
2
1
1
1 ln L1 L̄2
and WG (1, 1) − WG (1, 0) > 0 if and only if E 1 + ϕ ln
>
α
L̄
and
2
1
2
(1−α
)
α
2
L̄ L
(L̄1 )
(L̄2 ) 2


 2 1
α
1−α

(L̄1 ) 1 (L̄2 ) 1
L̄ L
α1 L̄2 ln L
> E 2 1 + ϕ2 ln (L1 )α1 (L2 )1−α1 . Conditions (a) and (b) in part 4 are equivalent to
2 L̄1

these two inequalities.

−α3

(ii) Suppose L̄2 /L̄1 < α2 Γ2 /α1 Γ1 (A3 ) α1 +α2 . Then L1 < L̄1 and L2 > L̄2 . WG1 (1, 1) − WG1 (1, 0) > 0


 1 2
(1−α2 )
α

(L̄1 )
(L̄2 ) 2
L̄ L
2
2
1
1
1
and WG (1, 1) − WG (1, 0) > 0 if and only if α2 L̄ ln L1 L̄2 > E 1 + ϕ ln
and
1 (1−α2 )
2 α2

(L )

59

(L )




α
1−α
( L1 ) 1 ( L2 ) 1
2 ln L2 L̄1 . Conditions (a) and (b) in part 5 are equivalent to
>
α
L̄
1+
ln
1
α
1−α
2
1
L̄ L
(L̄1 ) 1 (L̄2 ) 1
these inequalities. This completes the proof of the proposition. 

E2

ϕ2





C.3 Citizenship for sale
Consider an economy with two countries (J = 2), two tradeable goods (ZT = {1, 2}) and one nontradeable good (ZN = {3}). Production functions, endowments and preferences are as in the simple
Ricardian economy. Let τ j ∈ [0, 1] be the income tax rate that country j charges to foreign mobile
workers that decide to locate in j and let T f j ≥ 0 be the transfer per capita received by country j’s
workers. The government of country j selects its trade
migration policies in order to maximize
 and
j
j,m
j,im
j
j
j
j
WG = mvL + (1 − m) vL subject to T f L̄ = τ max L − L̄j , 0 , government j’s budget constraint.
Trade policy is λT ∈ {0, 1}, where λT = 1 indicates that both countries accept free trade and λT = 0
that at least one country refuses to trade. Migration policy is λM ∈ {0, (1, τ )} with τ ∈ [0, 1], where
λM = 0 indicates that at least one country does not accept free labor mobility and λM = (1, τ ) indicates
that both countries accept labor mobility with the recipient country charging a proportional income tax
τ ∈ [0, 1] to foreign mobile workers.
Under autarky, all goods must be produced domestically. Hence, pjz = wj ajL,z for z ∈ Z = {1, 2, 3}.
If labor mobility is not allowed, then v j,im (0, 0) = v j,m (0, 0) = C + T j and,
Wj (0, 0) = mv j,m +
 hence,

j,im
j
j,im
j
j
(1 − m) v
= C+T . If labor mobility is allowed, then v
= C+T +ln 1 + τ max Lj − L̄j , 0 /L̄j ,
where τ j ∈ [0, 1] is the income tax changed by country j to immigrants.
Mobile workers
in country 1


strictly prefer to locate in country 1 if and only if T 1 +ln 1 + τ 1 max L1 − L̄1 , 0 /L̄1 > T 2 +ln 1 − τ 2 .
Since T 1 > T 2 and τ j ∈ [0, 1] for j = 1, 2, this inequality always holds. Thus, mobile workers in country
1 always prefer to locate
 in country
 1. Mobile workers in country
 2 prefer to locate in country 1 if and
only if T 1 + ln 1 − τ 1 ≥ T 2 + ln 1 + τ 2 max L2 − L̄2 , 0 /L̄2 . Since L2 ≤ L̄2 , this inequality becomes
T 1 + ln 1 − τ 1 ≥ T 2 . Therefore,
if T 1 + ln 1 − τ 1 ≥ T 2 , then L1 = L̄1 + mL̄2 and L2 = (1 − m) L̄2 ,

1
1
2
while
ln 1− τ  < T , then L1 
= L̄1 and L2 = L̄2 . Hence, WG1 0, 1, τ 1
= C + T1 +
 if 1T +

1
1
1
2
1
1
1
2
ln 1 + τ L − L̄ /L̄ and WG 0, 1, τ
= m C + max T + ln 1 − τ , T
+(1 − m) C + T 2 .

Finally, note that WG1 0, 1, τ 1 adopts a maximum for τ 1 = τ̂ = 1 − e−(T1 −T2 ) . Thus, WG1 (0, (1, τ̂ )) =



C + T 1 + ln 1 + 1 − e−(T1 −T2 ) mL̄2 /L̄1 and WG2 (0, (1, τ̂ )) = C + T 2 .
Suppose there is free trade. Provided that A1 > α1 L2 /α2 L1 > A2 , country j specializes in good
z = j ∈ {1, 2}. Thus, in equilibrium, p1 = w1 a1L,1 , p2 = w2 a2L,2 , pj3 = wj ajL,3 and the balanced

trade condition is α2 w1 L1 = α1 w2 L2 . Therefore, v 1 = C + T 1 + α2 ln α1 L2 /A2 α2 L1 and v 2 =
C+T 2 +α1 ln A1 α2 L1 /α1 L2 . If labor mobility is not allowed, then v 1,im (1, 0) = v 1,m (1, 0) = W 1 (1, 0) =

C + T 1 + α2 ln α1 L̄2 /A2 α2 L̄1 and v 2,im (1, 0) = v 2,m (1, 0) = W 2 (1, 0) = C + T 2 + α1 ln A1 α2 L̄1 /α1 L̄2 .
If labor mobility is allowed, the indirect utility of an immobile worker
 who owns one unit of la-
1 + α ln α L2 /A α L1 + ln 1 + τ 1 max L1 − L̄1 , 0 /L̄1
bor in country 1 (2) is v 1,im = C +
T
2
1
2
2




(v 2,im = C + T 2 + α1 ln A1 α2 L1 /α1 L2 + ln 1 + τ 2 max L2 − L̄2 , 0 /L̄2 ). Mobile workers in country

α3
α3
 
1 prefer to locate in country 1 if and only if w1 / w1 a1L,3
≥ w2 1 − τ 2 / w2 a2L,3
. In equilibrium, α2 w1 L1 = α1 w2 L2 , which implies that mobile workers in country 1 strictly prefer to locate
−α3
−α3
 1
in country 1 if and only if α1 L2 /α2 L1 > 1 − τ 2 1−α3 (A3 ) 1−α3 . If α1 L̄2 /α2 L̄1 > (A3 ) 1−α3 , then
−α3
 1
α1 L2 /α2 L1 > 1 − τ 2 1−α3 (A3 ) 1−α3 holds whenever L2 /L1 ≥ L̄2 /L̄1 . Thus, in equilibrium, it must
60

1
1
2
2
be the case all mobile workers in country 1 locate in country 1, i.e.,
work L ≥αL̄3 and L ≤ L̄ . Mobile

α3
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
ers in country 2 prefer to locate in country 2 if and only if w / w aL,3
≥ w 1 − τ / w aL,3
.

In equilibrium, α2 w1 L1 = α1 w2 L2 , which implies that mobile workers in country 2 prefer to locate
−α3
 1
in country 2 if and only if α1 L2 /α2 L1 ≤ (A3 ) 1−α3 / 1 − τ 1 1−α3 . Therefore, we must distinguish two
−α3
−α3
 1
 1
possible cases. If α1 L̄2 /α2 L̄1 ≤ (A3 ) 1−α3 / 1 − τ 1 1−α3 , then α1 L2 /α2 L1 ≤ (A3 ) 1−α3 / 1 − τ 1 1−α3
holds for all L1 ≥ L̄1 and L2 ≤ L̄2 . Then, in equilibrium, L1 = L̄1 and L̄2 = L2 . If α1 L̄2 /α2 L̄1 >
−α3
−α3
 1
 1

(A3 ) 1−α3 / 1 − τ 1 1−α3 , then α1 L̄2 /α2 L̄1 > (A3 ) 1−α3 / 1 − τ 1 1−α3 > α1 (1 − m) L̄2 /α2 L̄1 + mL̄2
−α3
 1
2 /α L1 = (A ) 1−α3 / 1 − τ 1 1−α3 ,
and, hence, the allocation of mobile workers
is
such
that
α
L
1
2
3


 1


which implies L1 = ψ τ 1 L̄1 + L̄2 and  L2 =
1 − ψ τ1
L̄ + L̄2 , where ψ τ 1
=
−α3
1
1



1−α3
(A3 )−α3 , then
α1 1 − τ 1 1−α3 / α1 1 − τ 1 1−α3 + α2 (A3 ) 1−α3 . Thus, if τ 1 < τ̄ = 1− α2 L̄1 /α1 L̄2









WG1 1, 1, τ 1 = C
+ T 1 + α2 ln α1 1 − ψ τ 1 /A2 α2 ψ τ 1 + ln 1 +
τ 1 ψ τ 1 L̄1 + L̄2 − L̄1 /L̄1

and WG2 1, 1, τ 1
= C + T 2 + α1 ln A1 α2 ψ τ 1 /α1 1 − ψ τ 1 , while if τ 1 ≥ τ̄ , then
1
1
1
1 and W 2 1, 1, τ 1
WG 1, 1, τ
= WG (1, 0) = C + T 1 + α2 ln α1 L̄2 /A2 α
= WG2 (1, 0) =
2 L̄
G
2
1
2
1
1
C + T + α1 ln A1 α2 L̄ /α1 L̄ . Note that WG 1, 1, τ
adopts a maximum for τ 1 = τ ∗ =

α2 

1
1
2
1
1−ψ(τ 1 )
1 ψ(τ )(L̄ +L̄ )−L̄
1
arg max0≤τ 1 ≤τ̄
+
τ
. Finally, we prove that τ ∗ > 0 and find suffi1
1
ψ(τ )
L̄

cient conditions under which τ ∗ < τ̄ . Take the derivative of WG1 1, 1, τ 1 with respect to τ 1 .


 1

1−ψ(τ 1 )
1
2
1

ψ τ
L̄ + L̄
1 − τ (1−α3 )(1−τ 1 ) − L̄1
∂WG1 1, 1, τ 1
α2

=
+
∂τ 1
(1 − α3 ) (1 − τ 1 )
(1 − τ 1 ) L̄1 + τ 1 ψ (τ 1 ) L̄1 + L̄2
Evaluating this derivative at τ 1 = 0 we obtain:
∂WG1



−α3

 α1 L̄2 − α2 (A3 ) 1−α3 L̄1 
1, 1, τ 1 = 0
α2

 
=
+
−α3

∂τ 1
(1 − α3 ) 
1−α
α1 + α2 (A3 ) 3 L̄1

−α3

> (A3 ) 1−α3 , then ∂WG1 1, 1, τ 1 = 0 /∂τ 1 > 0, which implies that τ ∗ > 0. Evaluating
If α1 L̄2 /α2 L̄1 
∂WG1 1, 1, τ 1 /∂τ 1 at τ 1 = τ̄ we obtain:


∂WG1 1, 1, τ 1 = τ̄
L̄1 + L̄2 α2 − τ̄ 1 L̄2

=
∂τ 1
(1 − α3 ) (1 − τ̄ ) L̄1 + L̄2

Note that

∂WG1

whenever



α1 L̄2
α2 L̄1

1,


1, τ 1

= τ̄



/∂τ 1

L̄2 −(L̄1 +L̄2 )α2
L̄2



< 0 if and only if

1
1−α3

−α3



α1 L̄2
α2 L̄1

  L̄2 −

(L̄1 +L̄2 )α2
L̄2



1
1−α3

> (A3 ) 1−α3 , it must be the case that τ ∗ < τ̄ .

Proposition 9 characterizes trade and labor mobility policies.
61

−α3

> (A3 ) 1−α3 . Thus,

Proposition 9 (citizenship for sale). Suppose that A1 >
α1 (1−m)L̄2
α2 (L̄1 +mL̄2 )

α1 (L̄2 +mL̄1 )
α2 (1−m)L̄1

>

α1 L̄2
α2 L̄1

−α3

> (A3 ) α1 +α2 >

> A2 and T 1 > T 2 . Then:

1. (i) Neither trade nor labor mobility; (ii) no trade and immigration fee τ̂ = 1 − e−(T1 −T2 ) > 0; and
(iii) free trade and no labor mobility are always Nash equilibrium outcomes. Moreover:

(a) WG1 (1, 0) , WG1 (0, (1, τ̂ )) > WG1 (0, 0) while WG1 (1, 0) > WG1 (0, (1, τ̂ )) if and only if

α2
L̄1 + τ̂ mL̄2
α1 L̄2
>
L̄1
A2 α2 L̄1
(b) WG2 (1, 0) > WG2 (0, (1, τ̂ )) = WG2 (0, 0).
2. (iv) Free trade and immigration fee τ ∗ = arg max0≤τ ≤τ̄
is a Nash equilibrium outcome if and only if

h

i
1−ψ(τ ) α2
ψ(τ )



1+τ

ψ(τ )(L̄1 +L̄2 )−L̄1
L̄1



>0

"
#

L̄1 + τ̂ mL̄2
α1 (1 − ψ (τ ∗ ))


≥ ln
α2 ln
A2 α2 ψ (τ ∗ )
L̄1 + τ ∗ ψ (τ ∗ ) L̄1 + L̄2 − L̄1



A1 α2 ψ (τ ∗ )
≥
m
max
ln (1 − τ ∗ ) + T 1 − T 2 , 0
α1 ln
α1 (1 − ψ (τ ∗ ))


where ψ (τ ) =

α1 (1−τ )1/1−α3
1/1−α3
α1 (1−τ )
+α2 (A3 )−α3 /1−α3

and τ̄ = 1 − α2 L̄1 /α1 L̄2

1−α3

(A3 )−α3 . Moreover:

(a) WG1 (1, (1, τ ∗ )) ≥ WG1 (1, 0) > WG1 (0, 0) and WG1 (1, (1, τ ∗ )) ≥ WG1 (0, (1, τ̂ )).
(b) WG2 (1, (1, τ ∗ )) ≥ WG2 (1, 0) > WG2 (0, (1, τ̂ )) = WG2 (0, 0)
1

  L̄2 − L̄1 +L̄2 α  1−α
−α3

3
(
) 2
α1 L̄2
1−α3
(c) If α L̄1
>
(A
)
, then τ ∗ < τ̄ , L1 = ψ (τ ∗ ) L̄1 + L̄2 > L̄1 and
3
2
L̄
2

WGj (1, (1, τ ∗ ))

> WGj (1, 0) for j = 1, 2.

Proof :
(λT , λM ) = (0, 0) is always a Nash equilibrium outcome.
−(T1 −T2 ) is a Nash equilibrium outcome. We have already
(λT , λM ) = (0, (1, τ̂ )) with τ̂ = 1 − e
proved that WG1 (0, (1, τ̂ )) > WG1 0, 1, τ 1 for all τ 1 6= τ̂ . Also note that WG1 (0, (1, τ̂ )) = C + T 1 +



2 /L̄1 > W 1 (0, 0) = C + T 1 . Finally, W 2 (0, (1, τ̂ )) = W 2 (0, 0).
ln 1 + 1 − e−(T1 −T2 ) mL̄
G
G
G

(λT , λM ) 
= 0, 1, τ 1 , with τ 1 6= τ̂ is not a Nash equilibrium outcome because WG1 (0, (1, τ̂ )) >
WG1 0, 1, τ 1 .

1 (1, 0) = C +T 1 +α ln α L̄2 /A α L̄1 >
(λT , λM ) = (1, 0) is a Nash equilibrium outcome because
W
2
1
2
2
G

WG1 (0, 0) and WG2 (1, 0) = C + T 2 + α1 ln A1 α2 L̄1 /α1 L̄2 > WG2 (0, 0).
We have already proved that WG1 (0, (1, τ̂ )) > WG1 (0, 0), WG1 (1, 0) > WG1 (0, 0), and WG2 (1,0) >
α
WG2 (0, (1, τ̂ )) = WG2 (0, 0). Finally, note that WG1 (1, 0) > WG1 (0, (1, τ̂ )) if and only if α1 L̄2 /A2 α2 L̄1 2 >
L̄1 + τ̂ mL̄2 /L̄1 , which completes the proof of part 1.
62

(λT , λM ) = (1, (1, τ ∗ )) could
equilibrium outcome. We have already proved that
 be a Nash
1
1 1, 1, τ 1
1 ∈ [0, 1], with strict inequality if τ 1 6= τ ∗ .
WG (1, (1, τ ∗ )) ≥ WG
for
all
τ
Since for

τ 1 ≥ τ̄ , WG1 1, 1, τ 1 = WG1 (1, 0), we have WG1 (1, (1, τ ∗ )) ≥ WG1 (1, 0) > WG1 (0, 0). WG1 (1, (1, τ ∗ )) ≥
W 1 (0, (1, τ̂ )) if and only if
"
#

L̄1 + τ̂ mL̄2
α1 (1 − ψ (τ ∗ ))


α2 ln
≥ ln
A2 α2 ψ (τ ∗ )
L̄1 + τ ∗ ψ (τ ∗ ) L̄1 + L̄2 − L̄1



∗
and we have already proved that WG1 (0, (1, τ̂ )) > WG1 0, 1, τ 1 for all τ 1 6= τ̂ . WG2 (1, (1,
 τ )) =
2
∗
∗
2
2
1
2
C + T + α1 ln [A1 α2 ψ (τ ) /α1 (1 − ψ (τ ))] ≥ WG (1, 0) = C + T + α1 ln A1 α2 L̄ /α1 L̄ because
ψ (τ ∗ ) / (1 − ψ (τ ∗ )) ≥ L̄1 /L̄2 . We have already proved that WG2 (1, 0) > WG2 (0, 0). WG2 (0, (1, τ ∗ )) =
C + m T 1 + ln (1 − τ ∗ ) + (1 − m) T 2 if τ ∗ < τ̂ and WG2 (0, (1, τ ∗ )) = WG2 (0, 0) = C + T 2 if τ ∗ ≥ τ̂ . Thus,
if τ ∗ < τ̂ , then, WG2 (1, (1, τ ∗ )) ≥ WG2 (0, (1, τ ∗ )) if and only if




A1 α2 ψ (τ ∗ )
≥ m ln (1 − τ ∗ ) + T 1 − T 2
α1 ln
∗
α1 (1 − ψ (τ ))

while if τ ∗ ≥ τ̂ , then WG2 (1, (1, τ ∗ )) ≥ WG2 (0, (1, τ ∗ )) if and only if α1 ln [A1 α2 ψ (τ ∗ ) /α1 (1 − ψ (τ ∗ ))] ≥ 0,
which always holds.
Therefore, (λT , λM ) = (0, (1, τ ∗ )) is a Nash equilibrium outcome if and only if
"
#


α1 (1 − ψ (τ ∗ ))
L̄1 + τ̂ mL̄2


α2 ln
≥ ln
A2 α2 ψ (τ ∗ )
L̄1 + τ ∗ ψ (τ ∗ ) L̄1 + L̄2 − L̄1



A1 α2 ψ (τ ∗ )
α1 ln
≥
m
max
ln (1 − τ ∗ ) + T 1 − T 2 , 0
α1 (1 − ψ (τ ∗ ))

(λT , λM ) 
= 1, 1, τ 1 with τ 1 6= τ ∗ is not a Nash equilibrium outcome because WG1 (1, (1, τ ∗ )) >
WG1 1, 1, τ 1 .
We have already proved that when (λT , λM ) = (0, (1, τ ∗ )) is a Nash equilibrium outcome,
WG1 (1, (1, τ ∗ )) ≥ WG1 (1, 0) > WG1 (0, 0), WG1 (1, (1, τ ∗ )) ≥ WG1 (0, (1, τ̂ )), and WG2 (1, (1, τ ∗ )) ≥ WG2 (1, 0).
1

  L̄2 − L̄1 +L̄2 α  1−α
−α3
3
(
) 2
α1 L̄2
1−α3
Also note that if α L̄1
>
(A
)
, then τ ∗ < τ̄ and, hence, WG1 (1, (1, τ ∗ )) >
3
2
L̄
2

WG1

(1, (1, τ̄ )) = WG1 (1, 0) and
that WG2 (1, 0) > WG2 (0, (1, τ̂ ))

WG2 (1, (1, τ ∗ )) > WG2 (1, (1, τ̄ )) = WG2 (1, 0). Finally, we have also proved
= WG2 (0, 0), which completes the proof of part 2. 

63

