                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 FINANCING ENTREPRENEURIAL EXPERIMENTATION

                                        Ramana Nanda
                                     Matthew Rhodes-Kropf

                                      Working Paper 21278
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w21278


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2015




This paper has been written for the NBER's Book Series, Innovation Policy and the Economy, volume
16. We draw extensively on the examples used in William Kerr, Ramana Nanda and Matthew Rhodes-
Kropf (2014) and Ramana Nanda (2015) throughout this chapter. We thank Josh Lerner, Scott Stern,
Navid Bazzazian and participants at the 2015 NBER Innovation Policy and Economy Conference
for helpful comments. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Ramana Nanda and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Financing Entrepreneurial Experimentation
Ramana Nanda and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf
NBER Working Paper No. 21278
June 2015, Revised October 2015
JEL No. G24,L26,O31

                                             ABSTRACT

The fundamental uncertainty of new technologies at their earliest stages implies that it is virtually
impossible to know the true potential of a venture without learning about its viability through a sequence
of investments over time. We show how this process of experimentation can be particularly valuable
in the context of entrepreneurship because most new ventures fail completely, and only a few become
extremely successful. We also shed light on important costs to this process of experimentation, and
demonstrate how these can fundamentally alter both the rate and direction of startup innovation across
industries, regions and periods of time.


Ramana Nanda
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 317
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
rnanda@hbs.edu

Matthew Rhodes-Kropf
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 313
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mrhodeskropf@hbs.edu
                 Financing Entrepreneurial Experimentation

                                              I.   Introduction


  When it was founded in 1999, Google was in many ways a long-shot investment. Its

founders were students, it was entering a space with many established competitors and had

no clear business model. In fact, more than one venture capitalist had turned down the

opportunity to invest in Google at the time. One such firm was Bessemer Ventures, whose

partner David Cowan, on being asked to meet with the two Google founders working in

the garage, is believed to have quipped, “Students? A new search engine? ... How can I

get out of this house without going anywhere near your garage?”

  Not everyone is as candid as about great deals they passed on as Bessemer Ventures,

who have been so successful that they can playfully mock at their ‘anti-portfolio’ of in-

vestments.1 Nevertheless, the example of Google and of Bessemer Ventures frames a key

challenge for policy-makers engaged in entrepreneurship: although entrepreneurship is

widely acknowledged as being central to economic growth, the commercialization of the

most promising ideas is not guaranteed, and depends critically on the ability of entre-

preneurs to raise startup capital. The fundamental uncertainty of new technologies at

their earliest stages implies that it is virtually impossible for financiers to know the true

potential of a new venture. Often the only way to understand its potential is to learn

about its viability through a sequence of investments over time. Investors therefore play

the role of gatekeepers as they decide whether to make an initial investment to learn about

the viability of a radical new idea, how to interpret intermediate results, and whether to

continue or abandon their investment. Costs or constraints to this experimentation can

not only impede entrepreneurship, but also fundamentally alter the trajectory of innova-

tion in the economy by shaping which industries, regions, and time periods see the most

  1 see   http://www.bvp.com/portfolio/antiportfolio
2                                                                                                        MAY 2015


radical innovations.

    In this paper, we synthesize recent research on the role of finance in entrepreneurial

experimentation. Our focus is on the financing of startups that commercialize new tech-

nologies. These startups form a small share of new firms each year, but are central to

the process of creative destruction through their role in creating new industries (such as

automobiles, semi-conductors, biotechnology or the internet) and the introduction of dis-

ruptive innovations in existing industries.2 For example, only about 1,000 of the 500,000

new startups each year in the United States receive a first round of venture capital (VC)

funding, but VC-backed firms account for about half of US IPOs each year. The process

of experimentation across multiple rounds of financing is particularly valuable for such

ventures because most fail completely, and only a few, such as Google, become extremely

successful (Robert E. Hall and Susan E. Woodward (2010)).

    Experimentation allows investors learn about a venture’s potential over time. Impor-

tantly, the ability to abandon investments at an intermediate point, before committing

the full amount of capital, allows investors to finance an initial exploration into an idea

that would not have been funded in an all-or-nothing bet. This is also good for entrepren-

eurs in that it allows more ideas to get an initial round of funding, but also implies that

many projects are shut down early when intermediate information about their prospects is

poor. Viewed from the perspective of experimentation, failure is not necessarily bad if the

best projects are being selected and advanced. In fact, a large number of failed startups

might even be an indication that investors are willing to finance extremely novel, radical,

technologies. Nevertheless, a few thousand individuals working in a few hundred venture

capital firms are largely responsible for choosing and advancing the most radical innova-

    2 This does not diminish the contribution of other startups to productivity growth in the economy. For example,
the vast majority of startups do not commercialize new technologies, but a substantial share of productivity growth
across the economy is shown to arise from the birth of more productive firms and the closure of unproductive firms
rather than just through existing firms becoming more productive. Such firms (over 80% of which are in Construc-
tion, Retail and Wholesale Trade and Services) rely principally on their savings, personal loans or commercial credit
to fund their operations and growth. Banks are the principal financiers for such ventures and are not the focus of
this paper.
                                    EXPERIMENTATION AND FINANCE                                                   3


tions in the US economy, and it is easy to see how financing frictions may lead investors

to systematically overlook, or inefficiently shut down some extremely promising ventures.3

Our paper provides a framework for understanding this process of experimentation and the

sources of financing frictions. This naturally sets up the ways in which policies towards

the financing of experimentation might help alleviate financing constraints for startups

engaged in innovation.

  The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we develop a simple frame-

work that compares an all-or-nothing investment with one where the investor can exper-

iment and abandon the investment at an intermediate stage, to provide an intuition for

the key results. Section 3 examines how the falling cost of an early experiment impact

the type of entrepreneurs who are backed, and sectors that see the most innovation. We

show that investors naturally gravitate to sectors where the cost of experimentation is

lower, independent of the areas where there is the greatest need for innovation, or even

where the supply of innovative ideas are greatest. In Section 4, we consider how the ebbs

and flows of capital interact with the financing of experimentation. We show how even

when the initial experiment goes well, shocks to the availability of capital can impact the

ability of a firm to finance its next stage. The fluxes in capital and investors’ beliefs about

the availability of capital at the next round of funding can have important implications

for whether investors are willing to finance an initial experiment at a given moment in

time. For example, hot financial markets can amplify and even drive innovation in the

real economy, as these are instances in which investors are most likely to finance an initial

exploration into a novel, new technology. Section 5 examines frictions associated with

abandoning investments when intermediate information is negative. Investors may want

to build a reputation as being ‘entrepreneur friendly’, may face organizational resistance

because investors have pet projects or may want to set a policy for being ‘failure tolerant’.

    3 For example, the National Venture Capital Association reports that there were 462 active venture capital firms
in the US in 2010 (Kerr, Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf (2014)).
4                                                                                 MAY 2015


These factors have a bearing on what projects investors may start, and hence organiza-

tional and even institutional factors can drive the extent to which radical innovations are

funded in certain firms or certain regions. Section 6 concludes.


                        II.   Why is Experimentation Important?



    Startups engaged in innovation face fundamental uncertainty associated with their

prospects. A good example of the difficulty in determining how well a new venture will

do comes from Kerr, Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf (2014), who study internal data from a

single large and successful US venture capital firm. They look at ratings the partners at

this firm gave each deal at the time of first investment and study how this score relates

to the ultimate outcome of the same startups. They find that the correlation between

initial scores and ultimate performance of startups was 0.1, showing how even successful

professional investors have a hard time distinguishing among the most promising startups

at the earliest stages of investment. Using similar data from an angel investment group,

Kerr, Lerner and Schoar (2014), find the correlation among the interest levels assigned

to funded deals and their ultimate success was less than 0.1. More generally, that fact

that the majority of venture capital investments fail (nearly 60% of this VC’s investments

returned less than the money invested) is itself indicative of the difficulty in predicting

which firms will be successful and which will fail.

    In this environment of extreme uncertainty, experimentation allows investors and entre-

preneurs to pursue projects that are not feasible in an all-or-nothing bet. A number of

papers on venture capital have demonstrated that financiers of innovative firms want to

stage their investments and learn more about the firm’s potential before investing further,

in order to preserve the real-option to terminate their investment (see Paul Gompers,

1995; Franchesca Cornelli and O. Yosha, 2003; Dirk Bergemann and Ulrich Hege, 2005;

Z. Fluck, K Garrison and S. Myers, 2007; Dirk Bergemann, Ulrich Hege and Liang Peng,
                             EXPERIMENTATION AND FINANCE                                        5


2008). In fact, it is standard for venture capitalists to negotiate control rights that allow

the investors to fire management and/or abandon the project (see Paul Gompers and Josh

Lerner (2004), William A. Sahlman (1990) and Thomas Hellmann (1998)). Even among

venture backed firms that are ‘successful’ Thomas Hellmann and Manju Puri (2002) and

Steven Kaplan, Berk Sensoy and Per Stromberg (2009) show that many end up with CEOs

who are different from the founders. To help demonstrate the key idea we set up a simple

model which we then use as a framework for the remainder of the paper.

                                   PANEL A: ALL OR NOTHING BET

                                                                                   Success:
                                                    1%                             $1 Billion


              Investment:
                 $11 M

                                                     99%                            Fail: $0



                                      PANEL B: STAGED FINANCING


                             Experiment                                Stage 2



                                                                                 Success:
                                                                 10%             $ 1 Billion
                                          Intermediate Results
                                                Positive
                             10%
                                             Invest $11 M                    Fail: Value = 0
                                                                 90%

              Fund the
             Experiment?

                                          Intermediate Results
                             90%                Negative

                                          Abandon Investment



                              Figure 1. Investor’s Decision Tree




  Consider a startup that requires $11 million to commercialize, will be worth $0 with 99%

probability, and will be worth $1 billion (V) with 1% probability. This project will not

be pursued as its expected value is negative (−$1M ), i.e., $11M > 0.01 ∗ $1B. But what

if the entrepreneurs can conduct an experiment that will reveal that the project either

has a 10% chance of working or a zero percent chance of working. Furthermore, assume
6                                                                                                     MAY 2015


this experiment will reveal the more promising news with a 10% probability. Thus, the

unconditional probability of success, 1%, is the same whether or not the entrepreneurs

conduct the experiment. The decision tree of the investor is shown in figure 1.

    The question facing the investor is whether it is worthwhile to finance the initial exper-

iment. Intuition might suggest that since running the experiment increases the amount

the investor has to pay, the experiment is not worth pursuing. However, the value in the

experiment arises because it may prevent the investor from spending $11 million at all.

    The experiment can thus be thought of as an investment that pays off $89 million with

10% probability and pays off $0 with 90% probability (since the investor will not invest

the $11 million if the the results of the experiment are not promising). In our example,

the probability that initial information is positive is 10%, so that the expected value of

the experiment is 10% * $89 million = $8.9 million. Thus, as long as the experiment costs

less than $8.9 million, it should be run.

    We see from this that even though the original investment of $11 million was not a

good idea, an investment of up to $8.9 million followed by an investment of $11 million

if the experiment is successful is a good idea - it is positive expected value. Spending an

additional $8.9 million to learn about the viability of the project is more valuable than

simply directly spending $11 million. This is the power of experimentation.4

    The value of experimentation stems from two sources. The first is the cost of the

experiment. Intuitively, it is easy to see that experiments that are not expensive to run

are more likely to be valuable. The second driver of the value of experimentation is the

amount of information that the experiment generates. More discriminating experiments

generate more information and hence make it easier for an investor to decide whether

to abandon their investment or continue financing the next stage. In an extreme, an

experiment might demonstrate nothing. That is, the probability of earning $1 billion

   4 We emphasize that the value of experimentation is not driven by the specific numbers chosen in this example.
The Appendix provides a formal model to show this.
                             EXPERIMENTATION AND FINANCE                                  7


is the same no matter the experiment’s outcome. Alternatively, the experiment might

provide a great deal of information. In this case, the value of the startup conditional on

intermediate success would be much larger than the value of the startup conditional on

failure. We can think, therefore, of the difference in the value of the startup when the

experiment works and when it fails, as the amount or quality of the information revealed

by the experiment. This difference is larger if the experiment reveals more about what

might happen in the future. Overall, we see that experimentation is very valuable in

situations when relatively small dollars invested can reveal information that results either

in a valuable project going forward or preventing a mistaken investment.

  This simple example can be used to demonstrate the ideas that underlie recent work on

entrepreneurial experimentation and finance and reveal the relevant policy implications.

Given the need to experiment as a backdrop, we focus on three aspects of the financing of

experimentation and the policies they imply. We will start with implications surrounding

the costs of experimentation. Then we will consider how experimentation interacts with

volatile financial markets and the risk a project will not be able to find financing in

the future even if the intermediate information is positive. Finally, we will examine the

benefits and costs surrounding investor tolerance toward early experimental failure when

intermediate information is negative.


  III.   The Falling Costs of Experimentation and the Change in the Financing of

                                        Entrepreneurship



  The above model makes the importance of the costs of experimentation very clear. If an

early experiment can be run cheaply and reveal enough information, then a startup can be

financed that otherwise could not. For example, technologies such as the internet, open

source software, cloud computing, etc., have reduced the costs associated with starting

a new company. This shift has led to new ways to think about entrepreneurship, such
8                                                                                             MAY 2015


as the Lean Startup methodology advocated by Steve Blank and popularized by Eric

Ries (2011). The crux of Lean Startup Methodology is to identify and develop a “minimal

viable products” (MVP). This experimental product seeks to validate as many assumptions

as possible about the viability of the final product before expending enormous effort and

financial resources. The followers of this methodology frequently discuss how to make their

experiments more cost effective, in large part so that they do not need to raise as much

money to pursue their ideas. As shown in the Appendix, a falling cost of experimentation

is particularly valuable for startups that are “long shot bets”. These are startups startups

with low chances of initial success but where an investor can learn a significant amount

from an initial experiment.

    The last two decades have seen dramatically lower costs associated with starting new

firms, particularly in industries that have benefited from the emergence of the Internet,

open source software, and cloud computing. Industry observers suggest that initial exper-

iments to learn about the viability of an idea in these sectors would have cost $5 million

a decade ago, but can be conducted for under $50,000 today. For example, Mark An-

dreessen, a prominent venture capital investor, notes that “In the 90s, if you wanted to

build an Internet company, you needed to buy Sun servers, Cisco networking gear, Oracle

databases, and EMC storage systems... and those companies would charge you a ton of

money even just to get up and running. The new startups today, they don’t buy any of

that stuff... They’re paying somewhere between 100x and 1000x [less] per unit of compute,

per unit of storage, per unit of networking”. Andreessen also notes that the rise of services

such as Amazon’s Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2) have transformed many infrastructure

costs from upfront capital expenditures to subscription services that can scale with a com-

pany as it grows.5 Each of these features has made it significantly cheaper to finance an

initial exploration into the viability of a new idea. However, not all industries have been

   5 Douglas Macmillan, ‘Andreessen: Bubble Believers Don’t Know What They’re Talking About’, Wall Street
Journal, January 3, 2014.
                             EXPERIMENTATION AND FINANCE                                     9


equally affected by the technologies that have led to a fall in the cost of experimentation.

In particular, the advent of Amazon’s elastic cloud compute services (EC2) lowered the

cost of starting businesses in certain technology segments such as computer software and

internet business. However, biotech and medical device firms were logically less impacted

by cloud computing.

  Michael Ewens, Ramana Nanda and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf (2015) use this idea and

compare new firms funded in the 2006-2010 period to those funded in the 2002-2005

period across different industries. Consistent with the predictions of the model, they find

investors are more likely to back unproven founding teams in the post period when the

startup is in an industry segment that benefited from Amazon’s EC2 services. In these

sectors, VCs backed younger founders and fewer serial entrepreneurs - these are startups

that are likely to have a lower chance of success, but where the investor can now learn

a lot about the venture’s ‘traction’ with consumers without a large upfront investment.

These results suggest that the falling cost of experimentation has helped to democratize

entry, particularly among young, unproven founding teams and has allowed for greater

experimentation in certain sectors of the economy.

  Cheeper experimentation also allows more ‘audacious’ and costly projects to be com-

pleted. Going back to the example in Section 2, we saw that an $8.9 million experiment

followed by an $11 million investment had a positive expected value, but if the required

investment in the second stage was any more than $11 million then the project would not

be started. If the cost of the initial experiment dropped to say $5.5 million, this allows

a second stage investment that can cost as much as $45 million. Thus, a relatively small

drop in the cost of the initial experiment (8.9 − 5.5 = 3.4) allows a relatively large increase

in the cost of the project (45 − 11 = 34).

  An interesting example of this is the recent surge in the startups looking to commercialize

nuclear energy technologies. Recent advances have lowered the costs associated with
10                                                                                      MAY 2015


simulating the inside of a nuclear reactor to learn about the viability of a potential new

nuclear technology. This, in turn, makes it possible to finance an initial exploration of

radical new ideas in nuclear startups, despite the extremely large financial commitments

required to build a nuclear reactor (e.g., it takes up to $4 billion to build a test reactor). In

fact, Bill Gates, who made an investment to enable an initial exploration into the viability

of nuclear startup Terrapower, specifically points to advances in supercomputing as the

reason behind a resurgence in startups engaged in nuclear energy innovations in the last

few years.

     The pace of technological progress therefore has a feedback effect on new innovations.

Advances in supercomputers or cloud computing affect the cost of experimentation in

completely different sectors like nuclear energy and consumer internet and make viable

projects that could not have been started in the past. This helps sustain and potentially

increase high rates of technological progress.

     However, to the extent that risk capital is in short supply, the relative fall in the cost of

experimentation can have important consequences for the composition of innovation that

is financed by the private sector. The majority of capital in professionally managed venture

capital firms comes from endowments, pension funds and sovereign wealth funds. These

institutions tend to allocate capital to venture capital investors based on metrics that are

often unrelated to investment opportunities (Sampsa Samila and Olav Sorenson (2011)).

Capital available to take experimental risks and fund new innovations is therefore limited,

particularly in the short run. Thus, investors need to choose which, among many potential

profitable ideas, they want to fund. A fall in the cost of experimentation in some areas

will increase the value of investing in those areas relative to others. Capital will then flow

from areas with more costly experiments to those with less costly experiments. This will

slow the innovation in the areas with less capital and possibly increase the shift in capital

to the area with ever cheeper experiments. This idea may provide an explanation for the
                             EXPERIMENTATION AND FINANCE                                   11


relative dearth of capital is some areas of our economy such as biotech and greentech where

technological advancement seems so important, while technologies related to mobile apps

and social web seem to find abundant capital.

  The greater proportion of startups being financed by less expensive experiments also

leads to changes in the type of financier that fund new ventures. When ventures require

millions and even tens of millions of dollars to start they typically need to be backed by

investors with large pools of capital. When the costs of experimentation plummet there

are a larger number of less expensive experiments that need to be run. This fall in the

cost of experimentation should mean that investors with much smaller pools of capital

can find viable investment opportunities. The last decade has seen a dramatic rise in

angel networks, super-angel funds, accelerators and incubators as well as crowd funding.

Furthermore, a new style of investing has risen that is colloquially referred to as ‘spray and

pray’ in which investors take a very large number of small bets with limited due diligence

and hope that just one or two of these experiments turn out to be extremely successful.

Each of these different types of investors and investing styles is the natural consequence

of the dramatic fall in the costs of starting a new high technology firm. In an economy

with a plethora of very small start up experiments that need to be run, investors naturally

arise to support them. These ‘financial innovations’ help to maximize the impact of the

technological shocks to the cost of experimentation.

  To summarize this section, we emphasize three points related to the cost of experi-

mentation. First, differences across industries in the costs of experimentation and the

ability to learn from experimentation have a bearing on the degree of experimentation

and radical innovation. For example, the very long time frames and costs associated with

learning about a new way to produce clean energy or different approaches to curing cancer

create a dearth of experimentation, despite intense societal interest (Jose-Maria Fernan-

dez, Roger M. Stein and Andrew W. Lo, 2012; David E. Fagnan, Jose-Maria Fernandez,
12                                                                                     MAY 2015


Andrew W. Lo and Roger M. Stein, 2013).

     Second, the pace of technological progress has a feedback effect on new innovations.

As technological advances such as supercomputers or cloud computing diffuse, they have

an effect on the cost of experimentation. The advances make viable projects that had a

negative expected value in the past. However, the falling cost of experimentation will also

pull financiers towards the sectors where the returns from experimentation are greatest.

Sectors where experiments are expensive or not as discriminating in the early stages of a

venture are less attractive to investors and less likely to receive attention from financiers,

independent of their importance for society or the amount of ideas that are available to

be commercialized.

     Third, financial markets will naturally respond to the fall in the costs of experimentation.

New smaller investors and even individuals can more readily participate in a market with

low cost experiments. Note, however, that this market will be rife with failure. Many

will quickly conclude that this is because more junk is being funded by these smaller

unsophisticated investors. However, more experimental projects should be expected to

fail at a higher rate. Thus, failure rates alone will not reveal whether investors are making

more investments or just investing in more radical projects. Instead we must wait to see

the extent to which new radical innovations that change how we live emerge from this

cacophony of experimentation. From the perspective of investors, it is important to note

that most investors in startup ventures will lose their investments entirely, while only a

few will back startups that end up becoming big hits. This is even more likely to be true

when the falling cost of experiments make ‘long shot bets’ viable for a first financing. The

profile of returns from such investments looks very similar to a lottery, suggesting that

transparency into the likely outcomes of investments will be helpful for the larger set of

individuals getting access to equity investments in private ventures through reforms such

as the JOBS Act - that aim to provide unaccredited individuals access to such investments.
                                   EXPERIMENTATION AND FINANCE                                                   13


                                           IV.     Financing Risk


  Having examined how the direct cost of experimentation can impact the composition

of entrepreneurship and innovation, we turn next to challenges associated with the act of

staged financing. We first look at a how staging investments can impose a challenge even

when intermediate information from the experiment is positive.

  Financing available for startups engaged in innovation is notoriously volatile (Gom-

pers and Lerner, 2004; Steven Kaplan and Antoinette Schoar, 2005; Paul Gompers, Anna

Kovner, Josh Lerner and David Scharfstein, 2008). Entrepreneurs and venture capital

investors constantly worry about these fluxes in capital and refer to them as financing

risk: the risk that the survival of an otherwise healthy startup might be threatened by a

negative shock to the supply of capital in its sector when it is looking for the next round

of funding and hence derail its progress.6 This worry seems rational given the ebbs and

flows of capital that have occurred within different venture sectors at different times.

  Ramana Nanda and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf (2014) explicitly model the response to

financing risk by venture capital investors and provide a theoretical framework for why

investors’ response impacts the most novel technologies in the economy. They show that

investors can respond to financing risk by providing firms more upfront funding, hence

making startups less vulnerable to the future state of the capital markets. The investor

response can effectively eliminate financing risk, but it also comes at a cost: providing

firms greater upfront funding reduces investors’ ability to abandon their investment in

startups if intermediate information on its prospects is poor. In fact, the value of the lost

real option can be high enough that it makes the investment unviable. They show how this

tradeoff between wanting to protect firms from financing risk and wanting to preserve the

option to abandon the investment is most salient for firms engaged in radical innovations.

   6 Large firms who finance with debt and face a similar risk refereed to as rollover risk when trying to issue new
bonds to replace maturing bonds (Viral Acharya, Douglas Gale and Tanju Yorulmazer, 2011; Zhiguo He and Wei
Xiong, 2012b,a).
14                                                                                     MAY 2015


Their model therefore predicts that the startups most susceptible to financing risk are the

ones commercializing radical innovations. These are the ventures that are most likely to

be funded when financing risk is low and most likely to be constrained when financing risk

is high.

     The insight from Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf (2014) can be seen in the context of our

model by noting that financing risk reduces the probability that a firm will receive the

next round of funding and hence is equivalent to a less informative experiment. That is, it

reduces the value of experimentation. Hence, the types of startups that are funded when

financing risk is high are safer, less novel ones. This fits the intuition that good, solid firms

are funded when capital is not freely available. The results also suggest, however, that

investors are more willing to experiment in boom times, so that these are times when more

novel, experimental startups are financed. Startups funded in boom times should be more

likely to fail (when investors exercise their abandonment options), but also likely to have

bigger successes. Many take the fact that failure rates among venture backed companies

are higher during boom times as evidence of lower quality investments, driven by a fall in

investor discipline. Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf (2014) note, however, that times of greater

experimentation would also be associated with increased failure rates. What distinguishes

novel startups from worse investments is that the few that succeeded are more likely to

be transformational.

     Figure 1 from Ramana Nanda and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf (2013) (here reproduced

as figure 2) provides intuition for the idea. The image on the right of figure 2 shows

the standard expectation of what occurs during a boom - the distribution of expected

investment payoffs essentially ‘shifts’ left (from the dashed line to the solid line) resulting

in more failures and lower expected payoffs. The image on the left of figure 2 depicts the

alternative in which more experimental projects are completed in hot markets. As can be

seen, the failure rate also increases in this instance but extreme success also become more
                                   EXPERIMENTATION AND FINANCE                                     15


                 Ex ante risky investments                         Ex ante worse investments




                                                     Probability
   Probability




                               Startups funded
                                in hot markets




                                    Ex post Payoff                                Ex post Payoff


Figure 2. Distinguishing risky investments from worse investments. The figure depicts the ex post
distribution of outcomes for investments that are riskier versus worse ex ante.




likely. While the expected value of investments in hot markets may be lower, higher, or the

same, what should differ is that the outcomes will be more in the tails of the distribution

- higher failure rates and more extreme successes.

  Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf (2013) examine startups whose initial investment from VCs

occurred between 1984 and 2004, and study how the financing landscape when the startup

was initially funded related to its ultimate outcome. They find, consistent with conven-

tional wisdom, that startups funded in ‘hot’ markets were more likely to fail. However,

conditional on an IPO, firms financed in more active times had higher valuations when

they went public, controlling for the level of the stock market on the day of their IPO.

Among firms that had an IPO, those funded in hot markets also filed more patents and

their patents were more highly cited. This suggest that firms funded in hot markets were

more risky, novel investments that were more likely to fail but conditional on success were

more innovative.

  Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf (2013) find that this difference does not stem purely from the
16                                                                                      MAY 2015


types of investors who are active in hot or cold markets; the same investors, including

the most experienced investors, change their investments towards novel technologies at

times when financing risk is low. Furthermore, the authors show that this change is not

just driven by a response to the arrival of new technologies. Looking at the aspect of hot

markets that are exogenous to the arrival of new technologies, they find that increases in

the availability of capital play a causal role in funding novel technologies, consistent with

the notion that investors are more willing to experiment with an initial funding of such

firms at times when financing risk is low. This is a different way to think about investment

cycles in venture capital, as it shows that cycles in the financial markets can amplify and

even drive innovation in the ‘real economy’.


     Research on financing risk for startups has also focused on how investors and startups

can overcome the challenges associated with boom and bust cycles in the availability of

finance. Incumbent firms that acquire promising startups can play an important role

in reducing financing risk. Vibrant competition among incumbents for the underlying

technology of startups can allow startups to be acquired by incumbents if there are shocks

to the supply of capital, without it being a firesale. This in turn makes it attractive

for venture capital investors to fund an initial exploration into startups, knowing that if

intermediate information is positive, there will be a way to finance the technology even if

there is a shock to the supply of capital. Furthermore, a vibrant market for ideas, where the

startup is able to license or sell their technology in the event that it is doing well is critical

to reducing financing risk (Gans, Hsu and Stern 2001). From a policy perspective, it also

seems important to distinguish between bubbles in asset prices and bubbles of activity

around the introduction of new technologies (William H. Janeway (2012)). Anecdotally,

financial market activity has been linked to revolutionary new technologies, but is usually

seen as a response to, rather than a driver of, radical new technologies. This work suggests

that in fact financial market activity can lead to more innovation, making it important
                            EXPERIMENTATION AND FINANCE                                  17


not to diffuse bubbles of activity in technology investing. This work suggests that some

extremely novel but capital intensive technologies may in fact need ‘hot’ financial markets

to get through the initial period of diffusion because otherwise the financing risk for them

is too extreme.


                                  V.    Failure Tolerance



  Having discussed constraints to experimentation when intermediate information is pos-

itive, we now turn to costs and constraints related to experimentation that arise when

intermediate information is negative.

  From an investor’s perspective, the benefit of running an experiment stems from an abil-

ity to abandon the investment if intermediate information is poor. However, this means

that an entrepreneur may find themselves rapidly out of work when the startup is shut

down. Many entrepreneurs do not like this scenario and look for investors willing to allow

them a second go if intermediate information is negative, or even look for investors who

are willing to fund the project more fully up front. In fact, in an extreme, entrepreneurs

may not be willing to take an investment from investors who have a reputation for ex-

ercising their abandonment options. A number of empirical papers consider the impact

on innovation of policies that create a tolerance for failure to motivate agents to engage

in experimentation (M. Burkart, D. Gromb and F. Panunzi, 1997; Viral Acharya and K.

Subramanian, 2009; Gustavo Manso, 2011; Daniel Ferreira, Gustavo Manso and Andre

Silva, 2011; Philippe Aghion, John Van Reenen and Luigi Zingales, 2009; Xuan Tian and

Tracy Yue Wang, 2014).

  Ramana Nanda and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf (2015) note that investors and policy mak-

ers cannot set an optimal failure tolerance policy on a project-by-project basis. Instead

there are many reasons why a single policy will be fixed in advance and apply to all

projects they choose to pursue. For example, any investor in innovation may desire to
18                                                                                              MAY 2015


foster a reputation of entrepreneurial friendly.7 They may do so by committing not to

shut down projects quickly. Alternatively, a company culture or level of bureaucracy will

apply to all projects. Or, for example, a government looking to stimulate innovation may

pass laws making it harder to fire employees. These levels of ‘failure tolerance’ will apply

to all employees, regardless of the project. Put differently a principal often has an ‘inno-

vation strategy’ that is set ex ante—one that is a blanket policy that covers all projects in

the principal’s portfolio. This preset policy, culture or bureaucracy may then affect what

projects the principal chooses to pursue. These policies however can have unintended

consequences by changing the types of startups investors are willing to back in the first

place. That is, investors who commit not to shut down a project when intermediate in-

formation is negative will be more likely to startup projects where there is less variance in

the expected value following the initial experiment. That is investors who are more failure

tolerant will be less likely to back more novel, experimental projects.

     More generally, this work implies that formal and informal institutions in an economy

can play an important role in the level of innovation through their role in promoting the

amount of experimentation that investors undertake. First, certain financial intermediaries

are, by design, limited in the amount of experimentation they can engage in. Banks, for

example, do not share proportionately in the benefits when a startup does extremely

well but do suffer the losses. They are therefore much less likely to invest in startups

where the outcomes might vary significantly. Indeed Black and Gilson (2000) argue that

bank oriented economies are less likely to encourage startups engaged in innovation. In

a similar vein, regulations surrounding the amount of money that can be committed by

pension funds to asset classes such as venture capital can have important implications

for the amount of capital available to support the financing of experimentation (Samuel

   7 For example, the manifesto of the VC firm the Founders Fund (investors in Facebook) reads “companies
can be mismanaged, not just by their founders, but by VCs who kick out or overly control founders in an at-
tempt to impose ‘adult supervision.’ VCs boot roughly half of company founders from the CEO position within
three years of investment. Founders Fund has never removed a single founder...” (emphasis added)
http://www.foundersfund.com/the-future
                             EXPERIMENTATION AND FINANCE                                   19


Kortum and Josh Lerner (2000)).

  Second, policies that are aimed at motivating experimentation by entrepreneurs can

limit the degree to which investors are willing to finance this experimentation. For exam-

ple, lenient bankruptcy laws may encourage entrepreneurs to take on bolder experiments,

but at the same time make investors less willing to fund the experimentation since their

return if things go badly is reduced (Isin Guler (2007b) Isin Guler (2007a), Nanda and

Rhodes-Kropf (2015), Geraldo Cerqueiro, Deepak Hegde, Mara Fabiana Penas and Robert

Seamans (2013)). On a similar note, employment protection laws might encourage em-

ployees in large companies to engage in more experimentation, but can at the same time

limit the attractiveness for venture capital investors, who need to hire and fire employees

to effectively engage in experimentation (Ant Bozkaya and William R. Kerr (2014)).

  Finally, cultural institutions can have important interactions with the formal institu-

tional environment and with the organizational strategies of investors. Cultures where

there is a high stigma of failure are ones where entrepreneurs are less likely to want financ-

ing from investors with a reputation for shutting down projects. This can lead investors

to pick more failure tolerant strategies, and in doing so, only finance the less experimental

startups in the economy.


                                     VI.   Conclusion



  Entrepreneurship plays a central role in economic growth, but startups need to access

finance to succeed. Much prior research on the financing of startups has focused on frictions

that prevent capital from reaching the exante most promising startups. Recent research in

entrepreneurial finance complements this work by focusing on another possible source of

financing frictions: the fundamental uncertainty facing high-tech startups in their earliest

stages, where neither the entrepreneur nor the investor knows about the true potential

of the venture without investing to learn about the viability of the idea. In this context
20                                                                                     MAY 2015


of extreme uncertainty, multi-stage financing allows investors to learn about a venture’s

potential over time, without committing the full amount upfront. These real options can

be particularly valuable in the context of entrepreneurship because most new ventures fail

completely, and only a few go on to become extremely successful.

     This paper has shown how constraints to staged-financing reduce the value of these

real options and hence influence the degree to which investors can effectively experiment.

First we have shown how differences in the costs of experimentation across sectors can

strongly influence the startups that profit-seeking investors choose to fund, irrespective

of their importance to society. Some projects, where the costs of experimentation are

too high to be borne by profit-seeking investors, but where the returns to society are

high are therefore better off undertaken in setting such as academia or the government.

Indeed, even when the cost of experimentation falls, the relative pace of falling costs

across sectors can disproportionately lead private capital into sectors where the returns

from experimentation are higher.

     Second, we have also shown how the process of staged financing can itself impose certain

costs to financiers funding experimentation. Formal regulations and informal cultural

institutions that make it harder to abandon investments when intermediate information is

bad can lead investors to only finance startups where the value of abandonment options is

low. These are startups with safer, less novel innovations with the implication that regions

where it is harder to engage in experimentation are likely to see fewer startups engaged

in innovation.

     Finally, potential shocks to the availability of capital when the firm raises its next round

of funding can reduce the value of staged financing. The firms for whom staging is most

beneficial are the most novel startups in the economy, which is why startups engaged in

innovation are most vulnerable to the state of the financial markets. Indeed, we have

shown that cycles in the financial markets can amplify and drive innovation in the real
                            EXPERIMENTATION AND FINANCE                                   21


economy. In fact, some extremely novel but capital intensive technologies may in fact need

hot financial markets to get through the initial period of diffusion because otherwise the

financing risk for them is too extreme.

  Overall, these insights also suggest caution in trying to prevent failure of startup ven-

tures. Failure is a natural part of the experimental process, and in fact, extreme failure

and extreme success may be two sides of the same coin. This fact is particularly important

to understand in the context of recent regulation allowing crowd-funding and the external

environment that has seen a dramatic fall in the cost of early experiments. Our framework

highlights that startups that become viable investments when the cost of experimentation

falls are likely to be more “long shot bets”. While democratizing access to private equity

investment is important, policy makers should note that the investments made by crowds

of investors are going to be more likely to fail - precisely because these are the marginal

“long shot bets” that have become viable investments with the falling cost of experimen-

tation. It seems important that crowds of individuals making angel investments in early

stage startups are given the information that helps them understand their odds of success

and the implications it has for their investment portfolios.


                                     VII.   Appendix

  In this section, we provide a more formal description of the framework outlined in the
text. Consider the following investment: A startup requires $X to commercialize its
technology that may or may not work. With a probability p it will be successful and
worth V while with probability 1 − p it will be worth nothing. The expected value of the
project is pV − X. Thus this project will not be financed if X > pV .
  Instead, imagine that the entrepreneur can conduct an experiment before fully funding
the startup. This might entail the building of a prototype, a market validation, or an
FDA regulated Phase I trial of a new drug. The likelihood that the experiment generates
positive intermediate information is pE , while the likelihood of intermediate information
being negative is (1 − pE ). If results from the experiment look promising (the Good
outcome), the chance of ultimate success is pG , while if the results from the experiment are
not promising (the Bad outcome), the chance of success is pB . The experiment costs $Y to
22                                                                                       MAY 2015


                                                                              Success,
                                                                      pG
                                                                              Payoff V
                                                 Success, S
                                                 Invest $X?   Yes
                                         PE              No         1 – pG    Failure,
                                                                              Payoff 0
                  Experiment $Y? Yes
                                                        End
                         No
                                                                              Success,
                                                                      pB
                                       1 – pE                                 Payoff V
                                                 Failure, F
                                                 Invest $X?   Yes
                                                        No           1 - pB   Failure,
                                                                              Payoff 0
                                                       End
                                                                              Success,
                                                                      p
                                                                              Payoff V
                                                 Invest $X?
                                                              Yes
                                                         No          1-p      Failure,
                                                                              Payoff 0
                                                        End


                                       Figure 3. Investor’s Decision Tree




run. To be equivalent to the project when no experiment is run pG ∗ pE + pB ∗ (1 − pE ) = p,
i.e., the probability of success is the same whether or not the experiment is run. Thus,
the experiment reveals information about the quality of the project. The experiment is
valuable anytime that:


             p ∗ V − X < pE ∗ (pG ∗ V − X) + (1 − pE )M ax[pB ∗ V − X, 0] − Y                 (1)


i.e. when the expected value without the experiment is less than the expected value with
the experiment. When is this true? This cannot hold, for example, for any project that has
a positive expected value even after the experiment fails. In this case M ax[pB ∗V −X, 0] =
pB ∗ V − X. Since pG ∗ pE + pB ∗ (1 − pE ) = p we see that pE ∗ (pG ∗ V − X) + (1 − pE )(pB ∗
V − X) = p ∗ V − X and running the experiment really is just a waste of resources. This is
because it changes no decision as the investor invests $X no matter what the experiment
reveals. However, if pB ∗ V − X < 0 then the investor would like to avoid investing when
the true probability of success is pB . The investor would therefore be willing to pay to
learn whether the probability is pG or pB . How much the investor is willing to pay depends
on how much the investor learns from the experiment.
     In an extreme, an experiment might demonstrate nothing, i.e., V ∗ pG = V ∗ pB . That
is, the probability of earning V is the same no matter the experiment’s outcome. Alter-
                                   EXPERIMENTATION AND FINANCE                                                 23


natively, the experiment might provide a great deal of information. In this case V ∗ pG
would be much larger than V ∗ pB . We can think, therefore, of V ∗ pG − V ∗ pB as the
amount or quality of the information revealed by the experiment. V ∗ pG − V ∗ pB is larger
if the experiment revealed more about what might happen in the future.8 Note that the
experiment is not more or less important if the project is riskier - a risker project might be
one with a larger V and smaller probabilities of success, pG and pB - but the information
revealed by the experiment, V ∗ pG − V ∗ pB , could be the same. Thus a project with
valuable experiment and the risk of the project are related but not the same. Overall,
we see that experimentation is very valuable in situations when relatively small dollars
invested can reveal information that results either in a valuable project going forward or
preventing a mistaken investment.
  We can use equation (1) to see what lowering the cost of experimentation allows from
the perspective of investors. An experiment is valuable if the expected payoff from the
experiment is both greater than zero and greater than the expected payoff without the
experiment -


                               p ∗ V − X < pE ∗ (pG ∗ V − X) − Y > 0                                          (2)

  Thus, if Y falls then some projects that would not have been done (projects such that
p ∗ V − X < 0 and pE ∗ (pG ∗ V − X) − Y < 0) can now be run. These are projects
with small probabilities of success (p) but where the value of the abandonment option
is high (V ∗ pG − V ∗ pB is large). Put differently, a lower cost of experimentation is
particularly valuable for startups with low chances of success but where an investor can
learn a significant amount from an initial experiment.
  This framework can also be used to understand the costs and constraints to staged
financing. The insight from Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf (2014), that financing risk leads to
less innovative startups being funded, can be seen in the context of our model by noting
that financing risk reduces the probability that a firm will receive the next round of funding
and hence is equivalent making the first stage of the experiment less informative. That
is, it reduces the value of experimentation. Hence, the types of startups that are funded
when financing risk is high are safer, less novel ones.
  Including a cost of early failure for the entrepreneur if intermediate information is neg-
ative reduces the value of experimentation for investors, even though they do not directly
pay the failure costs. This is because the financier and entrepreneur must negotiate over
   8 Note that we can think of p
                                 G and pB as posterior probabilities with a prior of p. Thus, one special case are
martingale beliefs with prior expected probability p and updating follows Bayes Rule. In this case projects with
weaker priors would have more valuable experiments.
24                                                                                 MAY 2015


any surplus generated by the project. The loss from early failure lowers the entrepreneur’s
expected payoff. If the total expected value of the project does not generate enough to
cover the costs borne by both the entrepreneur and investor then the entrepreneur and
investor will not be able to find a deal that will induce them to both participate. The
deals where they do agree will be ones that will tend to be less innovative, so that by
committing to be failure tolerant, investors will shift the projects they fund away from the
most innovative projects in the economy.
                           EXPERIMENTATION AND FINANCE                             25


                                      REFERENCES

Acharya, Viral, and K. Subramanian. 2009. “Bankruptcy Codes and Innovation.”
  Review of Financial Studies, 22: 4949 – 4988.

Acharya, Viral, Douglas Gale, and Tanju Yorulmazer. 2011. “Rollover risk and
  market freezes.” Journal of Finance, 66: 11771209.

Aghion, Philippe, John Van Reenen, and Luigi Zingales. 2009. “Innovation and
  Institutional Ownership.” Harvard University working paper.

Bergemann, Dirk, and Ulrich Hege. 2005. “The Financing of Innovation: Learning
  and Stopping.” RAND Journal of Economics, 36: 719–752.

Bergemann, Dirk, Ulrich Hege, and Liang Peng. 2008. “Venture Capital and Se-
  quential Investments.” Working Paper.

Bozkaya, Ant, and William R. Kerr. 2014. “Labor Regulations and European Venture
  Capital.” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 23: 776–810.

Burkart, M., D. Gromb, and F. Panunzi. 1997. “Large Shareholders, Monitoring,
  and the Value of the Firm.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112: 693 – 728.

Cerqueiro, Geraldo, Deepak Hegde, Mara Fabiana Penas, and Robert Sea-
  mans. 2013. “Debtor Rights, Credit Supply, and Innovation.” SSRN Working Paper
  2246982.

Cornelli, Franchesca, and O. Yosha. 2003. “Stage Financing and the Role of Con-
  vertible Securities.” Review of Economic Studies, 70: 1–32.

Ewens, Michael, Ramana Nanda, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf. 2015. “En-
  trepreneurship and the Cost of Experimentation.” Harvard Business School Working
  paper no. 15-070.

Fagnan, David E., Jose-Maria Fernandez, Andrew W. Lo, and Roger M. Stein.
  2013. “Can Financial Engineering Cure Cancer?” American Economic Review: Papers
  and Proccedings, 103(3): 406–411.

Fernandez, Jose-Maria, Roger M. Stein, and Andrew W. Lo. 2012. “Commercial-
  izing Biomedical Research Through Securitization Techniques.” Nature Biotechnology,
  30: 395–400.
26                                                                               MAY 2015


Ferreira, Daniel, Gustavo Manso, and Andre Silva. 2011. “Incentives to Innovate
     and The Decision to Go Public or Private.” London School of Economics working paper.

Fluck, Z., K Garrison, and S. Myers. 2007. “Venture Capital Contracting: Staged
     Financing and Later-Stage Syndication of Venture Capital Investments.” MIT Working
     paper.

Gompers, Paul. 1995. “Optimal Investment, Monitoring, and the Staging of Venture
     Capital.” Journal of Finance, 50: 1461–1489.

Gompers, Paul, and Josh Lerner. 2004. The Venture Capital Cycle. Cambridge, MA
     and London:MIT Press.

Gompers, Paul, Anna Kovner, Josh Lerner, and David Scharfstein. 2008. “Ven-
     ture capital investment cycles: The impact of public markets.” Journal of Financial
     Economics, 87: 1–23.

Guler, Isin. 2007a. “An Empirical Examination of Management of Real Options in the
     U.S. Venture Capital Industry.” Advances in Strategic Management, 24: 485–506.

Guler, Isin. 2007b. “Throwing Good Money After Bad? A Multi-Level Study of Sequen-
     tial Decision Making in the Venture Capital Industry.” Administrative Science Quar-
     terly, 52: 248–285.

Hall, Robert E., and Susan E. Woodward. 2010. “The Burden of the Nondiversifiable
     Risk of Entrepreneurship.” American Economic Review, 100: 1163 – 1194.

Hellmann, Thomas. 1998. “The Allocation of Control Rights in Venture Capital Con-
     tracts.” RAND Journal of Economics, 29: 57–76.

Hellmann, Thomas, and Manju Puri. 2002. “Venture Capital and the Professional-
     ization of Start-Up Firms: Empirical Evidence.” Journal of Finance, 57(1): 169–197.

He, Zhiguo, and Wei Xiong. 2012a. “Dynamic debt runs.” Review of Financial Studies,
     25(6): 1799–1843.

He, Zhiguo, and Wei Xiong. 2012b. “Rollover Risk and Credit Risk.” Journal of
     Finance, 67(2): 391–429.

Janeway, William H. 2012. Doing Capitalism in the Innovation Economy. Cambridge
     University Press.
                           EXPERIMENTATION AND FINANCE                               27


Kaplan, Steven, and Antoinette Schoar. 2005. “Private Equity Performance: Re-
  turns, Persistence and Capital Flows.” Journal of Finance, 60(4): 1791–1823.

Kaplan, Steven, Berk Sensoy, and Per Stromberg. 2009. “Should Investors Bet on
  the Jockey or the Horse? Evidence from the Evolution of Firms from Early Business
  Plans to Public Companies.” Journal of Finance, 64(1): 75 – 115.

Kerr, William, Ramana Nanda, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf. 2014. “En-
  trepreneurship as Experimentation.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28: 25–48.

Kortum, Samuel, and Josh Lerner. 2000. “Assessing the impact of venture capital on
  innovation.” Rand Journal of Economics, 31: 674–92.

Manso, Gustavo. 2011. “Motivating Innovation.” Journal of Finance, 66(5): 1823 –
  1860.

Nanda, Ramana. 2015. “Experimentation and Real Options in Entrepreneurial Finan-
  cel.” Harvard Business School Note 815-056, 1–35.

Nanda, Ramana, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf. 2013. “Investment Cycles and
  Startup Innovation.” Journal of Financial Economics, 110(2): 403–418.

Nanda, Ramana, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf. 2014. “Financing Risk and Innova-
  tion.” Harvard University working paper.

Nanda, Ramana, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf. 2015. “Innovation Policies.” HBS
  Working Paper.

Ries, Eric. 2011. The Lean Startup: How Today’s Entrepreneurs Use Continuous Inno-
  vation to Create Radically Successful Businesses. Crown Business Publishing.

Sahlman, William A. 1990. “The Structure and Governance of Venture-Capital Orga-
  nizations.” Journal of Financial Economics, 27: 473–521.

Samila, Sampsa, and Olav Sorenson. 2011. “Venture capital, entrepreneurship and
  economic growth.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 93: 338–349.

Tian, Xuan, and Tracy Yue Wang. 2014. “Tolerance for Failure and Corporate Inno-
  vation.” Review of Financial Studies, 27(1): 211–255.
