                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            DISCOUNTING PENSION LIABILITIES:
                                 FUNDING VERSUS VALUE

                                         Jeffrey R. Brown
                                        George G. Pennacchi

                                        Working Paper 21276
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21276


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2015




We thank Joshua Rauh and participants in the 2015 NBER conference on Retirement and Health Benefits
in the Public Sector for helpful feedback and suggestions. Disclosure: Brown is a trustee for TIAA,
a financial services company that provides services to numerous public sector retirement plans. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Jeffrey R. Brown and George G. Pennacchi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Discounting Pension Liabilities: Funding versus Value
Jeffrey R. Brown and George G. Pennacchi
NBER Working Paper No. 21276
June 2015
JEL No. G20,H55,J26

                                              ABSTRACT

We argue that the appropriate discount rate for pension liabilities depends on the objective. In particular,
if the objective is to measure pension under- or over- funding, a default-free discount rate should always
be used, even if the liabilities are themselves not default-free. If, instead, the objective is to determine
the market value of pension benefits, then it is appropriate that discount rates incorporate default
risk. We also discuss the choice of a default-free discount rate. Finally, we show how cost-of-living
adjustments (COLAs) that are common in public pensions can be accounted for and valued in this
framework.


Jeffrey R. Brown
Department of Finance
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
515 East Gregory Drive
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
brownjr@illinois.edu

George G. Pennacchi
College of Business
University of Illinois
4041 BIF, Box 25, MC520
515 E. Gregory Drive
Champaign, IL 61820
gpennacc@illinois.edu
                       Discounting Pension Liabilities: Funding versus Value
                             Jeffrey R. Brown and George G. Pennacchi


1.      Introduction

        There is a long-standing debate among financial economists, pension actuaries and other

interested parties about the appropriate rate to use for discounting future pension liabilities. The

Government Accounting Standards Board (GASB) has long used rules that relate the discount

rate to the expected return on pension plan assets, a position that has been defended by numerous

actuaries and plan sponsors. 3 In contrast, most financial economists argue that liabilities should

be discounted using a rate that reflects the risk of the liabilities (Novy-Marx and Rauh, 2011;

Brown and Wilcox 2009; Lucas and Zeldes 2009; Andonov, Bauer, and Cremers, 2014). In the

special case where the public pension benefits are considered free of default risk, such as in the

presence of strong constitutional protections, financial economists have argued that the

appropriate rate to use is a default-free one (e.g., Brown and Wilcox 2009).

         In this paper, we make a simple but important conceptual point. We argue that there is

an important difference between the appropriate measure of a plan’s funding status and the

appropriate measure of its market value. Specifically, we argue that the correct discount rate for

determining a plan’s funding status is the default-free rate: in a departure from prior studies in

financial economics, we argue that this is true regardless of whether the liabilities are default-

free or not. In contrast, a default-risky discount rate is the appropriate rate to use for measuring

the market value of the liabilities.

3
  In 2012, GASB issued new standards for discounting public pension liabilities. Whereas the previous standards
discounted liabilities with the expected return on plan assets, the new standard uses a “blended rate.” Roughly
speaking, the new standard permits plans to use the expected return assumption for discounting so long as they are
adequately funded using that discount rate. For underfunded plans, the standard calls for discounting the unfunded
portion using a default free rate. As with the prior standard, the new GASB standard has no grounding in financial
theory. As such, it is not clear what question, if any, the resulting measure of funding actually answers.
                                                   2


        Measuring underfunding and placing a market value on liabilities are clearly two distinct

concepts, and are useful for answering different questions. For example, the use of a default-free

discount rate is informative to participants who want to know how much money the plan would

need to be assured that the plan will be able to pay promised benefits. This would also be a

relevant measure if the plan wished to offload its liabilities to an insurance company that intends

to make good on the future benefit payments. For example, a number of defined benefit (DB)

plans, including General Motors, have recently transferred their currently-accrued pension

liabilities to an insurance company (Prudential, in the GM case) that will then provide the

retirement annuities to the sponsor’s employees. The insurance company taking over the plan

would rationally require the sponsor to pay the difference between the accrued plan liabilities

discounted at the default-free rate and the plan’s assets (plus any administrative costs). If the

insurance company received this payment along with the plan’s current assets, it would permit

the insurance company to invest in exactly those default-free securities that guarantees its ability

to meet future obligations to the sponsor’s employees. Thus, for the purposes of determining how

much it would cost the sponsor to sell off its pension liabilities, discounting the liabilities at the

default-free rate is needed to determine the payment to the acquirer of the liabilities.

        However, there are also cases for which the market value of the liability is important.

Current or potential plan participants might want to know the market value of pension liabilities

(rather than the promised value) when they are making decisions about the value of pension

benefits being offered by two different employers. Current employees may also want to know the

market value of pension promises when they are deciding when to retire: if their employer is

likely to default on pension promises, they may want to work longer to increase their savings

from current salary. The market value of a DB plan’s promises would also be informative to
                                                  3


individuals faced with a choice between a DB and a DC plan, a choice that a number of states

provide to their public employees.

       Prior research analyzing the financial condition of public pension funds often fails to

distinguish between accounting for pension liabilities to compute a pension fund’s level of

(under-) funding and determining the market value of a pension fund’s liabilities. We

demonstrate that these are distinct exercises, though previous work frequently treats them as

being the same. Specifically, it has been common in academic studies to justify the use of a

pension discount rate based on the likelihood that a state or local government will default on its

pension obligations: a higher probability of default would warrant a higher discount rate.

       We apply the standard Merton (1974) structural credit risk model to the context of a

defined-benefit pension fund. We show that discounting the liability with a default-free rate has

the attractive property that the size of the total liability (funded plus unfunded) is not affected by

the plan’s funding status. We further show that it has the desirable property that the measure of

fundedness declines to zero as plan assets fall to zero. For comparison, we show that the market

value of the liability can have odd properties as a system of funding measurement: specifically,

the size of the total (funded plus unfunded) liability can vary with the degree of funding, and that

funding levels asymptotically approach 100 percent as assets approach zero.

       Our argument, therefore, is that the appropriate measure of funding uses default-risk-free

rates. This naturally leads to the practical question of how to measure default-free discount rates.

There are at least three reasons that the most commonly-used proxies – the yields on debt

securities issued by the federal government – are occasionally criticized for being biased

measures of the economy’s default-free rates. First, government bonds are not truly default-free.

Although the risk of a U.S. government default is not high, it is also not zero, as is evidenced by
                                                 4


the very existence of a market for credit default swaps on government bonds. Second, there are

state income tax advantages to U.S. government bonds, suggesting that some investors in high

marginal tax rate states might be willing to accept a lower yield compared to other securities with

the same default risk. Third, government bond yields might be lowered by their high liquidity

relative to other fixed income assets. Our paper discusses these factors and their quantitative

importance as a way of bounding the measure of a default-free rate. In the end, we find that the

effects are roughly offsetting and that Treasury yields are a reasonable approximation to a

default-free rate.

        Having established that the appropriate way to discount pension liabilities for purposes of

measuring funding status is to use (a proxy for) the default-free rate, we then turn to the question

of how to incorporate cost-of-living adjustments (COLAs) that are common in public sector

plans. Were COLAs pure CPI-indexation, and were there a deep market for CPI-indexed default-

free bonds available in the economy, one could simply use the term structure of default-free real

yields on these indexed bonds, rather than the term structure of default-free nominal yields.

However, as we discuss below, most public pensions in the U.S. do not use straight CPI

indexation for their COLAs. Rather, COLAs are contractually subject to upper and lower

bounds (caps and floors) on inflation. Thus, we discuss how one can use market prices of

inflation derivatives to compute the default-free values of these promised, state contingent

COLAs.

        This paper proceeds as follows: In section 2, we provide a brief discussion of issues that

arise when choosing an appropriate discount rate for public pensions and the debate that

surrounds this issue. In section 3, we apply the Merton (1974) model to a discussion of Defined

Benefit (DB) pension liabilities and use it to illustrate the distinction between measuring funded
                                                 5


status and valuing liabilities. In section 4, we discuss how one should think about the choice of a

default-free rate to use for discounting. We acknowledge three common criticisms of the use of

the yield curve for U.S. Treasuries, present relevant evidence, and ultimately conclude that

Treasury yields are a “close enough” measure of default-free rates that they represent a

reasonable proxy. In section 5, we turn to the issue of how to account for the presence of

COLAs that are common in public pensions. We show that COLAs often have the same

promised payments as particular combinations of inflation derivatives, so that the price of these

derivatives represents the market cost of replicating the COLA payments. We provide examples

of how this approach can be used to value several COLAs that are common in the public sector.

Section 6 concludes.


2.     Background on Public Pension Funding Measures

       Unlike private pensions in the U.S., which are required to meet funding standards

imposed by the federal government, state and local plans are not subject to externally imposed

funding rules. Despite the lack of compulsion, most states have adopted policies for funding

their public employee pensions. The funding policies are typically based on standards issued by

the Government Accounting Standards Board (GASB), an independent organization responsible

for establishing accounting and financial reporting standards for state and local governments.

GASB has no enforcement authority and its pronouncements only have any legally binding

nature if the state or local government chooses to voluntarily adopt the standards as law or

regulation.

       Because states have no external legal requirement to fund pensions, the level of funding

is a policy decision. Although “full funding” is one natural benchmark, it is worth noting that

economic theory does not dictate that full-funding is optimal. If a populace wishes to engage in
                                                  6


some form of intergenerational redistribution, then transferring resources across cohorts can be

achieved through under or over funding pensions, just as it can be done through adjusting the

level of other debt obligations or, even more generally, through whether resources are spent on

consumption versus investment. Indeed, the largest public pension in the U.S. – the Social

Security system – has operated in a manner closer to a true pay-as-you-go system than as a

funded system. Although states are less able to sustain pure unfunded systems than is the U.S.,

owing to the fact that it is much easier to move capital and labor out of a fiscally distressed state

than out of the country, they nonetheless have some policy flexibility in choosing how much to

fund.

        A reason it is important to acknowledge that a funding ratio is a policy choice rather than

a requirement is that it allows one to separate the measurement of the level of funding from the

choice of the level of funding. One can accept that the appropriate way to measure funding is to

use a default-free rate without it necessarily following that the optimal funding level for a state is

to always be 100 percent funded according to this measure. This paper is focused on the issue of

how to measure the level of funding, without taking a view on what the optimal level of funding

should be.

        In contrast to GASB standards that rely upon expected asset returns, numerous financial

economists have argued that the appropriate rate is one adjusted for the risk of the liabilities

being discounted. Several authors have then made the argument that public pensions are “close

to” default-free. For example, Brown and Wilcox (2009) use several historical case studies to

argue that public pension benefits have little default risk.

        The discount rate assumptions matter for the measurement of funding status. For

example, Munnell, Aubrey and Cafarelli (2014) estimated that the actuarial value of assets for
                                                          7


the 150 state and local plans in their database was $2.9 trillion at the end of 2013. 4 Using the

prior GASB standards that allow for discounting based on the expected return of plan assets, they

calculated the present value of liabilities at $4.1 trillion. This 72 percent funded ratio, however,

clearly overstates the financial health of these plans because of the use of a high discount rate.

Government bond yields were quite low in 2013: on December 21, 2013, the yield on a 30-year

Treasury was only 3.96 percent, and the yield on shorter-term bonds was even lower. Assuming

a flat four percent term structure, Munnell, Aubry and Cafarelli calculate an aggregate liability of

$6.8 trillion, for an average funding ratio of approximately 43 percent.

           In a departure from most existing papers in financial economics (including one co-

authored by one of the current authors), it is our contention that the appropriate discount rate to

use for measuring funding shortfalls is the default-free rate, even if the liabilities are not default-

free. We discuss this more in the next section with the help of a simple model.

           Before turning to this discussion, we note that we are focusing on discounting the

Accumulated Benefit Obligation (ABO) rather than the Projected Benefit Obligation (PBO). The

general distinction is that the ABO represents the liability that the plan has accrued to date and is

measured at current earnings levels. The PBO, in contrast, accounts for the fact that many of

today’s participants have earned a benefit that will not be payable until some future date and

will, at that time, be based on a higher earnings level. We focus on the ABO for the reasons

outlined in Brown and Wilcox (2009) and Bulow (1982), including that the ABO measure has

the effect of treating salary and pension accruals similarly. In other words, employers are not

required to report a higher salary today just because employees are likely to receive a higher

salary in the future. Similarly, we believe it is appropriate to account for the effect of future


4
    http://crr.bc.edu/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/slp_39.pdf
                                                         8


salary increases on pension liabilities only after those salary increases have become effective.

Because we are focused only on the ABO, we do not need to worry about adjusting discount

rates to reflect the risk of liabilities that might arise from uncertain earnings growth. Lucas and

Zeldes (2006, 2009) discuss the implications of PBO hedging for both discount rate selection and

portfolio allocation.


    3.      A Simple Model for Measuring Pension Funding

            To illustrate the distinction between measuring liabilities and placing a market valuation

on them, we apply the standard Merton (1974) structural credit risk model to the context of a

defined-benefit pension fund. To make our point transparent, we first consider a highly

simplified case in which a pension plan promises a single lump-sum benefit payment at one

future date. The model makes the following four simplifying assumptions:

         1) The pension fund invests in risky assets that have a current date t market value of At and a

            rate of return volatility (annual standard deviation) of ı.

         2) The pension fund promises a single retirement benefit equal to X payable at date t +W.

         3) The continuously-compounded, default-free interest rate (yield) is constant, equal to y.

         4) The sponsor of the pension fund is expected to contribute to the fund’s assets in amounts

            cAt per unit time until date t+W. 5 If at date t + W the pension fund has sufficient asset value,

            pension participants receive their promised payment of X. Instead, if At+W is worth less

            than X, the pension fund defaults and the participants receive only At+W.

            Let us denote the date t market value of the pension fund’s liabilities as Lt. Lt is the

current fair market value that investors would pay for the possibility of receiving the default-

5
 There may be more realistic ways of specifying future contributions. Our assumption that contributions are a fixed
proportion of current assets might describe the phenomenon that when pension assets experience losses during a
market downturn, the sponsor is likely to be financially weak and reduce contributions.
                                                          9


risky cash flow of min > X , At W @ at the future date t+W. Similar to Merton (1974), the market

value of this default-risky pension liability equals

                                  Lt   Xe yW N d 2  At ecW N d1                                         (1)


where d1         ln ª¬ At / Xe  yW º¼  c  12 V 2 W / V W    and d 2   d1  V W . N() is the standard

normal cumulative distribution function. Note from equation (1) that Lt is a function of five

quantities: 1) the current market value of assets, At; 2) the rate at which new assets are expected

to be contributed to the fund, c; 3) the volatility of assets, ı; 4) the time until the pension’s

benefit is due to be paid, W; and 5) the promised pension benefit discounted at the default-free

interest rate, Xe  yW .

            Equation (1) provides several immediate insights. One is that the market value of

liabilities, Lt, can never be worth more than the promised payment discounted at the default-free

rate, Xe  yW . Further, as the value of the pension fund’s current assets grows, Lt converges to

Xe  yW :

                                                 lim Lt       Xe yW                                       (2)
                                                 At of



            The quantity Xe  yW plays a natural role in the concept of a fully-funded pension plan for

at least two reasons. First, if the current value of pension assets equals At = Xe  yW , then there

exists an investment strategy that can guarantee to participants their full payment of X, without

any need for the sponsor to make future asset contributions to the fund (c=0). This strategy

consists of investing all of the pension assets in the default-free security at rate y. Indeed, if this

plan were to transfer its currently-accrued liabilities to an insurance company, so that it would

not be making any new contributions after the transfer, it would need to top up its assets to equal

At = Xe  yW in order for the insurance company to implement this riskless investment strategy.
                                                     10


        Second, we argue that the ratio of the default-risky market value of liabilities to its

default free value is a good measure of the relative risk faced by a pension participant. This

quantity Lt / Xe  yW   N d 2  ª At / Xe yW º ecW N d1 is a function of only four factors: c, ı,
                                ¬             ¼

W, and At / Xe  yW . Thus, the pension funding ratio for which liabilities are discounted at the


default-free rate, At / Xe  yW , emerges as the natural factor for measuring pension risk.

Moreover, it is clear that this definition of a funding ratio delivers the sensible result that as the

value of pension assets declines, the funding ratio goes to zero:

                                          lim At / Xe yW       0                                      (3)
                                          At o0


        If, instead, pension liabilities were discounted at a risk-adjusted rate, say Y, that reflected

their true default risk, then Xe YW   Lt . However, using this liability measure to account for the

pension plan’s funding ratio, At / Lt , is problematic. It is also straightforward to show that such a

value of liabilities leads to the illogical result that the pension plan becomes fully funded as the

value of assets shrink:

                                              lim At / Lt   1                                          (4)
                                             At o0


        A simple numerical example illustrates the importance of this distinction. Consider a plan

that has a single nominal liability of X = $1,000 that is payable in ten years. If the current

continuously-compounded yield on a 10-year default-free bond is y = 3.0 percent, then investing

Xe-yW =$1,000 e-0.03u10 = $740.82 in this bond today, without any need for the sponsor to make

future contributions (c = 0), would guarantee that the plan could make good on its liability.

        Now suppose the plan was underfunded, having assets of only At = $500 on hand today.

Using the default-free rate, the plan would be X e-yW - At = $240.82 underfunded, or a funding
                                                            11


ratio of At /( X e-yW ) = 67.5 percent. Contrary to how GASB discounts, this level of underfunding

is the same regardless of how the $500 is invested. We argue that this 67.5 percent is the

appropriate measure of a plan’s funding status because it tells participants and other stakeholders

how much money the plan would need today to pay full promised benefits in the future. This

measure would also be helpful to determine the future contribution rate, c, that would be

expected to close this funding gap over some future horizon. 6

         Next, consider the consequence of incorporating default risk when discounting pension

liabilities. Suppose that the rate of return on the plan’s assets has an annual standard deviation of

V = 20 percent. If the sponsor is expected to make additional contributions to the fund at the rate

of c = 2 percent per year, the current market value of liabilities calculated from equation (1) is Lt

= $476.64. This market value is equivalent to discounting the plan’s promised liabilities by Y =

7.41 percent. That is, Lt = $476.64 = X e-YW =1000ue-0.0741u10. If one then discounted the plan’s

benefit promises by a rate that reflects the true likelihood of default and used the result to

measure funding, then the plan would be overfunded by $500 – $476.64 = 23.36 and its funding

ratio would be At /( X e-YW ) = 104.9%.

         While discounting benefit promises by a risk-adjusted rate leads to a distorted measure of

funding, information on the Lt =$477 current market value of liabilities would be quite valuable,

for example, to an employee deciding between the DB plan and, say, a $600 immediate

contribution to a DC plan. If the DB plan was fully funded and default-free, the individual might




6
  The contribution rate at which the risk-neutral expected asset value equals liabilities by the time that benefits are
promised to be paid is given by the value of c such that (At /( X e-yW ))uecW = 1, or c = ln(X e-yW/At)/W. For our example,
this is c = 3.93 percent.
                                                         12


rationally choose the $741 DB over a $600 DC. 7 But if the DB plan is underfunded, the rational

choice might be the $600 DC rather than the $477 market value of the DB.

         Thus, the market value of the DB liability contains useful information. But it is not a

particularly robust measure of funding levels, i.e., how much money the plan sponsor would

need to set aside today to pay promised benefits. For example, if one is interested in measuring

funding status, it makes little sense to effectively “reward” the plan sponsor for underfunding

their plan. As indicated in the model above, if a plan sponsor does not fund at all, and if this

drives the probability of the plan sponsor making good on its promises toward zero, then the

market value of the liability can disappear completely. That is useful information to someone

trying to value their future benefit, but it serves little purpose as a measure of the funding

shortfall.

         In practice, Novy-Marx and Rauh (2011) consider two candidate rates as being

potentially appropriate for discounting state pension liabilities. One is a tax-adjusted general

obligation municipal bond rate. They argue that such a rate is appropriate if a state is just as

likely to default on its pension obligations as it is to default on its general obligation bonds.

Their second candidate discount rate is based on the logic of Brown and Wilcox (2009) who

document that a majority of states’ pension obligations are protected by state constitutional

guarantees. It is argued that these states have a lower probability of defaulting on their pension

obligations than of defaulting on their municipal bonds. Therefore, they argue that the

appropriate discount rate for pension liabilities should be less than a municipal bond rate and

closer to a nearly default-free zero-coupon U.S. Treasury rate. 8 The main point of our paper is


7
  For purposes of this illustration, we are ignoring other differences between DB and DC which might influence this
choice, such as access to annuitized income in retirement.
8
  Similar reasoning on accounting for pension liabilities is found in Andonov, Bauer, and Cremers (2014): “public
pension funds should use lower discount rates than private pension funds, because public plan benefits are virtually
                                                          13


that this discussion is relevant to computing the market value of public pension liabilities, but

that only the default-free rate is relevant for measuring the degree of underfunding. We argue

that there is no need to justify the choice of the liability discount rate based on the municipality’s

likelihood of default because finance theory supports the discounting of promised pension

obligations by a default-free rate, whether the pension fund sponsor is the U.S. government, the

State of Illinois, or the City of Detroit. 9

         As we discuss in the following sections, the insights obtained from the simple model in

equation (1) carry over to more realistic models where benefits are promised at many future

dates. For the purpose of measuring a plan’s funding status, each future promised benefit

payment should be discounted using the yield on the default-free bond that matures at the

benefit’s payment date. Furthermore, when promised benefits are state contingent, as they are in

the case of COLAs subject to limits on future inflation, these promises should be valued as if

they were default-free. If there exists default-free securities that can replicate the plan’s state-

contingent benefit promises, then the cost of these securities should be used to value liabilities

when calculating funding status. In other words, while valuation for the purpose of measuring

funding status should account for the state-contingent risk of the plan’s contracted benefits, it

should not account for benefits’ default risk which would constitute a violation or renegotiation

of the benefit contract.


4.       How to Measure Default-Free Rates

         To account for a pension plan’s funding level, we argued in the previous section that

liabilities should be valued as if future promised payments were default free, unless explicit

free of risk as accrued benefits are usually backed by constitutional guarantees; in contrast, members of private plans
still risk losing part of their pensions if the firm enters bankruptcy.”
9
  One exception is the case where pension benefit promises contain explicit provisions for write-downs if pension
asset values are insufficient.
                                                              14


contractual provisions allow for changes in these payments. Our rationale is that full funding

should imply that the plan has sufficient asset value to implement an investment strategy that

guarantees payment of the plan’s promised retirement benefits. If the plan’s promised benefits

can be replicated by a particular portfolio of securities, then the minimum cost of this portfolio

equals the plan’s fully-funded asset value. In turn, the difference between this portfolio’s cost

and the plan’s current asset value equals the plan’s underfunding. Equivalently, should the

sponsor terminate the plan and transfer its accrued liabilities to an insurance company, the

company’s cost of implementing an investment strategy that guarantees payment of the benefits

is the value of the replicating portfolio.

         As we discuss below, there exist several nominal and inflation-related securities that can

replicate many promised plan benefits. 10 In this section, we consider purely nominal liabilities

and then cover inflation-related cost-of-living adjustments (COLAs) in the following section.

         The simple model in the previous section assumed a single future promised payment, X,

and a single default-free interest rate, y. The qualitative insights of that model extend to

payments promised at multiple future dates. Suppose the current date is 0 and a plan promises

payments each year for T future years, t = 1, …, T, with corresponding amounts Xt, t = 1, …, T.

Then the current date 0 default-free value of the plan’s liabilities is

                                                       ¦t 1 X te
                                                          T         y0,t t
                                                                                                                        (5)

where y0,t denotes the date 0 continuously-compounded yield to maturity on a default-free zero-

coupon bond that matures at date t. Consequently, if the plan had asset value sufficient to
10
   If there do not exist securities that perfectly replicate some types of plan benefits, the asset value required for full
funding can be modified to equal the cost of purchasing the security portfolio that best hedges promised future
benefit payments. Presumably, such a marketable security portfolio that most closely matches the plan’s promised
payments will hedge the lion’s share of the liabilities’ systematic risks so that unhedged risks should be mostly
diversifiable. A large insurance company may be willing to guarantee the plan’s liabilities for the cost of this hedge
portfolio because the plan’s unhedged risks can be diversified away if the insurance company has other business
lines with uncorrelated risks.
                                                           15


purchase T default-free bonds with maturity values Xt, t = 1, …, T, it could guarantee payment of

the benefits. Thus, expression (5) represents the plan’s fully-funded asset value. Equivalently, a

portfolio of default-free bonds whose value and duration equals that of (5) is sufficient to pay

future benefits and immunizes the plan from interest rate risk.

         Lewis and Pennacchi (1999) extend the model of the previous section to find the market

value a DB plan’s liabilities or, equivalently, the fair cost insuring its liabilities from default.

Their model permits benefit payments and contributions from a plan sponsor at multiple future

dates and assumes default occurs if the plan’s sponsor (e.g., a corporation or a municipality)

declares bankruptcy at the same time that the pension plan is underfunded. Consistent with (5),

the model assumes that there exists a duration-matching bond portfolio that replicates the plan’s

promised benefits. The term structure of default-free yields changes randomly according to the

Vasicek (1977) no-arbitrage model. The insight of the previous section carries over to this

extended model in that the critical measure of the plan’s funding status is the ratio of the market

value of the plan’s assets to the value of the duration-matched, default-free bond portfolio that

replicates the plan’s promised future benefits. 11

         The issue that we now address is how to determine the appropriate set of default-free

yields. A natural starting point is yields on Treasury securities. The term structure of zero-

coupon Treasury yields can be obtained from Treasury STRIPS or the zero-coupon yields

implicit in the prices of Treasury coupon-paying notes and bonds. 12 However, several objections

might be made for using unadjusted Treasury yields to discount pension promises. We briefly



11
   Similarly, a state variable that determines the sponsor’s likelihood of bankruptcy is the ratio of the sponsor’s total
non-pension plan assets to the default-free value of the sponsor’s non-pension plan liabilities. A similar model but
without random interest rates is developed in Pennacchi and Lewis (1994).
12
   STRIPS (Separate Trading of Registered Interest and Principal Securities) are individual coupons or principal
payments of Treasury notes and bonds that trade separately and represent a true zero-coupon Treasury security.
Zero-coupon yields implicit in Treasury note and bond prices can be calculated using a bootstrapping method.
                                                           16


discuss these concerns, and use the existing literature to place bounds on adjustments that might

be made when using a Treasury yield curve to proxy default-free rates.

4.1 U.S. Government Debt is not Default-Risk-Free

         One criticism of using Treasury securities as proxies for default-free assets is that they,

like any sovereign debt, are not truly free from default risk. Evidence that at least some investors

believe U.S. Treasuries are default risky comes from the credit default swap (CDS) market. 13

CDS are insurance contracts against default. If an investor purchases a default-risky bond and

also buys CDS protection against the bond’s default, this combined investment approximates a

default-free bond whose annual yield equals the default-risky bond’s promised yield minus the

annualized CDS spread.

         Figure 1 shows U.S. Treasury CDS spreads reported by Bloomberg over the period from

December 2007 to December 2014. See the Appendix for details, including Bloomberg codes, on

the data used in this paper. The average CDS spreads over this sample period were 22.9, 34.6,

and 46.0 basis points for contract maturities of one, five, and ten years, respectively. CDS

spreads increased sharply following the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy, peaking in February of

2009. There was also an especially large spike for spreads of the one-year contract in July 2011

just before the resolution of a debt ceiling crisis on July 31, 2011. 14 CDS spreads rose to a

smaller extent prior to the culmination of a second debt ceiling crisis that was resolved on

October 17, 2013. 15 In summary, based on evidence from CDS spreads, yields on Treasuries

might contain roughly a 20 to 50 basis point default risk premium, depending on maturity.



13
   It is interesting that CDS on U.S. Treasuries are quoted in euros, rather than U.S. dollars, suggesting that foreign
investors might be most concerned about default risk. Since CDS spreads are expressed as annual premiums per
amount of notional principal, they are largely unaffected by the currency denomination.
14
   The U.S. Treasury was scheduled to exhaust its borrowing authority on August 2, 2011. On August 5, 2011,
Standard & Poor’s downgraded the U.S. government’s long-term credit rating from AAA to AA+.
15
   A partial government shutdown began on October 1, 2013.
                                                  17


4.2 U.S. Government Debt Provides State-Tax Advantages

       States that tax investment income typically exempt interest from federal government

bonds from the tax base. According to standard tax clientele theory, high-marginal-tax-rate

investors would be willing to accept a lower pre-tax yield on U.S. government debt than they are

willing to accept on an otherwise identical, but taxable, asset. This would drive the yield on

government bonds down and therefore require that one adjust the yields by 1/(1- W), where W is

the relevant state tax rate on interest income.

       However, the tax clientele theory does not appear to be empirically relevant. Using data

from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis as of April 1, 2014, out of the $12,877 million of

U.S. federal debt outstanding (a figure that excludes government holdings of its own debt, such

as in the Social Security trust funds), just over $6 billion (47 percent of total) was held by foreign

investors, including foreign governments for which tax considerations do not apply. Another 2.7

billion (21 percent) was held by Federal Reserve Banks, who also do not face a tax wedge

between government and corporate bonds. This leaves less than one-third of all U.S. government

debt held by private U.S. investors. These private investors, in turn, are dominated by pension

funds, life insurance companies, and other institutional investors. As noted by Cochrane (2015),

“the market for Treasury debt is heavily segmented, with few taxable investors holding any

debt.” Non-taxable investors do not experience any tax advantage to holding Treasuries relative

to other assets, and thus there is little reason to think that U.S. Treasury yields are significantly

affected by the state tax exemption. Thus, to a first approximation, we believe it is appropriate to

make no adjustment to Treasury yields to account for their preferential state tax status.

4.3 Liquidity Premia for U.S. Government Debt
                                                        18


        Another objection to using unadjusted Treasury yields as default-free rates relates to

Treasury securities’ high liquidity which that makes them especially attractive for investors that

may have needs to trade. Treasuries can be quickly converted to cash or easily used as collateral

for borrowing via repurchase agreements, features which raise their prices and lower their yields

relative to a less-liquid default-free security. However, if a pension fund tends to buy and hold

bonds until they mature, it may be able to form a replicating portfolio with default-free securities

that are less liquid than U.S. Treasuries. Doing so would allow it to purchase default free

securities at lower prices and higher yields.

        Longstaff (2004) provides evidence of such a possibility. He examines yields on bonds

issued by a U.S. government agency, Refcorp. 16 Unlike other government agencies such as

Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac, Refcorp bonds are fully collateralized by U.S. Treasury securities

and, hence, have the same credit risk as Treasuries. Over his April 1991 to March 2001 sample

period, the average difference in Refcorp bond yields relative to equivalent maturity Treasury

yields was 13.1 basis points at the 10-year maturity and 16.3 basis points at the 30-year maturity.

However, these yield spreads tended to be higher during periods of financial market stress or

“flights to liquidity.” Other research finds that, even among different Treasury securities,

liquidity premia affect yields. Recently auctioned “on-the-run” Treasury notes and bonds tend to

have yields that are 5 to 10 basis points lower than similar maturity but seasoned “off-the-run”

Treasury notes and bonds. 17 Thus, if a pension plan does not benefit from the greater liquidity of

on-the-run Treasuries, it would be justified to discount nominal payments using yields of off-the-

run securities or equivalent credit risk agency securities, such as Refcorp bonds.


16
   Refcorp is the funding vehicle for the Resolution Trust Company that was established by the 1989 Financial
Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act (FIRREA).
17
   Evidence of an off-the-run versus on-the-run yield spread includes Krishnamurthy (2002) and Graveline and
McBrady (2011).
                                                       19


4.4 Net Effect: Treasuries are a Reasonable Proxy

        Starting with Treasury yields, the above evidence suggests that it may be appropriate to

subtract 20-50 basis points to remove the effect of a small default-risk premium and then add 10-

16 basis points to remove the average effect of the liquidity premium. While Figure 1 seems to

indicate that Treasuries’ credit risk spread rises during periods of financial distress, research also

finds that their relative liquidity is highest during such periods, so time variation in these two

effects might partially offset each other. We further argued that the marginal investor in Treasury

securities is unlikely to be taxable, given the large share of government bonds held by foreign

governments and tax-exempt institutional investors. The net effect of these adjustments is close

to a wash: if anything, the previous evidence might suggest that a true default-free rate in the

U.S. economy is up to 35 basis points below the yields on government bonds.

        Additional evidence on whether Treasury yields are a reasonable proxy for default free

rates might be to compare the effective yields on synthetic default-free bonds created from CDS-

insured, high credit quality corporate bonds. We carried out a very rough, exploratory analysis

by obtaining yields on all existing AAA-rated, non-callable corporate bonds. 18 Currently, the

only two corporations with outstanding AAA-rated, noncallable bonds are Johnson & Johnson

and Microsoft. To see how yields on their corporate bonds compare to similar Treasuries, we

matched each corporate bond that currently has at least four years until maturity to a Treasury

note or bond with the most similar maturity date and coupon rate. Data on yields for each

corporate bond and matching Treasury bond were obtained from Bloomberg. Summary statistics

from this exercise are reported in Table 1.



18
  We limited the analysis to only AAA bonds because there might be more noise and idiosyncrasies in using lower-
grade bonds. We also examine only non-callable bonds because callable bonds have random maturities and their
yields are elevated by a call premium. All outstanding U.S. Treasury securities are non-callable.
                                                        20


        The sample period over which yield data was available for each corporate and matching

Treasury bond is given in the first column of Table 1. Columns 2, 3, and 4 give each corporate

bond’s maturity date, coupon rate, and average yield over the sample period, respectively. The

same data items for each bond’s matching Treasury are given in columns 5, 6, and 7. In the last

column 8 is the difference in the average yields of the corporate bond and its matching Treasury,

which we refer to as the “average spread.”

        Table 1 lists the bonds by corporation and maturity date. As is indicated in column 8, the

corporate – Treasury spread tends to rise with the bonds’ time until maturity. 19 Averaged over all

corporate bonds, the average spread is about 60 basis points for each corporate issuer. However,

if we limit the comparison to only bonds with a current time until maturity of 10 years or less,

then the average spread is 29.8 basis points for the (six) Johnson & Johnson bonds and 48.7 basis

points for the (four) Microsoft bonds. The reason that we focus on bonds of 10 years or less is

that data on CDS spreads for these corporate bonds were available only for CDS contract

maturities of 5 and 10 years. 20

        The last four rows in Table 1 compare these corporations’ spreads for 5-year and 10-year

CDS contracts to those of the U.S. Treasury. Johnson & Johnson and Treasury CDS spreads are

over the sample period beginning in December of 2007. However, since Microsoft issued its first

corporate bond in 2009, its CDS is compared to that of Treasuries for a shorter sample period. As

can be seen from the table, the differences are small, between 0 and 10 basis points.

        By subtracting this difference in relatively higher corporate CDS spreads from their

relatively higher yields, we can roughly estimate that the net yield from creating a synthetic

19
   Spreads that rise with the time until maturity would be expected if the long-run default risk of the federal
government is less than that of these currently AAA-rated corporations.
20
   While we only have data on CDS spread for maturities up to 10 years, like the corporate bond – Treasury yield
spread we might expect that the difference between corporate and Treasury CDS spreads would also grow with
maturities beyond 10 years.
                                                        21


default-free 10-year Johnson & Johnson bond is about 30 – 5 = 25 basis points greater than that

for a default-free synthetic Treasury. Similarly, the net yield from creating a synthetic, default-

free 10-year Microsoft bond is about 49 – 10 = 39 basis points greater than that for a default-free

Treasury. Therefore, while our previous evidence suggested that using CDS to make Treasuries

default-free would subtract up to 35 basis points from raw Treasury yields, this evidence from

less-liquid corporate bonds suggests that the raw Treasury yield is approximately the correct

return from creating a synthetic default-free bond from AAA corporates. 21 Thus, a solid

argument could be made that it is appropriate to use U.S. Treasuries as the base case for

measuring the degree of pension underfunding.


5. Accounting for Cost-of-Living Adjustments

        The discussion above indicates that using the U.S. Treasury yield curve to discount

nominal pension liabilities, and comparing this to the market value of plan assets, is an

appropriate way to measure the degree of underfunding of a plan. However, the exercise assumes

that pension liabilities are fixed nominal liabilities. In fact, many public pension plans have cost-

of-living adjustments (COLAs), an issue that can complicate the discounting process.

        Figure 2 shows the number and percentage of the 127 plans in NASRA’s Public Fund

Survey with various types of COLAS. 36 plans use a post-retirement benefit adjustment that is

not a true COLA at all, but rather is a pre-determined rate of automatic increase in nominal

benefits. Illinois is one such example: current retirees receive an annual 3 percent “automatic




21
  Another way of seeing this is that, for bonds of 10 years or less, the average yield on Johnson & Johnson and
Microsoft bonds over their matched Treasuries are 30 and 49 basis points, respectively. Since Table 1 shows the 10-
year CDS spreads for Johnson & Johnson and Microsoft are 51 and 60 basis points, respectively, these CDS insured
bonds would have a net yield of 30 – 51 = -21 basis points and 49 – 60 = -11 basis points below raw Treasury yields.
So a raw Treasury yield might be only slightly higher than the net yield on a synthetic default-free corporate bond.
                                                  22


annual increase” regardless of the rate of inflation. In such cases, one can apply the nominal

Treasury yield curve directly to the growing nominal stream of benefits.

       45 plans use a COLA that is based on the CPI. If these plans were fully indexed, i.e., if

benefits were simply real rather than nominal, then one could use a real yield curve, rather than a

nominal yield curve, to discount benefits. However, very few of the plans are purely inflation-

indexed. 38 of the 45 plans have some sort of ceiling on the inflation adjustment, ranging from a

low of 1.5% in the Kentucky ERS to a high of 6% in the Connecticut SERS plan. The most

common ceiling is 3%, with 15 plans capped at this level. Five plans report floors, although we

suspect that more plans than this have an implicit floor of zero. It would be misleading to use a

real term structure to discount a stream of benefits that is subject to floors and ceilings on the

inflation adjustment.

       Unlike prior research that values COLAs by making ad hoc assumptions regarding future

inflation, we show particular types of limited pension COLAs can be replicated and valued using

the market prices of recently available inflation derivatives, such as inflation swaps, inflation

caps, and inflation floors. Few, if any, assumptions regarding the process for inflation need to be

made when taking this approach. In addition, because market data is available at high frequency,

immediate updates on the cost of COLAs can be recognized.

       This approach is useful for at least two purposes. First, it allows us to convert the COLA

provisions into a fixed nominal price that can then be discounted back using the nominal default-

free term structure. Second, it provides a tool for evaluating the cost savings associated with

reforms that reduce COLAs. This latter point is highly relevant to the current policy

environment: Munnell, Aubry, and Cafarelli (2014) report that between 2010 and 2013, 30 plans

across 17 states either reduced, suspended or eliminated COLAs for existing employees. Of
                                                   23


these, 13 also reduced COLAs for current retires. Although these changes were legally

challenged in at least 12 of the states, the cuts were upheld in most of the states.

5.a Fixed Rate COLAs

       Valuing automatic fixed-rate COLAs, such as a compounded or simple 3% annual

increase is straightforward and can be done using the term structure of default-free nominal bond

yields. To illustrate this calculation, we assume for simplicity that each future year’s annuity

payment is made in a lump sum at the end of each year, rather than paid monthly throughout the

year. If the COLA is compounded at the rate r, then for each $1 of base year’s annuity, the

cashflow paid t years in the future is (1+r)t – 1. If y0,t is the initial, date 0 annually-compounded

yield to maturity on a default-free zero-coupon bond maturing at date t, then the present value of

this future year’s promised COLA payment is simply [(1+r)t – 1]/(1+ y0,t)t. Over a T-year

retirement horizon, the present value of all future years’ COLA payments are

                                                        t
                                            T    1  r 1
                                           ¦                t                                       (6)
                                           t 1   1  y0,t

       Expression (6) is the value of the COLA per $1 of base annuity value. Expressing it as a

proportion of the present value of the total nominal annuity received over T years, i.e., the

present value of a $1 per year benefit without a COLA, leads to:

                                      ªT
                                            1  r  1º» ª« T                   º
                                                 t
                                                                    1
                                      «¦             t » / «¦
                                      «                                        »                    (7)
                                                                            t »
                                        t 1 1 y             t 1 1 y
                                     ¬«          0,t   ¼» ¬«          0,t     ¼»

Expression (7) is then the default-free value of a fixed rate, compounded COLA over a T-year

period as a proportion of the value of the nominal annuity over that same period. The

corresponding expression for a non-compounded (simple) COLA at the fixed rate r is
                                                           24


                                         ªT                 º ªT                   º
                                                r ut                    1
                                         «
                                           ¦
                                         « t 1 1 y      t » «¦
                                                            »/«
                                                                 t 1 1 y
                                                                                t »
                                                                                   »                                (8)
                                        ¬«         0,t     ¼» ¬«          0,t     ¼»

We calculate (7) and (8) using Treasury security data compiled by Gürkaynak, Sack, and Wright

(2007). They provide daily estimates of zero-coupon Treasury yields from daily prices of

Treasury coupon notes and bonds. Because their estimates use data on “off-the-run” Treasury

securities, liquidity premia that are highest for “on-the-run” Treasury securities are mitigated. 22

Hence, these yields reflect what a pension fund would earn on more illiquid, seasoned Treasury

securities.

         The single most common fixed rate that pension funds choose for automatic COLAs is 3

percent, both when this rate is compounded and when it is not. Therefore, we compare the value

of 3 percent compounded and simple (non-compounded) COLAs for retirement horizons of 10,

20, and 30 years. In each case the COLA values are expressed as a percentage of the value of the

same-horizon retirement annuity that does not contain the COLA. We make these calculations

for each day starting from the beginning of October 2004 until February 2015. These days’

values are averaged over each month and graphed in Figure 3.

         As would be expected, Figure 3 indicates that the difference between compounded and

simple COLAs grows as the retirement horizon lengthens. The average compounded versus

simple COLAs per nominal benefit at the 10, 20, and 30 year horizons are 17.0% versus 15.6%,

32.5 versus 27.1%, and 48.2 versus 36.8%, respectively. Relative COLA values are also higher

during periods when the yield curve was generally lowest, such as during the depth of the

financial crisis in late 2008 and early 2009, as well as the most recent period of Federal Reserve

“quantitative easing.”

22
  Their daily estimates of the zero-coupon bond yield curve derive from prices of Treasury coupon securities that
exclude the two most recently issued securities with maturities of two, three, four, five, seven, 10, 20, and 30 years.
                                                            25


5.b Fully Inflation-Indexed COLAs

         Inflation-indexed COLAs provide future cashflows that are random in terms of nominal

payments but fixed in terms of real purchasing power. Previous research such as Novy-Marx and

Rauh (2011) estimates COLAs tied to the Consumer Price Index (CPI) by making an assumption

regarding future inflation and discounting the resulting expected nominal cashflows by nominal

yields. Alternatively, one might discount a CPI-indexed annuity payment using the term structure

of real yields, rather than nominal yields. Daily zero-coupon real yield curves estimated from

U.S. Treasury Inflation Protected Security (TIPS) coupon prices are available for maturities from

2 to 20 years and could be used. 23 However, TIPS are less liquid than nominal U.S. Treasuries,

and there is evidence that their yields became unrealistically high (and prices unreasonably low)

during stress periods such as the 2008-2009 financial crisis. 24

         An alternative to using TIPS to value CPI-indexed COLAs is to use an inflation

derivative security known as a zero-coupon inflation swap. Zero-coupon inflation swaps are the

most common and liquid type of inflation derivative. Also, traders in inflation swap contracts are

subject to regulatory collateral requirements that are intended to minimize counterparty default

risk. 25 A zero-coupon inflation swap is really a forward contract in which there is a single future

exchange between two parties where one party pays a fixed payment and the other pays an

inflation-linked payment. For a swap negotiated at date 0 and maturing at the end of year t, the

net payment from the point of view of the fixed-rate payer is (1+k0,t)t - CPIt/CPI0, where k0,t is

the inflation swap rate negotiated at date 0 on this t-year inflation swap and CPIt is the CPI at

23
   This data is available at http://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/researchdata/feds200805.xls .
24
   For evidence that TIPS were underpriced relative to nominal Treasuries and inflation swaps, see Haubrich,
Pennacchi, and Ritchken (2012) and Fleckenstein, Longstaff, and Lustig (2014).
25
   Under current international regulations, most standard swaps, such as interest rate swaps, are required to be
processed through central clearinghouses that set margin requirements. However, inflation swaps, as well as cross-
currency swaps and swaptions, are exempt from central clearing requirements. These uncleared, over-the-counter
derivatives are subject to different collateral requirements that are designed, in principle, to be greater than those for
centrally-cleared swaps. See Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2015).
                                                         26


date t. 26 k0,t is the inflation swap rate agreed to by the parties at date 0 such that the present value

of the future exchange is zero.

         Let r0,t be the annualized real yield on a zero-coupon inflation indexed bond (e.g., TIPS)

that promises one unit of current date 0 purchasing power at the future date t, which in nominal

terms equals CPIt/CPI0. Then the present value of the swap’s inflation payment is 1/(1+r0,t)t

while the present value of the swap’s fixed-rate payment equals (1+k0,t)t/(1+y0,t)t. Equating the

value of these two payments, since the exchange has zero value, implies k0,t = (1+y0,t)/(1+r0,t) – 1

| y0,t - r0,t, which makes the inflation swap rate equal to what is known as the “breakeven

inflation” rate. 27 Hence, knowledge of the term structure of inflation swap rates, along with the

term structure of nominal yields, implies a term structure of real interest rates. 28 Inflation swaps

also have advantages because they are quoted daily in maturities from 1 to 30 years, and

sometime as long as 50 years.

         Figure 4 gives time series data from Bloomberg on 5-, 10-, 20-, and 30-year swap rates

over the 2004 to 2015 period. Notice that the 5-year rate dipped to just below zero, indicating

deflation, following the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy. However, it should be noted that during

this same period, breakeven inflation implied by the five-year nominal and TIPS yields was even

lower, illustrating TIPS’s high yields and lower liquidity relative to inflation swaps.

         Like TIPS breakeven inflation rates, zero-coupon swap rates equal “risk-neutral” or

“certainty equivalent” expectations of inflation. In other words, zero-coupon swap rates equal

26
   In practice, an inflation swap maturing at date t is based on the CPI index recorded approximately 3 months earlier
and its initial CPI index, CPI0, is based on the CPI index recorded approximately 3 months prior to the initiation of
the contract. Thus, a t-year swap involves an exchange of a full t years of inflation but lagged 3 months. This is
exactly the same convention use to calculate TIPS payments.
27
   Note that the approximation k0,t | y0,t - r0,t becomes an exact equality if all rates are measured as continuously-
compounded rates, rather than annually-compounded rates.
28
   Indeed, purchasing a zero-coupon nominal Treasury with face value (1+k0,t)t and current price (1+k0,t)t/(1+y0,t)t,
and then entering into an inflation swap with notional principle of $1 produces a real cash flow worth a current $1 at
date t. In other words, purchase of a nominal Treasury and a fixed-rate swap position replicates a real (TIPS)
payment.
                                                         27


actual (physical) expectations of inflation plus an inflation risk premium. Studies that attempt to

estimate this inflation risk premium typically find that it is positive. 29 Additional evidence is

given in Figure 5 which graphs the 10-year zero coupon inflation swap rate versus the 10-year

mean forecast of inflation from the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia’s Survey of

Professional Forecasters. 30

         The figure shows that, over the 2004 to 2014 sample period, the average 10-year zero

coupon inflation swap rate of 2.65% exceeds the survey’s average 10-year expected inflation

rate of 2.44%, reflecting an average inflation risk premium of 21 basis points for a 10-year

horizon. Note, as we discuss next, that use of inflation swap rates that include this inflation risk

premium is appropriate for valuing inflation-linked COLAs.

         Inflation swaps imply that the value of the random accumulated inflation from the current

date 0 to future date t, CPIt/CPI0 -1, equals a fixed payment of (1+k0,t)t -1 at date t. Thus, the

present value of this accumulated inflation payment equals [(1+k0,t)t-1]/(1+y0,t)t. Aggregated

over a T-year retirement horizon, a fully CPI-indexed COLA per $1 of initial base year annuity

payment equals

                                                                t
                                                  T    1  k0,t  1
                                                 ¦                  t                                               (9)
                                                 t 1    1  y0,t

and the value of this COLA as a proportion of the total nominal annuity without the COLA is

                                         ª T 1  k t  1º ª T                       º
                                                                       1
                                         «
                                            ¦               »/«
                                                                 ¦                  »
                                                  0,t
                                                                                                                (10)
                                         « t 1 1 y      t  » « t 1 1 y         t »
                                         «¬          0,t   ¼» ¬«         0,t       ¼»




29
  See Haubrich, Pennacchi, and Ritchken (2012) for references to these studies.
30
  The approximately 40 participants in this survey make this 10-year forecast of inflation once per quarter. Ang,
Bekaert, and Wei (2007) find that this survey is the most accurate measure of expected inflation.
                                                   28


Note that these expressions are similar to those of the fixed-rate COLAs but where the term

structure of inflation swap rates, k0,t t =1,…,T, replaces the single fixed rate, r.

        To compute the COLA values in (9) and (10), we obtained data from Bloomberg on daily

zero-coupon swap rates at maturities from 1 to 10 years and 12, 15, 20, 25, and 30 years. A swap

rate yield curve for every annual horizon greater than 10 years was fitted by a cubic spline that

passed through the observed 12, 15, 20, 25, and 30 year rates. Along with the daily nominal yield

curve obtained from the aforementioned Gürkaynak, Sack, and Wright (2007) database,

expressions (9) and (10) were calculated for each day from November 2004 through January

2015. The monthly averages of these daily COLA values are plotted in Figures 6 and 7.

        Figure 6 shows that over the entire sample period, the COLA values for 10, 20, and 30

year horizons averaged 1.1, 3.9, and 7.5 times the initial year’s annual benefit, respectively. The

values declined dramatically at the depth of the financial crisis as deflation fears heightened.

Values appear to have peaked early in 2013 when beliefs that quantitative easing could produce

greater inflation may have been highest.

        Figure 7 plots the same COLA values but as a percentage of the value of the nominal

annuity over the same horizons. Over the sample period, COLA values for 10, 20, and 30 year

horizons averaged 13.3%, 27.7%, and 42.5%, respectively, of the nominal annuity values. The

declines in these relative values in late 2008 were even more dramatic since deflation fears

coincided with a dramatic decline in the nominal term structure which raised the value of the

nominal annuity.

5.c Inflation-indexed COLAs subject to Zero-Coupon Floors and Caps

        As mentioned at the start of this section, few, if any, actual COLAs are linked purely to

the CPI without any constraints. Rather, COLAs typically are constrained by a minimum
                                                                    29


inflation rate floor, say rf, and often limited to a maximum inflation rate cap, say rc. For example,

rf is almost always 0 and rc is often 2% or 3%. If these minimum and maximum rates are

compounded relative to the annuity’s base year (date 0), then the COLA paid at the end of future

year t can be written as

                    CPI t           ª                  t       CPI t º        ª CPI t          t  º
                           1  max « 1  rf                       ,0»  max «        1  rc ,0 »              (10)
                    CPI 0           ¬                          CPI 0 ¼        ¬ CPI 0             ¼

In expression (10), CPIt/CPI0 -1 is the unconstrained inflation payment made in year t. The next

term max[(1+rf)t- CPIt/CPI0, 0] is the payoff of a put option on inflation, also referred to as a

zero-coupon inflation floor. If rf = 0, the floor pays the owner the amount of deflation since the

start of the retirement annuity at the initial date 0. 31 This floor combined with the unconstrained

inflation payment CPIt/CPI0 -1 implies that the future COLA adjustment is always nonnegative

so that the future annual benefit payment is never less than the base year annual payment. The

last term, max[CPIt/CPI0-(1+rc)t,0] is the payoff of a call option on inflation, also referred to as a

zero coupon inflation cap.

         Over a T-year retirement horizon, the present value per $1 of base year annuity of the

payoff in expression (10) is

                                               t
                                  T    1  k0,t  1             T
                                 ¦                 t        ¦ ª zcf 0 rf , t  zcc0 rc , t º
                                                                     ¬                     ¼
                                                                                                                 (11)
                                 t 1    1  y0,t               t 1



where zcf0(rf,t) is the date 0 value of a zero coupon floor with floor rate rf and time to maturity t

and zcc0(rc,t) is the date 0 value of a zero coupon cap with cap rate rf. The combination of

purchasing a floor and writing a cap is referred to as a “collar.” Prices of zero coupon floors and


31
  The principal payment on a TIPS bond has exactly this type of a zero inflation floor such that the investor will
never receive less than the bond’s nominal (accrued) principal value when it was first issued. However, TIPS
coupon payments are unconstrained as in our previous example.
                                                         30


caps are quoted daily for a variety of floor and cap rates. We obtained from Bloomberg daily

prices for floors with a floor rate of 0% and for caps with cap rates of 2% and 3%. Prices for 0%

floors and 2% caps were available since October 2009, and prices for 3% caps were available

starting in April of 2011. Similar to zero coupon inflation swaps, these floor and cap prices are

quoted for maturities of 1 to 10 years and 12, 15, 20, 25, and 30 years. Prices for every annual

horizon between 10 and 30 years were obtained by fitting a cubic spline.

        Figure 8 plots CPI COLAs with 0% floors as well as CPI COLAs with 0%, 3% collars

and 0%, 2% collars. These COLAs are computed for horizons of 10 and 30 years as a percent of

the present value of the total nominal annuity for the corresponding horizon. Comparing the

values of CPI COLAs with a 0% floor to the pure CPI COLAs in Figure 7, one sees that the 0%

zero-coupon floor adds relatively little value. On average over the sample period, the value of the

floors adds 3.9%, 2.4%, and 1.9% at the 10, 20, and 30 year horizons, respectively, to the value

of the pure CPI COLAs. Thus, these low floor values indicate that likelihood of deflation over

horizons of many years is small. In contrast, the 3% cap at the 10, 20, and 30 year horizons

subtracts 12.9%, 17.9%, and 20.5%, respectively from the pure CPI COLAs. For the 2% cap at

the 10, 20, and 30 year horizons the deductions are 32.6%, 39.2%, and 43.9%, respectively. As

expected, the lower the cap, the less valuable is the COLA.

5.d “Simple” Inflation-Indexed COLAs subject to Year on Year Floors and Caps

        A few states offer non-compounded, CPI-linked COLAs subject to a 0% floor and a cap.

For illustrative purposes, we focus on this type of COLA provided by the State of Illinois. 32 The

Illinois COLA applies to state employees hired after December 31, 2010. It is a non-compounded


32
   Other examples are the political subdivisions of the State of Tennessee which have the option of providing a non-
compounded COLA equal to the lesser of the CPI and 3%. The State of Utah also provides a non-compounded CPI-
linked COLA. For those hired before July 1, 2011, it is the lesser of CPI inflation and 4%. Newer hires receive the
lesser of the CPI and 2.5%.
                                                             31


COLA where annual benefit increases are the lesser of ½ of CPI inflation and 3%, or zero when

annual inflation is negative. Therefore, if annual CPI inflation exceeds 6%, the total annual

benefit increase is limited to 3%. Because increases are non-compounded, each future year’s

increase is based on the initial year’s annuity value, not the year previous to the increase. Since

this non-compounded COLA is tied to ½ of annual CPI inflation subject to a 3% cap and 0%

floor, the COLA is equivalent to a non-compounded COLA equal to the full CPI subject to a 6%

cap and 0% floor but where the COLA applies to only one-half of the annuitant’s initial-year

pension payment.

         As in our prior calculations, let us assume that each future year’s annuity payment is

made in a lump sum at the end of each year and includes the year’s COLA with no indexation

lag. In this case, the total non-compounded COLA cashflow received at the end of year T per $1

of base year annual benefit equals:

                                               ª        ª     § CPI t          ·º        º
                                 ¦t
                                    T
                                          min « 12 max « rf , ¨             1¸ » , 12 rc »
                                               ¬«                              ¼»
                                        1
                                                        ¬«    © CPI t 1       ¹ ¼»
                                                                                                                (12)
                                               ª      ª § CPI t        ·º º
                                    2 ¦t 1
                                       T
                                    1
                                           min «  max « f ¨
                                                        r ,         1 ¸ » , rc »
                                               «¬     «¬ © CPI t 1 ¹ »¼ »¼

where in the case of the Illinois COLA, rf =0 and rc = 6%.

         Each year’s annual future random inflation, CPIt/CPIt-1, can be valued using forward

inflation rates implied by the term structure of zero-coupon inflation swaps. 33 Recall that for a

swap maturing at the end of year t, the net payment from the point of view of the fixed-rate payer

is (1+k0,t)t - CPIt/CPI0, where k0,t is the inflation swap rate negotiated at date 0 on a t-year

inflation swap. Similarly, for a swap maturing at the end of year t -1, the net payment from the


33
  This is done in a manner similar to how random future interest rates can be valued using forward interest rates
implied by the term structure of zero-coupon bond interest rates.
                                                        32


point of view of the fixed-rate payer is (1+k0,t-1)t-1 - CPIt-1/CPI0, where k0,t-1 is the inflation swap

rate negotiated at date 0 on a (t-1)-year inflation swap.

        The inflation payment received on a t-year inflation swap, CPIt/CPI0, can be replicated

by entering into a t-1 year inflation swap at date 0, and then at date t-1 using the inflation

proceeds to enter into a one-year inflation swap with the notional principal of CPIt-1/CPI0. The

accumulated inflation proceeds at date t is then (CPIt-1/CPI0)u (CPIt/CPIt-1) = CPIt/CPI0, the

same as the t-year inflation swap. Thus, the implied forward inflation swap rate that equates the

value of the replicating contract is (1+k0,t-1)t-1 u(1+ kt-1,t) = (1+k0,t)t, or

                                                              t
                                                  1  k0,t
                                      kt 1,t                 t 1   1                              (13)
                                                1  k0,t 1

Consequently, the random inflation payment of CPIt/CPIt-1 received at date t has the same date 0

value as receiving a fixed payment of a (1+ kt-1,t) at time t. Equivalently, the payment of

CPIt/CPIt-1 -1 received at date t has the same date 0 value as receiving kt-1,t at time t.

        Therefore, since the COLA payment received at date t includes all previous non-

compounded annual inflation increases, the present value of the total non-compounded CPI-

linked COLA with no floor or cap paid at the end of year t is


                                                    ¦ i 1 ki1,i
                                                        t

                                                                     t                               (14)
                                                     1  y0,t

where y0,t is the date 0 annually-compounded yield to maturity on a default-free zero-coupon

bond maturing at date t. Thus, from the term structure of zero-coupon inflation swaps and zero-

coupon Treasury securities, we can value future non-compounded annual inflation payments.

        Importantly, floors and caps on non-compounding annual CPI inflation payments are

traded. They are referred to as “year on year” inflation options. For example, the purchase of a
                                                                33


year on year CPI inflation cap with a maturity of t years and a cap rate of rc would pay

max[(CPIi/CPIi-1 -1) –rc, 0] at the end of each year i = 1,…, t. 34 Similarly, the purchase of a year

on year CPI inflation floor with a maturity of t years and a strike price of X would pay max[rf -

(CPIi/CPIi-1 -1), 0] at the end of each year i = 1,…, t. Thus, for each $1 of initial base annuity,

the Illinois COLA paid at the end of year t has a value equal to one-half of


                                  ¦ i 1 ki1,i  yyf
                                     t

                                              t        0   rf    0%, t  yyc0 rc    6%, t                        (15)
                                   1  y0,t

where yyf0(rf=0%,t) is the date 0 value of a 0% t-year, year on year inflation floor and where

yyc0(rc=6%,t) is the date 0 value of a 6% t-year, year on year inflation cap. The expression (15)

gives the present value of the floored and capped inflation payment made at the end of a single

future year, t. Therefore, the present value of COLA payments for years t = 1, …,T has a value

equal to one-half of

                               § t k                                                      ·
                               ¨ ¦ i 1 i 1,i  yyf r
                            T
                           ¦                                     0%, t  yyc0 rc    6%, t ¸
                               ¨
                           t 1 ¨ 1 y
                                           t       0  f                                   ¸¸
                               ©      0, t                                                 ¹
                                                                                                                 (16)
                                 T §                · T
                                      ¦
                                        t
                                    ¨ i 1 ki 1,i   ¸
                                ¦   ¨
                                t 1 ¨ 1 y
                                               t    ¸¸ ¦
                                                       t 1
                                                           yyfc0 rf      0%, rc    6%, t
                                    ©     0, t       ¹

where yyfc0(rf=0%,rc=6%, t) is a year on year inflation collar with a 0% floor and 6% cap.

         Daily prices of year on year 0% floors and 6% caps were obtained from Bloomberg over

the period from October 2009 through January 2015. As with the zero coupon floors and caps,

these year on year floor and cap prices are quoted for maturities of 1 to 10 years and 12, 15, 20,




34
  Note that the previously discussed zero-coupon floors and caps were contracts on a single option payoff at the
maturity of the contract. Year on year floors and caps are contracts on multiple option payoffs at the ends of each
year throughout the life of the contract.
                                                 34


25, and 30 years. As before, we fit a cubic spline to obtain prices for every annual horizon

between 10 and 30 years.

       Figure 9 plots the results of calculating one-half of the value of the expression (16), first

including a pure simple (non-compounded) yearly change in the CPI, then adding the zero rate

floor, and finally adding the 6% cap rate. COLA costs were computed for 10 and 30 year

retirement horizons.

       Compared to the previous section’s calculations that used zero-coupon floors and caps,

year on year floors and caps have values that are larger compared to their corresponding

unconstrained simple interest COLAs. On average over the sample period, the value of the floors

adds 17.0%, 21.2%, and 26.4% at the 10, 20, and 30 year horizons, respectively, to the value of

the simple CPI COLAs. The, 6% cap (3% on ½ of the CPI) decreases the simple CPI COLA by

10.0%, 15.9%, and 21.5% at the 10, 20, and 30 year horizons, respectively. The intuition for the

relatively large effects of these floors and caps is that they are based on each year’s change in the

CPI, rather than the CPI accumulated since the beginning of retirement. If inflation is believed to

follow a process that mean-reverts to a target between the floor and cap constraints, the value on

long-dated options may be less than that of short-dated ones.

       Figure 10 compares the Illinois ½ CPI simple COLA with the 0%,6% collar graphed in

Figure 9 with an automatic 3% compounded fixed rate COLA. This latter COLA covered all

Illinois state employees prior to the implementation of the new Illinois COLA. Over the sample

period, the average COLA value as a percent of the total nominal retirement benefit declines

from 17.2% to 5.8% for a 10-year retirement horizon. At the 20 and 30 year retirement horizons,

the declines in the COLA values were 33.0% to 9.4% and 49.1% to 11.2%. Clearly the new

COLA represents a substantial reduction in value.
                                                       35


5.e Limited Price Index COLAs

       One of the more common types of COLA is an inflation-indexed, compounded COLA

with year on year floors and caps. This COLA is similar to the previous section’s non-

compounded “simple” COLA with year on year floors and caps. However, standard year on year

floors and caps are not equivalent to this compounded COLA’s limits because standard year on

year floors and caps are based on the same, non-compounded notional principal throughout the

lives of the options.

       In contrast, compounded COLAs with annual limits on inflation payments can be linked

to a Limited Price Index (LPI) that derives from the CPI. Specifically, let LPIt be the LPI at the

end of year t, and set LPI0 = CPI0 at the initial date 0. Let this LPI be subject to a year on year

floor rate of rf and a year on year cap rate of rc. Then the annual change in the LPI is

                                                  ª         ª CPI t                º           º
                        LPI t   LPI t 1 u max « min «                   ,1  rf » , 1  rc »       (17)
                                                  ¬«        ¬ CPI t 1             ¼           ¼»

so that its process from date 0 to the end of year T satisfies:

                                              ª         ª CPI                  º          º
                                   t 1 max ««min « CPIt t 1 ,1  rf » , 1  rc
                                     T
                         LPIT                                                             »         (18)
                                              ¬         ¬                      ¼          »¼

Thus, LPIs have annual growth rates that are equal to the corresponding annual CPI growth rate,

but with the annual growth floored at rate rf and capped at rate rc.

       In the United Kingdom, regulation requires that all private sector pension plans provide

limited price indexation linked to the Retail Price Index (RPI), which is similar to the U.S. CPI.

Perhaps due to this COLA uniformity and a desire by U.K. pension managers to hedge this type

of inflation risk, zero coupon inflation swaps trade on LPIs with specific floors and caps. As with

a zero coupon swap tied to the RPI or CPI, a zero coupon swap tied to an LPI represents a single
                                                        36


future exchange between two parties. For an LPI swap negotiated at date 0 and maturing at the

end of year t, the net payment from the point of view of the fixed-rate payer is (1+k0,t)t -

LPIt/LPI0, where k0,t is the LPI swap rate negotiated at date 0 on this t-year swap. Two of the

most popular swaps are based on LPIs with the sets of limits (rf =0%, rc=5%) and (rf =0%,

rc=3%).

        Given the existence of zero coupon swaps on an LPI, the value of such an LPI-based

COLA is easily valued using the same method for a zero coupon swap based on the CPI (or

RPI). That is by using the expressions in (9) or (10). From Bloomberg, we collected daily data on

three different U.K. zero-coupon swaps: the first based on the RPI, the second on the LPI with (rf

=0%, rc=5%), and the third on the LPI with (rf =0%, rc=3%). Daily zero-coupon bond yield

curves based on U.K. gilts also were obtained from the Bank of England. 35

        Figure 11 graphs COLA values for indexation based on the RPI (with no floor or cap),

the LPI with rf =0%, rc=5% (denoted LPI05) and LPI with rf =0%, rc=3% (denoted LPI03). This

is done for the period of July 2012 through December 2014 for retirement horizons of 10, 20,

and 30 years and expressed as a percent of total nominal annuity value.

        For all horizons, the LPI05 COLA values are very similar to those based on the RPI. On

average over the sample period, the LPI05 COLAs are worth 99.0%, 99.6%, and 100.8% of RPI

COLAs for horizons of 10, 20, and 30 years, respectively. Consequently, the value of the 0%

floor is approximately equal to the value of the 5% cap. In contrast, the LPI03 COLAs are worth

77.7%, 72.2%, and 68.4% of RPI COLAs for horizons of 10, 20, and 30 years, respectively.

Thus, the tighter 3% cap significantly reduces the COLA value.




35
  Yield curve data is available for maturities out to 25 years. To value COLAs based on swaps with maturities out
to 30 years, we assumed that gilt yields for maturities from 26 to 30 years were the same as the 25-year yield.
                                                           37


           At this time, LPI swaps based on the U.S. CPI are not traded. In the absence of these

swaps, valuing LPI-based COLAs require additional assumptions regarding the random process

followed by the CPI index. 36 Such valuation, while straightforward, is beyond the scope of our

paper. However, given that the CPI inflation has been similar to RPI inflation in the last few

years, we expect LPIs based on the U.S. CPI might not be too different from those in Figure 10.

5.f COLAs Conditional on Funding Status or Legislative Discretion

           Several public pension plans offer COLAs that are explicitly contingent on the plan’s

funding status. Since funding status depends, at least partially, on the pension fund’s asset

returns, one approach to account for these types of promised COLA payments is to value them as

options on the pension fund’s assets. Promised future COLA benefits would be higher (lower)

when future asset values are greater (less) than the COLA-contingent exercise value. Bikker and

Vlaar (2006) take such an approach when valuing COLAs of Dutch pension funds which

guarantee nominal pension benefits but have COLAs contingent on a plan’s funding ratio. Novy-

Marx and Rauh (2014) also use option-pricing theory to value various types of retirement benefit

adjustments linked to investment performance.

           In practice, it may be difficult to accurately value options written on a pension fund’s

asset portfolio. An alternative might be to calculate two liability measures of a plan’s funding

status: one which values only promised nominal payments assuming no COLA will be paid;

another which values both nominal and COLA payments assuming the COLA is paid with

certainty. These two measures would represent lower and upper bounds on the default-free value

of pension benefits.




36
     See, for example, Ticot and Charvet (2013) and its references.
                                                         38


         This two-measure approach for valuing promised pension liabilities also would be

reasonable when a plan’s COLA is at the discretion of legislators or the plan’s directors. 37

Moreover, providing two liability measures, one with and one without a COLA, makes the

marginal COLA cost transparent and should lead to improved policy.


6.       Conclusion

         How pension plans should account for the value of their liabilities is a prominent policy

issue, as evidenced by a recent U.S. Senate-requested Government Accountability Office (2014)

study of this topic. The GAO found that “experts sharply disagree on which approach should be

taken to calculate these plans’ estimated obligations for benefits promised to workers and

retirees.” Given this lack of consensus, it is not surprising that the GAO study decided against

making any recommendations as a result of its findings.

         We hope that our paper clarifies the essential issues of pension discounting and, as a

consequence, creates consensus on how discounting should be done. Our main point is that the

appropriate rate for discounting depends on the purpose of the discounting exercise. In particular,

if the objective is to account for pension under- or over- funding, a default-free discount rate

should always be used. 38 Instead, if the objective is to determine the market value of an

employee’s pension benefits, then it is appropriate that discount rates incorporate the plan’s

default risk.

         Another contribution of our work is to show how to account for different types of COLAs

in pension plan benefits. In many instances, inflation-linked benefits can be valued by

recognizing that they are replicated by inflation derivatives, such as inflation swaps, floors, and

37
   Attempting to calculate a single measure for the plan’s promised liability value would require modeling
policymakers’ decisions, which appears to be a highly speculative exercise.
38
   Moreover, we have argued that use of a default-free discount when measuring a plan’s funding status is likely to
be most important when the plan is on the brink of default.
                                                39


caps. By using the market prices of these derivative securities, the cost of specific COLAs can be

objectively determined. The ability to accurately value COLAs is particularly important for

gauging the impact of recent and proposed public pension plan reforms.
                                              40



                                         References

Andonov, Aleksandar, Rob Bauer, and Martijn Cremers (2014) “Pension Fund Asset Allocation
      and Liability Discount Rates,” SSRN working paper
      http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2070054.

Ang, Andrew, Geert Bekaert, and Min Wei (2007) “Do Macro Variables, Asset Markets, or
      Surveys Forecast Inflation Better? Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 1163–1212.

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and International Organization of Securities
       Commissions (2015) “Margin Requirements for Non-Centrally Cleared Derivatives,”
       (March) available at http://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d317.htm.

Bikker, Jacob and Peter Vlaar (2006) “Conditional Indexation in Defined Benefit Pension
       Plans,” De Nederlandsche Bank Working Paper No. 86/January 2006.

Brown, Jeffrey R. and David Wilcox (2009) “Discounting State and Local Pension Liabilities,”
      American Economic Review 99, 538-542.

Cochrane, John H. 2015. “A New Structure for U.S. Federal Debt.” University of Chicago Booth
      Graduate School of Business working paper. Available at:
      http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/john.cochrane/research/papers/Cochrane_US_Federal_De
      bt.pdf

Fleckenstein, Matthias, Francis Longstaff, and Hanno Lustig (2014) “The TIPS-Treasury Bond
       Puzzle,” Journal of Finance 69, 2151-2197.

Government Accountability Office (2014) “Pension Plan Valuation: Views on Using Multiple
      Measures to Offer a More Complete Financial Picture,” GAO-14-264 September.

Graveline, Jeremy and Matthew McBrady (2011) “Who Makes On-the-Run Treasuries
       Special?,” Journal of Financial Intermediation 20, 620-632.

Gürkaynak, Refet, Brian Sack, and Jonathan Wright (2007) “The U.S. Treasury Yield Curve:
      1961 to the Present,” Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 2291–2304.

Haubrich, Joseph, George Pennacchi, and Peter Ritchken (2012) “Inflation Expectations, Real
       Rates, and Risk Premia: Evidence from Inflation Swaps,” Review of Financial Studies 25,
       1588-1629.

Kristhnamurthy, Avrind (2002) “The Bond/Old-Bond Spread,” Journal of Financial Economics
       66, 463-506.

Lewis, Christopher and George Pennacchi (1999) “Valuing Insurance for Defined-Benefit
       Pension Plans,” Advances in Futures and Options Research 10, 135-167.
                                              41



Longstaff, Francis A. (2004) “The Flight-to-Liquidity Premium in U.S. Treasury Bond Prices,”
       Journal of Busines 77, 511-526.

Lucas, Deborah, and Stephen P. Zeldes. 2006.“Valuing and Hedging Defined Benefit Pension
       Obligations—The Role of Stocks Revisited.”
       http://www0.gsb.columbia.edu/whoswho/getpub.cfm?pub=2382

Lucas, Deborah J. and Stephen P. Zeldes (2009) “How Should Public Pension Plans Invest?”
       American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings. Vol. 99, No. 2, 527-532.

Merton, Robert C. (1974) “On the Pricing of Corporate Debt: The Risk Structure of Interest
      Rates,” Journal of Finance 29, 449-470.

Munnell, Alicia H., Jean-Pierre Aubry and Mark Cafarelli. 2014. “COLA Cuts in State / Local
      Pensions.” Boston College Center for Retirement Research. State and Local Pension
      Plans Issue Brief Number 38. May.

Novy-Marx, Robert and Joshua Rauh (2011) “Public Pension Promises: How Big Are They and
      What Are They Worth?,” Journal of Finance 66, 1211-1249.

Novy-Marx, Robert and Joshua Rauh (2014) “Linking Benefits to Investment Performance in
      U.S. Public Pension Systems,” Journal of Public Economics 116, 47-61.

Pennacchi, George and Christopher Lewis (1994) “The Value of Pension Benefit Guaranty
      Corporation Insurance,” Journal of Money Credit and Banking 26, 733-753.

Ticot, Yann and Xavier Charvet (2013) “LPI Swaps with a Smile,” Risk (May), 66-71.

Vasicek, Oldrich (1977) “An Equilibrium Characterization of the Term Structure,” Journal of
       Financial Economics 5, 177-188.
                                         42


                                       Table 1

                          AAA Corporate Bond – Treasury Spreads

                     Johnson & Johnson                  Matched Treasury
Sample Period Maturity Coupon Av Yield           Maturity   Coupon    Av Yield   Av Spread
 12/14-3/15    12/05/19   1.875      1.54        12/31/19    1.625       1.47       7.8
  8/13-3/15     9/01/20   2.950      2.17         8/31/20    2.125       1.93      23.2
  5/11-3/15     5/15/21   3.550      2.33         5/15/21    3.125       1.93      39.3
 12/14-3/15    12/05/21   2.450      1.96        12/31/21    2.125       1.77      19.7
  4/04-3/15    11/15/23   6.730      4.18         8/15/23    6.250       3.66      51.7
 12/13-3/15    12/05/23   3.374      2.78        11/15/23    2.750       2.41      37.1
  2/04-3/15     9/01/29   6.950      4.68         8/15/29    6.125       3.94      74.4
  8/07-3/15     8/15/37   5.950      4.64         5/15/37    5.000       3.48      115.0
  6/08-3/15     7/17/38   5.850      4.66         5/15/38    4.500       3.34      131.6
  8/10-3/15     9/01/40   4.500      4.10         8/15/40    3.875       3.36      74.2
  5/11-3/15     5/15/41   4.850      3.98         5/15/41    4.375       3.18      79.9
        Average                                                                    59.4

                          Microsoft                     Matched Treasury
Sample Period Maturity    Coupon Av Yield        Maturity   Coupon    Av Yield   Av Spread
  5/09-3/15     6/01/19    4.200    2.53          5/15/19    3.125       2.06      47.1
 11/10-3/15    10/01/20    3.000    2.44         11/15/20    2.625       2.01      43.2
  2/11-3/15     2/08/21    4.000    2.51          2/15/21    3.625       1.97      54.5
 11/12-3/15    11/15/22    2.125    2.73         11/15/22    1.625       2.23      50.0
  5/09-3/15     6/01/39    5.200    4.48         05/15/39    4.250       4.30      18.6
 11/20-3/15    10/01/40    4.500    4.23         11/15/40    4.250       3.33      91.1
  2/11-3/15     2/08/41    5.300    4.24          2/15/41    4.750       3.24      99.3
 11/12-3/15    11/15/42    3.500    4.10         11/15/42    2.750       3.29      81.1
        Average                                                                    60.6

                                   Average CDS Spreads

   Corporation      CDS Maturity    Sample Period       Corporation   Treasury   Difference
Johnson & Johnson      5 Years       12/07-12/14           32.8         34.6        -1.8
Johnson & Johnson     10 Years       12/07-12/14           51.4         46.0         5.4
    Microsoft          5 Years        1/13-12/14           33.7         25.2         8.6
    Microsoft         10 Years        9/09-12/14           60.1         49.8        10.2

Source: Bloomberg
                                                                   43



                                        Figure 1 CDS Spreads for U.S. Treasury Securities

                            100
                             90
  Annualized Basis Points




                             80
                             70
                             60
                             50
                             40
                             30
                             20
                             10
                              0




                                                   1Y CDS        5Y CDS         10Y CDS

Source: Bloomberg

                                             Figure 2 Types of COLAs in Public Plans


                                             Type, Number, Percent
                                  out of 127 Plans in NASRA Public Fund Survey


                                                             None,
                                                             9, 7%




                                              Ad Hoc, 29, 23%           CPI linked, 45,
                                                                              35%


                                    Investment
                                   Based, 7, 6%
                                                            Fixed Rate, 36,               Earnings based,
                                                                 28%                           1, 1%
                                                                               44


                                               Figure 3 Compounded and Simple Fixed-Rate COLAs


                             55

                             50
Percent of Nominal Benefit




                             45

                             40

                             35

                             30

                             25

                             20

                             15

                             10
                              200411 200511 200611 200711 200811 200911 201011 201111 201211 201311 201411

                                    10Y Comp      20Y Comp          30Y Comp        10Y Simple       20Y Simple       30Y Simple




                                                   Figure 4 Zero-Coupon Inflation Swap Rates

                              3.5
                             3.25
                                3
                             2.75
                              2.5
                             2.25
                                2
Percent




                             1.75
                              1.5
                             1.25
                                1
                             0.75
                              0.5
                             0.25
                                0
                                    2004   2005    2006      2007     2008       2009   2010       2011     2012     2013   2014

                                                     5Y Rate          10Y Rate          20Y Rate          30Y Rate
                                                                                     45



Figure 5 10-Year Zero Coupon Inflation Swap Rates versus 10-year Survey of Professional
       Forecasters Mean 10-Year Inflation Forecast

                                     3.25

                                          3

                                     2.75

                                      2.5
  Percent




                                     2.25

                                          2

                                     1.75

                                      1.5

                                     1.25
                                              2004   2005   2006    2007    2008   2009      2010    2011    2012   2013   2014

                                                                   10Y Swap Rate          10Y SPF Mean Forecast




                                              Figure 6 CPI-Indexed COLA Values as a Multiple of Initial Year Benefit

                                     11
                                     10
  Multiple of Initial Year Benefit




                                      9
                                      8
                                      7
                                      6
                                      5
                                      4
                                      3
                                      2
                                      1
                                      0
                                      200411 200511 200611 200711 200811 200911 201011 201111 201211 201311 201411

                                                             10 Year COLA          20 Year COLA         30 Year COLA
                                                                             46


                                  Figure 7 CPI-Indexed COLA Values as a Percent of Total Nominal Benefit

                             50
                             45
                             40
Percent of Nominal Benefit




                             35
                             30
                             25
                             20
                             15
                             10
                              5
                              0
                              200411 200511 200611 200711 200811 200911 201011 201111 201211 201311 201411

                                                     10 Year COLA          20 Year COLA          30 Year COLA




                                         Figure 8 Values of CPI COLAs with Zero-Coupon Floors and Caps
                                                       as a Percent of Total Nominal Benefit
                             50

                             45
Percent of Nominal Benefit




                             40

                             35

                             30

                             25

                             20

                             15

                             10

                              5
                                  2010             2011             2012                  2013            2014              2015

                                              10Y CPI, 0%Floor        10Y CPI, 0%,3%Collar           10Y CPI, 0%,2%Collar
                                              30Y CPI, 0%Floor        30Y CPI, 0%,3%Collar           30Y CPI, 0%2%Collar
                                                                             47


                                  Figure 9 Values of the Illinois COLA as a Percent of Total Nominal Benefit

                             16
Percent of Nominal Benefit



                             14

                             12

                             10

                              8

                              6

                              4
                              200910             201010            201110             201210             201310           201410

                                     10Y 1/2 Simple                    10Y 1/2 Simple 0%Floor            10Y 1/2 Simple 0%6%Collar
                                     30Y 1/2 Simple                    30Y 1/2 Simple 0%Floor            30Y 1/2 Simple 0%6%Collar




                                         Figure 10 Illinois COLA versus 3% Compounded Fixed Rate
                                                 Values as a Percent of Total Nominal Benefit

                             55
                             50
                             45
Percent of Nominal Benefit




                             40
                             35
                             30
                             25
                             20
                             15
                             10
                              5
                              0
                              200910            201010             201110            201210             201310          201410

                                                         10Y IL COLA        20Y IL COLA         30Y IL COLA
                                                         10Y 3% Comp        20Y 3% Comp         30Y 3% Comp
                                      Percent of Nominal Benefit




                                 10
                                      20
                                           30
                                                 40
                                                        50
                                                              60
                        201207                                     70
                        201208
                        201209
                        201210
                        201211




            10Y RPI
                        201212




20Y LPI03
                        201301
                        201302
                        201303
                        201304




30Y RPI
                        201305




            10Y LPI05
                        201306
                        201307
                        201308
                                                                                                                         48




                        201309
                        201310

30Y LPI05
            10Y LPI03
                        201311
                        201312
                        201401
                                                                                Percent of Total Nominal Benefit




                        201402
            20Y RPI




                        201403
30Y LPI03




                        201404
                                                                        Figure 11 RPI- and LPI- Based COLA Values as a




                        201405
                        201406
                        201407
                        201408
            20Y LPI05




                        201409
                        201410
                        201411
                        201412
                                                                        49


                                                                  Appendix
                                                                 Data Sources
                         Description                                                                     Source
CDS spreads on U.S. Treasuries                                   Bloomberg code US CDS EUR SR yY, where y = 1,2,…, or 10
Yields on Treasury coupon notes and bonds                        Bloomberg code T C.R mm/dd/yy where C.R is the bond’s coupon rate (e.g. 2.125)
                                                                 and mm/dd/yy is the bond’s maturity date.
Johnson & Johnson bond yields                                    Bloomberg code JNJC.R mm/dd/yy where C.R is the bond’s coupon rate (e.g.
                                                                 5.95) and mm/dd/yy is the bond’s maturity date.
Johnson & Johnson CDS spreads                                    Bloomberg code JNJ CDS USD SR yY, where y = 5 or 10
Microsoft bond yields                                            Bloomberg code MSFTC.R mm/dd/yy where C.R is the bond’s coupon rate (e.g.
                                                                 2.125) and mm/dd/yy is the bond’s maturity date.
Microsoft CDS spreads                                            Bloomberg code MSFT CDS USD SR yY, where y = 5 or 10
Yields on zero coupon Treasury securities                        Gürkaynak, Sack, and Wright (2007) and available at
                                                                 http://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/researchdata/feds200628.xls .
Zero-coupon inflation swap rates                                 Bloomberg code USSWITm where m is the maturity in years (e.g., m = 20).
Survey of Professional Forecasters’ 10-year inflation forecast   https://www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/real-time-center/survey-of-
                                                                 professional-forecasters/
Zero-coupon inflation floors and caps                            Bloomberg code for floors is USIZFfm and for caps is USIZCcm where f is the
                                                                 floor rate (e.g., f = A is zero % floor), c is the cap rate (e.g., c = 3 is 3% cap) and
                                                                 m is the maturity in years (e.g., m = 10).
Year on year inflation floors and caps                           Bloomberg code for floors is USISFfm and for caps is USISCcm where f is the
                                                                 floor rate (e.g., f = A is zero % floor), c is the cap rate (e.g., c = 3 is 3% cap) and
                                                                 m is the maturity in years (e.g., m = 10).
U.K. zero-coupon RPI inflation swap rates                        Bloomberg code BPSWITm where m is the maturity in years (e.g., m = 20).
U.K. zero-coupon LPI inflation swap rates                        Bloomberg code for the 0% floor 3% cap LPI is BPIL03m and for the 0% floor
                                                                 5% cap LPI is BPIL05m where m is the maturity in years (e.g., m = 30).
Yields on zero coupon U.K. Treasury securities                   Bank of England, available at
                                                                 http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/statistics/pages/yieldcurve/default.aspx .
