NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SUICIDE, AGE, AND WELLBEING:
AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION
Anne Case
Angus Deaton
Working Paper 21279
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21279
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2015

Deaton acknowledges funding support from the Gallup Organization, with whom he is a consulting
Senior Scientist, and from the National Institute on Aging through the NBER, grants numbers 5R01AG04062902 and P01 AG05842-14, and through Princeton's Roybal Center for Translational Research on Aging,
Grant P30 AG024928. Case acknowledges support from the National Institute on Aging under Grant
P30 AG024361. We thank David Cutler and Julie Phillips for perceptive and helpful comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Anne Case and Angus Deaton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Suicide, Age, and Wellbeing: an Empirical Investigation
Anne Case and Angus Deaton
NBER Working Paper No. 21279
June 2015
JEL No. I12,I3
ABSTRACT
Suicide rates, life evaluation, and measures of affect are all plausible measures of the mental health
and wellbeing of populations. Yet in the settings we examine, correlations between suicide and measured
wellbeing are at best inconsistent. Differences in suicides between men and women, between Hispanics,
blacks, and whites, between age groups for men, between countries or US states, between calendar
years, and between days of the week, do not match differences in life evaluation. By contrast, reports
of physical pain are strongly predictive of suicide in many contexts. The prevalence of pain is increasing
among middle-aged Americans, and is accompanied by a substantial increase in suicides and deaths
from drug and alcohol poisoning. Our measure of pain is now highest in middle age—when life evaluation
and positive affect are at a minimum. In the absence of the pain epidemic, suicide and life evaluation
are likely unrelated, leaving unresolved whether either one is a useful overall measure of population
wellbeing.
Anne Case
367 Wallace Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
accase@princeton.edu
Angus Deaton
361 Wallace Hall
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1013
and NBER
deaton@princeton.edu

1. Introduction
This paper juxtaposes wellbeing measures and suicide rates. We use data from the United
States and from other countries to examine patterns of suicide and wellbeing by age and
across space.
Information on self-reported wellbeing (SWB) is now widely used in economics.
SWB measures correlate with traditional real income measures in the expected way, but
are also sensitive to a wide range of other welfare-related circumstances and outcomes,
holding out the possibility that they may provide a broader window into human wellbeing
than does real income. Yet, at least since Lionel Robbins (1932) argued that psychological measures were unnecessary for economic analysis, economists have been wary of
measures that are not backed up by observable behavior, and have given greater weight to
preference revealed through choice than to preferences that are self-reported. As noted by
Daly, Wilson and Johnson (2013), suicide should reveal unhappiness, at least in its most
extreme form. Suicides are rare, 12.6 per 100,000 in the United States today, and while it
is possible for those contemplating suicide to be extremely unhappy when other people
are not, it is also true that shifts of the whole distribution will show up in the tails, dramatically so for many distributions. In consequence, if suicide rates were positively correlated or uncorrelated with wellbeing measures, we would have something of a paradox,
Helliwell (2007). Such a paradox, if real, would cast some doubt on the validity of selfreported wellbeing. Alternatively, if we maintain the validity of wellbeing measures, the
paradox would cast doubt on the usefulness of suicide as an overall indicator of population mental health. Studying the patterns of suicide and wellbeing can thus potentially
contribute to an understanding of both. Such is our aim here. Our purpose is not to ex-

2

plain suicide by happiness—indeed it seems likely that each is affected by other, more
fundamental causes—but to look for the negative correlation that these theories predict.
Hamermesh and Soss (1974) propose an “economic theory of suicide” that links
suicide to intertemporal utility as used in theories of intertemporal choice of consumption
and labor supply. Hamermesh and Soss postulate that people will kill themselves when
the utility of being dead is higher than the utility of staying alive, a theory whose implications have been explored by them, and extended and corrected by Cutler, Glaeser and
Norberg (2001) and by Becker and Posner (2004). Goudie et al (2014) use the same theory to link life satisfaction and risk taking and Chen et al (2010) survey the field. Whether
or not the utility of intertemporal choice in economics matches self-reported wellbeing,
and if so how—for example whether SWB is the integral over life, or the forward looking
integral, or instantaneous utility (felicity) for the period—remain open questions, but the
links between suicide and SWB provide a fertile ground for testing the theory as well as
for exploring the meaning of SWB itself.
There is a small previous literature that looks at SWB and suicide together. It includes the papers by Helliwell (2007), Daly and Wilson (2009), Daly, Wilson and Johnson (2013) as well as the book by Layard (2005, p.71), all of whom argue that the same
factors that explain suicide also explain unhappiness or, more precisely, that the coefficients of the linear projections of suicide rates and SWB on selected covariates such as
age, education, sex, race, time, and geography, have similar patterns in both sign and
magnitude. We will follow this methodology; indeed there is little alternative in the absence of baseline wellbeing data in large follow-up studies.
A few studies have found marked differences between suicide and SWB patterns

3

in some contexts, including Daly, Oswald and Wu (2011) and Bray and Gunnell (2006)
who examine suicide and life satisfaction over US states and European countries respectively. Daly et al find that suicide and life satisfaction are positively correlated across US
states while Bray and Gunnell find a negative correlation across European countries that
is entirely driven by the comparison of Eastern with Western European countries; exclusion of the East results in a perverse positive correlation. We shall return to these results
below.
We are aware of only one prospective study that gathers life satisfaction at baseline and follows individuals over time; Koivumaa-Honkanen et al (2001) follow a sample
of 29,173 Finnish adults from 1976 to 1995 and find that life-satisfaction was protective
against suicide. However, their measure of life satisfaction—the sum of Likert scores on
four items, interest in life, happiness, ease of living, and loneliness—is quite different
from what is usually called life satisfaction. The Finnish measure, as noted by the authors, is conceptually and empirically close to a measure of clinical depression, a wellestablished risk factor for suicide. That depression predisposes to suicide is consistent
with a protective role for SWB, but is essentially a different finding.
One contribution of this paper is to use Gallup data, from the Gallup Healthways
Wellbeing Index (GHWBI) for the US, collected daily on a range of wellbeing
measures—with nearly 2 million observations from 2008 through 2013—as well as The
Gallup World Poll—which covers nearly all of the countries in Europe, the OECD, and
Latin America for which suicide data can be obtained from the World Health Organization’s mortality database, WHO (2014), in conjunction with UN population data, UN
(2014). Because the Gallup data contain several wellbeing measures, including life eval-

4

uation, happiness, worry, stress, and anger, we can explore the possibility that suicide
links differently to these different evaluative and hedonic measures.
The Gallup surveys also collect data on physical pain, in the same format as the
hedonics, asking whether the respondent experienced physical pain during a lot of the day
prior to the interview. We do not think of physical pain as a wellbeing measure, but pain
is a risk factor for suicide, Goldsmith et al (2002), which makes it a useful variable in its
own right. Pain is also associated with lower wellbeing, and so provides a potential link
between suicide and SWB. Beyond that, obtaining the expected link between suicide and
the pain measure from the Gallup data provides a baseline comparison for the hedonic
measures. If pain as measured in the Gallup data is not correlated with suicide, it would
not be surprising if the hedonics also are not; if pain is correlated with suicide, and the
hedonics are not, we will have stronger case against the link between SWB and suicide.
We therefore examine pain along with the hedonics in most of the calculations below.
We begin (Section 2) with summary data for the United States, tabulating suicide
and SWB by age, sex, race, and education. Section 3 focuses on suicide and SWB over
the days of the week; we argue that these patterns help discriminate between economic
and other theories of suicide, rather in favor of the latter. Section 4 focuses on age, and
examines whether the famous U-shape of life evaluation over life, with older Americans
doing better than those in middle age, has any counterpart in the suicide data. Section 5
turns to spatial patterns, across the states of the US, as well as across countries of the
OECD, Eastern Europe, and Latin America, with some attention to the age patterns within countries.
The suicide data come from the Compressed or Detailed Mortality Data from the

5

Centers for Disease Control, available through the CDC Wonder website. At the end of
Section 2 we use the individual death records merged with population data from the
American Community Survey (ACS), but we otherwise rely on tables generated by CDC
Wonder. Suicides comprise deaths from intentional self-harm (ICD10 codes X60–84) as
well as sequelae of intentional self-harm (ICD10 code Y87.0); we add the corresponding
data from ICD9 in Section 4 below. Some suicides are certainly misclassified, particularly into the category of deaths from events of undetermined intent, but here we adopt the
narrow definition. All data on SWB and pain come from the GHWBI poll, and in Section
5, from the Gallup World Poll.

2. Suicide and wellbeing in the United States today
Table 1 presents some of the basic facts on suicide and wellbeing by three broad age
groups of adults aged 25 and older, by sex, and by education level. All data in the table
are for 2013.
The relationship between suicide and wellbeing is like the curate’s egg, good only
in parts. Life evaluation (here the Cantril ladder, which ranges from 0 for the worst possible life to 10 for the best) is higher for women than for men—a standard finding in the
literature—while women have more negative affect (especially stress and worry) than
men and about the same amount of positive affect. Positive and negative affect measure
short-run feelings (“Did you feel X during a lot of the day yesterday?” yes, or no) with
positive affect defined as the average of happiness, smiling, enjoyment, and not sad,
while negative affect is the average of worry, anger and stress. If (or when) suicide is an
impulsive act, hedonic emotions are likely to be a better indicator than long-term life

6

evaluation. Men are almost four times more likely to kill themselves than are women.
While this is consistent in direction with women’s higher life evaluation, it is not consistent with the patterns of affect. Adding physical pain only deepens the puzzle; in the
Gallup data on pain, as well as across a range of morbidities, Case and Paxson (2005),
women fare less well than men in all age groups.
Turning to age, we have the well-known U-shaped pattern of life evaluation for
both men and women; for both sexes, life evaluation is at its lowest in middle age. If suicide rates are to match this, they should peak in middle age. This is true for women, but
not for men. The suicide rate for men in 2013 rises with age with no sign of a peak in
middle age, at least across these coarse age categories. By contrast, women were more
likely to commit suicide in middle age than in youth or in old age, matching the agepattern in life evaluation. Durkheim (1897) argued that suicide should rise with age, as
did Hamermesh and Soss (1974), though as noted by Cutler et al (2001), their prediction,
though plausible, does not strictly follow from their analysis. That suicide should rise
with age is especially likely in the presence of unanticipated negative health events that
become harder to reverse with age, leading to the accumulation of irreversible conditions
some of which involve great pain. If so, the puzzle is not with suicide, which rises with
age at least for men, but with life evaluation, which fails to fall among the elderly. It is
possible that suicide is an impulsive choice that depends, not on the sum of expected future utilities, but on instantaneous utility today. This works for women, but not for men.
It is possible that suicide is a forward-looking rational choice for men, but an impulsive
decision for women, but this is hardly a principled argument.
Negative affect is lower (i.e. better) in the oldest age group for both men and

7

women—Stone at al (2010) show that anger and stress decline steadily after young adulthood, and worry does so after middle age—yet neither men’s nor women’s suicide rates
decline monotonically with age. We shall look at age patterns in more detail in Section 4.
Except among older women, a college degree or better is strongly protective
against suicide. Durkheim (1897) argued that education would increase suicide rates, but
the modern literature for the US is in accord with our findings; see e.g. Phillips et al
(2010) who also cite other studies that reach the same conclusion. The protective effect of
a college degree is larger for men than for women, and larger for young than for old; men
aged 25–34 with a college degree are nearly three times less likely to kill themselves than
are men of the same age with a high school diploma but without a BA. Yet the effect of
education is not monotonic; for both men and women, and at all age groups, those without a high school degree are less likely to kill themselves than those with only a high
school degree. Once again, this poses problems for the link between SWB and suicide;
for the former, more education comes with higher life evaluation, more positive affect,
less negative affect, and less physical pain, and this is true across all three education
groups, unlike the suicide rate. Higher human capital raises earnings opportunities, so
that more educated people have more opportunities for a better life, and more to lose by
killing themselves. But only the first of these is consistently seen in the data. Note that
while death certificates have information on education, they do not collect income, so
with these data, it is not possible to examine whether education works through income, or
directly, or both.
It is possible to tabulate these data in a many different ways, in particular to consider the relationship between suicide and SWB, not only by age, sex, and education, but

8

also by race, by Hispanic status, and by marital status. One economical way to show these patterns is to run descriptive regressions in which suicide rates and SWB are projected
on these variables and on selected interactions, and then to examine the two sets of regression coefficients for similarities in sign patterns and in magnitude. We do this as follows. We start from the American Community Surveys (ACS) for 2009 through 2013.
From these, we calculate the number of people in each of 2,520 cells defined by (5)
years, (2) sexes, (4) marital status categories (never married, married, divorced, and widowed), (3) education levels (less than high school, high school diploma up to some college, four-year college degree or above), (3) race/ethnic categories (non-Hispanic whites,
non-Hispanic blacks, and Hispanics), and (7) age groups (25–34, 35–44, 45–54, 55–64,
65–74, 75–84, 85 and over). The ACS gives the numbers of people at risk, and we gather
the numbers of suicides in each cell from the micro data files on each death from the
CDC. Dividing the suicides by the numbers at risk gives probabilities of death in each
cell, and these probabilities are regressed (with the population in each cell as weights) on
categorical dummies for each variable, as well as selected interaction terms. Including all
interactions gives a fully saturated model that is equivalent to a six-dimensional cross
tabulation, which would have obvious difficulties of both overfitting and presentation.
Our regressions should be identical to running linear probability models on the ACS data
with the mortality data merged in; of course, we can only use as explanatory variables the
information that appears on the death certificates as well as in the ACS. (We here use the
publicly available micro data, which does not contain any geographical identifiers.)
We process the GHWBI data to match the same categories so that we can run
SWB regressions that have exactly the same explanatory variables as the suicide regres-

9

sions and that can be examined for matching patterns.
Figure 1 shows one (out of many) possible regressions. It excludes interactions
other than running different regressions for men and women; beyond that, it is hard to
find a succinct way of presenting the results. The top panel of the figure is for men, the
bottom panel is for women, and the categories are arrayed horizontally. In each case,
there is an omitted category (2009, whites, less than high school, never married, ages 25–
34) and the red bars show the coefficients in the suicide regressions. The blue bars show
the coefficients in the regression for the ladder, though we have changed the signs, so that
the two sets of bars should go in the same direction if wellbeing and suicide match. We
have also multiplied the ladder coefficients by ten, so as to put everything on (roughly)
the same scale; this factor is the same for men as for women. If suicide and life evaluation match, the blue and red bars should be in the same ratio over all categories.
Note first that the blue bars are much larger relative to the red bars in the bottom
panel for women than is the case in the top panel for men. The suicide scales (on the yaxis) are different for men and for women, given the much higher suicide rates among
men. But, as we have already seen, the differences in the ladder by sex are small, and this
carries over to the patterns in the coefficients of the various categories. For example, the
blue (ladder) bar for women aged 85 and above is larger for women than for men, but
checking the scales shows that the magnitudes are similar, about 8 suicides per thousand,
once we examine the scales. This tells us that, even when we allow for all of these categories simultaneously, we cannot match the gender patterns of suicides to the gender patterns in the ladder, because the gender differences in the ladder, overall, and for each category, even when they are in the right direction, are much too small to match the huge

10

differences in suicides, overall, and for each category.
Perhaps there is some fundamental evolved difference between men and women
in their propensity to kill themselves, a difference that is not reflected in their life evaluations or hedonic wellbeing. Indeed and with the possible exception of China, women kill
themselves less often than men, although women evaluate their lives more highly in only
about two-thirds of countries. If so, we should look at each sex separately, looking only
horizontally along the upper and lower panels of Figure 1, without trying to match the top
and bottom panels. Starting from the left, the time effects are in the wrong direction for
both sexes. Suicides are increasing from 2009 to 2013, for both men and women—even
controlling for the other variables—but the ladder is higher after 2009—which might be
in part attributed to context effects in the poll in 2009, Deaton (2012)—and is increasing
from 2010 to 2013 for both sexes—which cannot be so explained. Blacks and Hispanics
are much less likely to kill themselves than whites, and while both groups have higher
ladder scores than whites—this result depends on conditioning by education, and is not
true in the raw data—the sizes of the differences are too modest to match the differences
in suicide rates, as was the case for the comparison between men and women. Of course,
we could rescale the ladder coefficients to better match these differences, but that would
make the match even worse for the other categories.
The sign patterns are close to being correct for the education and marital status
categories; both education and marriage come with higher life evaluation and lower suicide rates. (There are small sign violations for women with high school degrees and for
widowers.) But for women, the effects of education on suicide are modest compared with
the very large effects of education on life evaluation or, put differently, while the effects

11

of education on the ladder are similar for men and women, it is only among men that education, particularly a college degree, has a substantial effect on suicide. Marriage is
consistently protective against suicide, though remarkably, widowhood, while bad for
men, is protective for women. Again, the relative magnitudes do not match, with the effects on suicide much more marked than the effects on the ladder. As was the case for
race and ethnicity, scaling up the ladder coefficients would exacerbate the differences
over years and age groups.
The age-group patterns in Figure 1 mostly echo the results in Table 1, albeit with
finer groups. For women, the U-shape in the ladder (here shown as an inverted U because
of the sign change) matches the pattern of suicides with age while, for men over the age
of 65, the patterns do not match, with life evaluation continuing to improve as suicide
rates rise. As we shall argue in the next section, it is possible that the dip in life evaluation in middle age is relatively recent, and that it is indeed linked to the rise in suicide in
middle age, with both driven by increasing physical and mental distress in middle age.
We do not show more interactions here, but we note that the estimated age profiles differ markedly by race. In particular, for black non-Hispanic men and women, suicide rates fall with age, showing no signs of the peak in middle-age suicide that we see in
white men and white women. The ladder for blacks also has no dip in middle age, but
falls steadily with age so that, once again, there is no match with the suicide rates.
Our results are much less favorable to the match between wellbeing and suicide
than those of Helliwell (2007) and Daly and Wilson (2009). We suspect that these differences are more a matter of interpretation than of reality. Those earlier results also have a
substantial number of mismatches, and our tests here, by checking magnitude as well as

12

direction, are more severe.

3. Circaseptan rhythms
Suicides are not equally spread over the days of the week. As most people might guess,
and is confirmed in the literature, e.g. McMahon (1983), Maldonado and Kraus (1991),
Monday is the peak day for suicides. Figure 2 shows averages over the years 2008
through 2013. Suicides fall steadily throughout the week from the Monday high to a low
on Saturday, where there are about 950 fewer male suicides and about 200 fewer female
suicides each year than on Mondays. From a baseline of around 4,000 (1,000) male (female) suicides each day, these effects are large. Sundays are marginally worse than Saturdays, but the biggest upward jump is between Sunday and Monday. As always, there
are fewer female than male suicides, but the weekly patterns are the same; Mondays are
bad for both men and women. We do not show similar graphs by age because the
circaseptan shape is the always the same as in Figure 2 for ten year age groups, 25–34,
35–44, etc., up to 85 and above. It is worth noting that the pattern holds true even for the
highest age groups, so that Mondays are bad even for those who are retired and do not
have to go to work.
Deaton (2012, Figure 1) shows the corresponding patterns for self-reported wellbeing and we have checked that these hold over the longer and later 2008 to 2013 period.
We do not show these graphs because they are easily summarized. Life evaluation is the
same on every day, while affect is better on weekends than in the week, more smiling,
enjoyment, happiness, and less sadness, worry, stress, anger and physical pain. Using the
same data, Stone, Schneider, and Harter (2012) show that these patterns hold for all age

13

groups, with minor differences in the shapes across age groups. They also find a very
small negative effect of Mondays on positive affect, and a larger but still small positive
(negative) effect of Fridays on positive (negative) affect, but these differences between
weekdays are small relative to the difference between all weekdays and all weekend days.
The fact that life evaluation is the same for all days of the week is exactly what
we would expect of any measure that assesses life as a whole; indeed, its lack of
circaseptan rhythm is almost a test of its validity. The same is largely true of lifetime utility in intertemporal choice models, or in the Hamermesh and Soss economic theory of
suicide. Note however that if today’s overall lifetime utility is the (discounted) sum of
expected future utilities in each day of the rest of life, and if those future utilities are lower on weekdays, there will be a small (depending on the number of days of life remaining) drop on Mondays as the weekend moves from the future into the past, and an increase over the rest of the week as the weekdays move into the past, but the effect must
be small except for those very near the end of life. Beyond that, if life evaluation refers to
just the utility of each day, there are no circaseptan effects for expected future utility to
work on. These arguments work against the claim that suicides are entirely driven by
fluctuations in lifetime utility or life evaluation. That suicides have a large impulsive
component appears to have a better chance of matching these data.
Even so, the circaseptan pattern of affect does not easily match the suicide patterns in Figure 2. If we are trying to match affect with suicides day by day, negative affect is only slightly higher on Mondays than on other weekdays, and positive affect is only very slightly lower. And although hedonics are somewhat better on Fridays than on
Mondays through Thursdays, there is no steady pattern of improvement over the week to

14

match the steady decline in suicides through the week from the Monday peak.
A possible account can be constructed following Becker and Posner (2004) who
postulate that the utility that matters for suicide depends on instantaneous utility relative
to the person’s past level. Happiness is high at weekends, so the suicide peak on Mondays comes, not just because of the lower happiness on Mondays, but also because of the
fall in happiness from Sunday to Monday. Come Tuesday, instantaneous happiness is the
same as on Monday, but Sunday now has less weight, and so there is an improvement in
suicide-decision utility on Tuesday relative to Monday. If suicide is to go on declining
through the week, Sunday’s experience must only gradually fade into the background,
and if we are to explain why there are more suicides on Sundays than Saturday, we will
have to allow some anticipation of Monday on Sunday.
Table 2 presents regressions of deaths by suicide against positive affect, negative
affect and the ladder, including both today’s and yesterday’s value; the data come from
2008 through 2013, though of course we only have seven observations. This procedure
can be thought of as two-sample instrumental variable estimation, with day of the week
as the instrument for the hedonics and life evaluation. In spite of the small number of observations, the results are remarkably strong and remarkably consistent. The ladder has
no apparent effect on suicides, but both positive affect and negative affect do, with all
signs in the expected direction, and all attracting very large t–values. The coefficient on
yesterday’s affect is between half and two-thirds of today’s affect, consistent with the
supposition that suicide decision utility depends on what happens today relative to what
happened yesterday, though yesterday’s affect gets less weight. When tomorrow’s affect
is added to these regressions, it never attracts a significant coefficient. Regressions on

15

today’s affect only (excluding yesterday’s affect) are significant, but the t–values are typically one-fifth of the size of those in the table. We have also run parallel regressions for
the components of positive affect (smiling, enjoyment, happiness, and not being sad) and
of negative affect (worry, anger, and stress.) All of these show the same patterns of today
and (oppositely signed) yesterday, and all have large t–values.
The effect sizes in these regressions are substantial. Positive affect has a mean of
0.85 (0.84) for men (women) with a standard deviation over the seven days of 0.016 for
both. From the definition of positive affect, this means that 85 percent of men report that,
on the previous day, they experienced a lot of happiness, enjoyment, smiling, and not a
lot of sadness. A one-percentage point decrease in positive affect is associated with an
additional 224 (45) male (female) suicides, which is muted by a reduction of 128 (24) the
next day. For men, the biggest effect is for pain, where a one percentage point increase
(mean is 22 percent) comes with 282 additional suicides, followed by 227 fewer suicides
on the next day. For pain, unlike positive or negative affect (or their components), it is
essentially the change from the previous day that matters; the coefficients are almost
equal and opposite.
Perhaps the most important result of this section is the fact that life evaluation is
the same throughout the week while suicide rates are not. This casts doubt on (at least the
completeness of) the economic theory of suicide and also questions the earlier-cited accounts that argue that happiness, invariably measured as life satisfaction, is determined
by the same underlying variable as is suicide. If so, there is some unknown determinant
that smooths out life evaluation while not smoothing suicide. In contrast to the lack of a
link with life evaluation, and in accord with the idea that many suicides are impulsive, we

16

find that positive and negative affects, either singly, or in combinations, are strongly related to the circaseptan pattern of suicides, but only when we recognize that it is not only
today’s affect that matters, but also the change since yesterday. For pain, which has the
strongest effect of all, it is the increase since yesterday that drives suicides.

4. Changing age patterns
Figure 3, for men, and Figure 4, for women, show suicide rates by age for selected
single years between 1979 and 2013. As we have seen, women are much less likely
to kill themselves than are men, but the age patterns are also quite different, and
perhaps most remarkably, those patterns have seen large changes over the last 40
years, especially for women.
Durkheim’s view that suicide rates increase with age is borne out—at least in
part, and at least for men—by Figure 3. The suicide rate rises rapidly from 10-14
year-olds to 20-24 year-olds, and then is stable until the 60s, rising rapidly thereafter. Such a pattern is clearly consistent with the influence of accumulating disability
on the probability of suicide. Suicide rates among elderly men rose steadily from
1979 through to the mid-1990s but fell thereafter, first among those aged 65–74,
then among those aged 75–84, and finally among those aged 85 and over, whose suicide rate falls only after 1995. These are possible cohort effects associated with
men (but not women) born between 1910 and 1920 who were particularly prone to
suicide in old age. Among younger men, suicide rates fell with age until the mid-40s,
but only from 1979 to 2000. Since then there is a clear increase in middle age, an
increase whose size continues to climb.

17

Patterns of suicides among women are markedly different. In 1979 and the
early 1980s, women were more likely to kill themselves in middle age, with the rate
peaking in the early 40s. This pattern slowly changed as the peak shrank, so that by
the early 1990s, suicide rates for women were close to constant after age 40. In recent years, the middle age peak has reappeared, and by 2013, is almost as high as it
was in 1979. These changes are driven by changes in suicide rates in middle age.
Suicide rates among elderly women were approximately constant from 1979 to the
mid-1990s and, as has been the case for men, have been declining ever since.
The Gallup Healthways Wellbeing Index data started only in 2008, and are
therefore not useful for matching to these patterns. As a substitute, the General Social Survey, which has a much coarser wellbeing question, is available from the early
1970s, though not for every year. The GSS question asks “Taken all together, how
would you say things are these days—would you say that you are very happy, pretty
happy, or not too happy?” We have coded this as 3, 2, and 1, and interpret this as a
life satisfaction question, as does the literature; although the word “happy” appears
in the question (in contrast to the Gallup ladder), it is offset by the “Taken all together,” though it is certainly possible that answers to the question are influenced
by the hedonic state of the respondent at the time of interview.
The GSS sample is small, between 1,400 and 2,000 per year, so we have
pooled years centered around the years used in Figures 3 and 4—the precise years
are marked on the panels in Figure 5—and we have split those data by sex and by
the same age groups as the suicide data. Some of these cells have few observations;
for those aged 15–19, and for those aged 85 and above, there are cells with around

18

50 observations. The minimum is for men aged 85 and above in the first group of
years, which has 33 observations (there are 74 women). For the other age, sex, and
year groups, all cells have more than 200 observations, except for men aged 75–84,
and women aged 75–84 in the first year group, where there are still more than 100
observations.
Figure 5 shows, as expected, that the estimates of life-satisfaction are noisy.
Given that we do not believe that life evaluation is very different for men and women, or has a different shape over life, putting them on the same graph gives an idea
of the margins of error of the estimates. It also allows us to see some fairly clear patterns. Most surprisingly, the U-shape over the life cycle is only apparent in the last
two panels—between 2004 and 2014—but not at all before that. Between 1977 and
1988, the GSS measure of life satisfaction rises with age, with a dip among the oldest
men and women, something that might be expected given failing health. Subsequently, there are some signs of a middle age dip in wellbeing, and of falling wellbeing after age 75, but recall the small sample sizes for these groups, especially men.
These graphs raise the intriguing possibility that the U-shape in life satisfaction is a
relatively recent phenomenon in the US: it is certainly not universal in all countries
and so cannot be a fixed biological trait; see Steptoe, Deaton, and Stone (2015).
As was the case in Section 2, it takes a great deal of imagination to match the
wellbeing patterns to the suicide patterns. Most immediately, there is no clear difference in age profiles of life satisfaction for men and women, in spite of their markedly different life-cycle profiles of suicide. In recent years, the increasing dip in
wellbeing for women in middle age matches the increasing rates of suicide in middle

19

age, but this does not work so clearly for men. Indeed, in the early period we have
men’s wellbeing and men’s suicide rising in parallel through much of the life cycle,
except for those aged 85 and over. Once again, these life satisfactions measures do
not line up in any obvious way with the suicide data.
For the years since 2008, we can use the Gallup Healthways Wellbeing Index
data to compare the age profiles of SWB with the suicide numbers. The ladder has
the U-shape for both men and women, and so cannot be matched with both sets of
suicide rates. Much more telling are the Gallup data on pain and on positive affect.
For pain, we would expect a steady increase with age, but in fact, there is a peak between ages 50 and 60 when 28 percent of the population report that they experienced a lot of pain yesterday, compared with 15 percent of those in their 20s, and 23
percent among those in their 70s and 80s; there is indeed some increase between
70s and 80s, as we might have expected. Figure 6 shows also that, for men, the middle-age peak increased from 2008 to 2013; the corresponding graphs for women in
the bottom panel have similar shapes, but the increase in the middle-age peak is only apparent in 2013. Figure 6 shows graphs for positive affect that look like the mirror image of the graphs for pain, attaining their lowest values in middle age.
We do not fully understand these data, nor their relationship with suicide.
Other national data in the US show an epidemic of increasing morbidity and mortality in middle age, at the same time as similar indicators for the elderly are improving.
Given this, we suspect that the peak in pain in middle age is both real and recent;
indeed, the same factors are possibly implicated in the dips in life evaluation and in
positive affect in middle age. If so, the U-shape is not a constant of biology, but is at

20

least in part a response to recent events among middle aged Americans. The link
with suicide is clearly clouded, if only because of the different patterns for men and
women. Note again, however, that Figure 3 shows increasing suicides among middle-aged men in recent years, with a magnitude that is actually two to three times
larger than the (apparently much more dramatic) increase among middle-aged
women; for men, the peak is less obvious, because there are so many more suicides
to start with so that the increase does not change the shape of the whole curve.
We currently have no firm explanation for the changing patterns in Figures 3
and 4. We suspect that increasing suicides among both middle-aged men and women in the US is tied to the recent middle-age epidemic of sickness (mental and physical distress) and death (not only suicides, but accidental poisonings from alcohol,
and from prescription and illegal drugs—particularly opioids—as well as a large
category of deaths by poisonings where intent is unclear). Whether rising pain is the
cause of prescription drug use and misuse, or their consequence, or both, is not
presently clear. In any case, our best guess is that the patterns of positive affect and
of pain in Figure 6 are real and, when other patterns are allowed for, match the suicide data.
Unless the epidemic is reversed, recent declines in morbidity among the elderly will not persist when the current cohort of middle-aged Americans move into
old age.

5. Geographies of suicide
Figure 7 shows the state-by-state scatterplot of mean age-adjusted suicide rate

21

against the mean value of the ladder from the GHWBI data. In both cases means are
calculated over the years 2008 to 2013. We take men and women together and, in
order to avoid possible spurious effects from spatial variations in race and ethnicity,
we use data only on non-Hispanic whites, both from the CDC suicide data and from
the GHWBI.
The graph itself is somewhat more interesting than the correlation. Note in
particular the very large variation in suicide rates even over areas as large as states.
The lowest suicide rates are in New Jersey and Massachusetts (9.3 per 100,000), and
the highest are in the “suicide belt” of (from low to high) Idaho, Colorado, Utah, Arizona, Montana, Wyoming, New Mexico, and Nevada, all of which have suicide rates
of more than 20 per 100,000, with Nevada at 26.2. (Alaska at 19.5 is immediately
before Idaho.) Several of the states in the suicide belt are among the top states in
life evaluation. In this figure, Hawaii is an outlier in terms of high life evaluation;
Hawaiians generally report high life evaluation, but less than half of Hawaii’s population is non-Hispanic white, and this minority has substantially higher life evaluation than the majority.
The correlation in Figure 7 is 0.16, weak but positive, and is similar to that
reported by Daly, Oswald and Wu (2011), who interpret it as a “dark contrast” in
which relative effects are so strong that high general wellbeing drives the less fortunate to suicide. Inspired by this, we have redrawn Figure 7 using the fractions of
people whose ladder scores are zero or one (out of ten), less than or equal to two,
and less than or equal to three; the correlations of these measures with suicides
rates are essentially zero. Once again, we find no obvious univariate relationship be-

22

tween life evaluation and suicide. The correlations between suicide and positive affect and negative affect are also small and perverse. However, and as we shall see
repeatedly, there is a much stronger relationship between self-reported physical
pain and suicide, where the correlation is 0.39 over the 50 states.
We have also looked at the relationship between suicide and wellbeing at the
county level, which gives us many more data points as well as a wider range of variation. Because suicide is rare, and because many counties have small populations,
we need a run of years to get reasonable precision (or indeed any CDC estimates for
smaller counties), and the GHWBI data start only in 2008. Previous literature and
state-level data suggest that geographical suicides are persistent over time—for example, the suicide belt has been that way for many years—so we have used average
county level age-adjusted mortality rates for non-Hispanic whites for the whole period of ICD10, 1999–2013, and compared it with the GHWBI data from 2008 to
2013. This is not ideal, but will still turn out to be informative, if only because it
gives us the ability to look at the correlations between suicide and SWB while controlling for other factors.
We start with the 2,259 counties for which we have age-adjusted suicide
rates from the CDC as well as SWB data from the GHWBI. There is an extraordinary
range of suicide rates across counties, from 38.2 in Sierra County, NM, and 37 in Nye
County, NV to 5.3 in Holmes County, OH, and 5.4 in Rockland County, NY. Fourteen
of the twenty counties with the lowest rates are in New York or New Jersey. If we
confine ourselves to the 2,102 counties with at least 100 observations in the GHWBI,
the correlation between suicide and the ladder is now negative, –0.12, and between

23

suicide and positive (negative) affect are negative (positive), –0.18 (0.11). The
strong positive correlation with physical pain is 0.34, similar to that across the
states.
Table 3 presents regression results of suicide rates on the SWB measures,
physical pain, and a range of other variables suggested in the literature. An immediate question with these regressions is whether the cutoff of 100 for observations in
GHWBI is sufficient, so we present regressions with cutoffs of 250, 500, and 1,000.
Because the county sample sizes in the GHWBI are almost perfectly correlated with
county population sizes, higher cutoffs, while reducing measurement error in the
estimated means, also drop smaller-population counties from the analysis. As a result, there is no reason to suppose that, even in the absence of measurement error,
the parameters being estimated will be the same. The effects of the cutoff can be illustrated by looking at New Jersey and Montana. With the cutoff of 100 in the first
column, 22 Montana counties and 21 New Jersey counties are included; by the time
we reach the cutoff of 1,000 in the last column, there are only 3 Montana counties
left, but 17 in New Jersey. Even so, the qualitative pattern of results does not change
greatly across the table.
All of the regressions include controls for the nine census divisions, with New
England as the omitted category. Suicides become more prevalent as we move South
and West, with the Mountain dummy picking up much of the suicide belt; there are
around 9 more suicides per 100,000 in the Mountain division than in New England.
With these geographical controls, the ladder has the expected protective effect, but
negative affect (anger, stress, and worry) is also, and presumably perversely, protec-

24

tive. Positive affect is not significant, and physical pain, as always, is a strong risk
factor. The effect of pain is large; an increase of one standard deviation, 5.9 percentage points (the median is 26 percent), is associated with 0.57 additional suicides per
100,000. As was the case with the age profiles, physical pain appears to be an important correlate of suicide.
Income and income inequality are both estimated to be significantly protective against suicide; we do not show it, but conditional on the log of income, the
number of years of education has no effect. We have already noted the protective
effect of education in Section 2, but there we could not control for income, which
may be the mechanism through which education operates. Either way, suicide—like
many other causes of death—is less common among those with the higher socioeconomic status that comes with income or education. It is often claimed that local
income inequality is itself a cause of mortality, but the results here show the opposite effect for suicide; previous literature has been inconsistent, see Smith and
Kawachi (2014).
Religious denominations are often thought to be protective, and all are here
estimated to be so; there is no sign here of the often argued greater propensity of
Protestants over Catholics to kill themselves, see Durkheim (1897) and Becker and
Woessmann (2015). Belonging to the “other Christian” group, here mostly evangelicals, is always protective, but becomes more so on the right of the table among the
larger counties. All religious denominations do better than those in the omitted category, which comprises non-Christians/non-Jews (Jews are included as one of the
religious groups) and those who espouse no religion at all. We note the possibility

25

of ecological fallacy; if religion protects individuals, we would expect it to show up
in the county aggregates, but the reverse is not true.
We have also added variables constructed from the Behavioral Risk Factor
Surveillance Survey which collected data in 2001, 2003, and 2004 on gun ownership
as well as information on whether an individual is at risk for alcohol abuse; guns are
the primary means of committing suicide for men, and alcohol is an important risk
factor. The BRFSS is large enough to calculate averages of these measures at the
county level, though only for 1,237 counties, which are further reduced by the selection criteria in Table 3. The fraction owning a gun is not significant conditional on
the census division dummies, even though there is substantial county level variation
in gun ownership within divisions. The alcohol abuse variable is, however, highly
significant with a coefficient of 19.2 when added to the final regression in the table.
The mean of the alcohol abuse variable is 0.05, and ranges from 0 to 0.16.
Our purpose here is not to claim new findings on the spatial correlates of suicide in the US; for a comprehensive recent analysis see Phillips (2010). What is new
here is the inclusion of the SWB measures; evaluative wellbeing is modestly protective against suicide, but so is negative affect. The effects of physical pain are what
might be expected; the importance of pain and of alcohol in the county cross-section
matches their link to changes in suicides over time, particularly among middle-aged
Americans.
We conclude with a brief examination of international patterns in suicide,
using data from the World Health Organization’s mortality database. Figure 8
shows the scatter plot of suicide rates against mean ladder scores from the Gallup

26

World Poll using data from 2006 to 2010 for both. While there are a few other countries with data, the suicide information does not extend much beyond Europe and
Latin America, both of which are included in the figure. The blue points are for the
rich European and OECD countries, the green points are for Latin America, and the
red points are for Russia and the former satellites of the former Soviet Union. Note
that the US is not at all exceptional, and is in the middle of the cluster of points on
the right. But there are several countries, including France, Belgium, Finland, and
Austria, where suicide rates are much higher, though none are as high as the highest
of the eastern European countries, with Belarus, Russia, and Kazakhstan leading the
group with rates more than twice as high as in the US.
Bray and Gunnell (2006) earlier found positive relationships between life satisfaction (from the European Values Survey in 1999/2000) and suicide rates for
western European countries, as well as for eastern European countries, when each
group is examined separately, but a negative relationship when the two groups are
pooled. The eastern European countries have low life evaluations, and high suicide
rates. These results are replicated for the Gallup data in Figure 8. The addition of the
Latin American countries groups them firmly with the western European pattern;
they have somewhat lower ladder scores and somewhat lower suicide rates. Our
other wellbeing measures are also related to suicide rates in less than obvious ways.
Pain is positively correlated with suicide within the three regions, but not across
them. Positive affect is negatively correlated with suicide rates both within and
across regions, while negative affect, as was the case in the American counties, is
negatively correlated with suicides.

27

Durkheim believed that suicide increased with age, as was true in his data. In
31 of these 52 countries, the suicide rate of those aged 60 and above is greater than
the suicide rate of those aged 25–59. For men, the suicides rates for the older group
are larger in 41 countries; for women in 31. As shown in Steptoe et al (2015), the Ushape in life evaluation, while evident in the English-speaking rich countries, is not
apparent in the rest of Europe nor in Latin America. It is thus reasonable to ask
whether international patterns in life evaluation match age patterns in suicide rates.
Figure 9 plots the ratio of suicides rates of those 60 and above to those 25–59
against the ratios of the mean ladders for the two age groups. This analysis is unaffected by rescaling of ladder by countries, and is thus robust to cross-country (or
cross-region) differences in reporting styles, or at least those that can be represented by rescaling. And indeed, here there is a strong negative link between suicide and
life evaluation; in countries where the old are more likely to kill themselves, the old
are more likely to have lower life evaluations.

6. Discussion and conclusions
This paper compares suicide rates with self-reported measures of wellbeing in the
hope that each set of measures might provide insights about the other. We follow
Bray and Gunnell (2006) in investigating the possibility that suicide and life satisfaction, or measures of hedonic affect, are markers of population mental health. We do
this in a range of contexts, over geographies, over time, over life cycles, and over the
days of the week, hunting for insights and tests of theory. We also look at pain, to

28

test whether “yesterday” questions work, because pain is a risk factor for suicide,
and because pain has strong effects on SWB, thus providing a link.
There is an economic theory of suicide, rooted in intertemporal choice theory,
which says that people kill themselves when the utility of being dead exceeds the
utility of continuing to live defined as some forward looking integral. It predicts that
higher utility people are less likely to kill themselves, because they have more to
lose, and thus suggests that people are more likely to kill themselves as they age. An
alternative to the economic theory is that suicide is often an impulsive choice, depending on feelings now, without much thought for the future. One hardly has to
subscribe to economists’ notions of rationality to agree that for those with accumulating burden of disease, including worsening pain, suicide can be a rational decision, and indeed the right to medical assistance in committing suicide under such
circumstances is legally recognized in a number of countries.
Our findings suggest that, with some exceptions, suicide has little to do with life
satisfaction. Correlations between suicide and measured wellbeing are either absent
or inconsistent. Differences in suicides between men and women, between Hispanics, blacks, and whites, between age groups of men or of African Americans, between
countries or US states, between calendar years, and between days of the week, do
not match differences in life evaluation. Suicide rates in the US have risen in recent
years, though there is no evidence of decreases in SWB. Marriage and education do
indeed bring more life satisfaction and less suicide, though the relative sizes of the
effects do not match the effects on SWB, even for men and women separately. For
example, when we control for age, sex, and race, being married comes with higher

29

life evaluation and lower suicide. For men, and as we should expect, those who are
divorced have lower wellbeing and higher suicide rates, but the magnitude of the
effect on suicide is much larger relative to the effect on life evaluation than is the
case for marriage. When we look at widowers, there is more suicide, comparable to
the suicide associated with divorce, yet widowed men actually show slightly higher
life evaluation.
Women’s suicide rates peak in middle age, men’s in old age; yet both men and
women show a U-shape in life evaluation. Suicide rates among non-Hispanic blacks
fall with age alongside declines in life evaluation.
Sixteen percent of suicides happen on Mondays and only thirteen percent happen on Saturdays. Yet life evaluation is the same on all days of the week. Monday suicides can be matched to positive affect, or to pain, if “suicide decision utility” depends on both today’s feelings and the change since yesterday. Given that positive
affect is not consistently connected to suicide in other contexts, and that pain is, it is
possible that the higher pain on Mondays affects both positive affect and suicide, but
not overall life satisfaction. These results are also hard to reconcile with an economic theory of suicide that emphasizes the benefits of future (dis)utility versus the
(dis)utility of dying unless, for some unknown reason, death itself is less unpleasant
on Mondays.
Age patterns of suicide are different for men and for women, and have changed
differentially over time. The most important facts about suicide over the last decade
is that for white non-Hispanics, both men and women, (a) suicide is rising overall,
which is driven by (b) increasing suicide rates in middle age, offset by (c) falling sui-

30

cide rates among the elderly. The suicide epidemic in middle age is the tip of an iceberg of mortality and morbidity, especially pain, among middle-aged Americans. In
the Gallup data, “pain yesterday” is now higher in middle age than in old age. We do
not know what is driving this epidemic, but it is showing up in at least some of the
SWB indicators, including low positive affect in middle age, and perhaps even as
some of the dip in middle age life evaluation, the presence of which we find little evidence of prior to the last decade. Our tentative hypothesis is that pain is an underlying fundamental cause here, and that it is driving changes in both suicides and SWB.
There are very large variations in suicides across states in the US (by more
than a factor of two) and across counties (by more than a factor of seven.) At the
county level, but not the state level, suicide rates are lower where life evaluation is
higher, but higher where negative affect is lower, and uncorrelated with positive affect. Pain is strongly correlated with suicide, across both states and counties, and is
a significant predictor even conditional on standard predictors, such as income, income inequality and religious denomination.
Across 52 countries in the OECD, Latin America, and Eastern Europe, suicide
rates are neither well nor consistently correlated with wellbeing measures. In a majority of countries, suicides are higher among the elderly, particularly for men. In
countries where life evaluation is high in old age relative to middle age, suicides are
relatively low in old age, and vice versa. At least some of this is driven by the extreme negative effects of the transition on the elderly in Eastern Europe.

31

7. List of references:
Becker, Gary S., and Richard A. Posner, 2004, “Suicide: an economic approach,” preliminary and unpublished.
http://storage.globalcitizen.net/data/topic/knowledge/uploads/20090519114107
05.pdf
Becker, Sascha O., and Ludger Woessmann, 2015, Social cohesion, religious belief,
and the effect of Protestantism on suicide,” CESifo Working Paper 5288, March.
Bray, Isabelle and David Gunnell, 2006, “Suicide rates, life satisfaction and happiness
as markers for population mental health,” Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 41(5), 333–7.
Case, Anne and Christina H. Paxson, 2005, “Sex differences in morbidity and mortality,” Demography, 42(2), 189–214.
Chen, Joe, Yun Jeong Choi, Kohta Mori, Yasuyuki Sawada, and Saki Sugano, 2010,
“Socio-economic studies on suicide: a survey,” Journal of Economic Surveys, 26(2),
271–306.
Cutler, David M., Edward L. Glaeser and Karen E. Norberg, 2001, “Explaining the rise
in youth suicide,” in Jonathan Gruber, ed., Risky behavior among youths: an economic
analysis, Chicago. UC Press for NBER.
Daly, Mary C., Andrew Oswald, Daniel Wilson, and Stephen Wu, 2011, “Dark contrasts: the paradox of high rates of suicide in happy places,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 80(3), 435–42.
Daly, Mary C., and Daniel J. Wilson, 2009, “Happiness, unhappiness, and suicide: an
empirical assessment,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 7(2–3), 539–
549.
Daly, Mary C., Daniel J. Wilson, and Norman J. Johnson, 2013, “Relative status and
well-being: evidence from U.S. suicide deaths,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
95(5), 1480–1500.
Deaton, Angus, 2012, “The financial crisis and the wellbeing of Americans,” Oxford
Economic Papers, 64(1), 1–26.
Durkheim, Emile, 1951 (1897) Suicide: a study in sociology, translated by John A.
Spaulding and George Simpson, New York. The Free Press.
Goldsmith, SK, TC Pelimar, AM Kleinman, WE Bunney, 2002, eds., Reducing Suicide: a
national imperative, Washington, DC. National Academies Press.

32

Goudie, Robert J. B., Sach Mukherjee, Jan-Emmanuel de Neve, Andrew Oswald, and
Stephen Wu, 2014, “Happiness as a driver of risk-avoiding behavior: theory and an
empirical study of seatbelt wearing and automobile accidents,” Economica, 81 (324),
674–697.
Hamermesh, Daniel S. and Neal M. Soss, 1974, “An economic theory of suicide,” Journal of Political Economy, 82(1), 83–98.
Helliwell, John F., 2007, “Well-being and social capital: does suicide pose a puzzle?”
Social Indicators Research, 81(3): 455–96.
Keivumaa-Honkanen, Heli, Risto Honkanen, Heimo Viinamäki, Kauko Hiekkilä,
Jaakko Kaprio, Markku Koskenvuo, 2001, “Life satisfaction and suicide: a 20–year
follow-up study,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 158(3), 433–9.
McMahon, Kathleen, 1983, “Short-term temporal cycles in frequency of suicide, US
1972–78,” American Journal of Epidemiology, 117(6), 744–50.
Layard, Richard, 2005, Happiness: lessons from a new science, London. Allen Lane.
Maldonado, George, and Jess F. Kraus, 1991, “Variation in suicide occurrence by time
of day, day of the week, month, and lunar phase,” Suicide and life-threatening behavior, 21(2), 174–87.
Philiips, Julie A., 2013, “Factors associated with temporal and spatial patterns in suicide rates across U.S. states, 1976–2000,” Demography, 50(2), 591–614.
Phillips, Julie A., Ashley V. Robin, Colleen N. Nugent, and Ellen L. Idler, 2010, “Understanding recent changes in suicide rates among the middle-aged: period or cohort
effects,” Public Health Reports, 125(5), 680–8.
Robbins, Lionel, 1932, An essay on the nature and significance of economic science,
London. Macmillan.
Smith, Nathan Daniel Lucia, and Ichiro Kawachi, 2014, “State-level social capital and
suicide mortality in the 50 U.S. states,” Social Science and Medicine, 120(2), 269–77.
Steptoe, Andrew, Angus Deaton, and Arthur A. Stone, 2015, “Psychological wellbeing, health, and ageing,” Lancet, 385(9968), 640–8.
Stone, Arthur A., Joseph E. Schwartz, Joan E. Broderick, and Angus Deaton, 2010, “A
snapshot of the age distribution of psychological well-being in the United States,”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107(22), 9985–90.

33

Stone, Arthur A., Stefan Schneider, and James K. Harter, 2012, “Day-of-week mood
patterns in the United States: on the existence of `blue Monday’, `thank God it’s Friday’ and weekend effects,” Journal of Positive Psychology, 7(4), 306–14.
United Nations, 2014, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population and
Development Database 2014,
http://www.un.org/en/development/desa/population/publications/development/
population-development-database-2014.shtml
World Health Organization, World mortality database, accessed 2014,
http://www.who.int/healthinfo/mortality_data/en/

34

Table 1: Life Evaluation, positive and negative affect, and suicide by age, sex and education, 2013
Ages 25-34
Outcome:
Suicide

Life Evaluation

Positive Affect
smile/enjoy/happy/not sad
Negative Affect
anger/worry/stress
Pain

Ages 35-54

Ages 55+

Education category:
Less than High School
High School
4-year College
All
Less than High school
High School
4-year College degree
All
LT High School

Men
26.43
29.34
9.95
23.4
6.52
6.60
7.13
6.77
0.81

Women
6.51
7.74
3.47
6.1
6.80
6.82
7.32
7.02
0.77

Men
25.95
32.06
16.98
27.0
6.22
6.53
7.22
6.73
0.76

Women
7.20
10.26
6.70
8.7
6.34
6.73
7.36
6.94
0.70

Men
26.53
32.47
23.80
30.4
6.16
6.77
7.49
6.95
0.77

Women
3.79
6.70
6.90
6.30
6.51
7.11
7.56
7.16
0.72

High School
4-year College
All
LT High School
High School
4-year College
All
LT High School
High School
4-year College
All

0.86
0.88
0.86
0.36
0.32
0.30
0.32
0.30
0.20
0.12
0.19

0.84
0.89
0.85
0.39
0.34
0.33
0.34
0.28
0.23
0.13
0.20

0.83
0.87
0.83
0.35
0.31
0.30
0.31
0.38
0.26
0.15
0.24

0.81
0.87
0.82
0.44
0.34
0.31
0.34
0.47
0.31
0.17
0.27

0.84
0.88
0.85
0.23
0.20
0.19
0.20
0.37
0.29
0.20
0.27

0.84
0.87
0.84
0.30
0.22
0.22
0.23
0.45
0.32
0.24
0.31

35

Table 2:
Circaseptan patterns of suicide, affect and life evaluation
Men

Today
Yesterday

Ladder

Positive Affect

Negative Affect

Pain

–11,831
(1.7)
–5,269
(0.7)

–22,410
(12.3)
12,821
(7.0)

10,045
(8.4)
–6,420
(5.4)

28,261
(5.2)
–22,686
(4.2)

Women
Today
Yesterday

Ladder
–1,107
(0.7)
–932
(0.4)

Positive Affect
–4,468
(7.0)
2,356
(3.7)

Negative Affect
2,129
(11.0)
–1,325
(6.9)

Pain
4,425
(5.2)
–4,272
(5.0)

Notes: Each column shows a regression of the number of suicide deaths (average for each day for 2008 to 2013) on the SWB measure for that day of the
week and for the previous day of the week. Absolute t-values are shown in parentheses.

36

Table 3: County level regressions of age-adjusted suicide rate on SWB and
other variables
Mean population
Median population
Number of counties
Ladder
Positive affect
Negative affect
Pain
Log income
S.d. log income
Fraction Catholic
Fraction Protestant
Fraction Jewish
Fraction Mormon
Fraction other Christian
Census Divisions
Mid-Atlantic
East North Central
West North Central
South Atlantic
East South Central
West South Central
Mountain
Pacific

n ³100

n ³ 250

n ³ 500

n ³1000

1.2
0.48
2,102
–1.28
(3.2)
–2.96
(0.8)
–11.1
(3.9)
9.61
(5.2)
–4.24
(8.8)
–4.85
(4.5)
–3.30
(2.2)
–4.91
(2.9)
–14.4
(2.2)
–6.62
(3.9)
–2.14
(1.3)

1.7
0.84
1,326
–1.42
(2.6)
–4.43
(0.9)
–16.8
(4.2)
15.5
(5.8)
–3.68
(6.5)
–7.89
(5.5)
–6.65
(3.8)
–8.23
(4.2)
–7.50
(1.2)
–9.99
(5.2)
–4.27
(2.3)

2.60
1.52
789
–3.35
(4.3)
1.25
(0.16)
–25.0
(4.5)
19.1
(5.3)
–3.50
(5.4)
–5.32
(2.9)
–9.79
(5.0)
–10.0
(4.3)
–8.52
(1.4)
–12.3
(5.6)
–7.4
(3.5)

3.95
2.63
431
–3.56
(3.2)
15.3
(1.3)
–20.2
(2.5)
33.0
(6.1)
–3.28
(3.9)
–3.05
(1.2)
–10.1
(4.2)
–10.1
(3.4)
–8.24
(1.3)
–11.8
(4.5)
–8.31
(2.9)

–1.19
(2.4)
–0.40
(0.9)
0.71
(1.5)
2.93
(5.9)
2.39
(4.4)
3.77
(7.4)
9.54
(19)
4.34
(8.8)

–1.12
(2.6)
–0.27
(0.7)
0.86
(0.8)
3.11
(6.6)
2.26
(4.2)
3.99
(7.9)
9.26
(19)
3.73
(8.3)

–0.48
(1.1)
0.47
(1.1)
2.15
(4.3)
3.87
(7.9)
3.55
(6.0)
4.72
(8.9)
8.89
(17)
4.02
(8.9)

0.01
(0.0)
1.00
(2.0)
2.75
(4.5)
4.44
(7.9)
4.48
(5.9)
5.43
(8.5)
8.69
(15)
3.40
(6.2)

Notes: Each column is a regression with the county age-adjusted mortality rate as dependent variable. n is the number of observations from the GHWBI surveys in each county. t–values in parentheses

37

Figure 1: Coefficients of matched variables on suicides and on ladder, 2009–
2013, men and women

Figure 2: Circaseptan pattern of suicides: average numbers of deaths per year

38

Figure 3: Suicides by age, selected years, men

Figure 4: Suicides by age, selected years, women

39

Figure 5: Life satisfaction (GSS) by age, selected periods, women in red

Figure 6: Positive affect and pain by sex and year: 2008 (dark blue) to 2013
(red)
40

Figure 7: Mean ladder and suicide in the US, 2008-2013, white non-Hispanics

Figure 8: Suicide and life evaluation across countries

41

Figure 9: Old versus young, suicide and life evaluation

42

