                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             BIOLOGICAL HEALTH RISKS AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

                                        Elizabeth Frankenberg
                                            Jessica Y. Ho
                                           Duncan Thomas

                                         Working Paper 21277
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21277


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2015




Ho is grateful for financial support from the National Institutes of Aging (grant T32AG000139 awarded
to the Duke Population Research Institute). The comments of Eileen Crimmins, Arun Hendi, Sam
Harper, John Komlos and Teresa Seeman have been very helpful. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Elizabeth Frankenberg, Jessica Y. Ho, and Duncan Thomas. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Biological Health Risks and Economic Development
Elizabeth Frankenberg, Jessica Y. Ho, and Duncan Thomas
NBER Working Paper No. 21277
June 2015
JEL No. I15,O10

                                               ABSTRACT

With populations aging and the epidemic of obesity spreading across the globe, global health risks
are shifting toward non-communicable diseases. Innovative biomarker data from recently conducted
population-representative surveys in lower, middle and higher income countries are used to describe
how four key biological health risks – hypertension, cholesterol, glucose and inflammation – vary
with economic development and, within each country, with age, gender and education. As obesity
rises in lower income countries, the burden of non-communicable diseases will rise in roughly predictable
ways and the costs to society are potentially very large. Investigations that explain cross-country differences
in these relationships will have a major impact on advancing understanding of the complex interplay
between biology, health and development.


Elizabeth Frankenberg                                  Duncan Thomas
Sanford School of Public Policy, RH178                 Department of Economics
Duke University                                        Duke University
201 Science Drive                                      Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708                                       Durham, NC 27708
and NBER                                               and NBER
e.frankenberg@duke.edu                                 d.thomas@duke.edu

Jessica Y. Ho
417 Chapel Drive
Department of Sociology
Box 90088
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708-0088
jessica.ho@duke.edu
1. Introduction
       Recent innovations in the measurement and interpretation of biological health risks in
population-representative surveys provide unparalleled opportunities to substantially advance
understanding of the relationships between economic development and the biological
underpinnings of population health, health disparities and health transitions. With the epidemic
of obesity spreading rapidly across the globe and no longer a major concern only in advanced
countries, the pressing need for this improved understanding cannot be overstated. Increases in
obesity are often accompanied by increases in the prevalence of a broad array of non-
communicable diseases (NCDs), many of which can be controlled, albeit with high-cost
treatments. At the same time, as life expectancy increases and fertility declines, populations are
aging worldwide. The combination of increasing NCDs and greater shares of older adults is
potentially a ticking time bomb that has critical implications for future economic development,
the allocation of resources between generations and population well-being in the years ahead. In
short, there is a compelling need from both a scientific and policy perspective for investment in
innovative research that provides a fuller understanding of the complex interplay between
biology, behavior, resources and the health of populations, and, thereby, the implications for
poverty, inequality and public finances.
       Because the most prevalent global health risks are shifting from infectious diseases and
inadequate nutrition to NCDs, we focus on how metabolic-related biological health risks vary
across developing and advanced countries, drawing out the implications for health and economic
development. After laying the foundation with anthropometry and hypertension, about which a
good deal is known at the population level, we examine blood-based health markers for which
population-representative data are more scarce. Specifically, we examine biomarkers for
cholesterol, blood sugar and inflammation, all of which have been implicated in major NCDs
including cardiovascular disease, strokes and cancers. These biological risk markers are selected
because, first, they are likely to play a key role in understanding the evolution of global health in
the years ahead and, second, they underscore the value-added of integrating insights from
biology with the behavioral sciences to understand that evolution.
       In recent years, the population health literature has shifted from relying primarily on self-
reported health status and anthropometrics to incorporate a broad array of physical health
measures. Self-reports contain valuable information about one’s own health status. Overall



                                                  1
general health status is arguably the best predictor of subsequent mortality. In part, this is
because self-reports summarize an individual’s entire health history, health behaviors and family
health history. However, these advantages also complicate interpretation of self-reports since
they reflect not only underlying health but also expectations about health, norms regarding health
and information about health. The latter is often related to use of health care and, for example,
randomized controlled studies have shown that individuals who are randomly assigned to a
group that receives more health care are more likely to report themselves as being in poorer
health. Inter-personal comparisons of health based on self-reported measures are, therefore, not
straightforward (Idler and Benyamini, 1997; Frankenberg and Thomas, 2002; Dow et al, 2010.)
       Biomarkers, in contrast, are quantified measures of general health and nutrition or
measures of physiological states that represent the functioning of specific organ systems and
physiological processes. In combination with self-reported health, biomarkers are valuable tools
for understanding the current and likely future trajectory of population health across the globe.
There are several important features of biomarkers. First, they are collected using standardized
protocols, at least within a study, and do not rely on the respondent’s knowledge of or
willingness to report a health condition. Second, they provide evidence on the prevalence of
specific risk factors and the underlying physiological mechanisms that affect population health as
well as exposures to environmental challenges and genetic predispositions to disease. Third,
biomarkers support estimation of sub-clinical risks in populations, that is, levels below cut-offs
used to define diseases, which provide a rich picture of the distribution of risks at the population
level. This is important for health policy planning and the design of forward-looking health
programs. Fourth, in many low income settings, biomarker measures have identified high levels
of undiagnosed, untreated and uncontrolled health conditions which significantly impacts
understanding the state of global health and NCD prevalence, particularly in settings with limited
health care access.
       For all these advantages, it is important to underscore that much remains unknown about
the optimal trade-off between the costs and benefits of collecting data on biological health risks
in population studies. Biomarker measurement can be expensive and is not straightforward
particularly in the context of complex population-based field studies that use different methods
to collect, store and assay biological samples. Standardization of the resulting biomarker values
so that they are comparable across studies remains a significant challenge. The development and
validation of protocols to harmonize methods and assure results from different studies are


                                                  2
comparable is an active area of ongoing research. Biomarkers for several important domains of
health, such as pain, are not fully developed and combining different biomarkers to construct a
picture of overall health taking into account interactions within and across biological systems
remains a challenge (McEwan and Stellar, 1993).
       Anthropometric measures, such as height, weight and arm circumference, have been
extensively used in the nutrition, health and economics literatures along with measures of
nutrient intake and, in some studies, energy output. Physical performance measures, such as lung
capacity assessments and grip strength have been included in some population surveys. Many
studies have measured blood pressure. Until recently, the collection of biological samples in
population-based field studies was rare because of costs, feasibility and perceived value of the
markers. In recent years, however, there has been a revolution in the technology of collection and
measurement of biomarkers, costs have fallen and a growing literature indicates that biomarkers
are likely to be a powerful tool for health research. In short, information about biological health
risks in population-based studies has the potential to dramatically transform the field and yield
important new insights into the links between health and economic development.


2. Data
       The relationship between life expectancy, one measure of overall population health, and
per capita gross domestic product (GDP) is displayed in Figure 1 for eight countries. We use
individual-level measures of health collected in population-representative surveys conducted
recently in each of these countries to illustrate key points in the rapidly growing literature on the
links between health and development. In the figure, GDP is measured in 2010 in purchasing
power parity in US $ and life expectancy at birth is estimated for 2005-2010 by the United
Nations Population Division. Three lower middle income countries, Ghana, India and Indonesia,
are displayed in red, three upper middle income countries, China, South Africa and Mexico, are
in green and two upper income countries, Russia, and the United States (U.S.) are in blue. GDP
per capita ranges between $2,300 (Ghana) and $47,000 (U.S.) and life expectancy generally rises
with per capita GDP except for the cases of South Africa (where HIV-related mortality is high)
and Russia (where life expectancy is over 10 years lower for males than females). (Strauss and
Thomas, 2006.)
       The surveys were selected because they include multiple metabolic-related biomarkers
for male and female adults of all ages. For the U.S., we use the 2009/10 wave of the National


                                                  3
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), a repeated cross-sectional survey that
collects an extensive battery of health measures including bio-specimens for hundreds of assays.
Data for Russia, Ghana and India are drawn from the first wave of the Study on Global Ageing
and Adult Health (SAGE) surveys collected by the World Health Organization between 2007
and 2010. The surveys are designed to be representative of the adult population with an over-
sample of adults age 50 and older (Kowal et al., 2012). The Mexican Family Life Survey is a
nationally representative longitudinal survey of Mexicans, including those who move to the U.S.;
we use those who were living in Mexico at the time of the third wave which was collected in
2007-2012 (Rubalcava and Teruel, 2014). The National Income Dynamics Survey (NIDS) is a
nationally representative longitudinal sample of South Africans; we use the baseline survey
collected in 2008 (Liebbrandt, Woolard, and de Villiers, 2009). Data on the health of Chinese is
drawn from the 2009 and 2010 waves of the China Health and Nutrition Survey (CHNS), a
longitudinal survey of respondents living in 9 provinces in China. The Indonesia Family Life
Survey is a longitudinal survey that was representative of 83% of the Indonesian population at
baseline (in 1993); we use the fourth wave collected in 2007 (Strauss et al. 2009). All samples of
adults are restricted to those age 30 through 79 in each country. For recent reviews of the
literature, see Crimmins et al, (2010), Popkin, Adair and Ng (2012), Crimmins (2014), Ng et al
(2014) and Roth et al (2015).


3. Height, weight and body mass index
       Height and weight have been widely used as markers of health and well-being in the
nutrition, history and economic development literatures. Adult stature, an indicator of the
“biological standard of living” (Komlos, 1985), is predictive of morbidity, mortality and
economic prosperity, reaching back over time (in pioneering work by Fogel, 1994; Steckel and
Floud, 1997; Komlos and Baten, 1998) as well as in contemporary societies, particularly in lower
income settings (Strauss and Thomas, 1998; Batten and Blum, 2014). While part of height is
inherited, attained adult stature also depends on phenotype influences with nutrition and disease
insults during the first few years of life being pivotal (Martorell and Habicht, 1986). Adult
stature is largely determined in the first 24 to 36 months of life in the absence of large nutrition
or health shocks and so linear growth of young children has been a focus of a very large and rich
literature in the health and social sciences. A key advantage of attained adult height is that it is
fixed until older ages and so can be used to infer variation in health, nutrition and well-being


                                                   4
across cohorts. Among older adults, for whom shrinkage is important, leg length and arm length
have been shown to be good proxies for attained adult stature (McDade and Hayward, 2009).
       Weight is difficult to interpret without adjusting for height. Body mass index (BMI),
which is weight (in kilograms) divided by height (in meters) squared, has also been linked with
mortality; Waaler (1984) documented that, among Norwegian adults, low BMI (below 18.5) and
high BMI (above 28) are associated with elevated mortality risks. Similar patterns have been
described for mortality and morbidity risks in populations around the globe with those who are
overweight (BMI>25) and, especially, those who are obese (BMI>30) being at elevated risk of,
inter alia, cardiovascular diseases, stroke, diabetes, cancers, muscular-skeletal problems and
mortality (Dey et al., 2002; Must et al., 1999; WHO, 2000). Studies have shown that BMI affects
economic prosperity, after controlling height and other human capital characteristics (Strauss and
Thomas, 1997). BMI reflects the combination of energy expenditure (including types of physical
activity), energy intake (taking into account diet composition), genetic factors and other lifestyle
factors (such as stress exposures and smoking) and, for some, elevated BMI is indicative of
greater muscle mass and may not indicate poor health. BMI is not indicative of a specific health
risk but is a portmanteau proxy that may point to elevated risks and, on this score, has proved to
provide valuable information about the evolution of population health.
       Height and weight, which can be measured quickly and accurately in a field setting using
a portable stadiometer and scale, respectively, have been included in population-based surveys
for many decades. While measurement is straightforward, interpretation of BMI is complicated
since it reflects the combination of fat, muscle and body type. Several alternative anthropometric
indicators have been shown to provide useful additional information about health status
including waist circumference (an indicator of central adiposity), the waist to hip ratio, arm
circumference, leg and arm length and skinfold thickness. Recent technological innovations
suggest that body composition may be estimated with bioelectric impedance analysis in field
surveys.
       One useful summary indicator for our cross-country comparisons is the percentage of the
population that is overweight (BMI>25). It is displayed in Figure 2 by age and gender (in panel
A) and by education and gender (adjusting for age, in panel B). Similar comparisons of average
BMI and the fraction obese yield essentially the same overarching conclusions. The countries are
arrayed by level of per capita GDP as in Figure 1. The figures by age are non-parametric
estimates using locally weighted smoothed scatterplots (Cleveland, 1979). The estimates of the


                                                  5
association with education are predicted values from regression models that include linear
splines in education, with knots at 6 and 12 years of completed schooling, as well as indicator
variables for 10-year age groups. All models are estimated separately by gender for each country.
       Generally, the fraction of adults who are overweight rises with GDP until countries enter
into middle income and is essentially constant at higher levels of GDP. For example, among
adults age 45 to 54, about 20% are overweight in India, 30% in Ghana and Indonesia, 40% in
China, 60% in South Africa and over three-quarters are overweight in Mexico, Russia and the
U.S., the three highest income countries. The fraction overweight is higher in the two African
countries, given their GDP, particularly for females. Rates for females in Ghana are slightly
higher than the rates in Indonesia and China (where GDP is two to four times higher) and rates
for females in South Africa are close to those in the three high income countries (where GDP is
two to five times higher).
       In every country, the fraction overweight tends to rise with age to around 50 years and
then declines, reflecting both life course and cohort effects with the latter being more important
in middle-income countries like China that have enjoyed faster economic growth in recent
decades. In all but the most advanced countries, females are more likely to be overweight than
males. Figure 1a highlights two striking facts about gender differences. First, the female-male
gap is very large in the African countries with females being almost twice as likely to be
overweight as males which, along with the particularly high rates of BMI given GDP for
females, suggests that factors over and above resources may affect BMI in these and other
African societies as well as among African-Americans in the U.S. (Prentice, 2006; Flegal et al,
2010.) Second, the gender gap is small and possibly reversed among younger adults in the three
highest GDP countries where BMI is high and does not rise with GDP.
       Figure 2b displays the relationship between being overweight and education, a marker of
longer-run socio-economic status (SES) so that the figure provides evidence on how biological
health risks varies across the SES distribution, within each country, controlling age and gender.
In every country other than the U.S, the best educated males are far more likely to be overweight
than those with little education, even in countries where BMI is high. In South Africa and
Mexico, over 80% of those with the most education are likely to be overweight. In the U.S., and
most advanced countries, it is the less educated who are more likely to be overweight, as is the
case for Russian females. In the upper middle income countries, South Africa, Mexico and
China, the fraction of overweight females first rises with education and then falls. In the poorest


                                                 6
three countries, better educated females are more likely to be overweight than those with little
education, as is the case for males. The pattern (across levels of GDP) of BMI and obesity first
rising with education, then an inverted V shape and then declining and the pattern of females
leading males in this transition in a country are well-documented (Popkin 2001; Popkin and
Gordon-Larsen, 2004). While these comparisons of the shapes of the relationships are
informative, comparisons of the fraction overweight for specific levels of education across
countries is complicated since education levels do not have the same relative significance in
every country.
       Taking Figures 2a and 2b together, BMI and the fraction overweight tends to rise with
overall economic prosperity but tapers off at high levels of BMI and GDP. Within the poorest
countries, the fraction overweight rises with education for both males and females. In the richest
countries, better educated females are more likely to adopt behaviors that limit BMI and the
BMI-education profile is reversed. In the middle income countries this transition is evident
among females but not among males: better educated females are on the vanguard of changing
behavior in response to risks of being overweight. This, in conjunction with the fact that very
large fractions of well-educated males in middle income countries are overweight suggests that
there is both considerable scope and arguably an urgent need for programs that will stem the
apparently inexorable march towards populations with high rates of overweight and the attendant
metabolic disease burdens.


4. Hypertension
       High blood pressure, or hypertension, is associated with several lifestyle factors including
elevated BMI, greater stress, inadequate exercise, excess sodium in the diet, and tobacco
consumption. High blood pressure usually develops over many years and prolonged exposure to
elevated blood pressure can damage the inner lining of the arteries, leading to arteriosclerosis
(hardening of the arteries) and atherosclerosis (narrowing of the arteries). Moreover, biological
mechanisms underlying elevated blood pressure vary over the life course, with stiffness in the
arteries playing an increasing role with age. Elevated blood pressure is a major risk factor for
heart disease, stroke and kidney disease and has been implicated in later life cognitive decline
(Kannel, 2000; Levy et al., 1996).




                                                 7
        Blood pressure is straightforward to measure in a field setting.1 Stage 2 hypertension is
indicated when systolic pressure is 160 mmHg or higher or diastolic pressure is 100 mmHg or
higher and stage 1 hypertension is indicated when systolic or diastolic pressure are 140 and 90
mmHg or higher, respectively. Figure 3 displays the percentage of males (in Figure 3a) and
females (in Figure 3b) who are considered stage 2 hypertensive for each of three age groups in
each country. The percentage whose blood pressure as measured in the survey exceeds at least
one of the cut-offs for stage 2 hypertension is displayed by the solid dark bar for each age group.
The percentage whose blood pressure is below the cut-off but report using medication to keep
blood pressure low is displayed by the white bar. The sum of the heights of the solid and white
bars indicates the percentage who are measured as hypertensive (i.e. uncontrolled hypertension)
or on medication to lower blood pressure (i.e. controlled hypertension). This distinction between
controlled and uncontrolled hypertension is important. In order to avoid long-term damage to the
body system, clinical guidelines recommend that hypertension be controlled through lifestyle
changes, medication or both. As is evident from the heights of the solid bars in Figure 3, for
many people, hypertension is not controlled, particularly in lower income countries. This may
reflect that hypertension is not diagnosed or not treated, or that treatment is ineffective.
        Taking controlled and uncontrolled hypertension together, prevalence rises with age in
every country. At younger ages, rates of hypertension are generally higher among males, relative
to females but since the rate of increase with age tends to be faster for females, among older
adults females are somewhat more likely to be hypertensive than males. These general patterns
by age and gender are well-established for both developed and developing countries.
        There are two striking additional features of Figures 3a and 3b. First, the variation across
countries in the rates of hypertension, particularly rates of uncontrolled hypertension, is stunning.
Second, levels of uncontrolled hypertension are extremely high in many developing countries
and the vast majority of these cases are undiagnosed. This is profoundly troubling given the
likely future impact on the lives of these people and their families as well as the impact on the
public health sector.


1
  While measurement with a stethoscope and sphygmomanometer is considered the gold standard, the method
requires considerable training. It is used in NHANES. In field settings, blood pressure has been measured using
automated home monitors with an inflatable cuff placed around the bicep. The monitors are inexpensive, robust,
well-validated and straightforward to use. In the Indonesian, Mexican, South African and SAGE surveys, blood
pressure was measured using an Omron monitor with multi-size cuffs to allow for variation in bicep size in the study
populations.



                                                         8
       Moreover, South Africa stands apart from all other countries in the figure. In each age
group, rates of uncontrolled hypertension are the highest among South Africans by a substantial
margin: around 60% of South Africans age 60 to 79 are hypertensive (based on field-
measurement) and another 10% report controlling hypertension with medication so that over
70% of this age group suffers from stage 2 hypertension: this is a staggering rate in the
population. Even among adults age 30 to 44, almost 30% are hypertensive and less than 5%
report taking medication. Since the impacts of hypertension cumulate over time, these high rates
of hypertension and low rates of control raise serious concerns about the future health of the
population which, taken in combination with the high rates of obesity, have powerful
implications for the future burden of NCDs in South Africa and the concomitant demands on the
health system and public finances supporting that system. This burden is exacerbated by the high
rates of infectious disease, weak infrastructure and high rates of poverty in South Africa. While
the figures are not as dramatic, similar concerns arise in the other African country, Ghana, where
about 40% in the 60-79 age group are hypertensive and less than 10% are controlling their blood
pressure. The data suggest that without significant changes in health care and lifestyles, the
epidemic of obesity and hypertension that is sweeping through Africa will likely impose a heavy
burden on future generations.
       In Russia and the U.S., about 60% of the 60-79 age group are hypertensive but over 80%
of the Americans and over 50% of the Russians control hypertension with medication (Ikeda et
al., 2014). Approximately 30% of the 60-79 age group are hypertensive in India, China and
Mexico where about half of those people control blood pressure with medication. In Indonesia,
the overall percentage of 60-79 year olds who are hypertensive is also about 30% but those who
are not controlling blood pressure (the solid bar) is overwhelming relative to those who are
controlling blood pressure (the white bar). This reflects two factors. First, diagnosis rates in
Indonesia are exceptionally low. Only 5% of all males and females age 60-79 report having been
diagnosed as hypertensive. Second, of that 5%, only one in three is actually keeping blood
pressure below the cut-offs with medication; for the other two-thirds, either the medication is
ineffective or the reports of using medication are wrong. (Franklin et al, 1999; Blacher et al.,
2000; Izzo, Levy and Black, 2000; Kannel, 2000; Stevenson, 1999.)
       The lower panels of the figure display the percentage of males (in Figure 3c) and females
(in Figure 3d) who are hypertensive by three education groups. For males in all but the two
highest income countries, the fraction controlling hypertension tends to rise with education while


                                                  9
the fraction that is measured hypertensive does not vary much with education and so, overall,
total hypertension rates rise slightly with education. For females in the same countries, the
fraction measured hypertensive is lowest among those with the most education but there is no
consistent association between education and the fraction controlling hypertension or with total
hypertension rates. In the U.S., better educated males and females are more likely to be taking
medication and less likely to be measured hypertensive and so total hypertension rates decline
with education. In contrast with the striking patterns linking education and being overweight in
Figure 2, variation in hypertension with education is very modest. Public health programs that
result in improved control of blood pressure will likely benefit populations across the entire
spectrum of SES in many low income countries. (Addo, Smeeth and Leon, 2007; Busingye et al.,
2014; Colhoun et al., 1998; Ibrahim et al., 1995; Lee et al., 2012; Steyn et al., 2008; Witoelar,
Strauss and Sikoki, 2012; Wu et al., 2008).
       In sum, in middle and low income countries, the pay-offs are likely to be substantial for
policies that are effective in improving diagnosis and, when indicated, treatment of hypertension
among adults across the entire age spectrum. The returns to programs and policies that result in
lifestyle changes and medication use where appropriate are likely to be very high for individuals,
their families and society.


5. Other non-invasive measures of health and nutrition
       Some field surveys have included non-invasive activity-related measures in addition to
anthropometry and blood pressure. Measures that are also simple, accurate and inexpensive to
field include, for example, heart rate variability, lung capacity, grip strength, timed walks, timed
repeated stands from a sitting position, observing a respondent perform specific activities such as
walking in a straight line or standing on one leg and tests of fine motor skills. Accelerometers
and pedometers are increasingly being adopted in population-based studies to measure energy
expenditure over extended periods of time. While the link between many of these measures and
underlying biology is indirect, the measures do contribute to a fuller representation of the
physical health of an individual and, in many cases, provide a valuable complement to self-
reported activities of daily living (ADLs) and instrumental ADLs. However, interpretation of
activity-based measures can be complicated when they reflect both the capacity to perform the
activity and the respondent’s desire to perform. For example, the speed with which a respondent
stands from a sitting position reflects not only musculo-skeletal difficulties but also exuberance,


                                                 10
energy and other, related traits. Similarly, converting accelerometer counts to energy expenditure
is complicated by differences in body composition and variation in basal metabolic rates (Steptoe
and Wilkins, 2011).
       There is a long history of measurement of nutrient intake in field surveys. These studies
have used individual food intake recalls, food consumption at the household level or
measurement of food prepared and eaten in the home, converting food consumption to calories
and nutrients. Each of these approaches is thought to be subject to substantial measurement error,
albeit from different sources. Food recalls are usually asked of an individual respondent and
typically span the preceding 24 hours. They miss day to day variation in diets which will be more
important in higher income settings. Since extending the recall period is thought to result in a
greater understatement of food intake, studies have suggested making daily visits to the same
respondent for multiple days or asking respondents to complete food diaries over several days.
An alternative that is less demanding of respondent time is the collection of food frequency
diaries which typically focus on a specific set of food items (Wiehl and Reed, 1960). In general,
these approaches tend to be associated with under-reporting of food intakes (Black, Welch and
Bingham, 2000; Hill, 2001).
       A key advantage of food recalls and food diaries is that it is possible, in principle, to
obtain individual-specific measures of intakes. Since food consumption is typically measured at
the household level, it is difficult to attribute consumption to an individual. The same concern
arises with food that is weighed and measured since this is also typically conducted at the
household level. Consumption data usually cover at least a week and in some cases longer
periods of time and include food consumed at home and away from home. Respondents report
the quantity of each specific item purchased or consumed out of own production. Converting
consumption data to nutrient intakes relies on conversion tables that are not adjusted for quality
(which tends to rise with income), wastage (which tends to increase with income) or food
purchased but not yet consumed (which also tends to rise with income). The more aggregate the
consumption data and the more diversity in foods within the aggregate, the greater the
conversion error. Few surveys collect a roster of every person at each meal, including household
members and guests, which complicates even per capita measurement of intakes.
       Some studies have weighed and measured food by either visiting the household daily for
up to a week or by providing scales and asking the respondent to measure all foods consumed.
Food that is prepared and all leftovers are weighed and, in some cases, food consumed by each


                                                 11
individual is also weighed. This method is considered the most accurate method to measure
intakes and addresses concerns with errors in recall and conversion to nutrients. However, it is
extremely demanding of respondents and survey enumerators; in addition, it is difficult to
measure food eaten out of the home which imparts a systematic bias.
        The central issue for our purposes is that all these approaches to measurement of food
intakes are subject to substantial error. An alternative approach measures energy expenditure
using doubly-labelled water2 or indirect calorimetry. However, measurement of specific nutrient
intakes requires reliance on biochemical analyses of biological samples such as blood and urine.


6. Blood-based markers of health and health risks
        In contrast with the markers discussed thus far, there has been a revolution in the
collection and analysis of biological health risks in recent years. Whereas thirty years ago, very
few large-scale household surveys collected any biomarkers over and above anthropometry,
nowadays, biomarkers are routinely collected in many surveys across the globe. This reflects the
combination of two complementary forces. First, understanding of health outcomes has been
substantially enriched by the integration of insights from the health and social sciences with
biologically-plausible models of causal mechanisms (McEwen, 1998; Crimmins and Seeman,
2004; Crimmins and Finch, 2006). These models have elucidated the complex biologic and
socio-economic underpinnings of health inequalities, provided the foundation for models of
health and health transitions over the life course and highlighted how, for some, the impact of
health insults cumulate over the life course and may present as physiological deterioration at
older ages. These insights have powerful implications for understanding the links between health
and development.
        The second force underlying this revolution in health measurement is the dramatic
decline in the costs of collecting biomarkers in household surveys because of new technologies.
There are four primary approaches to collecting and analyzing biological specimens to measure
biomarkers. First, respondents are asked to visit a designated site where specimens are collected.
A key challenge with this design is that the health of those who participate in the study may not
be representative of the health of the entire target population. Of particular concern is that those
in worst health may not be willing or able to travel to the site and those with the highest value of

2
 Doubly-labelled water contains a known concentration of stable isotypes of hydrogen and oxygen. As energy is
expended, the body produces carbon dioxide and water and the differences in the isotype elimination rates provide
an estimate of total energy expenditure.


                                                        12
time (who are also likely to be in good health) may be unwilling to travel to the site and
participate. The distribution of health of those included in the sample is likely to be sparse in
both the lower and upper extremes. Several studies have adopted this approach although few
have described the likely implications of sample selectivity for population estimates of
prevalence and associations with individual and community-level characteristics.
       The second approach essentially takes the clinic to the respondent. NHANES, a pioneer
of this approach, has been fielded since the early 1960s in the United States by the National
Center for Health Statistics. A mobile examination center (MEC), comprising several large
trailers equipped with state-of-the-art medical equipment are parked in a neighborhood and
respondents undergo a complete physical examination in the MEC. Some biomarkers are assayed
immediately; for others, specimens are stored for later analyses in a laboratory. All assays are
conducted using best practices and, where necessary, are validated against an established
reference laboratory. It is argued that NHANES provides the best estimates of population health
in the U.S. although participant non-response is an ongoing challenge. A small number of studies
have replicated the NHANES approach but a key impediment to widespread adoption of the
model is the cost of the MEC.
       The third approach collects specimens in the home and conducts assays at a later time.
Collection, storage and analysis of urine and venous blood samples are relatively complicated.
For some biomarkers, samples need to be assayed within a brief window after collection,
samples needs to be fractionated with protocols depending on the target biomarkers and in some
cases bio-specimens need to be collected over an extended period of time and thus involve
multiple visits with the respondent. However, for several bio-specimens, such as saliva, hair and
nail clippings, collection and transportation to a laboratory for analysis is inexpensive and
straightforward in complex field studies and protocols have been established to measure many
biomarkers with these specimens including, for example, endocrine and inflammatory responses,
infections, exposures to toxins, markers associated with cancers and genetic material such as
DNA and RNA.
       In this vein, dried bloods spots (DBS) are a potentially powerful bio-specimen which
have been collected in the home in several complex field studies in recent years and are being
used to measure a rapidly growing number of biomarkers. Collection of DBS is simple: drops of
whole blood are collected from a finger (or heel) prick onto absorbent filter paper which is then
dried and stored. The cards are easy to transport to a laboratory where a disc is typically punched


                                                  13
out and an assay is conducted. DBS have been used to screen for diseases among newborn babies
since the early 1960s (Guthrie and Susi 1963), have been used in many epidemiological studies
and are increasingly adopted in population surveys (McDade, Williams and Snodgrass, 2007). A
wide array of analytes have been measured using DBS including, for example, metabolic and
nutrition-related markers, HIV, hepatitis and infectious diseases, inflammation markers, cortisol,
testosterone, DNA and RNA. For some assays, the fact that each spot yields a relatively small
volume of blood can be a challenge. In addition, widely-used protocols for cross-validation of
assay implementation across different laboratories have not been fully established and
comparisons of assay results across studies are not straightforward (Crimmins et al, 2014).
However, progress is being made on both of these fronts.
       The fourth approach to biomarker measurement exploits recent advances in the
technology of point-of-care monitors. These portable monitors are usually battery-powered and
typically use capillary blood from a finger prick – thereby exploiting the advantages of the third
approach to biomarker measurement – while also providing information to the respondent at the
time of the assessment – a key advantage of the second approach, bringing the clinic to the
home. This is a significant and important advantage during a lengthy interview and is especially
valuable in settings where health service use is constrained by price, access, quality or
respondents’ resources. Regular measurement of known levels of the biomarker using quality
control strips provided by the manufacturer assures the monitor is accurate and measures do not
drift during the field period. The key limitation is that there are relatively few portable point-of-
care monitors that are robust enough and have been validated for complex field settings (as
opposed to a doctor’s office).
       The HemoCue photometer is a point-of-care monitor that has been successfully used in
numerous studies to measure hemoglobin (Hb) in the home. It is one of the earliest point-of-care
monitors developed and has been used since the late 1980s (Bridges, Parvin and van Assendorf,
1987). It requires only a small sample of blood from a finger stick; it is inexpensive, very robust
and portable; does not require electricity or refrigeration, displays the measure within seconds
and has been shown to have high levels of specificity and sensitivity in very diverse settings.
Indeed, the HemoCue photometer has provided important population-representative evidence on
the prevalence of this indicator of iron deficiency in populations across the globe.
       We examine three biological risk factors that have been implicated in cardiovascular
disease, stroke and premature mortality: total cholesterol and glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c)


                                                  14
are indicative of metabolic functioning while C-reactive protein (CRP) is a marker of
inflammation that has broader implications for health and well-being. All three are measured
using blood samples although the measurement strategy varies across countries and biomarkers.


Total cholesterol
       High levels of cholesterol put individuals at risk for cardiovascular disease. Total serum
cholesterol levels are related to coronary heart disease and, at some age, tend to increase the risk
of cardiovascular and all-cause mortality (Anderson, Castelli, and Levy, 1987; Weverling-
Rijnsburger et al., 2003). The three components of cholesterol are low density lipoprotein (LDL),
very low density lipoprotein (VLDL) and high density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol. HDL
cholesterol has antioxidant and anti-inflammatory functions and its benefits include the removal
of excess cholesterol from blood vessels, prevention of blood vessel blockages, promotion of
blood flow and improved innate immunity (Toth, 2005; Feingold and Grunfled, 2011). Low
levels of HDL cholesterol are associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular disease
incidence and mortality including coronary heart disease, coronary artery disease and stroke
(Barter and Rye, 1996; Castelli et al., 1986; Gordon et al., 1989; Weverling-Rijnsburger et al.,
2003). In contrast, LDL cholesterol deposits on the inside of blood vessels and creates plaque.
Whereas HDL and total cholesterol are not affected by whether an individual has fasted prior to
measurement, this is not the case for LDL. Since requiring study participants to fast, and
monitoring their fasting behavior, substantially complicates field work, most studies have
measured only HDL and total cholesterol.
       We focus on total cholesterol which has been measured in four of the studies we examine
using three of the different methods described above. In the United States, NHANES brought the
clinic to the respondent. In China, after an overnight fast, blood was drawn in the home, frozen,
and transported to a national central lab in Beijing. In Indonesia and Mexico, a point-of-care
monitor, the CardioChek Analayzer, was used to measure total cholesterol in the home. Recent
advances have established that total cholesterol can be measured in DBS.
       Results are presented for the percentage of the adult population age 30 through 80 years
for whom measured total cholesterol indicates a high risk of heart disease (240mg/dl or higher).
(Jellinger et al., 2012). Since cholesterol can be controlled with medication, this percentage is
adjusted to include the percentage of the population who report themselves as being on such
medication and whose measured total cholesterol indicates successful control (<240 mg/dl). This


                                                 15
adjustment is made for the United States and Indonesia; medication use to control cholesterol is
not reported in the China or Mexico studies. The fraction of the population on medication is tiny
in Indonesia (less than ½%) and the adjustment makes no difference in the figures. It is,
however, an important adjustment in the U.S., as explained below.
       Percentages with high total cholesterol (or on medication) are displayed by age in Figure
4a and by education in Figure 4c, estimated separately for males and females. Among females,
the levels and variation with age are remarkably similar in Indonesia, China and Mexico. The
percentage rises steeply with age from age 30 to around 50. Among females age 50 and older,
about one in five have high total cholesterol, and, among these older females, the percentage
does not vary with age. Among males, only about one in ten has high total cholesterol or is on
medication and the link with age is muted, rising slightly to around age 50 in China and Mexico
and not varying much with age in Indonesia. In the U.S., the patterns are completely different in
two key dimensions. First, the percentage with high total cholesterol or on medication rises
dramatically with age from about one in 10 among younger adults (age 30-39 years) to over half
of older adults (age 70-79 years). The majority of this age gradient reflects higher rates of
medication among older adults: among those who either have high total cholesterol or are on
medication, 15% of those in their thirties and 80% of those in their seventies are controlling
cholesterol with medication. Second, the female disadvantage in total cholesterol in Indonesia,
China and Mexico is not apparent in the U.S.
       The optimal cut-off to identify elevated health risks is not clear and it is not obvious that
a single cut-off is appropriate across all settings included in the figure. We present estimates
using a cut-off rather than levels of measured total cholesterol because methods for adjusting
measured levels for medication use have not been established. Selecting a lower cut-off
(>200mg/dL) increases the percentage of the population with elevated risks to between 35 and
40% in Indonesia, China and Mexico and to about 60% in the United States (including those on
medication) but has little impact on the comparisons across countries and demographic groups.
       The relationships between high total cholesterol and education, adjusted for age, are
displayed in Figure 4c. For males and females in China and the U.S., the education gradients are
not significantly different from zero. In Indonesia, for both males and females, the percentage of
the population with high total cholesterol rises with education (by 0.7 percentage points for each
year of education). In Mexico, the percentage rises at lower levels of education for females but
rises very dramatically at higher levels of education among males. Controlling for age, one-


                                                 16
quarter of Mexican males has high levels of total cholesterol.3 (Perova et al, 2001; Witeolar,
Strauss and Sikoki, 2012; Yan et al, 2012.)


Glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c)
        The prevalence of diabetes mellitus, which is indicated by poor control of blood glucose
levels, is thought to be growing rapidly in both developed and developing countries. This
reflects, in part, aging of populations (since the prevalence of type 2 diabetes rises with age) and
the worldwide epidemic of obesity (a powerful diabetes risk factor). The majority of population-
based estimates of glucose metabolism have relied on fasting blood samples which are
complicated to collect in a field setting. Several recent studies have relied on glycosylated
hemoglobin (HbA1c) which can be assessed without fasting. HbA1c is a measure of plasma
glucose concentration which, in turn, is indicative of average blood glucose levels over the
previous three months. HbA1c levels are elevated when blood glucose levels are not controlled
and are used to indicate diabetes mellitus which is associated with cardiovascular disease, kidney
disease and retinopathy (Rohlfing et al., 2000; Selvin et al., 2010; Khaw et al., 2004; Selvin et
al., 2010).
        Figures 4b and 4d display the percentages of the population with measured HbA1c that is
elevated (>6.5%) or who report being on medication to control blood sugar in China, Mexico and
the United States. Assays were conducted immediately after collection of blood in China and the
U.S. using high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and were conducted in the home
using the in2it A1c Analyzer in Mexico. Measures using the in2it A1c analyzer have been shown
to correlate well with HPLC assessments (Martin et al., 2010).
        Diabetes is usually indicated when two recordings of HbA1c are at least 6.5%; however,
the data used here are based on a single measure for each respondent. Nonetheless, the first and
most striking fact is that rates of elevated HbA1c are extremely high in Mexico: fully one-third
of adults age 30 through 79 are likely to suffer from diabetes. This is about twice the rate in the

3
  Using data from the same four countries, we have also explored levels of HDL cholesterol, the “good” cholesterol,
low levels of which are risk factors for poor health outcomes. Using 40g/dL as a cut-off, about one-quarter of
Chinese and one-half of Americans have low levels of HDL (or cholesterol is controlled with medication). In
Indonesia and Mexico, over two-thirds of the population is estimated to have low levels of HDL. While it is possible
that this reflects high levels of infection in Indonesia and Mexico; the estimate for Mexico is higher than other
estimates from that country. The fact that both the Mexican and Indonesian studies used the CardioChek Analyzer
and blood was analyzed in the lab in the Chinese and American studies suggests the differences may reflect
differences in measurement protocols and underscores the importance of future research that validates biomarker
measurement protocols in field settings taking account of variation in temperature, humidity and handling of
materials.


                                                        17
United States which, in turn, is about twice the rate in China. In all three countries, elevated
HbA1c rises with age although the rates decline at older ages among Mexican and American
males. Other than for older Mexicans, there are no differences between males and females. Only
a small fraction of adults who report themselves as controlling blood sugar with medication do
not have elevated HbA1c: 1% in China, 2% in Mexico and only 4% in the U.S. In fact, over 70%
of the people who have elevated HbA1c in the U.S. also report taking medication and they
account for over two-thirds of those who are on medication. Clearly, rates of elevated blood
sugar levels are very high in Mexico and the U.S., even in the presence of diagnoses and
medication. Moreover, clinical trials have not demonstrated clear benefits to lowering
glycosylated hemoglobin using diabetes medications among diabetic patients (Action to Control
Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes Study Group, 2008; Selvin et al., 2008).
       As shown in Figure 4d, conditional on age, uncontrolled blood sugar or being on
medication tends to decline with education among females, particularly in the U.S. and among
Mexican females with at least primary schooling. Among males, the rates rise with education
among Chinese, are unrelated to education among Mexicans with high school education or less
and then decline, and decline with education among Americans. These patterns are similar to
those observed for BMI. Specifically, elevated health risks switch from rising with education to
declining with education as levels of development increase and females tend to be on the
vanguard of this switch (Barquera et al., 2013; Yan et al., 2012.)
       The extremely high levels of elevated HbA1c among Mexicans adults, particularly those
in their forties and fifties, and among those with less education is profoundly troubling. Diabetes
ranks among the top three causes of death in Mexico (Sistema Nacional de Información en
Salud, 2007). Given the close link between diabetes and both age and obesity, as developing
countries like Mexico age and as obesity levels also rise in other countries that are aging,
diabetes is likely to become a very serious burden on individuals, their families, the health
system and the public sector budget. It is not too early to experiment with and evaluate policies
that have the potential to affect these patterns.


C-Reactive Protein (CRP)
       Our final biological risk factor is a marker of inflammation, C-reactive protein.
Inflammation arises whenever there is an infection or injury and is a defensive response to a
potentially harmful challenge. Acute inflammation occurs when increased blood and leukocytes


                                                    18
are transported to the tissues that are under assault and the biological system returns to its normal
state within a few days. Prolonged or chronic inflammation occurs when acute inflammation
persists rather than resolving, which typically results in tissue damage or destruction. Acute
inflammatory processes have been implicated in atherosclerosis and the pathogenesis of
cardiovascular disease. Chronic inflammation reflects disease history and risks for future disease,
as chronic activation of inflammatory pathways may be set off by early exposure to infectious
diseases (Crimmins and Finch, 2006). Inflammation is also elevated among those who are
overweight and obese as well as those who are currently exposed to an infection or injury.
Inflammation is, therefore, a general marker of health and may be a valuable complement to
BMI and self-reported health status to indicate overall population health.
         CRP is one of many potential markers of inflammation. It is an acute phase protein that
reflects general systemic inflammatory response. Part of the immune response to infection, tissue
damage and injury involves increases in circulating levels of CRP. Elevated levels of CRP have
been found to be positively associated with cardiovascular disease incidence including
myocardial infarction, stroke and peripheral arterial disease; diabetes; metabolic syndrome; and
mortality in adults (Jenny et al., 2007; Kuller et al., 1996; Pradhan et al., 2001; Ridker et al.,
2000, 2003).
         Since chronic inflammation occurs over the entire life course, we present CRP levels for
all ages for the countries with CRP measures, Indonesia, China, and the U.S., in Figure 5a. The
percentage of the population with CRP > 3 mg/L, a cut-off indicating chronic inflammation, is
displayed. In each country, elevated CRP rates decline during the first few years of life and then
rise after around age 10. In China, the rise is steep throughout the life course and in the U.S., the
increase tapers off in early middle age but remains elevated. In Indonesia, there is much less
variation with age. At each age, the probability of elevated CRP is similar in China and America,
but is substantially lower in Indonesia. Overall, only 10% of the Indonesian population has
elevated CRP whereas in China and the U.S., the rates exceed 25% and peaks for American
females around age 65 when half suffer from elevated inflammation.4
         Gender differences in CRP are relatively small in Indonesia and China, but high levels of
CRP are much more common among female adults relative to males in the U.S. Patterns by


4
  The substantially lower rates of elevated inflammation in Indonesia relative to China and the U.S. are surprising
given that overall infection rates are higher in Indonesia. They may reflect collection and assay differences; while
the reported estimates are designed to be translated into comparable units, CRP is measured from plasma in China
and the United States but from DBS in Indonesia..


                                                          19
education are displayed in Figure 5b, controlling age and gender, restricting the sample to adults
age 30 through 79 (to assure education has been completed). Elevated inflammation declines
substantially with education in the U.S., modestly in China and is essentially unrelated to
education in Indonesia. (Nazmi and Victora, 2007; Yan et al, 2012).


7. BMI and the other biomarkers
       As the epidemic of obesity spreads across the globe, increases in BMI will likely be
accompanied by higher rates of NCDs. It is, therefore, of substantial interest to compare the
associations between BMI and the other biomarkers across countries. Non-parametric estimates
of the associations for each country are presented for hypertension in Figure 6 and for elevated
HbA1c, total cholesterol and CRP in Figure 7. The estimates, which adjust for age and gender,
are displayed for adults age 30 through 79. For hypertension, total cholesterol and HbA1c, the
percentages include those who report being on medication to control the risk factor. Generally
speaking, as BMI increases, the fraction of the population with elevated levels of each of the four
biological risks also increases for every country. Consequently, the global epidemic of obesity is
likely to be accompanied by elevated rates of hypertension, metabolic health problems and
inflammation.
       As shown in Figure 6, as BMI increases, hypertension rates rise at roughly the same rate
in each country so that, for example, if average BMI for a country increases from 25 to 30, it will
be accompanied by a 10 percentage point increase in the share of the population that is
hypertensive. In part, the slopes reflect biological links between BMI and hypertension.
       Another striking feature of the figure is the tremendous heterogeneity across countries in
the level of hypertension for any particular BMI. There are three main groups of countries. First,
for any BMI, adults in Indonesia and Mexico are the least likely to be hypertensive: as an
example, among those whose BMI is 30 kg/m2, about 20% are hypertensive. Second, in the U.S.,
India and China, hypertension rates are higher with the risk rising to 30% for those with BMI of
30 kg/m2. Third, in Ghana, Russia and South Africa, hypertension rates are very high with the
risk being around 50% at this BMI level. These very large gaps across countries likely reflect
variation in lifestyle such as diet, exercise and stress, use of health care and possibly genetic
differences. Patterns in China suggest lifestyle differences are central. At low levels of BMI,
hypertension rates in China are very similar to those in the lowest group, Mexico and Indonesia,
but at high levels of BMI, hypertension rates are as high as in the second group, the U.S. and


                                                  20
India. The rapid rise in hypertension among heavier Chinese is a serious concern and presumably
reflects the impact of lifestyle differences among those who are overweight and obese relative to
those who are not. Moreover, the dual burden of elevated BMI and hypertension in the third and
possibly second group of countries will elicit a heavy price in terms of population well-being,
health care costs and, possibly, economic productivity in the years to come.
        As shown in Figure 7a, HbA1c also rises with BMI. The rate of increase is essentially
identical for all three countries -- Mexico, China and the U.S. -- except, perhaps, at very high
levels of BMI in Mexico where the curve is much flatter. A one unit increase in average BMI for
a country is associated with a one percentage point increase in the share of the population with
elevated HbA1c. Conditional on BMI, rates of elevated HbA1c are the same in China and the
U.S. but about twice as high in Mexico. This is not likely to be driven by genetic differences
since, controlling BMI, there are only small differences in the incidence of elevated HbA1c
among white Americans and Mexican-origin Americans in NHANES. To the extent the gap is
not due to differences in measurement, it is likely that diet, behavior and lifestyle factors play a
role. As BMI rises in Mexico, this evidence suggests it will be accompanied by high rates of
diabetes which will likely impose a very large burden on the society.
        The relationship between elevated total cholesterol and BMI is displayed in Figure 7b. As
BMI increases, elevated cholesterol rates rise and then decline; the point of inflection is at lower
levels of BMI in China, Indonesia and Mexico (between 25 and 30 kg/m2) than in the U.S. (30
kg/m2). At every level of BMI, cholesterol rates are much higher in the U.S. and lowest in China
and Mexico, with Indonesia lying between these extremes.
        Finally, Figure 7c displays the relationship between BMI and inflammation. In all three
countries, the relationship is flat until BMI reaches 25 and then rises. Given BMI, the rates of
inflammation are essentially identical in the U.S. and China but much lower in Indonesia. It is
not clear what explains this difference and it is possible that it reflects differences in
measurement.


8. Conclusions
        The evidence summarized in the figures suggests three main conclusions. First, as the
epidemic of obesity reaches more and more parts of the globe and as levels of BMI rise in lower
income countries, the burden of non-communicable diseases will also rise in roughly predictable
ways. The costs to individual, families and society are likely to be very large indeed. There is an


                                                   21
urgent need for a co-ordinated global effort to design, implement and evaluate programs and
policies that will forestall those costs.
        Second, there are important cross-country differences in the relationships among these
biomarkers which likely reflect differences in health conditions, the costs and organization of
health care services and possibly socio-economic, demographic and genetic heterogeneity.
Understanding the factors that underlie these differences remain important open questions and
new insights into these factors and mechanisms have the potential to yield powerful scientific
and policy conclusions regarding population health.
        Third, the technology exists to measure major biological markers of health and well-
being in even complex field studies but there is only limited evidence on these risk factors in
population-based studies. To be sure, there are significant measurement challenges and there is
considerable work to be done to cross-validate different measures in different settings. Such
investments are likely to have a major impact on scientific understanding of the complex
interplay between biology, health and development.




                                                22
References

The Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes Study Group. (2008). Effects of intensive glucose
   lowering in type 2 diabetes. New England Journal of Medicine 358: 2545-2559.

Addo, Juliet, Liam Smeeth, and David A. Leon. (2007). Hypertension in Sub-Saharan Africa: A systematic
   review. Hypertension 50: 1012-1018.

Akachi, Yoko, and David Canning. (2010). Health trends in Sub-Saharan Africa: Conflicting evidence from
   infant mortality rates and adult heights. Economics and Human Biology 8: 273-288.

Alley, Dawn E., Teresa E. Seeman, Jung Ki Kim, Arun Karlamangla, Peifeng Hu, and Eileen M. Crimmins.
    (2006). Socioeconomic status and C-reactive protein levels in the US population: NHANES IV. Brain,
    Behavior, and Immunity 20: 498-504.

Anderson, Keaven M., William P. Castelli, and Daniel Levy. (1987). Cholesterol and mortality: 30 years of
   follow-up from the Framingham Study. Journal of the American Medical Association 257(16): 2176-
   2180.

Barquera, S., I. Campos-Nonato, C. Aguilar-Salinas, R. Lopez-Riadaura, A. Arredondo, and J. Rivera-
   Dommarco. (2013). Diabetes in Mexico: Cost and management of diabetes and its complications and
   challenges for health policy. Globalization and Health 9:3.

Barter, P.J., and K.A. Rye. (1996). High density lipoproteins and coronary heart disease. Atherosclerosis
    121.1: 1-12.

Baten, Joerg and Matthias Blum. (2014). Why are you tall while others are short? Agricultural production and
    other proximate determinants of global heights. European Review of Economic History 18(2): 144-65.

Blacher, J., J.A. Staessen, X. Girer, J. Gasowski, L. Thijs, L. Liu, J.G. Wang, R.H. Fagard, and M.E. Safar.
    (2000). Pulse pressure not mean pressure determines cardiovascular risk in older hypertensive patients.
    Arch Intern Med 160(8): 1085-9.

Black, Alison E., Ailsa A. Welch and Sheila A. Bingham. (2000). Validation of dietary intakes measured by
    diet history against 24 h urinary nitrogen excretion and energy expenditure measured by the doubly-
    labelled water method in middle-aged women. British Journal of Nutrition 83(4): 341-354.

Black, Robert E., Cesar G. Victora, Susan P. Walker, Zulfiqar A. Bhutta, Parul Christian, Mercedes de Onis,
    Majid Ezzati, Sally Grantham-McGregor, Joanne Katz, Reynaldo Martorell, Ricardo Uauy, and the
    Maternal and Child Nutrition Study Group. (2010). Maternal and child undernutrition and overweight in
    low-income and middle-income countries. The Lancet 382(9890): 427-451.

Bridges, N., R.M. Parvin, and O.W. Van Assendelft. (1987). Evaluation of a new system for hemoglobin
    measurement. American Clinical Products Review 6(4): 22-25.

Busingye, Doreen, Simin Arabshahi, Asvini K. Subasinghe, Roger G. Evans, Michaela A. Riddell and
   Amanda G. Thrift. (2014). Do the socioeconomic and hypertension gradients in rural populations of low-
   and middle-income countries differ by geographical region? A systematic review and meta-analysis.
   International Journal of Epidemiology 43(5): 1563-1577.




                                                        23
Castelli, William P., Robert J. Garrison, Peter W.F. Wilson, Robert D. Abbott, Sona Kalousdian, and William
   B. Kannel. (1986). Incidence of coronary heart disease and lipoprotein cholesterol levels. Journal of the
   American Medical Association 256(20): 2835-2838.

Cleveland, William S. (1979). Robust locally weighted regression and smoothing scatterplots. Journal of the
   American Statistical Association 74(368): 829-836.

Colhoun, H.M., H. Hemingway, and N.R. Poulter. (1998). Socio-economic status and blood pressure: An
   overview analysis. Journal of Human Hypertension 12: 91-110.

Crimmins, E. (2014). Physiological differences across populations reflecting early life and later life
   nutritional status and later life risk for chronic disease. Population Ageing 8:51-69.

Crimmins, Eileen M. and Caleb E. Finch (2006). Infection, inflammation, height, and longevity. Proceedings
   of the National Academy of Sciences 103(2): 498-503.

Crimmins, Eileen, Jung Ki Kim, Sarinnapha Vasunilashorn. (2010). Biodemography: New approaches to
   understanding trends and differences in population health and mortality. Demography 47:S41-S64.

Crimmins, E. and T. Seeman. (2004). Integrating biology into the study of health disparities. Population and
   Development Review, 30;89-107.

Crimmins, E., F. Wheaton, S. Vasunilashorn, H. Beltram-Sanchez, L. Zhang and J.K. Kim. (2013). A global
   perspective on physiological change with age. In S. McDaniel and Z. Zimmer (eds.) Global Ageing in the
   Twenty First Century, Farnham:Ashgate.

Dey, Debashish K., Elisabet Rothenberg, Valter Sundh, Ingvar Bosaeus, and Bertil Steen. (2002). Waist
   circumference, body mass index, and risk for stroke in older people. J Am Geriatr Soc 50: 1510-1518.

Dow, W., P. Gertler, R. Schoeni, J. Strauss and D. Thomas. (2010). Health prices, health outcomes and labor
   outcomes: Experimental evidence. Mimeo.

Feingold, K.R. and C. Grunfeld. (2011). The role of HDL in innate immunity. Journal of Lipid Research
    52.1:1-3.

Flegal, K.M., M. D. Carroll, C.L. Ogden and L.R. Curtis. (2010). Prevalence and trends in obesity among
    U.S. adults, 1999-2008. Journal of the American Medical Association, 303:234-41.

Floud, Roderick, Robert Fogel, Bernard Harris, and Sok Chul Hong. (2011). The Changing Body: Health,
    nutrition and human development in the Western World since 1700. Cambridge: Cambridge University
    Press.

Fogel, Robert. (1994). Economic growth, population theory and physiology: The bearing of long-term
   processes on the making of economic policy. American Economic Review 84(3): 369-95.

Franklin, Stanley S., William Gustin, Nathan Wong, Martin G. Larson, Michael A. Weber, William B.
    Kannel, and Daniel Levy. (1997). Hemodynamic patterns of age-related changes in blood pressure.
    Circulation 96: 308-315.

Franklin, S.S., S.A. Khan, N.D. Wong, M.G. Larson, and D. Levy. (1999). Is pulse pressure useful in
    predicting risk for coronary heart disease? The Framingham heart study. Circulation. 100(4): 354-360.




                                                         24
Gordon, David J., Jeffrey L. Probstfield, Robert J. Garrison, James D. Neaton, William P. Castelli, James D.
   Knoke, David R. Jacobs Jr., Shrikant Bangdiwala, and H. Alfred Tyroler. (1989). High-density
   lipoprotein cholesterol and cardiovascular disease. Circulation 79: 8-15

Guthrie, Robert and Ada Susi. (1963). A simple phenylalanine method for detecting phenylketonuria in large
   populations of newborn infants. Pediatrics. 32: 338-43.
Harris, T.J., C.G. Owen, C.R. Victor, R. Adams, U. Ekelund, and D.G. Cook. (2009). A comparison of
   questionnaire, accelerometer, and pedometer: Measures in older people. Medicine and Science in Sports
   and Exercise 41: 1392-1402.

Hill, R.J. and P.S.W. Davies. (2001). The validity of self-reported energy intake as determined using the
    doubly labelled water technique. British Journal of Nutrition 85(4): 415-430.

Ibrahim, M. Mohsen, Hussein Rizk, Lawrence J. Appel, Wafaa El Aroussy, Sherif Helmy, Yasser Sharaf,
    Zeinab Ashour, Hossam Kandil, Edward Roccella, and Paul K. Whelton. (1995). Hypertension
    prevalence, awareness, treatment, and control in Egypt. Hypertension 26: 886-890.

Idler, Ellen L. and Yael Benyamini. (1997). Self-rated health and mortality: A review of twenty-seven
    community studies. Journal of Health and Social Behavior 38: 21–37.

Ikeda, Nayu, David Sapienza, Ramiro Guerrero, Wichai Aekplakorn, Mohsen Naghavi, Ali H. Mokdad,
    Rafael Lozano, Christopher J.L. Murray, and Stephen S. Lim. (2014). Control of hypertension with
    medication: a comparative analysis of national surveys in 20 countries. Bulletin of the World Health
    Organization 92: 101-9C.

Izzo, Joseph L., Daniel Levy, and Henry R. Black (2000). Importance of systolic blood pressure in older
    Americans. Hypertension 35: 1021-1024.

Jellinger, P.D. Smith, A. Mehta, O. Ganda, Y. Handelsman, H. Rodbard, M. Shepherd, and J. Seibel. (2012).
     American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists’ Guidelines for Management of Dyslipidemia and
     Prevention of Atherosclerosis. AACE.

Jenny, Nancy Swords, N. David Yanez, Bruce M. Psaty, Lewis H. Kuller, Calvin H. Hirsch, and Russell P.
    Tracy. (2007). Inflammation biomarkers and near-term death in older men. American Journal of
    Epidemiology 165(6): 684-695.

Kannel, WB (2000). Fifty years of Framingham Study contributions to understanding hypertension. Journal
   of Human Hypertension 14: 83-90.

Khaw, Kay-Tee, Nicholas Wareham, Sheila Bingham, Robert Luben, Ailsa Welch, and Nicholas Day. (2004).
   Association of hemoglobin A1c with cardiovascular disease and mortality in adults: The European
   Prospective Investigation into Cancer in Norfolk. Annals of Internal Medicine 141: 413-420.

Komlos, John. (1985). Stature and nutrition in the Habsburg Monarchy: The standard of living and economic
   development in the eighteenth century. American Historical Review 90(5): 1149-61.

Komlos, John and Jorg Baten. (1998). The Biological Standard of Living in Comparative Perspective.
   Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag.

Kowal, Paul, Somnath Chatterji, Nirmala Naidoo, Richard Biritwum, Wu Fan, Ruy Lopez Ridaura, Tamara
   Maximova, Perianayagam Arokiasamy, Nancy Phaswana-Mafuya, Sharon Williams, J. Josh Snodgrass,
   Nadia Minicuci, Catherine D’Este, Karl Peltzer, J. Ties Boerma, and the SAGE Collaborators. (2012).



                                                        25
    Data Resource Profile: The World Health Organization Study on global AGEing and adult health
    (SAGE). International Journal of Epidemiology 41: 1639-1649.

Kuller, Lewis H., Russell P. Tracy, Jessica Shaten, and Elaine N. Meilahn. (1996). Relation of C-reactive
   protein and coronary heart disease in the MRFIT nested case-control study. American Journal of
   Epidemiology 144(6): 537-47.

Leibbrandt, Murray, Ingrid Woolard and Louise de Villiers. (2009). NIDS Technical Papers No. 1-6.
    Available at: http://www.nids.uct.ac.za/publications/technical-papers.

Lee, Jinkook, P. Arokiasamy, Amitabh Chandra, Peifeng Hu, Jenny Liu, and Kevin Feeney. (2012). Markers
    and drivers: Cardiovascular health of middle-aged and older Indians. Pp. 387-414 in National Research
    Council. Aging in Asia: Findings from New and Emerging Data Initiatives. J.P. Smith and M.
    Majmundar, Eds. Panel on Policy Research and Data Needs to Meet the Challenge of Aging in Asia.
    Committee on Population, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC:
    The National Academies Press.

Levy, Daniel, Martin G. Larson, Ramachandran S. Vasan, William B. Kannel, and Kalon K.L. Ho. (1996).
   The progression from hypertension to congestive heart failure. Journal of the American Medical
   Association 275(20): 1557-1562.

Lindeboom, Maarten and Eddy van Doorslear. (2004). Cut-point shift and index shift in self-reported health.
   Journal of Health Economics 23: 1083-1099.

Lloyd-Sherlock, Peter, John Beard, Nadia Minicuci, Shah Ebrahim and Somnath Chatterji. (2014).
   Hypertension among older adults in low- and middle-income countries: prevalence,
awareness and control. International Journal of Epidemiology 43: 116-128.

Martin, M., N. Leroy, V. Sulmont, and P. Gillery. (2010). Evaluation of the In2it analyzer for HbA1c
   determination. Diabetes Metabolism 36(2): 158-64.

Martorell, R. and J-P. Habicht. (1986). Growth in early childhood in developing countries. In: F. Falkner and
   J. Tanner, editors. Human Growth: A Comprehensive Treatise. Second edition. New York: Plenum Press.

Mason, John, Adam Bailes, Mary Beda-Andourou, Nancy Copeland, Teresa Curtis, Megan Deitchler, Leigh
   Foster, Marianna Hensley, Peter Horjus, Christine Jonson, Tina Lloren, Ana Mendez, Mary Munoz,
   Jonathan Rivers, and Gwyneth Vance. (2005). Recent trends in malnutrition in developing regions:
   Vitamin A deficiency, anemia, iodine deficiency, and child underweight. Food and Nutrition Bulletin
   26(1): 59-162.

McDade, T. W. and M.D. Hayward. (2009). Rational and methodological options for assessing infectious
  disease and related measures in social science surveys. Biodemography and Social Biology. 55.2:159-77.

McDade, T.W., S. Williams, and J.J. Snodgrass. (2007) What a drop can do: Dried blood spots as a
  minimally-invasive method for integration biomarkers into population-based research. Demography.
  44:899-925.

McEwan, B. (1998). Protective and damaging effects of stress mediators. New England Journal of Medicine.
  338.3:171-9.

McEwan, B. and E. Stellar. (1993). Stress and the individual: Mechanisms leading to disease. Archives of
  Internal Medicine. 153.18:2093-101.



                                                        26
Must, Aviva, Jennifer Spadano, Eugenie H. Coakley, Alison E. Field, Graham Colditz, and Wiliam H. Dietz.
   (1999). The disease burden associated with overweight and obesity. Journal of the American Medical
   Association 282(16): 1523-1529.

Nazmi, Aydin and Cesar G. Victora. (2007). Socioeconomic and racial/ethnic differentials of C-reactive
   protein levels: a systematic review of population-based studies. BMC Public Health 7: 212.

Ng. M., T. Flemming, M. Robinson et al. (2014). Global, regional and national prevalence of overweight and
    obesity in children and adults during 1980-2013: A systematic analys for the Global Burden of Disease
    Study, 2013. Lancet. 384.9945:766-81.

Onat, Altan, Vedat Sansoy, Beytullah Yildirim, Ibrahim Keleş, Ömer Uysal, and Gülay Hergenç. (2001). C-
   reactive protein and coronary heart disease in western Turkey. Am J Cardiol 88(6): 601-7.

Pereira, Marta, Nuno Luneta, Ana Azevedoa, and Henrique Barrosa. (2009). Differences in prevalence,
    awareness, treatment and control of hypertension between developing and developed countries. Journal of
    Hypertension 27(5): 963-975.

Perova, Natalia V., Clarence E. Davis, Shouchi Tao, Andrzej Pajak, Yehezkhial Stein, Grazyna B. Broda,
    Yihe Li, and Herman A. Tyroler. (2001). Multi-country comparison of plasma lipid relationship to years
    of schooling in men and women. International Journal of Epidemiology 30: 371-379.

Popkin, B. M. (2001). The nutrition transition and obesity in the developing world. Journal of
   Nutrition.131:871-3S.

Popkin B. M. and P. Gordon-Larsen. (2004). The nutrition transition: worldwide obesity dynamics and their
   determinants. International Journal of Obesity. 28.3:S2-9.

Popkin, B.M., L. Adair and S. Ng. (2012). Global nutrition transition and the pandemic of obesity in
   developing countries. Nutrition Reviews 70:3-21.

Pradhan, A.D., J.E. Manson, N. Rifai, J.E. Buring, and P.M. Ridker. (2001). C-reactive protein, interleukin 6,
    and risk of developing type 2 diabetes mellitus. Journal of the American Medical Association 286: 327-
    334.

Prentice, A.M. (2006). The emerging epidemic of obesity in developing countries. International Journal of
    Epidemiology 35.1:93-9.

Ridker, P.M., C.H. Hennekens, J.E. Buring and N. Rifai. (2000). C-reactive protein and other markers of
   inflammation in the prediction of cardiovascular disease in women. New England Journal of Medicine
   342:836-43.

Ridker, Paul M., Julie E. Buring, Nancy R. Cook, and Nader Rifai. (2003). C-reactive protein, the metabolic
   syndrome, and risk of incident cardiovascular events. Circulation 107: 391-397.

Rohlfing, Curt L., Randie R. Little, Hsiao-Mei Wiedmeyer, Jack D. England, Maureen I. Harris, Katherine
   Flegal, Mark S. Eberhardt, and David E. Goldstein. (2000). Use of GHb (HbA1c) in screening for
   undiagnosed diabetes in the U.S. population. Diabetes Care 23(2): 187-191.

Roth, G., M. Forouzanafar, A Moran et al. (2015). Demographic and epidemiologic drivers of global
   cardiovascular mortality. New England Journal of Medicine. 372:1333-41.



                                                        27
Rubalcava, L. and G. Teruel. (2014). Mexican Family Life Survey, Third Round. Working paper.
   www.ennvih-mxfls.org.

Selvin, Elizabeth, Shari Bolen, Hsin-Chieh Yeh, Crystal Wiley, Lisa M. Wilson, Spyridon S. Marinopoulos,
    Leonard Feldman, Jason Vassy, Renee Wilson, Eric B. Bass, and Frederick L. Brancati. (2008).
    Cardiovascular outcomes in trials of oral diabetes medications: A systematic review. Arch Intern Med
    168(19): 2070-2080.

Selvin, Elizabeth, Michael W. Steffes, Hong Zhu, Kunihiro Matsushita, Lynne Wagenknecht, James Pankow,
    Josef Coresh, and Frederick L. Brancati. (2010). Glycated hemoglobin, diabetes, and cardiovascular risk
    in nondiabetic adults. New England Journal of Medicine 362(9): 800-11.

Sistema Nacional de Información en Salud. Secretaría de Salud. Mexico City: SSA; National Death Registry
    2007. Available from: http://sinais.salud.gob.mx/descargas/xls/diezprincausasmort2007_CNEGySR.xls.

Steckel, Richard H. and Roderick Floud (Eds.). (1997). Health and Welfare during Industrialization.
    Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Stevenson, D. R. (1999). Blood pressure and age in cross-cultural perspective. Human Biology 71(4): 529-
    551.

Strauss, J. and D. Thomas. (1998). Health, nutrition and economic development. Journal of Economic
    Literature 36: 737-782.

Strauss, J., F. Witoelar, B. Sikoki and A.M. Wattie. (2009). The Fourth Wave of the Indonesian Family Life
    Survey (IFLS4): Overview and Field Report. Santa Monica: RAND WR675/1.

Steptoe, Andrew and Anna Wikman. (2011). The contribution of physical activity to divergent trends in
    longevity. Pp. 193-216 in National Research Council. International Differences in Mortality at Older
    Ages: Dimensions and Sources. E.M. Crimmins, S.H. Preston, and

Steyn, Krisela, Debbie Bradshaw, Rosana Norman, and Ria Laubscher. (2008). Determinants and treatment of
    hypertension in South Africans: The first Demographic and Health Surveys. Afr Med J 98(5): 376-380.

Sauve, B., Koren, G., Walsh, G., Tokmakejian, S., Van Uum, S.H.,(2007). Measurement of cortisol in human
   hair as a biomarker of systemic exposure. Clin. Invest. Med. 30: E183—E191.

Thomas, D. and E. Frankenberg. (2002). The measurement and interpretation of health in social surveys. ", in
   C. Murray, J. Salomon, C. Mathers and A. Lopez (eds.) Summary Measures of Population Health:
   Concepts, Ethics, Measurement and Applications, Geneva:World Health Organization, 387-420.

Thomas. D. and J. Strauss. (1997). Health and wages: Evidence on men and women in urban Brazil. Journal
   of Econometrics 77.1:159-185

Toth, Peter P. (2005). The "good cholesterol": High-density lipoprotein. Circulation 111: e89-e91.

UNICEF. (2006). Vitamin and mineral deficiency: a global progress report. New York: UNICEF. Available at
   http://www.unicef.org/media/files/vmd.pdf.

Waaler, H.T. (1984). Height, weight and mortality. Acta Medica Scandinavica 215: 1–56.




                                                       28
Weverling-Rijnsburger, Annelies W.E., Iris J.A.M. Jonkers, Eric van Exel, Jacobijn Gussekloo, and Rudi GJ
  Westendorp. (2003). High-density vs low-density lipoprotein cholesterol as the risk factor for coronary
  artery disease and stroke in old age. Arch Intern Med 163: 1549-1554.

Wiehl, D.G. and R. Reed. (1960). Development of new or improved dietary methods for epidemiological
   investigations. American Journal of Public Health 50: 824-8.

Witoelar, Firman, John Strauss, and Bondan Sikoki. (2012). Socioeconomic success and health in later life:
   Evidence from the Indonesia Family Life Survey. Pp. 309-341 in National Research Council. Aging in
   Asia: Findings from New and Emerging Data Initiatives. J.P. Smith and M. Majmundar, Eds. Panel on
   Policy Research and Data Needs to Meet the Challenge of Aging in Asia. Committee on Population,
   Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: The National Academies
   Press.

World Health Organization. (1999). Obesity: preventing and managing the global epidemic: Report of a
   WHO consultation. WHO Technical Report Series 894. Geneva, Switzerland.

Wu, Yangfeng, Rachel Huxley, Liming Li, Vibeke Anna, Gaoqiang Xie, Chonghua Yao, Mark Woodward,
   Xian Li, John Chalmers, Runlin Gao, Lingzhi Kong, and Xiaoguang Yang. (2008). Prevalence,
   awareness, treatment, and control of hypertension in China. Circulation 118: 2679-2686.

Yan, S., J. Li, S. Li, B. Zhang, S. Du, P. Gordon-Larsen, L. Adair, and B. Popkin. (2012). The expanding
   burden of cardiometabolic risk in China: the China Health and Nutrition Survey. Obesity Reviews 13:
   810-821.




                                                       29
Figure 1: GDP per capita and life expectancy at birth
                80




                                                                                                       U.S.
                                                                                Mexico                 [$47,000]
                                                                                [$13,400]
    Life expectancy at birth




                                                                 China
                                                                 [$8,800]
                    70




                                                   Indonesia
                                                     [$4,300]
                                                                                       Russia
                                                  India                               [$17,000]
                                              [$4,000]
         60




                                   Ghana
                                   [$2,300]



                                                                  South Africa
                50




                                                                     [$8,900]




                               2              4               8              16       24          32    40
                                                  GDP per capita PPP$000s (log scale)

Note: GDP per capita is measured in 2010 purchasing power parity dollars (which are in brackets below each
country name) from the Penn World Tables, version 6.3. Life expectancy at birth estimates are for 2005-2010
from the United Nations Population Division.
Figure 2: Percent overweight (BMI> 25) by gender, age and education

                                           (a) By age
      80
      60




                                                             Mexico              US
   %




                                                                      Russia
  40




                                                 S Africa
      20




           Ghana                         China
                                                                               Females
                     India   Indonesia
                                                                               Males
      0




           30 50 70 30 50 70 30 50 70 30 50 70 30 50 70 30 50 70 30 50 70 30 50 70
                                          Age (years)



                                      (b) By education
      80
      60




                                                                                  US

                                                             Mexico
  %
      40




                                                                      Russia
      20




                                                 S. Africa
           Ghana                         China

                     India Indonesia
      0




           0 6 12   0 6 12   0 6 12      0 6 12 0 6 12 0 6 12         0 6 12    6 1218
                                           Education (yrs)
    Figure 3: Percent hypertensive or on medication by gender, age and education

                           (a) Males: by age                                                        (b) Females: by age
    80




                                                                            80
                   Controlled                                                                Controlled
                   Uncontrolled                                                              Uncontrolled
    60




                                                                            60
40




                                                                       40
%




                                                                       %
    20




                                                                            20
    0




                                                                            0
         Ghana   India Indonesia China   SA Mexico Russia     US                  Ghana    India Indonesia China   SA Mexico Russia        US
                        Age groups: 30-44, 45-59, 60-79                                           Age groups: 30-44, 45-59, 60-79


                       (c) Males: by education                                                 (d) Females: by education
    60




                                                                       60
    40




                                                                       40
%
    20




                                                                       20
    0




                                                                       0




         Ghana   India Indonesia China     SA Mexico Russia   US                 Ghana    India Indonesia China     SA     Mexico Russia   US
                         Educ groups: 0-6, 7-12, 13+ yrs                                          Educ groups: 0-6, 7-12, 13+ yrs



    Note: Hypertensive is stage 2 hypertensive, defined as systolic blood pressure > 160 mmHg and/or diastolic blood pressure > 100 mmHg.
Figure 4: Percent with high total cholesterol and high glycosolated hemoglobin by gender, age and education

                       Total cholesterol > 240 mg/dl                                 Glycosolated hemoglobin >6.5%

                              (a) By age                                                       (b) By age
         60




                                                              20 30 40 50
                           Females
                           Males
         40
     %




                                                          %
         20




                                                 US                                               Mexico




                                                              10
                                                                                                                 US
              Indonesia    China     Mexico                                      China
         0




                                                              0
               50 70      30 50 70 30 50 70 30 50 70                        30 50 70            30 50 70     30 50 70
                                Age (years)                                                      Age (years)


                           (c) By education                                                  (d) By education
         40




                                                              40
         30




                                                   US         30
                                                                                                  Mexico
     20




                                                          20
     %




                                                          %

                                       Mexico
              Indonesia
         10




                                                              10


                                                                                                                     US
                             China                                              China
         0




                                                              0




              0 6 12        0 6 12     0 6 12    0 6 12                     0    6      12      0 6 12           0    6   12
                              Education (yrs)                                                  Education (yrs)
         Figure 5: Percent with high levels of inflammation by gender, age and education
         (C-reactive protein > 3 mg/dl)
                                               (a) By age
    50




                          Females
                          Males
    40
    30
%
    20




                                                                            US
    10




                                                  China

                      Indonesia
    0




              10     30     50      70   10     30 50 70          10   30        50       70
                                                Age (years)




                                         (b) By education
    40
    30
  %
20




                                                     China
                                                                                      US
    10




                   Indonesia
    0




          0          6         12             0      6       12         0             6        12
                                               Education (yrs)
Figure 6: Relationship between percent hypertensive and BMI
 80
                                                                                                                             Russia


                                                                                                                            SA
 60




                                                                                                                    Ghana
                                                                                                                        US
40
%




                                                                                            China
                                                                                                                            Mexico
                                                                                            Indonesia
 20




         India
 0




                        20                         25                         30                          35
                                                                  BMI

Note: Hypertensive is stage 2 hypertensive, defined as systolic blood pressure > 160 mmHg and/or diastolic blood pressure > 100 mmHg.
  Figure 7: Relationship between blood-based biomarkers and BMI

  (a) Percent high glycosolated hemoglobin                (b) Percent high total cholesterol




                                                     40
 40


                                                                                    US
                                  Mexico




                                                     30
 30




                                  US                                                Indonesia




                                                 20
 %




                                                 %
20




                                  China                                             China




                                                     10
 10




                                                                                    Mexico
 0




                                                     0
        20        25         30        35                  20       25         30        35
                       BMI                                               BMI


                                                             (c) Percent high inflammation



                                                     60
                                                                                    US

                                                     40
                                                                                    China
                                                 %




                                                                                    Indonesia
                                                     20



  Note
  High glycosolated hemoglobin (HbA1c): >6.5%
  High total cholesterol: >240mg/dl
  High inflammation: C-reactive protein>3mg/dL
                                                     0




                                                           20       25         30        35
                                                                         BMI
