                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  NEOCLASSICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL
                         PERSPECTIVES ON
                     SEGMENTED LABOR MARKETS




                           Kevin Lang

                       William T. Dickens




                     Working Paper No. 2127




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                           January 1987




The research reported here is part of the NBERts research program
in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #2127
                                                January 1987




  Neoclassical and Sociological Perspectives on Segmented Labor Markets




                                ABSTRACT



     Neoclassical theory has been misrepresented in the segmented economy

literature. Consequently, most tests of "structural" vs. "neoclassical"

models are inadequate. Moreover, segmented economy theorists have

concentrated on the least significant departures of segmented models from

neoclassical economics. In fact, neoclassical economists have developed

elements of a segmented labor market model which is similar to the

segmented economy theories. We sketch this model and argue that the

neoclassical model gives a precise meaning to the concept of dual or

segmented labor markets but does not suggest that a classification system

for job characteristics must rely on a single dimension.




Kevin Lang                                 William T. Dickens
School of Social Sciencs                   Department of Economics
University of California                   University of California
Irvine, CA 92717                           Berkeley, CA 94720
                               TABLE OF CONTENTS



I.    Introduction

II.   Neoclassical Wage Determination

III. The Challenge of Segmented Labor Market Theories to Orthodox Theory

IV.   The Sociological Response

V.    Testing for Queues

VI.   Notes for a Neoclassical Model of Labor Market Stratification

VII. Some Concluding Remarks
I. Introduction

     Segmented labor market models gained popularity in economics during

the late 1960s and early l970s but fell fairly rapidly into disrepute

following criticisms by Wachter (1974) and Cain (1976). At about this

time, sociologists, drawing on the work of Averitt (1968) of segmented

labor market theorists, developed a theory of a dual or segmented

economy.* The sociological theory is portrayed as corrective of the

labor-supply-side and individualistic orientation of human capital and

status attainment theory.

     In this paper, we argue that neoclassical theory has been

misrepresented in the literature on segmented economy and that tests

designed to distinguish between "structural" and "neoclassical" models are

inadequate for that task. Moreover, we maintain that dual labor market

and dual economy theorists have concentrated on the aspects of the theory

which represent the least significant departure from neoclassical

economics. In fact, following a research heuristic of their own,

neoclassical economists have developed elements of a segmented labor

market model which is in many ways similar to the segmented economy

theories found in sociology. We sketch this model and argue that the

neoclassical model gives a precise meaning to the concept of dual or

segmented labor markets but does not suggest that a classification system

for job characteristics must rely on a single dimension.
                                                                          2



II. Neoclassical Wage Determination*

     Sociological critics (e.g. Berg, 1981; Bibb & Form, 1977; Horan, Beck

& Tolbert, 1980; Sorenson & Kalleberg, 1981) have sometimes characterized

the neoclassical model of wage determination as supply driven. According

to this view, neoclassical economics ascribes productivity to the worker

rather than to the job or to some combination of job and worker. Wage

differences are said to be explained by individual characteristics rather

than by the characteristics of the jobs the individuals hold. From this

perspective, dual economy and dual labor market theory are perceived as

reminding economists of their long-standing interest in demand as well as

supply.

     While these critics are certainly correct in their view that

economists have paid excessive attention to the human capital model of

earnings determination, neoclassical economists have developed quite

sophisticated models in which individuals' productivities vary according

to their job and have concerned themselves with the process whereby

workers and jobs are matched. In developing such models, neoclassical

economists clearly take account of both supply and demand. It is no more

surprising to the neoclassical labor economist than to the dual labor

market theorist that their graduate students will earn more as

professional economists in consulting firms than as dishwashers in

restaurants.
                                                                           3




     In this section, we describe the neoclassical model of wage

determination under pure competition when there is perfect information and

when jobs and workers are heterogeneous. The model has a fairly extensive

modern history; even if we ignore the obligatory reference to Adam Smith,

the essentials of the model were developed in the early 1950s (Roy, 1950,

1951; Tinbergen, 1951, 1956). More recent work (Heckman & Sedlacek, 1985;

Rosen, 1974; Sattinger, 1979, 1980; Thaler & Rosen, 1975) has built on

this tradition.

     In this model, the wage paid to workers in any particular job will

depend on personal attributes which affect productivity and on

characteristics of the job which affect its desirability. The relation

between personal attributes and wages varies among jobs. Since

information is assumed to be perfect, workers know what wage they will

receive in any job if they have a certain combination of attributes and

the job has a particular combination of characteristics. Certain

attributes (e.g height) are, of course, not easily altered, but others

such as education are somewhat under the control of the individual. It is

these personal attributes and job characteristics which are the primary

subject of economic analysis.

     Let us consider an individual's decision about how much education to

obtain. Since education is costly, individuals require higher earnings in

order to compensate them for obtaining additional education. Figure 1

shows "indifference curves" for two different workers. The indifference

curves represent combinations of schooling and earnings which leave that

worker equally well off. Indifference curves which are higher and to the
                                                                           4



left are preferred since they represent higher earnings for a constant

level of education (or the same earnings for less education). Of course,

individuals care about aspects of a job other than the education it

requires and the wages it pays. A myriad of factors such as location,

safety, and job pace affect the way workers view jobs. Those readers who

feel comfortable imagining tangencies of n-dimensional surfaces are

encouraged to recognize the immediate applicability to the more general

problem. For simplicity, we consider the case where jobs and workers have

only two characteristics which for purposes of concreteness we term wages

and education.

     Figure 1 also shows the combinations of wages and schooling which are

available to the individuals. Each individual chooses the point along the

wage/schooling locus (or hedonic wage equation) which puts him or her on

the highest indifference curve. By comparing the slopes of the two sets

of indifference curves at points at which they are depicted as crossing,

it can be seen that individual B requires less compensation for obtaining

education than does individual A. This may reflect any of several

possibilities For example, perhaps B enjoys education more or has more

financial resources with which to finance education, and therefore,

relative to A, chooses a combination of wages and schooling which involves

higher wages and more schooling.

     Figure 2 shows a similar decision for two different firms for a

particular type of job. In each firm, workers' productivities depend on

how much education they have received. However, education contributes

more to productivity in firm B than in firm A. Figure 2 shows isoprofit
                                                                          5



curves for each firm, representing combinations of wages and education

which leave the firm with the same profit. Isoprof it curves are more

desirable to the firm as one moves down and to the right, representing

combinations involving more education and lower wages. Firms have a

decision problem which is analogous to that of workers. They recognize

that they must pay higher wages in order to get workers with higher levels

of education. Firms in which education increases productivity to a

greater extent will be willing to spend more on hiring more educated

workers. They choose the wage/education combination given by the point

along the hedonic wage equation (EWE) which is just tangent to the

isoprofit curve, representing the highest level of profit attainable by

the firm.

     The final element of the theory is the determination of the HWE. The

EWE adjusts until the number of workers with each level of education is

exactly equal to the number demanded. The result, shown in figure 3, is

that firms in which education is particularly valuable are matched with

workers who require relatively little compensation for getting education.

The HWE represents the market relation between education and wages.*

     The EWE is a standard wage equation of the type estimated in human

capital models. We have derived it using a human capital theoretic

explanation of the role of education which assumes that education

increases productivity. However, we could equally have assumed that

education serves as a signal of innate ability and that innate ability is

more valuable in certain jobs than in others. The human capital

interpretation is not essential to the model. In the light of
                                                                          6




sociological critiques of the human capital model, it is, however,

important to note that the wage equation does not ignore "demand"

factors. Instead the HWE is the market equilibrium locus resulting from

the joint action of supply and demand when workers and jobs are

heterogeneous. In fact, given the manner in which the model has been

developed, it is not evident whether education should be considered a

characteristic of the worker or of the job. It is, in fact, neither or

both, depending on one's semantic choice, since it is a characteristic of

the worker/job match.*

     In particular, this model does not ignore marginal productivity

theory. However, the theory's assumptions are hidden in the equilibrium

requirement that the quantity supplied equal the quantity demanded, Firms

simultaneously choose the number of workers to hire and the level of

education. In equilibrium, the number of workers hired by the firm will

be such that the wage exactly equals the value of the marginal product of

the type of worker hired.

     There are several limitations to the model which should be noted. In

particular, it is a model of a perfectly competitive labor market. Thus

it ignores the role of unions and monopsony.** Economists have

generally used quite different models to describe wage setting in the

presence of unions and do not apply the competitive model described here.

     In addition, the model assumes perfect information which makes the

assumption of perfect matching of workers and firms sensible. More

realistically, the matching process should be modeled as one involving

search and imperfect, costly information. However, it seems unlikely that
                                                                           7




allowing for search would alter the model significantly. A model can be

constructed in which at each level of education, there is a distribution

of wages available. In this model, when choosing their level of

education, workers maximize their expected net wage (or expected utility)

given optimal search behavior. Workers with low costs of schooling get

more education, set higher reservation wages, and tend to end up in firms

in which education contributes significantly to productivity. Thus while

the matching process in a search model is not perfect, the broad outlines

of the perfect information model continue to hold.

     Simple search theory (dating at least from Stigler's (1962) seminal

piece) allows workers to receive different wages for the same job; the

extension to heterogeneous jobs is obvious, Models in which there is

uncertainty about the quality of the job match have also been incorporated

into the economic model (Jovanovic, 1979a&b). It should, therefore, be

evident from this description that the major departure of dual labor

market theory from neoclassical theory is not that workers receive

different wages depending on the job they obtain. There are, however,

significant differences between the neoclassical and dual labor market

models. These are addressed in the next section.



III. The Challenge of Segmented Labor Market Theories to Orthodox Theory

     Aside from a difference of methodology which has been emphasized by

Woodbury (1979) and Piore (1983), the dual labor market models of the late

1960s and early 1970s departed from the standard neoclassical model in

three significant ways.
     First, they introduced non-price rationing for good jobs. Unlike

neoclassical labor economists, dual labor market theorists maintained that

some individuals who were qualified for and wanted certain types of jobs

at the going wage could not obtain them. In the standard economic model

such people would bid down the wages in the desired jobs until supply

equated demand -   - the   available jobs would be rationed by the price

mechanism. In addition, difficulties of access were thought by dual labor

market theorists to be systematic. Women, blacks, and other minorities

faced barriers which inhibited them from obtaining desirable jobs.

     A number of authors (Bluestone, 1970; Hodson & Kaufman, 1982;

Kalleberg & Sorenson, 1979; Leigh, 1976; Rosenberg, 1980; Schiller, 1977;

Tolbert, 1982), including some dual labor market theorists, have

interpreted the view that there were two sectors of the labor market with

little or no mobility between them as a significant departure from human

capital theory. However, lack of mobility between "sectors" is fully

compatible with the neoclassical model as long as the initial worker-job

matches are optimal. Further, mobility between sectors does not

demonstrate the absence of non-price rationing.

     A very simple neoclassical model in which workers acquire firm,

occupation, industry or sector specific skills is consistent with no

mobility whatsoever between firms, occupations, industries or sectors,

respectively. Of course, more realistic models allow for some mobility,

but limited mobility is a direct consequence of the existence of such

skills. Thus much of the literature on internal labor markets and

mobility chains is fully compatible with the neoclassical model. On the
                                                                            Q




other   hand, if qualified blacks had to work in bad jobs for a few years

before obtaining good jobs but equally qualified whites could obtain good

jobs immediately, there would be mobility between the sectors. In fact,

we might find that blacks were more likely than whites to leave the

"secondary" sector. However, the non-price rationing of good jobs would

be inconsistent with standard models, despite the presence of mobility.

     The second departure of dual labor market theories from neoclassical

theory is the argument that the same product is often produced using two

distinct technologies. While the assumptions of neoclassical economics do

not preclude the existence of multiple solutions to the firm's

maximization problem, in general, standard convexity assumptions provide

structure to neoclassical models and ensure a unique maximum.

     We will argue in section V that both of these aspects of dual labor

market theory have been incorporated into neoclassical economics by recent

developments. These developments have occurred largely without explicit

reference to dual labor market theory. We conclude that they were never

really incompatible with neoclassical theory, although at the time they

were viewed as significant departures.

     Instead, we agree with Piore (1974) and Wachter (1974) that the major

innovation of dual labor market theory was the attempt to make certain

social-psychological qualities endogenous to the economic system. Thus

Doeringer and Piore (1971) argue that the development of stable work

habits depends on the type of job that workers obtain. In his later work

(1980b), Piore defines labor market sectors in terms of the types of

reasoning they require and promote. Thus in the upper tier of the primary
                                                                           10




sector, we find a wide range of related work tasks; this enhances the

worker's ability to achieve an abstract understanding of the work and is,

thus, conducive to abstract understanding and learning. In the lower tier

of the primary sector, the range of tasks is narrower and thus supports

concrete more than abstract learning and understanding. Finally, work is

organized in the secondary sector so that understanding is not required

and, hence, inhibits abstract understanding. Dickens (1979) relates

sector of employment to Kohlberg's stages of development and to Melvin

Kohn's studies of work and personality.

     It is important to note that Piore is not involved in psychological

reductionism. Although the cognitive processes developed prior to

employment, particularly in schools where training may depend on the

social stratum from which the student is drawn, affect the initial

placement of workers, the relation between job placement and cognitive

processes is seen as reciprocal. The role of labor market stratum in

determining cognitive processes is equally important. Thus the work is

not anti-sociological but instead has natural links to sociological work

on how social structure influences the way in which the individual comes

to understand his place in society, a concern which has traditions dating

at least to Marx, Durkheim and Simmel and which continues to interest

modern researchers such as Thom (1983). Indeed, the issues addressed by

Piore are also discussed in Durkheim's Division of Labor in Society.

    Wachter suggests that endogenous tastes are not antithetical to

neoclassical economics. We see little value in an extended debate on the

philosophy of economics, but it appears to us that if neoclassical
                                                                          11




economics has any core tenets, they are that individuals have preferences

which are exogenous to the economic system and are unchanging or only

slowly changing over time and that they use available information

efficiently to maximize their welfare given these preferences. Thus

endogenous work habits and cognitive processes represent a significant

departure from that model. It is unfortunate that this is also the aspect

of dual labor market theory that has received the least attention.

     We have not discussed the internal labor market as a significant

contribution of dual labor market theory. This is in part a matter of

definition. While some of the most significant contributions to our

understanding of internal labor markets are from dual labor market

theorists (particularly, Doeringer & Piore, 1971), we perceive their work

as complementing rather than contradicting ongoing neoclassical work, a

view shared by Cain (1976). Neoclassical economists recognized that the

presence of firm-specific human capital created a bilateral monopoly with

incentives for long term employment relations but an indeterminate wage

profile over the course of that relation. Essentially any wage profile

which gave both firm and worker incentives to maintain the employment

relation and paid the (appropriately discounted) competitive wage over the

life of the relation would be consistent with neoclassical theory. The

internal labor market contribution considered how that indeterminacy is

resolved.
                                                                           12




IV. The Sociological Response

     On the whole, the sociological literature on dual economy has not

been concerned with the issues outlined above. To a certain degree, this

reflects the fact that sociologists have drawn on a tradition derived from

Averitt's (1968) work on dual economy and have relied only loosely on the

dual labor market literature. With the possible exceptions of Bluestone

(1970) and Edwards (1975), there is general agreement that while, the core

or monopoly sector of the dual economy contains a preponderance of primary

jobs, dual economy and dual labor markets represent different sources of

division in the economy. Piore's work (l980a&b) on these linkages seems

to have been largely overlooked.

     Thus the sociological literature on dual or segmented economy has

taken as its starting point the existence of monopoly rents in the core

sector. Wages in the monopoly sector may be higher because workers are

able to capture part of these rents or because monopoly firms use their

ability to pay to purchase worker cooperation. The need to assure worker

loyalty is greater in large organizations and thus purchasing loyalty

through higher wages is particularly useful in the monopoly sector. The

literature on segmented economy (Kalleberg, Althauser & Wallace, 1981)

argues that the sources of worker power are more complex than suggested by

dual economy theorists, but retains the emphasis on worker power. The

dual and segmented economy models therefore explicitly reject the

assumption of a perfectly competitive labor market which is crucial to the

neoclassical model described in the previous section. In a perfectly

competitive labor market, workers would be unable to capture rents which
                                                                           13




firms accrue in the product market. Moreover, "ability to pay" does not

affect wage rates in a competitive market. Employers' ability to pay is

irrelevant because competition among workers guarantees that all employers

will pay the same wage for equivalent workers in jobs that are equally

unpleasant. An employer who offered a wage below the market equilibrium

wage would be unable to hire any workers. No employer would want to pay

more (even if he or she could) since profits could be increased by paying

only the going wage.

     To an economist, the dual economy approach implies that there will be

a queue (excess supply of workers) and thus non-price rationing for jobs

in the monopoly sector since wages in that sector are above their market

clearing level. Wages in the state sector are presumed to be patterned on

monopoly sector wages; consequently there should also be a queue for state

sector jobs as well. We do not wish to imply that the only prediction of

the dual economy literature is that wages are higher in the core sector.

On the contrary, the dual economy literature contains a number of

hypotheses regarding the relation between worker attributes and sector of

employment. For example, in the core sector, education is expected to

play a larger role because of the greater reliance on credentials in large

organizations. However, to a large extent these predictions can be

interpreted as either resulting from the absence of market clearing, as in

the case of discrimination (since employers can choose workers from the

excess supply who correspond to the type of worker they desire), or to be

hypotheses regarding where the firm will locate along the HWE and thus

fully compatible with the neoclassical model. Thus, on the whole, again
                                                                          14



economic and sociological perspectives do not conflict but rather address

different issues.

     Thus from an economist's perspective the primary departure of

segmented economy theory from neoclassical theory is the rejection of

market clearing in the model of wage determination. Dual labor market

theory also rejects market clearing; however, unlike most dual labor

market models (for exceptions see Doeringer & Piore, 1971; Piore 1975),

dual economy theory provides a theoretical basis for the existence of

queues and labor market segmentation which is derived from the ability of

workers to capture monopoly rents.

     On the other hand, dual economy theory has not taken up the two other

departures from neoclassical theory which we discussed in the previous

section. Unlike dual labor market theory, dual economy theory has tended

to treat entire industries as being in the core or periphery and thus has

not dealt with the use of differing technologies to produce the same

output. Also, it has not addressed the relation between cognition,

socialization and sector of employment with which dual labor market theory

has been concerned.

     Although the major departure from neoclassical theory of sociological

theories of segmentation is the rejection of market clearing, the dual

economy literature has concentrated on the issue of whether

characteristics of the employer influence the wage received by the

worker. A frequent practice in the segmented economy literature has been

to test the model by regressing wages on firm and/or industry

characteristics as well as worker characteristics (Hodson, 1984;
                                                                          15




Kalleberg, Wallace & Althauser, 1981; Wallace & Kalleberg, 1981). The

fact that, in general, industry and/or firm characteristics enter the

equation significantly is presented as evidence contradicting the human

capital model.

     There are two problems with this approach. First, the neoclassical

model of section II implies that firm or industry characteristics will

generally enter the wage equation with significant coefficients even when

worker/job match characteristics or worker attributes are included,

because inevitably not all characteristics are included and the functional

form is only approximate. Secondly, if the dual market approach is

correct, ordinary least squares is not a legitimate estimator for the wage

equation. We discuss these problems in turn.

     In the neoclassical model, it is perfectly legitimate to express the

wage equation entirely in terms of worker characteristics, entirely in

terms of firm characteristics or in terms of the worker/job match as in

the HWE. To express the wage equation solely in terms of the worker's

characteristics, note that from figures 1 and 3, the level of education

the worker obtains will depend entirely on his or her attributes.

Therefore, instead of expressing wages as a function of worker/job match

characteristics, it is possible to express the wage as a function of

worker attributes. Similarly, wages can be expressed as a function of

firm attributes.* Thus, to reiterate, even if one interprets standard

wage equations as expressing the wage solely in terms of worker

attributes, it does not follow that they have ignored the importance of

"demand."
                                                                          16




     More significantly, since the model can be expressed as a function of

any of the three types of characteristics, it is likely that when firm (or

industry) characteristics are included in the equation along with worker

characteristics that both will turn out to be significant. Since any

functional form for the wage equation is inevitably an approximation to

the "true" functional form, the error term in the wage equation with only

worker characteristics will almost definitely be correlated with firm

characteristics. Only if the wage equation were specified exactly and all

relevant worker characteristics were measured perfectly would this not be

true. Otherwise, firm or industry characteristics will be correlated with

unmeasured characteristics such as job safety or the quality of worker

hired.

     Dickens and Katz (1986, 1987) address the issue of why there are

significant inter-industry wage differences. They suggest three

possibilities: 1) that the model outlined in section II is accurate but

that there are inter-industry wage differentials resulting from temporary

disequilibria, 2) that the model outlined in section II is accurate and

that inter-industry wage differentials reflect unmeasured job match

characteristics and 3) that the neoclassical model outlined in section II

is inaccurate. They provide evidence that inter-industry wage

differentials have persisted over extended periods of time and thus

conclude that the temporary disequilibrium hypothesis can be rejected.

They also marshall evidence that inter-industry differentials persist even

after careful statistical controls for a large number of job match

characteristics, and that inter-industry differentials are strongly
                                                                           17



correlated across occupations. Thus, they conclude that the neoclassical

the model outlined in section II is probably inaccurate.

     However, as noted above, the standard neoclassical model implies that

firm or industry characteristics enter the wage equation containing

individual characteristics because they are correlated with the error

term. In contrast, the dual economy model suggests that these

characteristics belong in the equation in their own right. Therefore,

this conclusion ultimately rests either on conjectures about how large

inter-industry wage differentials can be or on auxiliary hypotheses such

as how correlated over time and across occupations and nations

inter-industry wage differentials should be. Thus including industry or

firm characteristics in the wage equation at best provides a weak test of

the neoclassical model.

     Moreover, if the segmented market model is correct, it is not

legitimate to interpret the OLS coefficients of a single wage equation

with industry dunimies or characteristics as measuring the amount of

monopoly rents captured by workers. As noted above, the dual economy

hypothesis implies that there are queues for good jobs. Since there is an

excess supply of workers for these jobs, firms will choose the "best"

available workers from the queue. These workers will be those whose wages

are unusually low given their productivity. Since it is inevitable that

we do not measure all determinants of wages, the expected value of the

contribution of unmeasured characteristics to the wage (in other words,

the error term) in those jobs is negative rather than zero as required for

ordinary least squares. Thus, in general, ordinary least squares will
                                                                            18




overestimate the importance of industry dummies or characteristics.

     This criticism is, if anything, more compelling when applied to tests

which have divided the sample into sectors and tested for the existence of

separate equations explaining the determination of wages for each sector

(Beck, iloran & Tolbert, 1978; Hodson, 1978, 1984; Horan, Beck & Tolbert,

1980; Osterman, 1975; Zucker & Rosenstein, 1981). The endogeneity of

sector of employment is particularly important because, as Cain (1976) has

pointed out, if workers are divided into two sectors, a large sector

composed mainly of workers with high wages and a small sector composed

mainly of workers with low wages, we will estimate that the returns to

education and experience are lower in the "low wage sector" even if in

fact there are not two distinct sectors, The estimated return to

education will be biased downwards In both sectors by the truncation of

the wage, but the bias will be more serious in the smaller sector since

the fraction of "missing" observations is larger. This statistical

problem can be avoided only by explicitly modeling the assignment of

workers to sectors. There is an extensive literature on consistent

estimation of models with this sort of selection problem. (see Maddala,

1983, for an excellent review.)

    A second difficulty arises because, with the exception of Dickens and

Lang (1985a&b, 1986, 1987), all estimates of sectoral models assume that

the sector of employment is known. Yet as Zucker and Rosenstein (1981)

make clear, the correlations among classification schemes that divide

industries into a core and periphery sector are relatively weak, ranging

from 57% to 83% agreement for the four taxonomies they study. The degree
                                                                          19



of disagreement is striking when one considers that if each study had

assigned people to sectors randomly but in the same proportions as in the

actual studies, the level of agreement would have ranged from 40% to 50%.

     Without doubt, part of the disagreement is due to underlying

theoretical differences. However, much of the disagreement simply

reflects the difficulties entailed in moving from the theoretical

conception to the empirical application. It simply is not possible to use

industry of employment to establish sector of employment with any degree

of certainty.

     The appropriate solution is to model sector of employment as unknown

a priori and to let the estimation technique determine the sector of

employment. The appropriate statistical technique is described in Dickens

and Lang (1985a) -- "endogenous switching with unknown regimes.t' To

estimate this model the research specifies two or more equations which

describe the wage determination process in each sector as a function of

human capital and other variables. The researcher also specifies an

equation describing the process by which people are assigned to the two

sectors as a function of human capital and ascriptive criteria. The model

is estimated by maximum likelihood. In effect, the model assigns a

probability of being in each sector to each person on the basis of

ascriptive and human capital variables. Simultaneously, it estimates the

return to human capital and other variables in each sector. This

"endogenous switching model with unknown regimes" stands at the opposite

end of the spectrum from the "exogenous switching models with known

regimes" which have been used in the dual economy literature. The latter
                                                                           20




assume that industry of employment provides complete information about

sector of employment while the former makes no use of industry information

to assign workers to sectors.   (If one wished to compromise between the

two approaches, one could modify the technique developed by Dickens and

Lang to take account of industry information without assuming that sector

of employment is known perfectly.)

     In sum, the segmented economy literature distinguishes itself from

the neoclassical model primarily by rejecting the assumption that wages

adjust to clear labor markets. As will be discussed below, there has been

a resurgence of interest in such models in neoclassical economics as

well. However, while both economists and sociologists have concerned

themselves with testing the segmented markets model by establishing

whether firm or industry characteristics enter a wage equation

significantly, this does not really address the issue of market clearing.

Moreover, the estimation techniques used in these "tests" are

inappropriate for the dual market model.



V. Testing for Queues

     Since both the dual labor market and dual economy models

differentiate themselves from the neoclassical model by rejecting the

existence of market clearing, the most direct way to distinguish between

segmented market models and the standard neoclassical model is to test for

the existence of queues.
     The most straightforward manner in which to consider whether or not

there are queues for jobs is to examine the effect of inter-industry wage

differentials on quit rates. If workers in high wage industries are, in

fact, receiving rents, we would expect them to have lower quit rates.

This prediction is confirmed by a number of studies. However,

interpretation of this result is hindered by an inadequate theory of why

quits occur. Moreover, if high ability workers tend to invest more

heavily in firm specific capital, they will simultaneously have higher

wages and lower quit rates.

     Farber (1983) presents the most sophisticated approach to studying

queues in his examination of queues for union jobs. He points out that it

is necessary to model the process whereby individuals are allocated to

each sector. Allocation is the outcome of two decisions. First, workers

must decide whether or not to seek union employment. Since the nonunion

sector is assumed to be competitive, those workers who desire nonunion

jobs at the going wage rate enter the nonunion sector. However, not all

workers who desire union jobs obtain them. Instead, the union wage

premium results in a queue (excess supply of workers) for union jobs.

Workers only obtain union jobs if an employer chooses them from the

queue. Thus the probability of being allocated to the union sector is the

probability of wanting a union job multiplied by the probability of

obtaining a union job given that the worker desires one. If there is not

an excess supply of labor for union jobs, the latter probability is one,

and the model reduces to one in which only the probability of wanting a

union job equation needs to be estimated. Thus, the no queue model is
                                                                           22




nested in the queue model, and it is possible to test for the existence of

queues. Farber's work is facilitated by the presence of a measure of

whether or not the workers desire union jobs.*

      Dickens and Lang (1985a,b, 1986), use a somewhat different approach

in the context of a dual labor market model. They point out that if

workers were free to choose their sector of employment, they would tend to

enter the sector in which their earnings, adjusted for the value of

nonwage characteristics of employment, were highest. Using the endogenous

switching model with unknown regimes discussed above, they find that for

an equal wage differential between the sectors, nonwhites are more likely

to be employed in the secondary sector. There are two possible

conclusions - -   either   nonwhites place a lower value on the nonwage

characteristics of the primary sector or nonwhites find it more difficult

to obtain primary employment. Auxiliary evidence** tends to contradict

the first conclusion. Therefore, it appears that nonwhites face nonprice

discrimination which implies the absence of market clearing.



VI.   Notes   for A Neoclassical Model of Labor Market Stratification

      We have presented evidence in support of the view that there is an

excess supply of labor for certain types of jobs. Since one of the major

departures of segmented market theory from earlier neoclassical theory is

the existence of queues, it is important to consider the extent to which

queues are compatible with more recent developments in neoclassical

theory. The major conclusion of this section will be that recent

neoclassical theorists have produced the elements of a model which, on
                                                                           23




those topics which have traditionally concerned neoclassical economists,

captures the major departures of dual labor market theory from

neoclassical theory. In addition, this theory helps clarify the relation

between dual economy theory and dual labor market theory. Moreover, there

is considerable convergence between the neoclassical and sociological

models. The major difference is that, in the recent neoclassical theory,

nonmeritocratic stratification can occur even when all markets are

competitive.

     For the last decade, some of the most important work in economics has

concerned itself with developing a microeconomic foundation for

macroeconomics. Within economics there has been a split between a

microeconomic model which assumes general equilibrium with market clearing

and a Keynesian macroeconomic model which many would argue is based on the

failure of market clearing. Two schools of thought have arisen in

response to this dichotomy. One of these has attempted to explain

macroeconomic phenomena in terms of a market clearing model, and the other

has attempted to develop microeconomic models to explain the absence of

market clearing.*

     The latter school has developed a number of related models which fall

under the general rubric of efficiency wage models. In order to describe

efficiency wage models, it is easiest to make the simplifying assumption

that all workers and jobs are homogeneous (though this assumption is not

necessary to the models). In this model, each firm chooses the amount of

labor it employs in order to maximize profits. In the standard model, the

derivative of profits with respect to the wage is just the negative of the
                                                                           24




amount of labor employed. In other words, as wages increase, profits

fall. Therefore, the firm would like to set the wage as low as possible,

and it would never pay more than the minimum necessary to obtain the

quantity (and in a more general model, quality) of workers it desires.

     Under the various efficiency wage models, raising wages can increase

profits. In most efficiency wage models this results from the fact that

output depends on the wage. As a consequence, in efficiency wage models,

firms do not necessarily choose the lowest possible wage; instead they

choose the wage which maximizes their profits. If the wage which

maximizes profits is above the market clearing wage, some workers will be

unemployed. In the standard model, unemployed workers would bid down any

wages above the market clearing level. However, in efficiency wage

models, since the wage has been chosen to maximize profits, lowering the

wage would actually lower profits. Consequently, there can be an excess

supply of labor.

     Katz (1986) and Yellen (1984) provide extensive reviews of the

various efficiency wage models. We provide only a brief summary here. In

most efficiency wage models, output is assumed to depend on the wage and

not just on the quantity of labor employed as in more standard models.

Wages may affect output in a number of ways --   through   worker morale

(Solow, 1979a; Akerlof, 1982), through differences in the quality of

workers hired that are unobservable by the firm (Weiss, 1980), by reducing

quits, or by reducing shirking, stealing and cheating (Bowles, 1985;

Calvo, 1979; Shapiro & Stiglitz, 1984; Stoft, 1982). In the models in

which higher wages reduce the probability of workers' cheating, shirking
                                                                          25



or quitting, the higher wage makes it costly for workers to lose their

jobs and thus provides a disincentive to behavior which might cause them

to be fired. In the morale models the higher wage might be thought of as

changing workers' preferences, but in the other models, preferences are

clearly constant, and workers change their behavior only because

incentives have been modified. The latter fit more easily into the

neoclassical paradigm of profit maximizing firms and utility maximizing

workers with constant preferences.

     The motivations for paying high wages are similar to those found in

the segmented economy literature. However, it should be noted that none

of the models above relies on the existence of monopoly rents or "ability

to pay" that is central to the segmented economy literature. Instead, in

most efficiency wage models, the queues exist despite pure competition in

the product market. One version of the efficiency wage model, however, is

quite close to the most prevalent model in the dual economy literature.

Dickens (1986) argues that firms may pay higher wages in order to deter

workers from taking collective action such as forming a union. The need

to pay union-deterring wages is greatest when the potential rents captured

by the union are large either due to the firm's monopoly power in the

product market or due to the presence of fixed capital.

     Although the efficiency wage models were developed to explain what

many economists perceive as the failure of the wage to adjust to clear the

labor market, they have obvious application to the development of a formal

neoclassical model of labor market segmentation. If the costs of

monitoring workers or the costs of worker malfeasance differ among
                                                                          26



industries, the wage levels which maximize profits will differ among

industries. If there is a set of firms which pay efficiency wages and a

set of firms which do not pay efficiency wages, then there will be two

sectors of the labor market. One will have high wages and an excess

supply of labor. The other will have low wages and behave according to

the standard competitive model. Such models are developed informally in

Dickens and Lang (1984) and Yellen (1984) and formally in Jones (1985) and

Bulow and Summers (1986).

     The above discussion suggests a clear relation between the dual

economy and dual labor market classifications. The primary sector

consists of all jobs for which there is structural and equilibrium excess

supply even in equilibrium. Thus the queues are structural rather than

transitory. Jobs in the monopoly or core sector tend to be in the primary

sector because, in general, the existence of a large amount of fixed

capital or monopoly rents is conducive to the formation of a union. In

addition, some versions of the efficiency wage model imply that firms

which earn rents will pay high wages because workers' conceptions of fair

pay depends on the ability of firms to pay. Also such firms may pay high

wages to deter unionization since the potential gains from unionization

are greater in the presence of rents. Furthermore, monopoly sector firms

tend to have high capital/labor ratios. Many efficiency wage models

suggest that firms with high capital/labor ratios will pay high wages

since the need to avoid shirking, abseenteeism and quits is greatest in

the presence of large quantities of fixed capital. Thus monopoly sector

firms tend to pay efficiency or union-deterring wages. However, some
                                                                           27




firms which are not in the monopoly sector may find it beneficial to pay

efficiency wages which exceed market clearing levels to at least some of

their workers. Consequently, the primary labor market is considerably

more extensive than the monopoly sector.

     Unfortunately, the efficiency wage model described above does not

provide a completely satisfactory neoclassical model of dual labor

markets. The major difficulty is that it suggests that unemployment

consists of people queuing for jobs in the primary labor market. Since

primary jobs tend to be stable, this contradicts evidence that much

unemployment consists of frequent long spells of unemployment interrupted

by short spells of employment and certainly conflicts with a perspective

designed to explain persistent poverty and unemployment among certain

disadvantaged groups.

     The answer to this problem lies in a model which is described

informally in Piore (1975) and developed independently in a neoclassical

model of contestable markets under uncertainty by Appelbaum and Lim

(1985). In that model, there is uncertain demand for industry output.

Output may be produced using either of two technologies, a low

variable-cost/high fixed-cost technology which requires investment prior

to the realization of the state of demand or a high variable-cost/low

fixed-cost technology which does not require prior investment. Firms will

invest in the low variable-cost technology in order to satisfy relatively

certain demand. When demand is high, they will produce additional output

using the high variable-cost technology. The proportion of demand which

is satisfied using the low variable-cost technology will depend on the
                                                                           28



relative costs of the two technologies, the cost of storing the good and

on the variability of demand. If demand is perfectly stable or if the high

variable-cost technology is much more expensive than the low variable-cost

technology and the good is storable, all output will be produced using the

low variable-cost technology. On the other hand, if demand is highly

unstable, the good is not storable and the cost difference is small,

almost all demand will be produced using the high variable-cost

technology. In most industries some output will be produced using the low

variable-cost technology, but this output will be supplemented in boom

periods through the use of the high variable-cost technology.

     It is worth noting that it is possible that high demand/ high

variable-cost technology production may take place in the same firms that

also use the low variable-cost technology, or in firms that "specialize"

in high variable-cost technology. For example, consider an old-fashioned

luncheonette which sells ice cream. For the luncheonette the marginal

cost of supplying the relatively stable day to day demand for ice cream is

low. However, every once in a while, there is an unusually hot day and

the demand for ice cream increases. The increased demand for ice cream

might be accommodated by setting up an additional stand outside the

luncheonette or push cart operators who sell hot chestnuts in the winter

might rapidly convert their carts to handle ice cream. Factors such as

the nature of the technology and access to short term labor markets and

ice cream suppliers would determine whether one or both of these solutions

would be used.
                                                                           29




     The Appelbaum/Lim contestable markets model provides a very different

model of economic dualism than the one based on a division of firms into

those in the monopoly and competitive sectors. Moreover, as Piore (1975)

argued, it is clear that not only can different firms within an industry

use different technologies, but even within firms, different technologies

may be used to produce the same output.

     It is easy to see why primary sector jobs would tend to be located in

firms using low variable-cost technologies. As Bulow and Summers (1986)

point out, when jobs become unstable, the wage required to deter cheating

increases since workers expect to receive that wage over a shorter period

of time. When the efficiency wage required to avoid worker malfeasance

becomes sufficiently large, firms will prefer to use other means such as

direct monitoring of workers' behavior. Thus firms facing stable demand

will tend to pay efficiency wages while firms facing unstable demand will

tend to use direct monitoring. This link between sector and method of

worker regulation is reminiscent of Edwards (1979).

     Of course, the link between stable demand and primary labor market

jobs will not be perfect. In some stable jobs, the cost of direct

monitoring will be sufficiently low that it will be preferable to paying

efficiency wages, while, in some unstable jobs, the cost of monitoring may

be sufficiently high to justify the use of efficiency wages despite the

instability. Thus while job stability, the use of low variable-cost

technology and high wages will tend to be linked, none of the pairwise

correlations will be perfect.
                                                                             30




      In addition, economic theory suggests that a number of other factors

are likely to be correlated with job stability, including investment in

on-the-job training and the use of pensions and job ladders. Thus there

are a number of job characteristics which we would expect to be

correlated.

     In this way, the neoclassical approach to dual labor market theory

casts light on the usefulness of factor-analytic approaches to testing the

model. A number of papers (Buchele, 1976; Gordon, 1971; Hodson & Kaufman,

1981; Horan, Tolbert & Beck, 1981; Kaufman, Hodson & Fligstein, 1981;

Oster, 1979; Tolbert, Horan & Beck, 1980) have interpreted dual economy

theory or dual labor market theory as maintaining that all jobs can be

classified on the basis of a single bimodal factor. They have either

attempted to test these models by techniques such as factor analyzing job

or industry characteristics to see whether they can be classified using a

single bimodally distributed factor, or have criticized dual economy

theory for not recognizing the greater dimensionality of segmentation

(Kalleberg, Wallace & Althauser, 1981; Wallace & Kalleberg, 1981). In the

light of the neoclassical model, this approach is generally misguided.

Nothing in the model suggests that a single factor should be sufficient to

classify jobs. It does suggest that one important factor should link

wages, stability and technology.

     However, dual labor market theory does not imply that the dual labor

market is the only basis on which jobs can be classified. For instance,

if in the list of job characteristics we were to include outdoor work in

winter,   western region, commuting distance, commuting method, whether or
                                                                                31




not most workers in the firm were born in the state or unionized, a factor

analysis would probably uncover an additional factor which might be termed

"sun belt." The presence of this second factor would in no way disprove

dual labor market theory. The model implies that certain characteristics

should be correlated not that no other characteristics are.

     One of the weaknesses of dual labor market theory has been that it

has generally been presented as a classification scheme designed to

describe certain empirical regularities. Without an underlying

theoretical base, it is difficult to maintain that one classification

scheme is superior to another. Thus, if a study finds that the variation

in wages that can be explained by a four or sixteen or sixty-four sector

model is significantly greater than that which can be achieved with a two

sector model, it is tempting to conclude that the dual labor market model

has been rejected. Drawing this conclusion is inappropriate for two

reasons -   - first,   because dual labor market theory does not suggest that

the only determinant of wages is sector of employment and, secondly,

because dual labor market theory should not be regarded principally as a

classification system.



VII. Some Concluding Remarks

     Although dual labor market theory has been largely atheoretical, the

neoclassical model we sketched in the last section is not the first

attempt to provide it with a theoretical underpinning. In fact, we

perceive that model as being a relatively faithful neoclassical rendering

of ideas presented by Doeringer and Piore (1971) and Piore (1975,
                                                                             32




1980a&b). The fact that it is possible to present a neoclassical version

of these ideas suggests that they were never all that incompatible with

neoclassical economics.

     Similarly, we believe that dual economy theory should also be

perceived as being compatible with neoclassical economics. The

sociological work in this area addresses the problems of eliciting worker

effort that, from a different perspective, are the concern of efficiency

wage and agency (Becker & Stigler, 1974; Lazear, 1979, 1981) models in

economics. There is clear potential for cross-fertilization of the

economic and organizational (e.g. Baron & Bielby 1980, 1982, 1984;

Stolzenberg, 1978) perspectives. From an economic perspective, the

sociological literature has paid undue attention to the role of monopoly

rents and insufficient to other economic conditions which foster or

inhibit the growth of different administrative mechanisms.

     Nevertheless, in the light of our analysis, we cannot avoid a certain

disappointment that sociologists have not concerned themselves more with

the most significant departure of dual labor market theory from

neoclassical economics - -   the   attempt to incorporate social-psychological

feedback into the system. Whether a model which dropped the assumption of

perfect rationality to incorporate the Piagetian concepts of Piore (1980b)

or a model which allowed tastes to be endogenous would still be

neoclassical is largely a matter of definition. We are, however, inclined

to agree with Piore (1974) that exogeneity of tastes and perfect

rationality are essential to the neoclassical model and that dropping

these assumptions would give rise to a model which differed significantly
from existing theory. In neoclassical economics, the individual is a

completely formed entity from birth. His or her utility function is

exogenous to the economic system, and since all individuals are fully

rational with unlimited cognitive capacity, cognition is independent of

the organization of work. It is in this area that the dual labor market

model presents the greatest challenge to neoclassical economics.

     Moreover, sociologists have more training and experience with this

type of model. Perhaps sociologists have neglected dual labor market

theory's tentative steps towards integrating these sociological notions

with labor market theory because of the weakness of the economists'

efforts in this direction. We expect that this is one direction of

inquiry in which sociologists could make substantial contributions to

theories of labor markets.
                                                                             3 L1




FOOTNOTES

cover page

    *    We   are grateful to Sam Gilmore, Shulamit Kahn, Ken Small, David

    Smith and Gary Thom for helpful comments and criticisms and to the

    National Science Foundation for research support under grant nuniber

    SES8606139. Any errors of fact or interpretation are, of course,

    entirely our responsibility.

page 1

    * Throughout this paper we use the following nomenclature. We use

    "dual or segmented labor markets" when we refer to the economic

    literature, "dual or segmented economy" when we refer to the

    sociological literature and "dual or segmented markets" when we refer

    to both literatures simultaneously. Neoclassical economists should be

    viewed as distinct from the Marxists and institutionalists who,

    together, comprise the schools of economic thought from which dual

    labor market theory developed.

page 2

    * This section is based heavily on Kahn and Lang (1986). A related

    analysis of the market for occupational safety is described in Kahn

    (1985).

page 5

    * More formally, the firm chooses the number of workers to hire and

    the level of education to require of them in order to maximize profits

    given by
                                                                        35




 (1)               profits    f(L,E,u)   -
                                               w(E)L


where without loss of generality the price of output has been

normalized to equal 1, f is the production function net of any capital

costs, L is the number of workers hired, E is their level of

education, w is the wage they receive and u is a parameter measuring

the contribution of education to productivity in the firm.

       Similarly, workers choose their level of education in order to

maximize their appropriately discounted lifetime earnings net of

education costs



(2)               net earnings  w(E)      -
                                               c(E,e)


where c is the appropriately amortized cost of education and e

represents the ease of obtaining schooling for the individual.

       It can be shown that the firm's demand depends on u and the slope

of the HWE (the w function) and, that similarly, the level of

education chosen by the worker depends on e and the slope of the HWE:



(3)               Ed     Ed(w. ,u)




(4)               E5    E5(w',e)


where superscripts denote supply and demand, and w', the slope of the

HWE, serves the role of price in standard supply or demand equations.
                                                                             36




       The competitive market matches workers with high values of e with

firms with high values of u. This matching process can be described

by a function relating e to U:



(5)                e     f(u)                 f'>O.




       To derive the HWE, we proceed as follows -     - first,   solve (3) and

(4) for u and e as functions of w' and E:



(6)                e    e(w',E)


(7)                u     u(w' ,E)




The next step is to substitute (6) and (7) into (5) to obtain



(8)                e(w' ,E)     f(u(w' ,E))




and then solve for w' as a function of E



(9)               w'     w'(E).



Finally, (9) can be integrated to obtain the hedonic wage equation



(10)              w  w(E).
                                                                           37




page 6

    * The fact that the wage equation can be interpreted as the

    equilibrium outcome of the interaction of supply and demand does not

    mean that this fact was clearly recognized in the seminal work of

    Becker (1971) and Mincer (1974). To the extent that the development

    of the human capital model ignored demand factors, the sociological

    criticism of the theoretical work is justified.

page 6

    ** Monopsony refers to a market with only one buyer. In a labor

    market a monopsony exists when one firm or a group of firms acting

    together are the sole source of employment for a particular group of

    workers.

page 15

    * More formally, from equation (9), w' is a function of E. Therefore,

    it is possible to substitute for w' in the demand equation and solve

    for E as a function of e. Kahn and Lang (1986) refer to this as the

    quasi-reduced form demand equation. Having derived E as a function of

    e, it is possible to substitute for E in the HWE and derive w as a

    function of e. By a similar process, it is possible to express the

   wage solely in terms of firm characteristics.

page 22

    *   Nevertheless, Abowd and Farber (1982) demonstrate that it is
   possible to test for the existence of queues even in the absence of

    such a measure.
                                                                           38




page 22

    **    Blacks are more likely to support unions in representation

    elections (Farber & Saks, 1980; Dickens, 1983), are less likely to

    quit a job (Viscusi, 1979) and have greater demand for occupational

    safety than equivalent whites (Kahn, 1983). Primary jobs are

    generally believed to be more heavily unionized, provide more stable

    employment and to be safer than secondary jobs. Thus, it is doubtful

    that blacks prefer the nonpecuniary features of secondary employment

    to a greater extent than whites.

page 23

    * See Solow (l979b) for a discussion of this debate.
                                                                          39




References

Abowd, John. M., and Henry S. Farber. 1982. "Job Queues and the Union

     Status of Workers." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 35:354-67.

Akerlof, George A. 1982. "Labor Contracts as Partial Gift Exchange."

     Quarterly Journal of Economics 87:543-569.

Appelbaum, Eli, and Chin Lim. 1985. "Contestable Markets Under

     Uncertainty." Rand Journal of Economics 16:28-40.

Averitt, Robert T. 1968. The Dual Economy. New York: Norton & Co.

Baron, James N., and William T. Bielby. 1980. "Bringing the Firms Back In:

     Stratification, Segmentation, and the Organization of Work." American

     Sociological Review 45:737-765.

Baron, James N., and William T. Bielby. 1982. "Workers and Machines:

     Dimensions and Determinants of Technical Relations in the Workplace."

     American Sociological Review 47:175-188.

Baron, James N., and William T. Bielby. 1984. "The Organization of Work in

     a Segmented Economy." American Sociological Review 49:454-473.

Beck, E.M., Patrick M. Horan, and Charles M. Tolbert. 1978.

     "Stratification in a Dual Economy: A Sectoral Model of Earnings

     Determination." American Sociological Review 43:704-720.

Becker, Gary S. and George J. Stigler. 1974. "Law Enforcement,

     Malfeasance, and the Compensation of Enforcers." Journal of Legal

     Studies 3:1-18.

Berg, Ivar. 1981. "Sociological and Institutional Perspectives on Labor

     Markets." Pp. 1-7 in Sociological Perspectives on Labor Markets,

     edited by Ivar Berg. New York: Academic Press.
                                                                           40



Bibb, Robert, and William H. Form. 1977. "The Effects of Industrial,

     Occupational and Sex Stratification on Wages in Blue-Collar Markets."

     Social Forces 55:974-996.

Bluestone, Barry. 1970. "The Tripartite Economy: Labor Markets and the

     Working Poor." Poverty and Human Resources Abstracts 5:15-35.

Bowles, Samuel. 1985. "The Production Process in a Competitive Economy:

     Walrasian, Neo-Hobbesian and Marxian Models." American Economic

     Review 75:16-36.

Buchele, Robert. 1976a. "Jobs and Workers: A Labor Market Segmentation

     Perspective on the Work Experience of Young Men." unpublished

     doctoral dissertation, Harvard University.

Bulow, Jeremy I., and Lawrence H. Summers. 1986. "A Theory of Dual Labor

     Markets with Application to Industrial Policy, Discrimination and

     Keynesian Unemployment," Journal of Labor Economics 4:376-414.

Cain, Glenn. 1976. "The Challenge of Segmented Labor Market Theories to

     Orthodox Theory." Journal of Economic Literature 14:1215-1257.

Calvo, Guillermo. 1979. "Quasi-Walrasian Theories of Unemployment."

     American Economic Review 69:102-107.

Dickens, William T. 1979. "Work and Personality: A Structural

     Interpretation of the Class-Values Relation."

Dickens, William T. 1983. "The Effect of Company Campaigns on

     Certification Elections: Law and Reality Once Again." Industrial and

     Labor Relations Review 36:560575.

Dickens, William T. 1986. "Wages, Employment and the Threat of Collective

    Action by Workers," NBER Working Paper No. 1856.
                                                                          41



Dickens, William T., and Lawrence Katz. 1986. "Occupational and Industry

     Wage Structures and Modern Theories of Wage Determination," mimeo.

Dickens, William T., and Lawrence Katz. 1987. "Industry Characteristics

     and Interindustry Wage Differences." Pp. 48-89 in Unemployment and

     the Structure of Labor Markets, edited by Kevin Lang and Jonathan S.

     Leonard. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Dickens, William T., and Kevin Lang. 1985a. "A Test of Dual Labor Market

     Theory." American Economic Review 75:792-805. (previously NBER

     working paper no. 1314, 1984).

Dickens, William T., and Kevin Lang. 1985b. "Testing Dual Labor Market

     Theory: A Reconsideration of the Evidence," NBER working paper No.

     1670.

Dickens, William T., and Kevin Lang. 1986. "Labor Market Segmentation and

     the Union Wage Premium," NBER working paper No. 1883.

Dickens, William T., and Kevin Lang. 1987. "Where Have All the Good Jobs

     Gone? Deindustrialization and Theories of Dual Labor Markets," Pp.

     90-102 in Unem1ovment and the Structure of Labor Markets, edited by

    Kevin Lang and Jonathan S. Leonard. Oxford:Basil Blackwell.

Doeringer, Peter B., and Michael J. Piore. 1971. Internal Labor Markets

     and Manpower Analysis. Lexington, Mass.: D.C. Heath.

Edwards, Richard. 1975. "The Social Relations of Production in the Firm

     and Labor Market Structure." Pp. 3-26 in Labor Market Segmentation,

     edited by Edwards, Richard, Michael Reich,, and David M. Gordon.

    Lexington, MA: D.C. Heath.

Edwards, Richard. 1979. Contested Terrain. New York: Basic Books.
                                                                             42



Farber, Henry S. 1983. "The Determination of the Union Status of Workers."

Econometrica 51:1417-38.

Farber, Henry S., and Daniel H. Saks. 1980. "Why    Workers Want Unions: The
     Role of Relative Wages and Job Characteristics." Journal of Political

     Economy 88:346-369.

Gordon, David M. 1971. "Class, Productivity and the Ghetto." unpublished

     doctoral dissertation, Harvard University.

Heckman, James J. ,   and Guilherme Sedlacek. 1985. "Heterogeneity,

     Aggregation, and Market Wage Functions: An Empirical Model of

     Self-Selection in the Labor Market." Journal of Political Economy

     93:1077-1125.

Hodson, Randy. 1978. "Labor in the Monopoly, Competitive and State Sectors

     of Production." Politics and Society 8:429-480.

1-!odson, Randy. 1984. "Companies, Industries, and the Measurement of

     Economic Segmentation." American Sociological Review 49:335-348.

Hodson, Randy, and Robert L. Kaufman. 1981. "Circularity in the Dual

     Economy: Conmient on Tolbert, Horan, and Beck." American Journal of

     Sociology 86:881-887.

Hodson, Randy, and Robert L. Kaufman. 1982. "Economic Dualism: A Critical

     Review." American Sociological Review 47:727-739.

Horan, Patrick M., E. M. Beck, and Charles M. Tolbert. 1980. "The Market

     Homogeneity Assumption: On the Theoretical Foundations of Empirical

     Knowledge." Social Science Quarterly 61:278-291.

Horan, Patrick M. ,   Charles M. Tolbert, and E.M. Beck. 1981. "The Circle
     Has No Close." American Journal of Sociology 86:887-894.
                                                                         43




Jones, Stephen R.G. 1985. "Minimum Wage Legislation in a Dual Market."

     mimeo, University of British Columbia.

Jovanovic, Boyan. 1979a. "Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover."

     Journal of Political Economy 87:972-991.

Jovanovic, Boyan. 1979b. "Firm-specific Capital and Turnover." Journal of

     Political Economy 87:1246-1260.

Kahn, Shulamit. 1983. "Occupational Safety and Worker Preferences."

     unpublished doctoral dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of

     Technology.

Kahn, Shulamit. 1985. "Economists' Evaluation of the Value of Life,"

     Proceedings of the National Science Foundation.

Kahn, Shulamit. 1986. "Economic Estimates of the Value of Life."

Kahn, Shulamit, and Kevin Lang. 1986. "Structural Hedonic Systems:

     Efficient Estimation and Specification Tests." mimeo, Irvine.

Kalleberg, Arne, and Aage B. Sorenson. 1979. "The Sociology of Labor

     Markets." Annual Review of Sociology 5:351-379.

Kalleberg, Arne, Michael Wallace, and Robert P. Althauser. 1981. "Economic

     Segmentation, Worker Power, and Income Inequality." American Journal

     of Sociology 87:651-83.

Katz, Lawrence F. 1986. "Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation,"

     in NBER Macroeconomics Annual. 1986, Cambridge, MA: MIT.

Kaufman, Robert L., Randy Hodson, and Neil D. Fligstein. 1981. "Defrocking

     Dualism: A New Approach to Defining Industrial Sectors." Social

     Science Research 10:1-31.
                                                                          44



Lazear, Edward. 1979. "y is there Mandatory Retirement?" Journal of

     Political Economy 87:261-284.

Lazear, Edward. 1981. "Agency, Earnings Profiles, Productivity, and Hours

     Restrictions." American Economic Review 71:606-620.

Leigh, Duane. 1976. "Occupational Advancement in the Late l960s: An

     Indirect Test of the Dual Labor Market Hypothesis." Journal of Human

     Resources 11:155-171.

Maddala, C. S. 1983. Limited-Dependent and Qualitative Variables in

     Econometrics, New York: Cambridge University Press.

Oster, Gerry. 1979. "A Factor Analytic Test of the Theory of the Dual

     Economy." Review of Economics and Statistics 61:33-51.

Osterman, Paul. "An Empirical Study of Labor Market Segmentation."

     Industrial and Labor Relations Review 28:508-523.

Piore, Michael J. 1974. "Comment on Wachter." Brookings Papers on Economic

     Activity 3:684-688.

Piore, Michael J. 1975. "Notes for a Theory of Labor Market

     Stratification" Pp. 129-150 in Labor Market Segmentation, edited by

     Richard C. Edwards, Michael Reich, and David M. Gordon. Lexington,

     MA: D.C. Heath.

Piore, Michael J. l980a. "Dualism as a Response to Flux and Uncertainty."

     Pp. 23-54 in Dualism and Discontinuity in Industrial Societies,

     edited by Suzanne Berger and Michael J. Piore, New York: Cambridge

    University Press.
                                                                           45



Piore, Michael J. 1980b. "The Technological Foundations of Dualism," Pp.

     55-81 in Dualism and Discontinuity in Industrial Societies, edited by

     Suzanne Berger and Michael J. Piore. New York: Cambridge University

     Press.

Piore, Michael J. 1983. "Labor Market Segmentation: To What Paradigm Does

     It Belong?" American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings

     73:249-253.

Rosen, Sherwin. 1974. "Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product

     Differentiation in Pure Competition." Journal of Political Economy

     82:34-55.

Rosenberg, Samuel. 1980. "Male Occupational Standing and the Dual Labor

     Market." Industrial Relations 19:34-49.

Roy, A. D. 1950. "The Distribution of Earnings and of Individual Output."

     Economic Journal 60:135-146.

Roy, A. D. 1951. "Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings." Oxford

     Economic Papers 3:135-146.

Sattinger, Michael. 1979. "Differential Rents and the Distribution of

     Earnings." Oxford Economic Papers 31:60-71.

Sattinger, Michael. 1980. Capital and the Distribution of Labor Earnings,

    Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Schiller, Bradley R. 1977. "Relative Earnings Mobility in the United

     States." American Economic Review 67:926-941.

Shapiro, Carl, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1985. "Equilibrium Unemployment as

     a Worker Discipline Device." American Economic Review 74:433-444.
                                                                          46




Solow, Robert. 1979a. "Another Possible Source of Wage Stickiness."

    Journal of Macro Economics 1:79-82.

Solow, Robert. 1979b. "Alternative Approaches to Macroeconomic Theory: A

     Partial View." Canadian Journal of Economics 12:339-354.

Sorenson, Aage B., and Arne L. Kalleberg. 1981. "An Outline of a Theory of

     the Matching of Persons to Jobs." Pp. 49-74 in Sociological

     Perspectives on Labor Markets, edited by Ivar Berg. New York:

    Academic Press.

Stigler, George J. 1962. "Information in the Labor Market." Journal of

     Political Economy 70:94-105.

Stoft, Steve. 1982. "Cheat Threat Theory: An Explanation of Involuntary

     Unemployment." inimeo, Boston University.

Stolzenberg, Ross M. 1978. "Bringing the Boss Back In: Employer Size,

     Employee Schooling, and Socioeconomic Achievement." American

     Sociological Review 43:813-828.

Thaler, Richard H., and Sherwin Rosen. 1976. "The Value of Saving A Life:

     Evidence from the Labor Market." Pp. 265-298 in Household Production

     and Consumption, edited by Nestor Terleckyj. New York: Columbia

     University Press.

Thom, Gary B. 1983. The Human Nature of Social Discontent. Totowa, NJ:

     Rowman & Allenheld.

Tinbergen,   Jan. 1951. "Some Remarks on the Distribution of Labour

     Incomes." International Economics Papers 1:195-207.

Tinbergen, Jan. 1956. "On the Theory of Income Distribution."

     Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv 77:155-73.
                                                                         47



Tolbert,   Charles M. 1972. "Industrial Segmentation and Men's Career

     Mobility." American Sociological Review 47:457-477.

Tolbert, Charles M., Patrick M. Horan, and E.M. Beck. 1980. "The Structure

     of American Economic Segmentation: A Dual Economy Approach." American

     Journal of Sociology 85:1095-1116.

Viscusi, W. Kip. 1979. Employment Hazards: An Investigation of Market

     Performance. Cambirdge, MA:Harvard University Press.

Wachter, Michael L. 1974. "Primary and Secondary Labor Markets: A Critique

     of the Dual Approach." Brookings Pacers on Economic Activity 3:

     637-680.

Wallace, Michael, and Arne L. Kalleberg. 1981. "Economic Organization of

     Firms and Labor Market Consequences: Toward a Specification of Dual

     Economy Theory." Pp. 77-117 in Sociological Perspectives on Labor

     Markets, edited by Ivar Berg. New York: Academic Press.

Weiss, Andrew. 1980. "Job Queues and Layoffs in Labor Markets with

     Flexible Wage Expectations." Journal of Political Economy 88:

     526-538.

Woodbury, S. A. 1979. "Methodological Controversy in Labor Economics."

     Journal of Economic Issues 13:933-955.

Yellen, Janet L. 1984. "Efficiency Wage Models of Unemployment." American

     Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 74:200-205.

Zucker, Lynne G., and Carolyn Rosenstein. 1981. "Taxonomies of

     Institutional Structure: Dual Economy Reconsidered." American

     Sociological Review 46:869-884.
                     FIGURE 1




Schooling




                                           individual A




                          individual B

            Hedonic Wage Equation



                                         Wages
                     FIGURE 2




Schooling            Firm B




    Firm A




             Hedonic Wage Equation



                                     Wages
                   FIGURE 3




                                    Individual
Schooling




 Individual B

                 Firm A



            Hedonic Wage Equation



                                       Wages
