                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       TIME-INCONSISTENCY AND SAVING:
              EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM LOW-INCOME TAX FILERS

                                             Damon Jones
                                            Aprajit Mahajan

                                         Working Paper 21272
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21272


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2015




We are grateful for funding from the Social Security Administration via the Center for Financial Security,
University of Wisconsin, Madison, as a part of the Financial Literacy Research Consortium and for
funding from the National Institute on Aging. We are thankful for useful comments from Benjamin
Lockwood and seminar participants at Stanford University, the University of Chicago, the 2012 Behavioral
Economics Annual Meeting and Wharton. All opinions expressed are solely those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research. This RCT was
registered in the American Economic Association Registry for randomized control trials under Trial
number AEARCTR-0000730.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Damon Jones and Aprajit Mahajan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Time-Inconsistency and Saving: Experimental Evidence from Low-Income Tax Filers
Damon Jones and Aprajit Mahajan
NBER Working Paper No. 21272
June 2015
JEL No. D14,D91,H24

                                             ABSTRACT

We conduct a field experiment designed to test theories of time-inconsistency, namely a "Beta-Delta"
model of present bias. The experiment takes place in the context of a saving decision made by low-income
tax filers who can deposit their income tax refund into an illiquid account. We find qualitative evidence
consistent with present-biased preferences. The tradeoff between an earlier payment or a later one
is much more skewed toward taking the early payment when the decision is made on the spot than
when the decision is made in advance. We estimate a and of 0.34 and 1.08 over an 8-month horizon,
respectively, which translates into an annual discount rate of 164%.


Damon Jones
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
damonjones@uchicago.edu

Aprajit Mahajan
Dept. of Agricultural & Resource Economics
University of California, Berkeley
219 Giannini Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720-3310
and NBER
aprajit@gmail.com
1         Introduction

A growing body of economic literature emphasizes the importance of time-inconsistent preferences.1
This deviation from standard models can have implications in a number of domains, including
health, labor supply and addictive behavior.2 In this paper, we examine a specific class of time-
inconsistent preferences, present-biased preferences,3 in the context of savings decisions among
low-income households, a population of particular interest in this setting. For example, self-control
problems may lead to poverty traps.4 Similarly, it has been shown that in the presence of limited
credit supply, self-control problems may prevent households from accumulating savings and making
lumpy purchases with non-linear payoffs, such as acquiring a vehicle or moving to a new neigh-
borhood.5 Furthermore, self-control problems may prevent households from optimally allocating
resources inter-temporally in the presence of lumpy transfers such as food-stamps.6 On the other
hand, solutions to self-control problems, such as illiquid savings vehicles, may render low-income
households more vulnerable to negative income shocks in the short-run.
        We conduct and analyze a field experiment designed to examine the relevance of self-control
related problems in explaining observed saving behavior. We develop formal tests for the presence
of present-bias by offering respondents monetary rewards for planning to save and actually saving.
The main intervention offered respondents one of two types of financial rewards — one closer in
time and one further in the future — if they saved or committed to saving their income tax refund
for a specific length of time. This was combined with a second intervention — a “soft-commitment”
device that offered households a financial reward if their actual saving decision at the time they
receive a refund corresponded to their stated decision months earlier.7 Together these interventions
allow us to identify the parameters of a quasi-hyperbolic discounting model, also known as the “β-δ”
    1
     See e.g. DellaVigna (2009); Frederick, Loewenstein, and O’donoghue (2002), for reviews.
    2
     See e.g. DellaVigna and Malmendier (2004b); Kaur, Kremer, and Mullainathan (2014); Rabin and O’Donoghue
(2001).
   3
     See Laibson (1997); O’Donoghue and Rabin (1999).
   4
     Banerjee and Mullainathan (2010)
   5
     Bernheim, Ray, and Yeltekin (2013)
   6
     Shapiro (2005)
   7
     In our setting, we use the term “soft-commitment” to describe a decision that increases the future incentive to
save, but does not completely determine the future saving decision. This is not to be confused with the usage in
Bryan, Karlan, and Nelson (2010), where “soft-commitment” devices — those with primarily psychological penalties
— are contrasted with “hard commitment devices” — those with primarily real economic penalties.

                                                         1
         8
model,       which nests the standard model of time-consistent preferences in a model of present bias.
    Our experiment results in several pieces of evidence in favor of present-bias. In our primary
analysis, we obtain point estimates for the time discount factor β in the range 0.19–0.45 — almost
always significantly lower than the null hypothesis of 1. This parameter is recovered using a set
of discrete outcomes — soft-commitment and saving decision — and relies on a quasi-linearity
assumption. We therefore turn to an alternative method developed by Andreoni and Sprenger
(2010), which relies on continuous saving decisions and allows for risk aversion. In this case, we
are able to identify the composite parameter βδ, which ranges from 0.06–0.49. This overlaps well
with the range of the same composite parameter using our primary analysis — 0.20–0.52. Since
our primary point estimates of β are estimated among the sample that conditions on non-attrition,
we additionally calculate bounds on these estimates that account for any non-random attrition.
Due to high rates of attrition, these upper bounds on β remain no longer rule out a value of 1.
In our preferred specification, the estimates of β and δ — 0.34 and 1.08, respectively, over an 8
month horizon — translate into an annual discount rate of 164%. This falls in the range of previous
estimates — 49%–238%.9
    Our project makes a number of contributions to the existing literature. First, we complement the
existing set of time preference studies — which tend to be laboratory or artefactual experiments
over moderate or hypothetical stakes — by varying relatively large stakes in a “natural” field
experiment. The income tax refund can typically be as much as 40% of annual income and the
decision of whether or not to save it in an illiquid account is not uncommon in our setting. In
recent work, Giné, Goldberg, Silverman, and Yang (2013) implement a field experiment in which
quantitative measures of time preference and time-inconsistency are correlated with the likelihood
of revising one’s savings plans. Meier and Sprenger (2010) elicit time-preference parameters from a
sample similar to ours: low-income tax filers in the US, while Eckel, Johnson, and Montmarquette
(2014) elicit time preferences from a sample of primarily working poor, Canadian households. In the
three aforementioned studies time-preferences are elicited by incentivized choice experiments: either
   8
     See Strotz (1955a) and Laibson (1997). While not the only parameterization for time-inconsistent preferences
(see e.g. Gul and Pesendorfer (2004) or Benhabib, Bisin, and Schotter (2010) for alternative formulations), the β-δ
model is the workhorse for empirical work on the topic.
   9
     See Laibson, Repetto, and Tobacman (2007); DellaVigna and Paserman (2005); Fang and Silverman (2009).

                                                        2
the “convex time budget” or “multiple price list” method.10 They may be regarded as “artefactual”
field experiments in the parlance of Harrison and List (2004). Our study contributes to this line of
work by measuring time-preferences in the course of decisions that are routine to the agents, i.e. the
decision to save one’s income tax refund.11 Thus, we aim for a context that is akin to a “natural”
field experiment (Harrison and List (2004)).12
       Our second contribution is that we complement existing methods of eliciting time preferences
by exploring the implications of a soft-commitment device — i.e. a non-binding commitment mech-
anism — and using these theoretical implications to inform our experimental design. A standard
approach to qualitatively detecting is demonstrating a demand for commitment.13 Our method
differs from these previous results in that our soft-commitment is intentionally non-binding, but
nonetheless incentivizes revelation of time-inconsistency.14
       In addition, our test does not hinge on detecting a demand for commitment. Similar to Read,
Loewenstein, and Kalyanaraman (1999), access to the commitment technology in our experiment is
exogenous, and the comparison of outcomes between these experimental groups is used to shed light
on time preferences. Essentially, we rely on the relative effectiveness of two monetary incentives
— one received earlier in time and another received later in time — and the difference in this
comparison when a decision is made in advance or on-the-spot. In this sense, our test of present-
bias is similar tests that rely on aggregate preference reversals over either hypothetical or real
payoffs at different points in time.15 We show how such aggregate preference reversals may be
used to identify the presence of present-bias under relatively weak assumptions, when there is not
uncertainty regarding preferences over time. However, once we allow for uncertainty, we must place
  10
     See Andreoni and Sprenger (2010) for a discussion and comparison of the two methods and see Frederick,
Loewenstein, and O’donoghue (2002) for an extensive review of the time-preference literature.
  11
     Another recent field experiment carried out in a “natural” setting is conducted by Sadoff, Samek, and Sprenger
(2015), who use food purchasing decisions to test for time-inconsistency.
  12
     Hausman (1979) and Wanrner and Pleeter (2001) estimate time preference parameters in “natural” decision-
making contexts, but do not explicitly test for time-inconsistent preferences. Harrison, Lau, and Rutström (2005)
test for dynamic inconsistency using an “artefactual” field experiment.
  13
     See Bernatzi and Thaler (2004); Ashraf, Karlan, and Yin (2006); Duflo, Kremer, and Robinson (2009); Tarozzi,
Mahajan, Yoong, and Blackburn (2009); Gine, Karlan, and Zinman (2010); Mahajan and Tarozzi (2010).
  14
     One exception to this set of studies is Beshears, Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Sakong (2013), where the commit-
ment technology is also only partially binding.
  15
     See Thaler (1981); Ashraf, Karlan, and Yin (2006); Meier and Sprenger (2010); Tanaka, Camerer, and Nguyen
(2010); Bauer, Chytilová, and Morduch (2012).


                                                        3
some restrictions on preferences — i.e. quasi-linearity. In return, our model can allow for shocks to
preferences over time if we use an appropriately rich experimental design. This method also allows
us to extend beyond qualitative evidence of present-bias and estimate the parameters of a “β-δ”
model. We describe our approach in more detail in Section 5.
       A third contribution is that the outcomes we examine are of direct interest to policy mak-
ers. The specific context for our study is that of savings among low-income tax filers. Previous
research has demonstrated that among tax filers there exists a demand for savings options16 , a
positive effect of a match on savings17 and a demand for illiquid savings options, such as a savings
bond.18 Our contribution includes examining the effects of commitment mechanisms in the context
of income tax refund-based saving in the US. Our method differs from these previous results in
that our soft-commitment is intentionally non-binding, but nonetheless incentivizes revelation of
time-inconsistency. Thus, our test does not hinge on detecting a demand for commitment. The
paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 describes the design of the field experiment. We present the
reduced form results from the experiment in Section 4. We then outline a basic theoretical model
in Section 5 and present the structural estimates for the model in Section 6. Section 7 concludes
with a discussion of the results.



2        Study Design

2.1       Institutional Details and Sample Selection

Our intervention takes place in the context of the non-profit tax preparation industry, where low- and
moderate-income tax filers receive free tax preparation assistance.19 These non-profits — referred
to as Volunteer Income Tax Association (VITA) organizations — typically offer additional services
to their customers, including enrollment assistance for public benefits and financial counseling.
  16
     Beverly, Schneider, and Tufano (2006)
  17
     Duflo, Gale, Liebman, Orzag, and Saez (2006)
  18
     Tufano (2008)
  19
     Third-party tax preparation is quite common among low-income households, particularly those eligible for various
refundable credits — which are the object of many saving promotion policies. For instance, IRS public use data
suggests that 70% of EITC recipients in 2006 used a tax preparer.



                                                         4
    The setting is useful for the purposes of experimental study as a majority of tax filers receive a
relatively lumpy payment during tax season — the income-tax refund.20 Due to refundable credits
such as the EITC and Child Tax Credit (CTC), as well as overwithholdings, the income tax refund
is likely to be the single largest payment received by low-income households during the year. This
lumpy payment generates a number of issues regarding consumption smoothing, including possible
borrowing in anticipation of the loan and the allocation of the payment optimally over future
periods. In response, VITA sites and policymakers have encouraged saving among low-income tax
filers, often by using a combination of illiquid and matched saving vehicles. These include US
Treasury bonds (Tufano, 2008), tax-deferred retirement accounts (Duflo, Gale, Liebman, Orzag,
and Saez, 2006), and, in the case of New York City, a short-term, illiquid CD with a relatively
high matching rate, the SaveNYC account.21 While we remain agnostic regarding the optimality
of saving one’s income tax refund among this population, we nonetheless use this decisionmaking
context — natural to our study participants — as the point of departure for experimental design.
    Tax preparation typically lasts from early February to mid April, with the bulk of refund recipi-
ents filing during the first few weeks of February or near the April deadline. In many cases, tax filers
interact with a VITA site solely during the tax season. In addition, there tends to be high turnover
in clients from year to year. Our partner, The Financial Clinic, based in New York City, features a
suite of services that include tax preparation, financial counseling and legal assistance. The Finan-
cial Clinic offers some year-round services, such as debt management counseling and legal assistance
with tax matters. Their interaction with clients throughout the year is key to our experimental
design, which involves reaching tax filers in advance of the tax season. It is also our hope that
the scope of their services — tax preparation, legal advice and financial counseling — generated
a relatively high level of baseline trust, which, if absent, can confound studies of time-inconsistent
preferences (Andreoni and Sprenger, 2012).
    Our initial pool of potential participants consists of all clients at the VITA site from the previous
tax filing season. In order to focus on filers with significant refunds, we only consider clients with
  20
     Note that over 80% of US tax filers receive income-tax refunds with the share being even higher for low-income
households (IRS public use data). In our study, the average refund size was about $2,095 for Tax Year (TY) 2009.
  21
     Now called the SaveUSA New York City account. See http://www.nyc.gov/html/ofe/html/policy_and_
programs/saveusa.shtml for details on this program.

                                                        5
tax refunds of at least $300 in the previous year.22 In addition, we restrict our study to those clients
whose primary language is either English or Spanish. In our main sample, this results in a total of
833 clients approached in the fall of 2010, who are randomly assigned to one of six experimental
groups.23
       Our sampling frame, while not representative of the US population, is of direct interest to
policymakers. There are various policy initiatives aimed at encouraging low-income tax filers to
save24 and our intervention is well suited to examine issues surrounding the take-up such a program.
In addition, we are not concerned that our estimates are biased due to the refund restrictions we
have made. In particular, prior research (Jones, 2012) demonstrates that the income tax refund is
the result of largely passive behavior on behalf of the tax filer, especially in the case of low-income
tax filers that receive the EITC.25


2.2       Conceptual Overview

To fix ideas, consider an individual who files her taxes in February and chooses in February between
receiving her income tax refund immediately or placing it in an illiquid, interest bearing savings
account until October. Suppose that the individual is offered a fixed payment as an incentive to
save and that this additional incentive can either be received immediately (February) or is delayed
until money is withdrawn from the savings account (October). As compared to the baseline take-up
rate of this savings account, the relative effect of the incentive, immediate or delayed, can give one a
sense of the time discount between the two periods, February and October.26 Alternatively, suppose
  22
     Analysis of 2008 and 2009 tax data at this tax preparer indicates that past refunds are highly predictive of future
refunds.
  23
     In the year after our main study, we attempted to collect more data among a second pool of 994 clients. We
discuss this additional data collection in Section G below.
  24
     Examples of this include: numerous changes to the tax filing process including the ability to have refunds
deposited directly into savings accounts or invested in savings bonds, a national pilot to offer matched savings to
low-income filers (Save USA) and potentially the Savers Credit, though this last program targets a broader range of
incomes.
  25
     In an appendix of that paper, the author shows that the high level of overwithholding cannot be fully explained
by a preference for forced savings. Other work (Jones, 2010) suggests that it is safe to assume that the Advance
EITC and its low take-up can be ignored due to dramatically low awareness of this program.
  26
     The use of monetary incentives to identify discount factors in relies on an assumption of borrowing constraints.
This is perhaps reasonable for the low-income EITC recipients in our study and can additionally be confirmed using
our survey data among participants.



                                                           6
that the individual were asked at an earlier date (e.g. in December of the previous year) to choose
between receiving the refund in February or saving it until a future date (e.g. October) and thereby
earning some interest as in the earlier setting. Again, suppose that a fixed savings incentive is either
delivered early (in February) or late (in October) as above.
   Standard theories of present-biased preferences predict that when asked at this earlier date,
respondents may be more inclined to choose the savings option. In addition, from this pre-tax
season vantage point, the relative effect of the early incentive versus the late incentive will be less
pronounced. Intuitively, when making a decision in December, the tax filer already has to wait two
months to receive the refund. Waiting an additional number of months to receive a larger payment
may not seem so costly. The individual is more aware of the benefits of saving vis-a-vis the cost of
putting the money aside when both occur far enough in the future. Typical models of present-bias
also suggest that if a sophisticated tax filer can make a binding, early decision in December to save
in February, she may do so as a means of self-control. However, if the commitment device is not
completely binding, a sophisticated tax filer may avoid it, realistically believing that commitment
will ultimately be undone. As we explain below, the use of a partial commitment mechanism will
be key in allowing the researcher to infer preferences in December over outcomes in February and
October.


2.3    Experimental Arms

Our actual experimental design builds upon the stylized setting described above. However, institu-
tional constraints require the actual experiment to differ in important ways. In particular, we are
not able to implement binding commitments to save in the months prior to the the tax season. In
practice, individuals may face uncertainty regarding the level of the refund and/or their ultimate
preferences over saving. Thus, we offer a “soft-commitment” option that incentivizes participants
to follow through with their initial commitment, but also allows revisions to the final saving plan.
Nonetheless, our experiment identifies time inconsistency by making use of the same key variation.
That is, we compare the relative responsiveness to an incentive received earlier in time (e.g. Febru-
ary) to one received later in time (e.g. October) for individuals making a decision in advance (e.g.

                                                   7
December) or on the spot (e.g. February).27
       The intervention has six experimental arms. In particular, each participant belongs to either
the non-commitment or commitment group — the nomenclature is explained below. Within each of
these groups, there are three arms. In the non-commitment group, there is a control arm, an early
incentive treatment arm and a late incentive treatment arm. Within the commitment group, there
is likewise a control arm, an immediate incentive treatment arm and a delayed incentive treatment
arm. A timeline of the of the field experiment is provided in Figure A.1 and graphical representation
of each experimental group’s incentives are provided in Figures A.2–A.6.


2.3.1      Non-Commitment Group

Tax filers in the non-commitment group make an on-the-spot savings decision at the tax site (e.g.
in February), in response to variation in incentives paid either immediately (e.g. in February) or
at a delayed time (e.g. in October). We use the outcomes in this group to inform us about the
discount between the present and a future period. This group was contacted in December 2010.
First, they received a notice in the mail, from the Financial Clinic, informing them that we would
be calling them to explain a savings opportunity. Importantly, the mailing included information
briefly summarizing the key, treatment group-specific, incentives.28 We then followed up the initial
mailing with phone outreach to enroll the tax filer in the study. During the call, survey data on
demographic characteristics and financial behavior were collected, and the participant was also
asked to consider a matched savings account: the SaveUp Account. Participants were informed
that if they return to The Financial Clinic tax preparation site to file their taxes, they would have
the opportunity to open the SaveUp Account. In order to obtain the match, the tax filer must keep
her savings amount in an illiquid account for 8 months (that is until October 2011). In return for
allocating at least $300 to this account, the tax filer would receive a 50% match for each dollar
  27
     For convenience we identify the pre-tax filing period as December, the tax filing period as February and the
post-tax filing period as October. In practice, pre-tax interventions are made between late November and early
December, tax filing is carried out between February and April, and savings withdrawals may be made as early as
October or as late as December. However, the period of time between decisions and payments at the tax site and
payments later in the year is held roughly fixed at 8 months across individuals.
  28
     Samples of the mailings sent to teach treatment group are provided in Appendix E.




                                                       8
saved between $300 and $1,050.29
       Participants who only received this information comprise the non-commitment control arm
(group 1). The incentives for this control arm are represented graphically in Figure A.2. Within
the set of non-commitment arms, there are two treatment arms who are additionally offered either
an “immediate” incentive of $50 (group 2), given at the time of filing taxes, or a “delayed” incen-
tive of $50 received after the 8 month saving period (group 3), in return for saving. A graphical
representation of the incentives for members in these two treatment arms is provided in Figures A.3
and A.4.30
       When participants in these three arms arrived to file their tax returns during the following tax
season — February through April — they were presented with the opportunity to open a SaveUp
account, featuring the savings incentives described above. The Financial Clinic is able to open
the savings account with money from the income tax refund, via a direct deposit option on the
income tax return. If an account is opened, the funds cannot be withdrawn for 8 months, at which
point all savings matches are credited to the account. Members of treatment arm 2 who open an
account receive their “immediate” incentive when making the initial deposit (see Figure A.3), while
members of treatment arm 3 receive the “delayed” incentive 8 months after opening the account
(see Figure A.4). Additional survey data, similar to that collected over the phone, was collected at
the tax site.
       Concretely, a member of the non-commitment control group had the opportunity to receive
up to $375 in saving incentives if they chose to save $1,050. A member of the non-commitment
treatment groups could have received up to $425 in saving incentives — which includes an extra
$50 incentive over the control arm for saving.
  29
     Though generous, our match is less generous than pre-existing programs offered by e.g. New York state. The
Save NYC account offers a 50% match on every dollar, until $1,000 (see http://www.nyc.gov/html/ofe/html/
poverty/save.shtml), and has been expanded to other cities across the US. Importantly, the Save NYC account is
not simultaneously offered to our study participants.
  30
     Even though the “immediate” match is given up front, it is forfeited by deducting the match amount from the
savings account in the event of an early withdrawal. Thus, it still serves as a conditional match.




                                                       9
2.3.2      Commitment Group

Participants in the commitment group made two decisions. Their first, soft-commitment decision
was made prior to the tax season (e.g. December) in response to incentives paid earlier in the
future (e.g. February) or later in the future (e.g. October). We use this first set of decisions
to learn about the discount between two future payments, one further in the future than the
other. Commitment group members also made a final savings decision at the tax site. This group
was similarly contacted during the December preceding the tax filing season with a mail notice
followed by phone outreach. In the mailing and over the phone they were provided with the relevant
information for their experimental arms.31 Members of the commitment group were given surveys
and informed of a saving opportunity, the SaveUpFront Account, in a similar fashion to members
of the non-commitment groups.
       In contrast to members of the non-commitment group, commitment group members were asked
in December to make a soft-commitment regarding a savings account. Importantly, they either had
the option of soft-committing to save or soft-committing to not save. The SaveUpFront account is
similar to SaveUp Account, with a minimum deposit of $300, and a 50% match on every additional
dollar deposited up until $950.32 The commitment was “soft” in that the ultimate savings deci-
sion could deviate from the commitment. However, the soft-commitment still mattered for future
incentives. If the tax filer softly committed to saving, the savings account would include an addi-
tional $100 in savings incentives conditional on saving at least $300. Alternatively, if the tax filer
soft-committed to not saving, she still had the option to save at the tax site, but now would receive
a $75 payment in October should she not have saved. Thus, the commitment reinforced decisions
in either direction, and therefore can be distinguished from “cheap talk.” Participants who only
received this treatment comprised the commitment control arm (group 4). The incentives for this
arm are illustrated in Figure A.5.
       The remaining members of the two commitment treatment arms were offered an additional
  31
    Samples of the mailings for these experimental arms are also provided in Appendix E.
  32
    We chose different upper limits for the two groups since commitment group members received additional incen-
tives for following through with commitments. In particular, this allowed our scripts across treatments to be roughly
equivalent when we stated “you will have the opportunity to receive as much as “$425” in savings incentives.”
Furthermore, we see that the upper limit is typically not binding in our study.


                                                         10
incentive for soft-committing to save. For soft-committing to save, the individual received a $50
incentive — either an “early” incentive, given at the time of filing taxes (group 5), or a “late” one
received 8 months after the tax season (group 6). Importantly, the incentive was kept regardless of
the final savings outcome — a key difference from the incentives for the non-commitment group. As
will be explained below in Section 5, linking this incentive to the commitment decision, but keeping
it independent of the final saving decision is key for separately identifying the discount parameters
in a quasi-hyperbolic discounting model. The incentives for the two commitment treatment arms
are illustrated in Figures A.6 and A.7.
    At the time of tax preparation, members of the commitment group were reminded of their
prior soft-commitment. They were also reminded of the features of the SaveUpFront Account,
which depended on the previous, soft-commitment decision as demonstrated in Figures A.5–A.7.
They then could make a final savings decision, which, importantly, could differ from their soft-
commitment. There was, however, a penalty for deviating, i.e. the forgone commitment reward.
The SaveUPFront Accounts were similarly funded via direct deposit from the income tax refund
and had a similar maturity horizon of 8 months. Additional survey data was likewise collected from
members of the commitment treatment groups when taxes were filed.
    A member of the commitment control arm had the opportunity to receive up to $425 in saving
and commitment incentives — $100 for following through on a soft-commitment to save and $325
for saving the maximum of $950. A member of the commitment treatment arms could receive up to
$475 in incentives — which includes an extra $50 over the control arm just for having soft-committed
to saving.



3     Data

As mentioned earlier, our sample is the pool of prior year tax clients at the collaborating non-profit,
the Financial Clinic. We restrict the study to tax filers who had a federal income tax refund above
$300 and who spoke either English or Spanish. This resulted in an initial pool of 833 potential
study participants.


                                                  11
   We collect a range of administrative and survey data. We have access to administrative tax
return data from IRS Form 1040. This includes filing status, age, adjusted gross income (AGI),
unemployment insurance, number of dependents, earned income tax credit (EITC), child tax credit,
withholdings, tax liability, federal and state income tax refund, and whether direct deposit was used
to receive a refund. We use data for both the prior tax year (2009) and the current one (2010),
which are collected between February and April (tax-filing season) in 2010 and 2011, respectively.
Additional client intake data for each tax-filing season are collected by the collaborating non-
profit. These data include gender, race/ethnicity, primary language, marital status, highest level of
education, zip code, tax filing date, tax preparation site location and type of bank accounts owned.
We have prior year data — tax year 2009 data collected during the tax filing season of 2010 — for
all baseline participants and only have current year data — tax year 2010 data collected during
tax filing season 2011 — for those participants that return to file their taxes with the non-profit
in 2011. Soft-commitment decisions for the commitment group members are recorded during the
initial phone call in late 2010, while saving decisions and saving amounts are recorded at the tax
site in early 2011.
   During our initial phone interviews, which happen in the winter of 2010 prior to the current
tax filing season, we collect data on savings and debt levels. Following Lusardi, Schneider, and
Tufano (2011), we measure credit constraints by asking participants the likelihood of unexpectedly
owing $2,000, the ability to come up with this amount of cash and the potential source of this cash.
Finally, after explaining the SaveUp and SaveUpFront accounts to participants, we quiz them on
the parameters of the savings vehicle, to measure comprehension. During the initial phone survey,
the pre-commitment decision is also recorded. In our follow up survey, which takes place during
the current tax filing season, we repeat questions regarding savings, debt, credit constraints and
comprehension.


3.1    Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 provides descriptive statistics across the six treatment groups for a range of pre-intervention
characteristics. As can be seen, the treatment groups are balanced at the onset. The average age is

                                                  12
about 41, and the sample is two-thirds female. The over-representation of females is in part due to
income restrictions on free tax preparation clients and the concentration of EITC benefits among
single female-headed households. For this same reason, average income is low, at $17,600 and the
share married is only 11 percent. The average federal refund is $2,500 and state refund is $666,
which together is well above the maximum allowable SaveUp deposit. About one-half of the sample
has a high school equivalent degree, but only 4 percent have a college degree or higher. Nearly
half of the sample is African-American, another 30 percent is Hispanic and only 5 percent is white.
The low share of Asian filers, less than 3 percent, is in part due to the sample being restricted to
English and Spanish speaking tax filers — the lower Manhattan location of our tax sites results in
a majority of Asian filers who do not have English as a first language. Finally, three-fourths of the
sample reports some type of bank account.


3.2    Sample Attrition

One challenge to the longitudinal design of the experiment is a high attrition rate. Table 2 shows
the likelihood of remaining in the sample at each of the three key stages of the intervention. The
first key stage is the pre-tax season phone call (in December) during which consent is obtained and
soft-commitment decisions are recorded for the commitment groups. As can be seen, we are able to
contact less than one-third of the potential participants over the phone. An additional 13 percent
of all respondents are lost due to a failure to obtain consent for the study after being reached on
the phone. Finally, another 6 percent are lost between the pre-tax-filing season phone call and the
actual appearance at the tax site where final savings decisions are made. We note in Table 2 that
survival rates rise considerably when we are able to contact respondents on the phone. From this
perspective, the consent rate rises from 15 percent to 51 percent and the share that appears at the
tax site rises from 9 percent to 28 percent. In other words, a majority of the drop off in sample size
occurs before our first phone call with individuals.
   While the high levels of drop-off are less than ideal, this appears to be a structural feature of the
population at hand — low income tax filers. Recall that we draw our initial sample from the roster
of tax filers at the nonprofit in the previous year. The likelihood of maintaining the same address

                                                  13
and contact information among this population from one year to the next appears to be considerably
low. Furthermore, the year-to-year turnover at our tax site is high — which is not surprising given
that the nonprofit is only one of numerous options for tax filing. Thus, any intervention similarly
designed to follow such tax filers over time is likely to face similar rates of attrition.33
       A more serious threat to our experiment is any difference in attrition across treatment groups,
shown in Table 2. Attrition is significantly higher for potential participants in the non-commitment
group — arms 1–3 have a significantly lower probability of being reached by phone, consenting to
the study (by phone) or appearing on-site at The Financial Clinic, relative to arms 4–6. Recall that
prior to being called, participants receive treatment-specific informational mailings. It is possible
that differential attrition arises because commitment groups on average receive larger financial
incentives than non-commitment groups.
       Despite these significant differences across the two broad experimental groupings, attrition
within the two broad experimental groups does not significantly differ across sub-arms — arms
1–3 do not differ from each other, and arms 4–6 do not differ from each other. The reader should
keep this in mind once we turn to our parameter estimates in Section 6.2. The identification of the
key parameters largely relies on comparisons between treatment and control arms within the two
major experimental groups — so, differential attrition across the two broad experimental groups is
less of a concern. It should be additionally noted that conditional on being contacted by phone,
consent rates and on-site appearances are comparable across all six experimental arms. Again, the
differences appear to be driven by pre-phone factors, i.e. differences in experimental arm-specific
information contained in the initial mailings.
       Given that we do not observe statistically significant differences in attrition within each broad
experimental arm, we report results below both unconditionally and conditional on non-attrition.
Conditioning on non-attrition allows us to examine the direct response to the incentives we present,
although it may introduce selection bias in the case of nonrandom attrition. In Section 4.3 we
discuss a bounding method that is robust to this potential bias.
  33
    Chetty and Saez (2013) find that 73% of tax filers in the Chicago Metropolitan Area return to H&R Block for
tax preparation in the second year of their experiment. In our case, the probability should be expected to be much
lower, since the market share of The Financial Clinic is significantly less than that of H&R Block.


                                                       14
4     Experimental Results

We now turn to summarizing the reduced form results of the experiment. We begin by describing
the main outcomes, soft-commitment and saving, across the experimental groups. We then report
results conditional on non-attrition, to better disentangle actual soft-commitment and saving deci-
sions from issues of attrition. In this case, we also make use of bounding methods that allow set
identification in the presence of differential attrition and/or in the presence of selection bias induced
by the use of estimates conditional on non-attrition.


4.1    Outcomes by Experimental Arm

Table 3 presents the overall Intent-to-Treat (ITT) soft-commitment and saving outcomes across
the six experimental arms. We observe a significantly higher probability of soft-committing to save
among the early and late commitment treatment arms (arms 5 and 6) relative to the commitment
control arm (group 4), which soft-commits at a rate of 5 percent. However, the timing of the
incentives does not appear to matter, as the early and late incentive arms soft-commit at a similar
rate of 14 percent. We do not observe any statistically significant differences in saving or the saving
amount. The point estimates for saving range between 4 percent and 9 percent, with saving among
the commitment group slightly higher than the non-commitment group. Finally, the amount of
saving among the the early and late incentive, commitment arms (arms 5 and 6) is on average $48
and $61, respectively. The saving amount among the remaining experimental arms ranges between
$31 and $38. While we fail to detect significant differences in most outcomes, the difference across
arms in the direct response to incentives is masked by an overall high rate of attrition.
    To disentangle attrition from the direct effect of incentives, we report in Table 4 outcomes
conditional on being reached by phone and officially entering into the study. Among this group,
we can observe an active soft-commitment to save or soft-commitment to not save, in response to
the incentives presented to each treatment arm. Those who are not reached by phone might be
doing so due to a lack of interest in the savings account, but may also be unreachable to due to
unrelated factors, such as a change in address or busy schedule. The rates of soft-committing to


                                                   15
save are now scaled up, once we adjust for phone contact. After conditioning on phone consent,
we observe similarly significant differences in the probability of soft-committing to save among the
early and late incentive arms — 0.69–071 in arms 5 and 6 — relative to the commitment control arm
— 0.37 in arm 4. However, we observe the similar qualitative pattern when comparing outcomes
— the relative timing of the incentives does not appear to matter. Among this arm, the saving
outcomes are an order of magnitude larger after we adjust for phone contact. The commitment
group appear to have a slightly higher saving probability — 0.24–0.36 among arms 4–6 — relative
to the non-commitment group — 0.13–0.17 among arms 1–3. A similar pattern is apparent when
looking at the saving amount, which ranges from $141 to $258 among arms 4–6 and from $96 to
$154 among arms 1–3. However, the differences in saving and saving amount are never statistically
significant in this table.
   In Table 5 we additionally condition on appearance at the tax preparation site. This is done,
again, to disentangle additional attrition in the experimental sample between the time of phone
contact and tax filing season. Given the level of attrition in our setting, we loose a significant
amount of power at this stage. While the probability of soft-committing to save among the early
and late incentive arms — 0.56 and 0.64, respectively — remain higher than the that among the
commitment control arm — 0.31 — the difference is no longer statistically significant. With respect
to saving outcomes, we now observe a statistically significant difference in the probability of saving
and the saving amount among the immediate incentive arm — 100 percent and $834, respectively
in arm 2 — relative to the non-commitment control arm — 0.43 and $320, respectively in arm 1.
The delayed incentive group also has a higher point estimate than the non-commitment control
group for saving and saving amount — 0.64 and $478 in arm 3 — but the difference is not as stark
as that between the immediate incentive and non-commitment control arms.


4.2    Treatment Effects Conditional on Non-Attrition

As already discussed above, the overall pattern in outcomes is a combination of attrition and
active decisions regarding soft-commitment and saving. In order to highlight the direct response
to incentives, we estimate treatment effects among those who are present at the relevant stage of

                                                 16
decisionmaking.34 We begin by examining the soft-commitment decision among the commitment
group (arms 4-6). Recall respondents can soft-commit to either save or to not save. The key
variation here is the additional incentive given for soft-committing to save for treatment arms 5 and
6 — the “early”, i.e. February, and “late”, i.e. October, incentives, respectively. We estimate OLS
regressions of the form
                                  Cn = αC + γe T5,n + γl T6,n + ΓC Xn + εC,n                                     (1)

where Cn is a dummy that equals one if individual n soft-commits to saving and zero if the individual
soft-commits to not saving, Tj,n , j ∈ {5, 6}, are dummies for arms 5 and 6, arm 4 is the omitted group
and Xn is a vector of predetermined covariates. We run these regressions among the individuals
who have non-missing soft-commitment outcomes, i.e. those who were successfully reached over
the phone. We conduct conventional robust inference as well as randomization inference using 500
replications.
       The effect on soft-commitment is shown in the first row of Table 6. The early and late incentives
almost double the likelihood of soft-committing to save relative to the control group; the treatment
arms increase soft-commitment by 30-35 percentage points from a baseline of 37 percentage points.
The treatment effects are statistically distinguishable from zero and are robust to randomization
inference.35 The effect is nearly identical across the early and late treatment arms and is not
sensitive to covariate adjustments — columns (2) and (4), respectively. The results suggest that
the incentives play a substantively important role in encouraging the soft-commitment to save, but
that their relative timing — whether they are to be received in February or October — does not
additionally affect agents’ choices in December. We also show in Table 6 that attrition rates for the
treatment arms are higher, but not in a statistically significant way.
       We now turn to the effect on saving among the non-commitment groups. The saving decision is
made at the tax site, e.g. in February, and the key variation is an additional incentive to save for
treatment groups 2 and 3 — the “immediate”, i.e. February, and “delayed”, i.e. October, incentives,
  34
      We justify conditioning on non-attrition here by relying on the fact that there are generally not statistically
significant differences in attrition across treatment and control arms, within our broad experimental groups. In
Appendix F we present results treating missing soft-commitment and saving decisions as zeros, i.e. we present intent-
to-treat (ITT) effects. We additionally bound these effects using the method of Horowitz and Manski (2000).
   35
      In seven of the 8 cases p < 0.05 and in one case p < 0.1.

                                                         17
respectively. We estimates regressions of the form


                                    Sn = αS + γi T2,n + γd T3,n + ΓS Xn + εS,n .                  (2)


where Sn is a dummy variable for saving, Tj,n , j ∈ {2, 3}, are dummies for arms 2 and 3, arm 1.
is the omitted group and Xn is again a vector of predetermined covariates. We restrict analysis
to those who with non-missing savings decisions, i.e. those who actually arrive at the tax site. We
conduct conventional robust inference as well as randomization inference using 500 replications.
      Table 7 presents the treatment effect on saving among the non-commitment groups in the first
row. In column (1), we see that the “immediate” incentive, group 2, roughly doubles the likelihood
of saving, with an increase of 57 percentage points in the saving share, relative to a baseline of 43
percent. This difference is statistically significant and robust to randomization inference.36 The
“delayed” incentive, group 3, likewise appears to increase saving, although the point estimate of
20-23 percentage points is not statistically distinguishable from zero. In this case, the timing of
the incentive appears to matter — the point estimate for the immediate incentive, i.e. a February
payment considered in February, is between two and three times as large as that of the delayed
incentive, i.e. an October payment considered in February. In columns (2) and (4), we see that the
points estimates are somewhat sensitive to controlling for observables, but the qualitative pattern
remains — the immediate incentive effect is nearly twice as large as the delayed incentive effect.
We observe a statistically significant difference in attrition in one case — treatment arm 2 versus
the control arm — although the difference is only marginally significant (p < 0.1).


4.3       Treatment Bounds

We have focused on treatment effects estimated conditional on non-attrition. From this perspective,
the potential outcome for each member of our sample is the soft-commitment or saving decision
when exposed to the the relevant treatments and incentives. However, in the case that we are
unable to contact the respondent by phone and/or expose her to the treatment offer at the tax site,
 36
      In three of four cases p < 0.05 and in the remaining case p < 0.1.



                                                           18
it seems reasonable to treat her lack of response as a missing data problem. It is important to note
that in Tables 6 and 7 the differences in attrition between the treatment and control arms, within
experimental groups, are generally not distinguishable from sampling variance at conventional levels.
Nonetheless, one may be concerned that the attrition, and therefore missing data, is nonrandom, in
which case we cannot obtain a point estimate for our treatment effects. However, set identification is
possible via a method proposed by Behaghel, Crépon, Gurgand, and Le Barbanchon (2009), which
allows us to bound the treatment effects.37
   We outline the bounding method in more detail in Appendix C. The bounds apply to a treatment
effect among the set of individuals who do not drop out of the sample when offered the immedi-
ate/delayed or the early/late incentives. In the parlance of the Local Average Treatment Effect
(LATE) literature, we can bound the treatment effect on the set of compliers and always takers,
where “take-up” refers to non-attrition. This effect is akin to the treatment on the treated and is
therefore a policy relevant one. Importantly, the bounds are valid even if there is a direct effect of
the treatment on attrition. The bounds rely on an assumption of monotonicity. That is, the effect
of the soft-commitment or saving treatments on attrition are weakly in the same direction for all
individuals.
   In Table 6 we show that the attrition rate for the commitment treatment arms 5 and 6 is
nominally lower than — though within sampling variance of — that of the commitment control arm
4. Intuitively, the prospect of receiving a higher net payout may increase the likelihood of answering
the phone and/or consenting to the study. This difference implies bounds on our conditional
treatment effects. The bounds on the two treatments for soft-committing to save are very similar,
with a lower bound of 10 percentage points and an upper bound of 46 percentage points. In
Table 7, we actually have a counterintuitive pattern — the attrition rate is higher among the non-
commitment treatment groups. We nonetheless report bounds on the treatment effect on saving.
Since the bounds on the treatments for group 2 and 3 overlap, we cannot rule out that they have the
same effect on saving. Again, we note that although potentially differential attrition motivates the
analysis of these bounds, the differences in attrition are generally not statistically different between
  37
     In Appendix F we use an alternative method proposed by Horowitz and Manski (2000) to bound the unconditional
ITT effects.

                                                       19
the corresponding treatment and control arms at conventional levels. It also important to note in
columns (1) and (2), the lower bound on the treatment effect in experimental arm 2 is negative.
We will return to this issue when using these treatment effect bounds to calculate bounds on the
discount factors of interest.



5        Model

We now outline a model of soft-commitment and saving behavior, in order to provide a formal
link between our experimental design, empirical methodology and the relevant economic theory
on time-inconsistency. We model the savings account as an “investment good” as in DellaVigna
and Malmendier (2004a) (see also DellaVigna and Malmendier (2002) and DellaVigna (2009) or
“immediate cost” activities in O’Donoghue and Rabin (1999)).38 We begin by specifying preferences
and beliefs and then by outlining, for each period, the state space, action space and per-period
payoffs. We then present our main results on identifying time-inconsistency.
       As outlined in Section 2.3, our identification of time preferences stems from comparing the
relative responsiveness to an incentive received earlier in time (e.g. February) to one received later
in time (e.g. October) for individuals making a decision in advance (e.g. December) or on the spot
(e.g. February). Under the null hypothesis, these comparisons should yield similar results, while
standard models of time-inconsistency imply a discrepancy between the two.
       A “soft-commitment” decision plays a key role in the model, as it makes decisions prior to tax
season incentive compatible. This decision is by design non-binding, reflecting both institutional
limitations and the fact that exact refund amounts and liquidity concerns are not known with
certainty ex ante. It is important to note, however, that our test of time-consistency is not based on
detecting a demand for commitment, as individuals do not choose between being in the commitment
or non-commitment groups. Moreover, a subsequent reversal of the commitment is not equivalent to
  38
     In mapping the model to the actual field experiment, the discrete choice modeled here is the decision to save
at least the minimum amount listed above. Individuals have an additional continuous choice of the amount to save
beyond the minimum savings threshold. But note, the immediate and delayed incentives are conditional on the
extensive margin decision, and thus map into a discrete choice model. We discuss below how to potentially use the
additional continuous choice to estimate time-preferences as in Andreoni and Sprenger (2010).



                                                       20
time-inconsistency in our model. As such, intra-personal comparisons of the commitment decision
and actual savings outcome do not constitute our formal test.39 Along the same lines, a divergence
in the levels of aggregate pre-commitment and aggregate savings probabilities are not necessarily
equivalent to time-inconsistency in our model, once we allow for uncertainty. Rather, it is the
marginal effect of savings incentives relative to these baseline probabilities that is used as described
below. To summarize, our test of time-consistency is not based on the demand for nor the direct
effect of the soft-commitment on savings probabilities. However, the soft-commitment is a key
ingredient in identifying time-inconsistency, as will be shown.


5.1     Preferences and Beliefs

We assume that individuals maximize additively time-separable and stationary — in the sense
that the per-period utility function, u(·), is time-invariant40 — utility functions with potentially
quasi-hyperbolic discounting, i.e. “β-δ” preferences (see Strotz (1955b), Phelps and Pollak (1985),
Laibson (1997) and O’Donoghue and Rabin (1999)).41 That is, in period t, the present discounted
value of a consumption stream {cs }Ts=t is

                                                           T
                                                           X
                                         vt = u(ct ) + β            δ τ −t · u(cτ ).
                                                           τ =t+1


where β < 1 generates time-inconsistent, and in particular present-biased preferences. In addition,
the agent holds beliefs about future objective functions, parameterized by β̂. That is, in period t,
  39
      Though we do not make explicit use of revision behavior, this does not mean that it is uninformative regarding
time consistency. We can observe revision behavior based on participant decisions and/or early withdrawal of savings.
In addition, we allow for shocks to information regarding the refund level. Giné, Goldberg, Silverman, and Yang
(2013) explicitly use commitment revisions to explore nature and presence of time-inconsistent preferences.
   40
      In Section 5.3, we actually relax the assumption of time-invariance. In Section 5.4, where we introduce uncer-
tainty, we also allow for shocks to preferences over time that affect the level of saving, which constitute a particular
form of time-variance. However, in this case we must also impose time-invariance of the marginal utility of consump-
tion through a quasi-linear functional form for utility in order to gain traction.
   41
      Our use of “stationary” and “time-inconsistent” is not to be confused with that of Halevy (2014b). Halevy
(2014b) uses the term non-stationary to refer to preferences that exhibit static preference reversals — e.g. preferring
one dollar today to two dollars tomorrow while simultaneously preferring two dollars received in t + 1 periods to
one dollar in t periods. Furthermore, Halevy (2014b) uses the term “time-inconsistent” to refer to preferences that
exhibit dynamic preference reversals — e.g. stating today a preference for two dollars at time t + 1 over one dollar at
time t, but stating the opposite when time t arrives. β-δ preferences are both non-stationary and time-inconsistent
in the sense used by Halevy (2014b) when β < 1.


                                                           21
the agent believes that the following objective function will be maximized in period t + k:

                                                        T
                                                        X
                               vt+k = u(ct+k ) + β̂              δ τ −t · u(cτ ).
                                                      τ =t+k+1



Our null hypothesis is that individuals are time-consistent — i.e. β = β̂ = 1. Alternatively,
individuals may be present-biased agents, either characterized by complete sophistication — β =
β̂ < 1 — or naı̈veté — β < β̂ ≤ 1 (see O’Donoghue and Rabin (2001)). We do not impose
restrictions on the extent of naı̈veté, i.e. we allow for β̂ < 1. Note that, in period t, all agents
discount utility between period t + k and t + k + j by a factor of δ j , but believe that when period
t + k arrives, utility will be discounted by a factor of β̂δ j . When period t + k actually arrives,
utility is discounted by βδ j . Note, our method in general allows for more general deviations form
time-consistency, i.e. future-bias (β > 1) as opposed to present-bias (β < 1). Although, we assume
the present-bias formulation in what follows for ease of exposition.


5.2    State Spaces, Action Spaces and Payoffs

We formulate a discrete choice model that takes place over 3 periods. These correspond to our
experimental time periods of (approximately) December (pre tax filing season), February (tax filing
season) and October (post tax filing season). Choices are made by agents during the first two
periods. The key choices are the “soft-commitment” decision (a1 ) in period 1 and the savings
decision (a2 ) in period 2. We model the savings decision as the consumption of an investment good,
as in DellaVigna and Malmendier (2004a). When saving, there is an up front cost c incurred in
period 2 and a benefit b realized in period 3. Finally, agents make decisions conditional on an
experimentally assigned set of incentives (i, d, e, l, p), which correspond to the immediate, delayed,
early and late incentives, and the commitment reward, respectively. Each of these experimentally
assigned amounts is a payment received by agents in either period 2 or period 3 and their value
is a function of the actions a1 and a2 as described more formally below and presented visually in
Figures A.2–A.6.



                                                  22
5.2.1    Period 1

State Space: x1 ∈ X1 , where x1 are pre-intervention observables that potentially affect the agent’s
utility in period 1. Note that our experimental incentives (i, d, e, l, p) — the immediate (i), delayed
(d), early (e) and late (i) incentives and the commitment reward (p) — are orthogonal to this state
variable, due to random assignment.
Action Space: a1 ∈ {0, 1}42 , where a1 = 1 indicates that in period 1 the agent makes a soft-
commitment to save in period 2, and a1 = 0 if the agent makes a soft-commitment to not save in
period 2. Note that both in the model and the experiment we do not allow for an alternative third
action in which the agent rejects the first two actions.43
Utility Flow in Period 1: To focus only on essential details it is assumed that the individual
receives no direct utility flow from actions taken in period 1. All incentives will be derived from the
effect on utility flows in periods 2 and 3 as a result of actions taken in period 1.


5.2.2    Period 2

State Space: a1 ∈ {0, 1}, i.e. the soft-commitment decision in period 1. It is straightforward
to incorporate additional state variables using standard approaches but those are eliminated here
in the interest of brevity. Note that members of the non-commitment group (N C) do not have
an opportunity to make a period 1 decision and therefore, the state variable is irrelevant for their
period 2 decision.
Action Space: a2 ∈ {0, 1}, where a2 = 1 indicates that the agent chooses to save and a2 = 0 if
the agent decides not to save. Recall that members of the commitment option groups are allowed
to deviate from their prior soft-commitment.
  42
      Note that in the model, we only model actions related to the experimental choices. In principle, agents could
make other decisions (e.g. change their saving and/or consumption behavior) in response to the intervention. If there
is an opportunity for financial arbitrage, then decisions over monetary payments may not reveal time preferences
(Coller and Williams, 1999, see). Cubitt and Read (2007) and Augenblick, Niederle, and Sprenger (2014) argue
that time preferences ought to be estimated using primary rewards, not monetary ones, although Halevy (2014a)
provides a defense of monetary rewards. In addition, Meier and Sprenger (2010), who also study time preferences
among lower-income tax filers at a free tax-preparation nonprofit, suggest that arbitrage is not a great concern with
experimental returns such as ours, 50% over 8 months. We further assume that individuals in our sample face credit
constraints, in which case the saving decision during tax season is an inter-temporal utility trade-off, rather than a
mere arbitrage opportunity.
   43
      It can be shown that this third action is weakly dominated.


                                                         23
Utility Flow in Period 2: Payoffs in the second period vary by experimental sub-group. We have
two broad experimental groups: (i) the “commitment” group (C) and (ii) the non-commitment
group (N C). The former makes both a soft-commitment and saving decision, while the latter
only makes a saving decision. Within experimental group C we have three sub-arms: (i) “early”
incentive, (ii) “late” incentive and (iii) commitment control arm. Similarly, within experimental
group N C we have three sub-arms: (i) “immediate” incentive, (ii) “delayed” incentive and (iii)
non-commitment control arm.
    In the N C “immediate” incentive arm, agents receive a payment of i if they decide to save,
representing the immediate savings incentive. This is the additional $50 incentive for saving, which
is contrasted with an equivalent “delayed” incentive received in period 3 by the N C “delayed”
incentive arm.
    In the group C “early” incentive arm, if the agent has chosen to soft-commit to saving — a1 = 1
— she receives a payoff e, irrespective of her actual savings decision. This is referred to as the early
incentive for soft-committing to save, which contrasts with the incentive in period 3 received by
agents in the “late” incentive arm. Finally, agents in all arms are assumed to pay a cost c — i.e.
the cost of saving c dollars, including a binding borrowing constraint — if they decide to save.
    Payoffs for period 2 are summarized in Panel A of Table 8. Flow utility is denoted as a function
u of the payoffs. For present purposes, the model will deal mostly with the case where u (·) is the
identity function, i.e. utility is quasi-linear.44 Note in column (2) of Panel A that uN
                                                                                       2
                                                                                         C
                                                                                           (·), i.e. the
utility flow for a member of the non-commitment group, is invariant to the state variable a1 , since
there is no soft-commitment decision for the non-commitment group. However, uN
                                                                             2
                                                                               C
                                                                                 (·) does depend
on a2 — the immediate incentive, i, is received in return for saving. In contrast, flow utility for
members of the commitment group in column (3) of Panel A, uC
                                                           2 (·), depends on both a1 and a2 . In

particular, when a soft-commitment is made, i.e. a1 = 1, the early savings incentive e is received.
Importantly, the early incentive is received irrespective of the final saving decision a2 (as is the late
incentive in period 3). In both columns, a cost c of saving is incurred for all agents that save, i.e.
when a2 = 1.
 44
    This type of quasi-linearity is found in other models that analyze present-biased preferences, e.g. DellaVigna and
Malmendier (2002). We consider relaxing this assumption below in Section 5.5.

                                                         24
5.2.3      Period 3

State Space: (a1 , a2 ) ∈ {0, 1} × {0, 1}, i.e. the actions taken in periods 2 and 3.
Action Space: Agents take no action in this period and payoffs are a function of group status and
state variables.
Utility Flow in Period 3: Period 3 payoffs are illustrated in Panel B of Table 8. In the non-
commitment group (column (2)) if the agent has not saved in period 2, i.e. a2 = 0, then she receives
a payoff of 0. If she has saved and is in the “delayed” incentive arm, she receives a savings incentive
of d referred to as the “delayed” payoff. In the commitment group, the agent receives a payoff of p
if the soft-commitment and actual savings decision coincide, i.e. a1 = a2 . That is, if she has soft-
committed to not saving and fulfills that commitment in period 2 or if the agent has soft-committed
to saving in period 1 and follows through with that commitment, she receives the payoff p. For
members of the “late” incentive arm in group C, a payoff l is received if a1 = 1 irrespective of her
period 2 saving decision a2 (as was the early incentive in period 2). This is the “late” incentive for
soft-committing to save. Finally, agents in all groups who chose to save in period 2 receive a payoff
of b, which is in effect the value of the amount now available to be withdrawn from the savings
account.45


5.2.4      Discussion

Examining Table 8 one can get a general sense of the source of identification. First, looking at the
column (2) for uN
                3
                  C
                    (·) one will notice that the incentives (i, d) vary depending on the decision in
period 2, a2 and are by construction invariant to a1 , since members of the N C group do not make
soft-commitments. Thus, by observing the response of a2 to experimental variation in (i, d), one
learns about period 2 preferences over utility in period 2 (i) relative to utility in period 3 (d). In
contrast, one can see in column (3) for uC
                                         3 (·), (e, l) vary depending on the decision in period 1, a1 ,

but are invariant to period 2 decisions, a2 . Thus, by observing the response of a1 to experimental
variation in (e, l) one learns about period 1 preferences over utility in period 2 (e) relative to utility
in period 3 (l). Finally, the comparison of the preferences in period 1 and period 2 provide the
 45
      This amount b is inclusive of the variable portion of the savings match, i.e. the 50% on each dollar above $300.


                                                          25
grounds for testing for time-consistency. Note also that in column (3), Panel B of Table 8 the
commitment reward p depends on both the period 1 decision and the period 2 decision. All things
equal, soft-committing to save makes saving more likely to occur, while soft-committing to not save
makes not saving relatively more preferable. In this sense, it is the mechanism by which period 1
decisions can alter period 2 decisions and is necessary for making period 1 decisions nontrivial —
without p ≥ l all commitment group agents would choose a1 = 1.46


5.3       Indentifying Time-Inconsistency Under No Uncertainty

We first solve the model assuming that individuals know in period 1 the costs (c) and benefits (b)
of saving in period 2. We will allow for unrestricted heterogeneity in the costs and benefits across
agents and the joint distribution of (c, b) is given by the unknown CDF G (c, b).47 In this case, we
can test for time-inconsistency without variation in (i, d, e, l). Therefore, we suppress all of these
parameters. Furthermore, we do not need to impose quasilinearity nor time-invariance on the flow
utility function u (·). We will reintroduce these instruments and the quasilinear assumption in the
next section, where identification in the presence of uncertainty requires it. In Appendix B.1 we
derive the following result:

Proposition 1 (Identifying Time-Inconsistency Under No Uncertainty).


       If an agent is time-consistent (T C), we have the following prediction for soft-commitment and
saving outcomes across the commitment option (C) and non-commitment (N C) option groups:


                                   E aC
                                               C         NC    
                                      1 |T C = E a2 |T C = E a2 |T C .

  46
     Again, note that the discrete decisions a1 and a2 are the decisions to soft-commit to save or to actually save above
the minimum savings threshold or not. The incentives (e, l) and (i, d) are the incentives received for soft-committing
to save or actually saving more than these thresholds. The variable part of the savings match is proportional to the
amount saved above the minimum and below the maximum savings deposit and is for convenience collapsed into the
(c, b) variables in the model.
  47
     When there is no uncertainty, we can actually allow for unrestricted heterogeneity in marginal value of the
commitment reward — i.e. pn Q p — and in the value of the discount parameters (βn , βn , δn ). Our results still hold,
although we suppress the subscript n for convenience in exposition.




                                                           26
If an agent is present-biased and sophisticated (P BS) and the soft-commitment reward, p, is “suf-
ficiently strong,” as defined in Definition B.1, then we have:


                           E aC
                                        C          NC     
                              1 |P BS = E a2 |P BS > E a2 |P BS .




Finally, if an agent is present-biased and naı̈ve (P BN ) and the reward p is both “sufficiently strong”
and “sufficiently weak,” as defined in Definition B.1, then we have:


                           E aC
                                        C          C      
                              1 |P BN > E a2 |P BN > E a2 |P BN .




   Intuitively, when the agent is time-consistent, there is no inaccuracy in beliefs nor is there
any conflict in preferences over time. Therefore, when the agent soft-commits to saving, her ac-
                                                          
tions in period 2 are aligned, i.e. E aC1 |T C   = E aC
                                                      2 |T C . Furthermore, the presence of the
                                                                  NC     
soft-commitment is not used to alter outcomes, i.e. E aC 2 |T C = E a2 |T C . Similarly, the so-

phisticated, time-inconsistent agent has accurate beliefs, and thefefore only soft-commits to saving
                                                             C       
when such an action will be born out, i.e. E aC 1 |P BS = E a2 |P BS . However, when given the

opportunity, the sophisticated agent makes use of the soft-commitment to steer outcomes toward
                               NC       
more saving: E aC 2 |P BS > E a2 |P BS . Finally, when the agent is naı̈ve and time-inconsistent,
                                                                      C       
she is overconfident in her ability to save in period 2: E aC
                                                            1 |P BN > E a2 |P BN . Nonetheless,

her naı̈vete serendipitously increases the likelihood of saving when the soft-commitment is available:
                  NC        
E aC2 |P BN > E a2 |P BN .

  Using aggregate outcomes, we can detect present-biased agents in the population whenever
         C                                                         
E aC
   2  > E aN2   and can further detect naı̈ve agents whenever E aC
                                                                 1  > E aC
                                                                         2 . The sufficient

strength and weakness of the soft-commitment reward p is explained in Definition (B.1) and is
related to the support of the preferences (c, b) given the magnitude of p. In short, as p grows,
the ability to distinguish between time-consistent and time-inconsistent agents increases, while the
ability to separately identify naı̈ve and sophisticated agents decreases.




                                                  27
5.4       Identifying Time-Inconsistency Under Uncertainty

We now relax the assumption that agents know (c, b) in period 1. Revisions in planning (i.e.
a1 6= a2 ) are no longer sufficient to identify time-inconsistency as uncertainty about period 2 costs
and benefits (c, b) may well generate this phenomenon, even for time-consistent agents. Thus, it will
be necessary to introduce our full set of experimental instruments (i, d, e, l, p) in order to identify
time-inconsistency.
       We make the following econometric assumptions. Agents are indexed by the variable n. To
capture uncertainty over time, we assume that individuals do not know in period 1 the precise values
of the cost and benefits of savings (c, b); rather, they know the joint distribution of these parameters
with CDF Gn (c, b) at the individual level. One can imagine, for example, that individuals do not
know exactly what their income tax refund will be, which generates uncertainty over cn and bn , but
that each agent still has some private information predictive of the refund.48 The subscript n allows
for ex-ante cross-sectional heterogeneity in preferences. Because c and b will be unobservable to the
                                                                                    R
researcher, we will make use of the average CDF of savings preferences G (c, b) = Gn (c, b) dF (n),
where F (n) is the CDF of the “type” n.
       In period 2, c and b are revealed to the agent, but are still unobservable to the researcher.
We will also make a structural assumption that the utility function u is the identity function, i.e.
preferences are quasi-linear. Using these assumptions, we solve the model by backward induction
in Appendix (B.2). Our results are summarized below:

Proposition 2 (Identifying Time-Inconsistency Under Uncertainty).


       Given our experimental payments (i, d, e, l, p) we can identify βδ among the non-commitment
option (NC) group members using variation in (i, d) as follows:

                                                C 
                                             ∂E aN2    ∂d
                                                          = βδ
                                             ∂E [aN C
                                                  2 ]/ ∂i
  48
    For example, in period 1, an individual who plans to save the entire refund may know that the cost will be
cn = c̄n + εn and benefit will be bn = Rcn , where εn is a mean-zero shock to the refund level and R is the gross
return of the savings account. Indeed, we remind the study participants during our phone interview of their prior
year income tax refund, which is predictive of future refunds.

                                                       28
Furthermore, we can identify δ among the commitment option (C) group members using variation
in (e, l) as follows:                            
                                              ∂E aC1    ∂l
                                                   C
                                                           = δ.
                                              ∂E [a1 ]/ ∂e

   Thus, we use the four reduced form parameters estimated in equations (1) and (2) to recover
time preference parameters. In particular, we have the following mapping:

                                                C       NC       C       C!
                                             ∂E aN
                                      
                                                  2   ∂E  a 2    ∂E  a 1   ∂E  a1
                     γi , γd , γe , γl   =          ,          ,         ,
                                                ∂i       ∂d        ∂e        ∂l


5.5     Allowing for Risk Aversion

We discuss one method for relaxing the assumption of quasilinearity. In this case, however, we
are only able to estimate the composite parameter βδ and must return to the case of certainty.
Nonetheless, we can still compare these results to those obtained using the methods developed above
in Section 5.4 that separately identify β and δ. Our model in Section 5.4 above focuses exclusively
on the discrete decisions to soft-commit to saving and to open a SaveUp account. However, once an
account is opened, study participants must also decide how much to deposit in the account, subject
to our maximum deposit rules. We make use of these continuous outcomes by applying the convex
time budget (CTB) method used in Andreoni and Sprenger (2010) to our context. This method
allows one to simultaneous estimate time preferences and risk preferences, using a continuous saving
decision. In Appendix D we discuss how this method is applied in our context. While we do not
have the same variation as in the original application in Andreoni and Sprenger (2010), we show
that our experimental variation allows us estimate a moment that is a function of the composite
discount factor βδ, a risk preference parameter γ and the growth rate of per-period income flows
4w between February and October. We therefore fix (γ, 4ω) and back out an estimate of βδ given
our data on saving amounts. As we vary the value of (γ, 4w), we can asses the sensitivity of our
results to curvature in the utility function and non-uniform income flows.




                                                     29
6     Estimation Results

6.1    Testing for Time-Inconsistency Under No Uncertainty

While we generally expect uncertainty to play a role in our experimental context, we begin by
reporting the results related to the predictions in Proposition 1. If it is indeed the case that agents
are fully aware of the costs and benefits of saving in an illiquid account prior to the tax season,
then we can conduct a nonparametric test of time-consistency versus present-biased preferences.
Table 9 reports the mean soft-commitment and saving outcomes for the commitment (C) and non-
commitment (N C) groups. In the first row, the means are calculated conditional on non-attrition
at the relevant stage of the experiment. We see that the levels of soft-commitment and actual saving
are roughly equal within and across the two groups — we are not able to rule out time-consistency.
Note that if saving is correlated with survival, this may create a bias in the conditional outcomes. In
the second row, we instead present results among a balanced panel — that is, we restrict attention
to commitment group and non-commitment groups members who are both reached by phone and
present at the tax site. In this case, we do observe patterns suggestive of present-biased, as outlined
in Proposition 1. If there is uncertainty present however, these tests are not conclusive. We therefore
turn to estimates of β and δ below that account for uncertainty.


6.2    Estimating β and δ Under Uncertainty

Using the methods outlined above in Section 5.4, we use the four estimated treatment effects in
Tables 6 and 7 to recover time preference parameters. The point estimates are combined by jointly
estimating equations (1) and (2) and then using the delta method for nonlinear combinations of
the coefficients. In Table 11 we present point estimates for β and δ. These results are conditional
on non-attrition at either the phone interview or tax site stage. The estimates for δ are very close
to 1. The estimates of β are relatively small in magnitude, between 0.34 and 0.45. In Column (3),
we can rule out a value of β = 1 with our 95 percent confidence interval.
    By conditioning on participation, we are implicitly assuming that attrition was not differentially
affected by experimental arm. It is the case that attrition is not statistically different across ex-

                                                  30
perimental arms within our two broad experimental groups, as can be seen in Table 2. However,
if differential attrition is a valid concern, our results will be biased. As discussed above, we can
potentially use the treatment effect bounds discussed in Section 4.3 to bound our parameter esti-
mates.49 There is, however, one setback. As mentioned earlier, the lower bound in Table 7 for γi ,
the “immediate incentive” treatment effect, is negative. Our model, however, requires of to impose
non-negativity on the treatment effects, or else the discount factors we estimate may be negative.
We therefore use the point estimate of γi instead of its lower bound, when bounding β in Table
11.50 The bottom two rows of Table 11 present our upper and lower bounds for β and δ. In this
case, we can no longer rule out a value of β = 1 with our upper bounds.51


6.3       Treatment Group Reassignment and Additional Enrollment

As we have discussed previously, the high turnover setting in which we conduct this experiment leads
to a fair amount of attrition. We take two additional measures to mitigate this sample attrition.
First, some individuals are initially assigned to one of our six treatment groups are sent the initial
mailing, fail to be reached by phone prior to the tax season, but do appear at the tax site to file their
taxes. In cases where we identify these individuals, they are randomly reassigned to one of the 3
non-commitment groups. In addition, to augment the sample of individuals making on site savings
decisions, we enroll a small set of walk-up tax filers, for whom we did not have contact information
prior to the tax season. They are similarly randomized into one of the three non-commitment
groups.
       We cannot enroll any of these individuals into the commitment groups, since that group requires
a decision to be made prior to the tax filing season. These additional participants are given little to
  49
     We are only able to calculate partial bounds, since, theoretically, our model only allows for strictly positive
treatment effects. Thus, we can only bound δ correctly. The lower bounds for group 2 in Table 7 become negative.
Thus, to bound β, we use our point estimate for β in combination with the upper or lower bounds for δ.
  50
     Specifically, the upper bound on β is calculated as

                                          β U B = γdU B · γeU B        γiLB · γlLB .
                                                                                

When γiLB < 0, we get a negative value for β U B . In this case, we use the point estimate for γi , instead of γiU B . This
creates a downward bias in the upper bound.
  51
     In Appendix Table F.6 we report estimates of β and δ using the unconditional ITT effects estimated in Tables
F.4 and F.5. In this case, we still estimate δ close to 1, but the estimates of β are highly unstable due to the near-zero
treatment effect point estimates in Table F.5.

                                                            31
no information prior to the tax season regarding the savings opportunity and therefore may therefore
differ from the members of our main sample. However, we can pool together saving outcomes
between this sample and our main sample, in order to gain more power. Table 10 we report the
immediate and delayed treatment effects using the pooled sample of non-attrited members of group
2 and 3, reassigned individuals and on-site enrollees. Among this expanded sample, we observe a
higher baseline rate of saving in group 1, 52%. Given the bounded nature of the outcome variable,
our treatment effects scale down. Nonetheless, we observe a familiar pattern — the immediate
incentive treatment effect, 36 percentage points, is much larger than the delayed incentive effect, 7
percentage points. In Table 12 we estimate β and δ among expanded sample. The estimates of β
are now somewhat lower — 0.19–0.18. Once again, the upper bound on β does not allow us to rule
out β = 1.


6.4      Estimates Accounting for Risk-Aversion

As discussed in Section 5.5, we can make use of the continuous saving amount decision to provide
alternate estimates of time preferences while accounting for risk preferences.52 In Table 13 we report
estimates of βδ for various values of (γ, 4ω) — these are the coefficient of relative risk aversion and
the growth rate of income flows in February relative to October, respectively. The risk parameter is
varied from 1-4, while the growth in income varies between 0%, 10% and 25%. As one may imagine,
the fact that individuals are not always saving the maximum amount in the presence of a marginal
return of 50% generates a significant level of estimated impatience. Each estimate is tested against
the null hypothesis of βδ = 1 and βδ is well below 1 in all cases.
      In this context low saving may be caused by the fact that higher income flows are expected
in October, relative to February. Moving along columns (1)–(3) from left to right, as we assume
a larger discrepancy in income flows we estimate slightly less impatience. However, the estimates
do not move much — we would need a very high imbalance in income flows to entirely explain
away the low saving rates. Saving may also be influenced by risk aversion. In particular, as we
increase the value of the risk aversion parameter, we actually need more impatience to fit the data
 52
      We explain this method in Appendix D.


                                                  32
— individuals should be saving much more than we observe. Rather than mitigating the finding of
high impatience, allowing for risk aversion makes it even harder to explain why individuals do not
save the maximum amount. In columns (4)–(6) we directly incorporate those at corner solutions.
In our data, there are more individuals at the minimum savings amount than at the maximum
suggesting our estimates of βδ were biased up when only using interior savers. The point estimates,
however, do not change by a great deal.
       With the CTB method, we are not able to test for time-consistency, as we only collect the
continuous savings decision at one point in time. Therefore, we cannot directly compare these
results to our previous results. However, over reasonable levels of risk aversion — γ ∈ {1, 2} —
we estimate values for βδ between 0.20 and 0.49. These estimates are generally in line with our
estimates of βδ in Tables 11 and 12, which range from 0.20 to 0.52. As mentioned above, our
estimate of βδ can be as low as 0.06 at the highest level of risk aversion used, e.g. γ = 4. Since
we cannot separately identify β and δ, we theoretically cannot rule out a value of β = 1. However,
as pointed out by Rabin and O’donoghue (2007), attributing the observed discounting to a simple
exponential discounting function, i.e. loading all the discounting on δ, places extreme restrictions
on the amount of long-term patience that can simultaneously explain our data.53 Thus, if we believe
that the long-term discount factor must be reasonably close to 1, then our evidence from even the
cross section is suggestive of present-bias.


6.5       Alternative Explanation: Information Shocks in February

Our estimates of β and δ are driven by the general patterns of our reduced form treatment effects —
the immediate incentive (Table 7, columns (1)–(2)) generates a stronger response in saving relative
to the delayed incentive (Table 7, columns (3)–(4)), and this difference is much greater than a similar
comparison of the early (Table 6, columns (1)–(2)) and late Table 6, columns (3)–(4)) incentives.
In other words, we find γi − γd > γe − γl when estimating equations (1) and (2). This is contrasted
with what we would predict under the null of time-consistent preferences — given that both pairs
  53
    Specifically, if we calibrate an 8-month discount factor of 0.35 — the midpoint of our estimates — within an
exponential discounting framework, this implies that individuals prefer a dollar of consumption today to nearly 7
million times as much in ten years — i.e. δ10−Y ears = 0.35120/8 ≈ 0.00000001.


                                                       33
of payments feature variation in a payment in February or a payment in October, we might expect
their relative strength to be similar. Though the evidence is consistent with a model of present-
bias, there are alternative stories that may explain the results. In particular, a positive shock to
the marginal utility of consumption in February or a negative shock to income flows in February,
relative to October, would generate a similar pattern. However, it is important to note that in the
aggregate, we find individuals responding much more strongly to the immediate incentive, which
implies that shocks to marginal utility need to be systematically skewed toward February relative
to October. That is, we would need the shock to not average out over the sample. In addition, an
unexpectedly low income flow in February is not sufficient. We also need that a comparable drop
in income in October is not expected. Using survey data from a similar group of tax filers in the
following tax season, we assess the merits of this phenomenon.
   In Table 14 we elicit individuals’ estimated income growth between two points in time, February
and October. We would like to asses the extent to which individuals receive new information about
the flows of income in February relative to October. In particular, we would like to know whether the
new information generates a poorer outlook for February relative to October, which is an alternative
explanation of the patterns we find. In the first row, we ask individuals in December about February
and October income flows. We then calculate the implied growth in income between February and
October. As can be seen in Column 1, we do find that people on average expect to earn more
in October than in February. In the second row, we ask in February the same set of questions,
expected income in February and expected income in October. Here, there seems to have been a
slightly more negative realization in February relative to October than was expected. This shock in
information may very well play a role in causing aggregate savings outcomes to appear less patient
than aggregate soft-commitment outcomes. However, we do not believe that this new information
is what primarily drives our results as the difference is not statistically significant. Furthermore,
we have shown in Section 6.4 that variation in relative income flows would have to be much larger
in order to completely explain our results.




                                                 34
7     Conclusion

Overall, we find evidence that suggests that our study participants have present-biased preferences.
First, we compare the effect of an immediate and delayed incentive offered on-the-spot and find
the immediate incentive to generate a greater saving response among study participants. This is
compared to an early and later incentive, which were offered in advance of the tax season and had
treatment effects on soft-commitment decisions that were effectively invariant to the future timing
of the payment. These patterns are consistent with a model where individuals have present-biased
preferences. Our results suggest that more immediate incentives for saving can have as much as 2–3
times as much an effect on the likelihood of saving. We then turn to estimating the parameters of a
β-δ model using our reduced form treatment effects. Our preferred point estimates for β and δ over
an 8-month horizon are 0.34 − 0.45 and 1.08 − 1.15 respectively. These translate into a one-year
discount factor of 0.38 − 0.56, or equivalently, a one-year discount rate of 164% at the high end or
79% at the low end. As compared to prior structural estimates, our discount rate is higher than
that implied in the life-cycle model estimated by Laibson, Repetto, and Tobacman (2007) (49%),
closer to the rate among low-wage workers estimated by DellaVigna and Paserman (2005) (153%)
and lower than the rate among single-women with children estimated by Fang and Silverman (2009)
(238%).
    One challenge to estimation in our context is sample attrition. In particular, differential savings
rates across treatment groups may be attributed to sample selection bias. We account for this by
estimating bounds on our time-preference parameters. Unfortunately, we lose significant precision
after this adjustment and are no longer able to rule out a β = 1. However, it is important to
note that our separate estimates of βδ and δ are accomplished within treatment subgroups that do
not face statistically significant differences in attrition. We also incorporate alternative methods of
estimating time preferences adapted from Andreoni and Sprenger (2010). In this case, we assess
how sensitive our results are to departures from the assumption quasi-linear preferences. We find
that uneven flows of income between February and October may account for some, but not all of
our estimates of impatience. Furthermore, we find that allowing for a greater level of risk aversion



                                                  35
may actually imply that we are under-estimating impatience.
    As described above, the contributions of the project are both an empirical test of economic
theory and the evaluation of financial policy tools used among low-income tax filers. First, we
join a relatively recent literature that uses field experiments to test theories of time-inconsistency.
We add to this literature by obtaining additional quantitative estimates of the parameters of a
quasi-hyperbolic discounting model and elicit these preferences from choices that take place in
a“natural” decisionmaking setting. In addition, our method allows us to identify time-preference
parameters with potentially less restrictive assumptions regarding naı̈veté than commonly found in
the literature — we allow for partial naı̈veté.
    Our study also takes place in a policy-relevant setting. Policies and research surrounding the
financial decisions made upon receiving one’s income tax refund are numerous. In this field, com-
prised of practitioners and researchers, it is commonly thought a prudent idea to save some or all of
the income tax refund, hence the prevalence of savings incentive programs. In our study, we remain
agnostic as to whether the savings is the optimal decision, but nonetheless aim to contribute to this
policy discussion.
    Our perturbation of existing savings incentives allows us to compare alternative methods of
encouraging savings. In particular, our study suggests that varying the timing of savings incentives
can result in a more cost-effective program design. A larger question is whether this savings results
in a welfare improvement, at the very least for the participants. On the one hand, income tax
refunds are comprised of over-withholdings and lagged transfers, which suggests that they are
prime candidates for spending or debt reduction. On the other hand, these lumpy payments may
provide a buffer of savings moving forward that is otherwise hard to build up in the presence of
self-control problems. Research shows that even at the monthly frequency, lumpy benefits appear to
be drawn down too quickly.54 Even so, placing the buffer in an illiquid account limits self-insurance
possibilities. Thus, it remains an empirical question whether placing a portion of the refund in
an illiquid account can aid in a more even, intra-annual allocation of the income tax refund and
help provide a buffer against late-year shocks by stemming the draw-down of the income tax refund
   54
      Shapiro (2005) shows that during the course of a month, food stamp benefits tend to be exhausted at rate that
is consistent with impatience, i.e. time-inconsistent preferences.

                                                        36
earlier in the year.55


References
Andreoni, J., and C. Sprenger (2010): “Estimating Time Preferences from Convex Budgets,” NBER Working
  Paper 16347.

         (2012): “Risk Preferences Are Not Time Preferences,” American Economic Review, 102(7), 3357–76.

Ashraf, N., D. Karlan, and W. Yin (2006): “Tying Odysseus to the Mast: Evidence from a Commitment
  Savings Product in the Philippines,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(2), 635–672.

Augenblick, N., M. Niederle, and C. Sprenger (2014): “Working Over Time: Dynamic Inconsistency in Real
  Effort Tasks,” Mimeo.

Banerjee, A., and S. Mullainathan (2010): “The Shape of Temptation: Implications for the Economic Lives
  of the Poor,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series, No. 15973.

Bauer, M., J. Chytilová, and J. Morduch (2012): “Behavioral Foundations of Microcredit: Experimental and
  Survey Evidence from Rural India,” American Economic Review, 102(2), 1118–1139.

Behaghel, L., B. Crépon, M. Gurgand, and T. Le Barbanchon (2009): “Sample attrition bias in randomized
  experiments: A tale of two surveys,” Paris School of Economics Working Paper No. 2009-15.

Benhabib, J., A. Bisin, and A. Schotter (2010): “Present-bias, quasi-hyperbolic discounting, and fixed costs,”
  Games and Economic Behavior, 69(2), 205–223.

Bernatzi, S., and R. Thaler (2004): “Save More Tomorrow TM : using behavioral economics to increase employee
  saving,” Journal of Political Economy, 112, S164–S187.

Bernheim, B. D., D. Ray, and S. Yeltekin (2013): “Poverty and Self-Control,” NBER Working Paper No.
  18742.

Beshears, J., J. J. Choi, D. Laibson, B. Madrian, and J. Sakong (2013): “Self control and liquidity: How
  to design a commitment contract,” Working Paper.

Beverly, S., D. Schneider, and P. Tufano (2006): “Splitting Tax Refunds and Building Savings: An Empirical
  Test,” in NBER Tax Policy and the Economy, vol. 20, pp. 111–161. Cambridge: The MIT Press.

Bryan, G., D. Karlan, and S. Nelson (2010): “Commitment Devices,” Annual Review of Economics, 2(1),
  671–698.

Chetty, R., and E. Saez (2013): “Teaching the Tax Code: Earnings Responses to an Experiment with EITC
  Recipients,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5(1), 1–31.

Coller, M., and M. Williams (1999): “Eliciting Individual Discount Rates,” Experimental Economics, 2(2),
  107–127–127.

Cubitt, R., and D. Read (2007): “Can intertemporal choice experiments elicit time preferences for consumption?,”
  Experimental Economics, 10(4), 369–389–389.
  55
    For this reason, we shortened the duration of the savings requirement to 8 months, relative to the 12 months
that is typically offered in the field. In the latter case, money is held until about the time another lumpy income
tax refund is received, while in the former case, the money becomes available at a more intermediate point between
lumpy tax transfers. These concerns also inform our decision to allow the commitment device to be symmetric, as
saving may not be the optimal decision for everyone in the study.



                                                        37
DellaVigna, S. (2009): “Psychology and Economics: Evidence from the Field,” Journal of Economic Literature,
  47, 315 – 372.

DellaVigna, S., and U. Malmendier (2002): “Overestimating Self-Control: Evidence from the Health Club
  Industry,” UC Berkeley Working Paper.

        (2004a): “Contract Design and Self-Control: Theory and Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119,
  p353–402.

        (2004b): “Paying Not to go to the Gym,” American Economic Review, 96, 694–719.

DellaVigna, S., and D. Paserman (2005): “Job Search and Impatience,” Journal of Labor Economics, 23, 527
  – 588.

Duflo, E., W. Gale, J. Liebman, P. Orzag, and E. Saez (2006): “Saving Incentives for Low- and Middle-
  Income Families: Evidence from a Field Experiment with H&R Block,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121,
  1311–1346.

Duflo, E., M. Kremer, and J. Robinson (2009): “Nudging Farmers to Use Fertilizer: Theory and Experimental
  Evidence from Kenya,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series, No. 15131.

Eckel, C., C. Johnson, and C. Montmarquette (2014): “SAVING DECISIONS OF THE WORKING POOR:
  SHORT- AND LONG-TERM HORIZONS,” in Research in Experimental Economicss, pp. 219–260. Emerald
  Group Publishing Limited.

Fang, H., and D. Silverman (2009): “Time-Inconsistency and Welfare Program Participation: Evidence from
  the NLSY,” International Economic Review, 50, 1043 – 1077.

Frederick, S., G. Loewenstein, and T. O’donoghue (2002): “Time Discounting and Time Preference: A
  Critical Review,” Journal of Economic Literature, 40(2), 351–401.

Giné, X., J. Goldberg, D. Silverman, and D. Yang (2013): “Revising Commitments: Time Preference and
  Time-Inconsistency in the Field,” Mimeo: University of Michigan.

Gine, X., D. Karlan, and J. Zinman (2010): “Put Your Money Where Your Butt Is: A Commitment Contract
  for Smoking Cessation,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(4), 213–235.

Gul, F., and W. Pesendorfer (2004): “Self-control and the theory of consumption,” Econometrica, 72(1),
  119–158.

Halevy, Y. (2014a): “Some Comments on the use of MOnetary and Primary Rewards in the Measurement of Time
  Preferences,” Mimeo.

        (2014b): “Time Consistency: Stationarity and Time Invariance,” Econometrica.

Harrison, G., M. I. Lau, and E. E. Rutström (2005): “Dynamic Consistency in Denmark: A Longitudinal
  Field Experiment,” Mimeo, Georgia State University, http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_
  id=698483.

Harrison, G. W., and J. A. List (2004): “Field Experiments,” Journal of Economic Literature, 122, 1009–1055.

Hausman, J. (1979): “Individual Discount Rates and the Purchase and Utilization of Enery-Using Durables,” The
  Bell Journal of Economics, 10, 33–54.

Horowitz, J., and C. Manski (2000): “Nonparametric Analysis of Randomized Experiments with Missing Co-
  variate and Outcome Data,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 95, 77–84.

Jones, D. (2010): “Information, Preferences and Public Benefit Participation: Experimental Evidence form the
  Advance EITC and 401(k) Savings,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2, 147 – 163.

                                                     38
        (2012): “Inertia and Overwithholding: Explaining the Prevalence of Income Tax Refunds,” American
  Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4(1), 158–185.

Kaur, S., M. Kremer, and S. Mullainathan (2014): “Self-Control at Work,” Journal of Poli.

Laibson, D. (1997): “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 63, 443–477.

Laibson, D., A. Repetto, and J. Tobacman (2007): “Estimating discount functions with consumption choices
  over the lifecycle,” NBER Working Paper No. 13314.

Lusardi, A., D. J. Schneider, and P. Tufano (2011): “Financially Fragile Households: Evidence and Implica-
  tions,” NBER Working Paper No. 17072.

Mahajan, A., and A. Tarozzi (2010): “Time Inconsistency , Expectations and Technology Adoption: The case
 of Insecticide Treated Nets,” Working Paper, Stanford University.

Meier, S., and C. Sprenger (2010): “Present-Biased Preferences and Credit Card Borrowing,” American Eco-
 nomic Journal: Applied Economics, 2, 193–210.

O’Donoghue, T., and M. Rabin (1999): “Doing it now or later,” American Economic Review, 89(1), 103–124.

O’Donoghue, T., and M. Rabin (2001): “Choice and Procrastination,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116,
  121–160.

Phelps, E. S., and R. A. Pollak (1985): “On Second-Best National Saving and Game-Equilibrium Growth,”
  American, 75, 1071–7082.

Rabin, M., and T. O’Donoghue (2001): “Addiction and Present-Biased Preferences,” Mimeo.

Rabin, M., and T. O’donoghue (2007): “Incentives and Self Control,” in Adances in Economcis and Econo-
  metrics: Volume 2: Theory and Applications, ed. by R. Blundell, W. K. Newey, and T. Persson, pp. 215–245.
  Cambridge University Press.

Read, D., G. Loewenstein, and S. Kalyanaraman (1999): “Mixing virtue and vice: combining the immediacy
  effect and the diversification heuristic,” Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 12(4), 257–273.

Sadoff, S., A. S. Samek, and C. Sprenger (2015): “Dynamic Inconsistency in Food Choice: Experimental
  Evidence from a Food Desert,” Becker Friedman Institute for Research in Economics Working Paper No. 2572821.

Shapiro, J. M. (2005): “Is there a daily discount rate? Evidence from the food stamp nutrition cycle,” Journal of
  Public Economics, 89, 303–325.

Strotz, R. H. (1955a): “Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility Maximization,” The Review of Economic
  Studies, 23(3), 165–180.

         (1955b): “Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility Maximization,” The Review of Economic Studies,
  23(3), 165.

Tanaka, T., C. F. Camerer, and Q. Nguyen (2010): “Risk and Time Preferences: Linking Experimental and
  Household Survey Data from Vietnam,” American Economic Review, 100(1), 557–571.

Tarozzi, A., A. Mahajan, J. Yoong, and B. Blackburn (2009): “Commitment mechanisms and compliance
  with health-protecting behavior: Preliminary evidence from Orissa, India,” American Economic Review (Papers
  and Proceedings), 99(2), 231–235.

Thaler, R. (1981): “Some empirical evidence on dynamic inconsistency,” Economics Letters, 8(3), 201–207.

Tufano, P. (2008): “Just Keep My Money! Supporting Tax-time Savings with US Savings Bonds,” Harvard
  Business School Finance Working Paper No. 09-059.

Wanrner, J. T., and S. Pleeter (2001): “The Personal Discount Rate: Evidence from Military Downsizing
 Programs,” American Economic Review, 91, 33–53.


                                                       39
                                   Table 1: Baseline Descriptive Statistics
                                      (1)         (2)           (3)       (4)        (5)        (6)
                                      Non-Commitment Groups                 Commitment Groups
                                    Group 1    Group 2     Group 3      Group 4   Group 5     Group 6
               Age                   40.83      40.84       38.47       41.84      41.44       42.80
                                     [1.24]     [1.14]      [1.21]      [1.27]     [1.18]      [1.13]

               Female                 0.68        0.64          0.58∗     0.71      0.64        0.66
                                     [0.04]      [0.04]        [0.04]    [0.04]    [0.04]      [0.04]

               AGI                  15, 813     17, 459     17, 479     17, 986   18, 234∗   18, 681∗∗
                                     [883]       [948]      [1,048]     [1,110]    [971]      [1,059]

               Federal Refund        2, 157      1, 990        1, 858    2, 132    2, 214      2, 222
                                     [178]       [156]         [145]     [175]     [178]       [193]

               NY Refund              730         641          554∗       713       721         642
                                      [73]        [69]         [57]       [70]      [83]        [80]

               Depedents              0.65        0.54          0.55      0.65      0.71        0.60
                                     [0.08]      [0.07]        [0.07]    [0.07]    [0.09]      [0.08]

               Married                0.10        0.12          0.14      0.14      0.09        0.11
                                     [0.03]      [0.03]        [0.03]    [0.03]    [0.02]      [0.03]

               High School            0.87        0.79∗         0.79∗     0.89      0.84        0.84
                                     [0.03]      [0.04]        [0.04]    [0.03]    [0.03]      [0.03]

               College+               0.13        0.21∗         0.21∗     0.11      0.16        0.16
                                     [0.03]      [0.04]        [0.04]    [0.03]    [0.03]      [0.03]

               African-American       0.48        0.56          0.57      0.52      0.51        0.52
                                     [0.04]      [0.04]        [0.04]    [0.04]    [0.04]      [0.04]

               Asian                  0.05        0.02          0.01      0.03      0.04        0.03
                                     [0.02]      [0.01]        [0.01]    [0.01]    [0.02]      [0.01]

               Hispanic               0.33        0.33          0.30      0.34      0.31        0.33
                                     [0.04]      [0.04]        [0.04]    [0.04]    [0.04]      [0.04]

               White                  0.07        0.06          0.06      0.04      0.04        0.07
                                     [0.02]      [0.02]        [0.02]    [0.02]    [0.02]      [0.02]

               Bank Account           0.78        0.74          0.83      0.76      0.80        0.75
                                     [0.04]      [0.04]        [0.03]    [0.04]    [0.03]      [0.04]


               N                      137         139           140       137       140         140

Note: Descriptive statistics for 6 treatment groups are tax year 2009 and tax-filing season 2010 variables
established prior to the intervention. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. One, two and three stars
denote statistically significant difference from treatment group 1 at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels respectively.



                                                          40
                               Table 2: Experimental Group Survival Rates
                                          (1)        (2)      (3)        (4)                     (5)          (6)
                                            Non-Commitment Groups                     Commitment Groups
                                          Group 1      Group 2      Group 3      Group 4      Group 5      Group 6
 Reached by Phone                            0.20         0.16         0.23        0.31         0.39         0.39
                                            [0.03]       [0.03]       [0.04]      [0.04]       [0.04]       [0.04]

  p-value between                             .          0.32         0.62         0.04∗∗       0.00∗∗∗      0.00∗∗∗
  p-value within                              .          0.32         0.62          .           0.21         0.21

 Consented to Study on Phone                 0.11         0.09         0.13        0.14         0.21         0.20
                                            [0.03]       [0.02]       [0.03]      [0.03]       [0.03]       [0.03]

  p-value between                             .          0.52         0.62         0.46         0.02∗∗       0.04∗∗
  p-value within                              .          0.52         0.62          .           0.13         0.17

 Appeared On Site                            0.10         0.04         0.08        0.09         0.08         0.13
                                            [0.03]       [0.02]       [0.02]      [0.03]       [0.02]       [0.03]

  p-value between                             .          0.06∗        0.49         0.84         0.49         0.49
  p-value within                              .          0.06∗        0.49          .           0.63         0.37

 Consented to Study on Phone                 0.54         0.55         0.56        0.44         0.54         0.52
 (Conditional on Phone Contact)             [0.10]       [0.11]       [0.09]      [0.08]       [0.07]       [0.07]

  p-value between                             .          0.95         0.84         0.44         0.99         0.88
  p-value within                              .          0.95         0.84          .           0.35         0.45

 Appeared On Site                            0.38         0.23         0.30        0.28         0.20         0.30
 (Conditional on Phone Contact)             [0.08]       [0.08]       [0.08]      [0.07]       [0.05]       [0.06]

  p-value between                             .          0.20         0.46         0.32         0.06∗        0.43
  p-value within                              .          0.20         0.46          .           0.37         0.79

 N                                           137          139          140          137          140         140

Note: Sample survival rates are the probability of remaining in the study at each stage of the experiment. Two sets
of p-values are reported. The “between” p-value measures compares each experimental group to group 1, while the
“within” p-value compares either treatment groups 2 and 3 to group 1 or treatment groups 5 and 6 to group 4.
One, two and three stars denote statistically significant differences at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level respectively.




                                                        41
                                Table 3: Outcomes by Experimental Group
                                  (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)                     (5)          (6)
                                   Non-Commitment Groups                        Commitment Groups
                                Group 1      Group 2       Group 3      Group 4      Group 5      Group 6
         Pre-commit                0.00         0.00          0.00        0.05          0.14         0.14
                                   [.]          [.]           [.]        [0.02]        [0.03]       [0.03]

          p-value within            .            .              .           .          0.01∗∗∗       0.01∗∗∗

         Saving                    0.04         0.04           0.05       0.06          0.06         0.09
                                  [0.02]       [0.02]         [0.02]     [0.02]        [0.02]       [0.02]

          p-value between           .           0.98          0.81        0.58         0.61          0.15
          p-value within            .           0.98          0.81         .           0.96          0.38

         Saving Amount            32.74        36.01        37.56        30.56        47.50        60.67
                                 [14.07]      [15.11]      [14.64]      [11.14]      [19.30]      [18.18]

          p-value between           .           0.87          0.81        0.90         0.54          0.22
          p-value within            .           0.87          0.81         .           0.45          0.16

         N                         137          139            140         137          140          140

Note: Table reports the soft-committment outcomes for treatment groups 1-3, and the saving and saving amount
outcomes for all treatment groups. Two sets of p-values are reported. The “between” p-value measures compares
each experimental group to group 1, while the “within” p-value compares either treatment groups 2 and 3 to group
1 or treatment groups 5 and 6 to group 4. One, two and three stars denote statistically significant differences at the
10, 5 and 1 percent level respectively.




                                                         42
             Table 4: Outcomes by Experimental Group, Conditional on Phone Consent
                                     (1)        (2)      (3)         (4)      (5)                           (6)
                                            Non-Commitment Groups                      Commitment Groups
                                         Group 1      Group 2      Group 3     Group 4      Group 5      Group 6
 Pre-commit                                 0.00        0.00         0.00         0.37         0.69        0.71
 (Conditional on Phone Contact)             [.]         [.]          [.]         [0.11]       [0.09]      [0.09]

  p-value within                             .            .           .            .           0.02∗∗      0.01∗∗

 Saving                                     0.13         0.17        0.17         0.26         0.24        0.36
 (Conditional on Phone Contact)            [0.09]       [0.11]      [0.09]       [0.10]       [0.08]      [0.09]

  p-value between                            .          0.81         0.79         0.33        0.36         0.08∗
  p-value within                             .          0.81         0.79          .          0.87         0.49

 Saving Amount                             95.73      154.17      128.22       141.42       212.07       257.93
 (Conditional on Phone Contact)           [72.24]    [105.07]     [71.35]      [61.38]      [86.06]      [74.21]

  p-value between                            .          0.63         0.74         0.62        0.29         0.11
  p-value within                             .          0.63         0.74          .          0.50         0.22

 N                                           15          12           18           19           29          28

Note: Table reports the soft-committment outcomes for treatment groups 1-3, and the saving and saving amount
outcomes for all treatment groups, conditional on initially consenting to the study by phone. Two sets of p-values
are reported. The “between” p-value measures compares each experimental group to group 1, while the “within”
p-value compares either treatment groups 2 and 3 to group 1 or treatment groups 5 and 6 to group 4. One, two and
three stars denote statistically significant differences at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level respectively.




                                                       43
            Table 5: Outcomes by Experimental Group, Conditional on Site Appearance
                                       (1)      (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)                           (6)
                                             Non-Commitment Groups                       Commitment Groups
                                           Group 1      Group 2       Group 3    Group 4      Group 5     Group 6
 Pre-commit                                  0.00           0.00         0.00       0.31        0.64         0.56
 (Conditional on Site Appearance)            [.]            [.]          [.]       [0.13]      [0.15]       [0.12]

  p-value within                               .             .            .          .          0.09∗        0.16

 Saving                                       0.43          1.00         0.64       0.62        0.73         0.67
 (Conditional on Site Appearance)            [0.14]         [.]         [0.15]     [0.14]      [0.14]       [0.11]

  p-value between                              .            0.00∗∗∗      0.29      0.33         0.12         0.17
  p-value within                               .            0.00∗∗∗      0.29       .           0.56         0.77

 Saving Amount                     320.43               834.33         478.00    322.08       604.55      471.89
 (Conditional on Site Appearance) [114.79]             [113.19]       [129.79]   [83.58]     [179.58]     [97.99]

  p-value between                              .            0.00∗∗∗      0.35      0.99         0.17         0.30
  p-value within                               .            0.00∗∗∗      0.35       .           0.14         0.23

 N                                            14             6           11         13           11           18

Note: Table reports the soft-committment outcomes for treatment groups 1-3, and the saving and saving amount
outcomes for all treatment groups, conditional on showing up at the tax preparation stie. Two sets of p-values are
reported. The “between” p-value measures compares each experimental group to group 1, while the “within”
p-value compares either treatment groups 2 and 3 to group 1 or treatment groups 5 and 6 to group 4. One, two and
three stars denote statistically significant differences at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level respectively.




                                                       44
       Table 6: ITT Estimates Conditional on Phone Consent – Soft-Commitment Decision
                                                (1)       (2)       (3)      (4)
                                                        Treatment Group 5        Treatment Group 6
                                                         (early incentive)         (late incentive)
          Treatment Effect                                0.321      0.306          0.346      0.352
                                                                ∗∗
                                                         [0.143]    [0.143]∗∗      [0.143]∗∗
                                                                                              [0.144]∗∗
                                                                 ∗∗
                                                         (0.143)    (0.154)∗       (0.148) ∗∗
                                                                                              (0.144)∗∗

          Control Mean                                     0.368      0.372      0.368      0.372
                                                          [0.113]∗∗∗ [0.110]∗∗∗ [0.113]∗∗∗ [0.110]∗∗∗

          N                                                  76         76           76          76
          Controls                                           No         Yes          No          Yes
          Non-Attrition Rate - Phone Consent

          Treatment Effect                                0.068        0.069        0.061        0.058
                                                         [0.045]      [0.046]      [0.045]      [0.045]
                                                         (0.045)      (0.044)      (0.047)      (0.044)

          Control Mean                                     0.139      0.140      0.139      0.140
                                                                 ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
                                                          [0.030]    [0.030]    [0.030]    [0.030]∗∗∗

          Treatment Bounds

          Upper Bound                                      0.443      0.428      0.459      0.461
                                                                 ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
                                                          [0.132]    [0.130]    [0.134]    [0.133]∗∗∗

          Lower Bound                                      0.113       0.099        0.152        0.169
                                                          [0.161]     [0.157]      [0.166]      [0.170]

          N                                                  417        417         417          417
          Controls                                           No         Yes         No           Yes

Note: Treatment effects on soft-committing to save for treatment arms 5 and 6 are relative to control arm 4 and
conditional on non-attrition — i.e. being contacted for the initial phone interview. Non-attrition rates in arms 5
and 6, relative to arm 4 are estimated among the entire sample. Upper and lower bounds are calculated using
methods outlined by Behaghel, Crépon, Gurgand, and Le Barbanchon (2009). Robust standard errors for the
treatment effects are reported in brackets and randomization inference standard errors are reported in parentheses.
One, two and three stars denote statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level respectively.




                                                        45
             Table 7: ITT Estimates Conditional on Site Appearance – Savings Decision
                                                  (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)
                                                        Treatment Group 2            Treatment Group 3
                                                       (immediate incentive)         (delayed incentive)
        Treatment Effect                                  0.571         0.431          0.208       0.225
                                                         [0.139]∗∗∗    [0.178]∗∗      [0.207]     [0.200]
                                                         (0.255)∗∗     (0.235)∗       (0.190)     (0.200)

        Control Mean                                      0.429          0.450         0.429      0.450
                                                         [0.139]∗∗∗     [0.123]∗∗∗    [0.139]∗∗∗ [0.123]∗∗∗

        N                                                    31          31            31           31
        Controls                                             No          Yes           No           Yes
        Non-Attrition Rate - Site Appearance

        Treatment Effect                                −0.059        −0.059         −0.024      −0.026
                                                         [0.031]∗      [0.032]∗       [0.035]     [0.035]
                                                         (0.030)∗      (0.030)∗       (0.030)     (0.031)

        Control Mean                                      0.102          0.103         0.102      0.103
                                                         [0.026]∗∗∗     [0.027]∗∗∗    [0.026]∗∗∗ [0.027]∗∗∗

        Treatment Bounds

        Upper Bound                                       1.353          1.173         0.380        0.410
                                                         [0.713]∗       [0.656]∗      [0.364]      [0.357]

        Lower Bound                                     −0.015        −0.176           0.079        0.074
                                                         [0.574]       [0.592]        [0.311]      [0.305]

        N                                                  416           416           416          416
        Controls                                           No            Yes           No           Yes

Note: Treatment effects on saving for treatment arms 2 and 3 are relative to control arm 1 and conditional on
non-attrition — i.e. appearing at the tax site. Non-attrition rates in arms 2 and 3, relative to arm 1 are estimated
among the entire sample. Upper and lower bounds are calculated using methods outlined by Behaghel, Crépon,
Gurgand, and Le Barbanchon (2009). Robust standard errors for the treatment effects are reported in brackets and
randomization inference standard errors are reported in parentheses. One, two and three stars denote statistical
significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level respectively.




                                                        46
                    Table 8: Period 2 and Period 3 Payoffs by Experimental Group

                                                       (1)              (2)              (3)
                       Panel A: Period 2             (a1 , a2 )   uN C
                                                                   2 (a1 , a2 )     uC
                                                                                     2 (a1 , a2 )

                       State Variable: (a1 )         (1,1)        u(i − c)          u(e − c)
                                                     (1,0)        0                 u(e)
                                                     (0,1)        u(i − c)          u(−c)
                                                     (0,0)        0                 0

                       Panel B: Period 3             (a1 , a2 )   uN C
                                                                   3 (a1 , a2 )     uC
                                                                                     3 (a1 , a2 )

                       State Variable: (a1 , a2 )    (1,1)        u(b + d)          u(b + l + p)
                                                     (1,0)        0                 u(l)
                                                     (0,1)        u(b + d)          u(b)
                                                     (0,0)        0                 u(p)


Note: State variables, action spaces and payoffs for each experimental group are explained in detail in Section 5.2.




                     Table 9: Testing for Time-Inconsistency Under No Uncertainty
                                                       (1)       (2)       (3)
                                                              E[aC
                                                                 1]           E[aC
                                                                                 2]       E[aN C
                                                                                             2 ]

                     Conditional on Non-Attrition              0.618           0.667        0.613
                                                              [0.056]         [0.073]      [0.088]

                     N                                            76           42              31
                     Balanced Sample                           0.724           0.759        0.613
                                                              [0.084]         [0.081]      [0.089]

                     N                                            29           29              31

Note: Mean outcomes for commitment and non-commitment group members. Means conditional on non-attrition
for soft-commitment and saving decision are among those reached by phone and those who appear on site,
respectively. The balanced sample conditions all means on appearing on site.




                                                         47
              Table 10: ITT Estimates Including Expanded Sample – Savings Decision
                                                 (1)       (2)         (3)        (4)
                                                         Treatment Group 2           Treatment Group 3
                                                        (immediate incentive)        (delayed incentive)
        Treatment Effect                                  0.361          0.374         0.073        0.048
                                                         [0.122]∗∗∗     [0.113]∗∗∗    [0.159]      [0.161]
                                                         (0.166)∗∗      (0.154)∗∗     (0.145)      (0.152)

        Control Mean                                       0.517         0.519         0.517      0.519
                                                          [0.117]∗∗∗    [0.120]∗∗∗    [0.117]∗∗∗
                                                                                                 [0.120]∗∗∗

        N                                                    59          59             59          59
        Controls                                             No          Yes            No          Yes
        Non-Attrition Rate - Site Appearance

        Treatment Effect                                −0.064         −0.069        −0.028       −0.027
                                                         [0.033]∗∗      [0.031]∗∗     [0.036]      [0.036]
                                                         (0.032)∗∗      (0.033)∗∗     (0.033)      (0.032)

        Control Mean                                       0.106         0.089         0.106      0.089
                                                          [0.026]∗∗∗    [0.026]∗∗∗    [0.026]∗∗∗
                                                                                                 [0.026]∗∗∗

        Treatment Bounds

        Upper Bound                                        1.110         1.995         0.251        0.256
                                                          [0.696]       [1.993]       [0.321]      [0.378]

        Lower Bound                                     −0.442         −1.376        −0.117       −0.176
                                                         [0.734]        [2.143]       [0.337]      [0.397]

        N                                                  473           473           473          473
        Controls                                           No            Yes           No           Yes

Note: Treatment effects on saving for armss 2 and 3 are relative to arm 1 and conditional on non-attrition — i.e.
appearing at the tax site. Sample includes reassigned group members not reached by phone and a group of
individuals enrolled at the tax site. Non-attrition rates in arms 2 and 3, relative to arm 1 are estimated among the
entire sample. Upper and lower bounds are calculated using methods outlined by Behaghel, Crépon, Gurgand, and
Le Barbanchon (2009). Robust standard errors for the treatment effects are reported in brackets and
randomization inference standard errors are reported in parentheses. One, two and three stars denote statistical
significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level respectively.




                                                        48
                     Table 11: Beta Delta Estimates, Conditional on Participation
                                          (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)
                                                       δ                         β
                      Point Estimates         1.077      1.152      0.338             0.453
                                             [0.395]∗∗∗ [0.428]∗∗∗ [0.301]           [0.375]

                      N                        76               76      107           107
                      Controls                 No               Yes     No            Yes
                      Upper Bound             4.078          4.645      1.933         2.413
                                             [5.914]        [7.462]    [2.740]       [3.242]

                      Lower Bound             0.344          0.394      0.014         0.014
                                             [0.384]        [0.411]    [0.060]       [0.061]

                      N                       417               417     833           833
                      Controls                No                Yes     No            Yes

Note: Estimates for δ and β are calculated using the results from Tables (6) and (7). One, two and three stars
denote statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level respectively.



   Table 12: Beta Delta Estimates, Conditional on Participation & Including Expanded Sample
                                       (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)
                                                       δ                         β
                      Point Estimates         1.077      1.152      0.189             0.112
                                             [0.395]∗∗∗ [0.428]∗∗∗ [0.374]           [0.335]

                      N                        76               76      134           134
                      Controls                 No               Yes     No            Yes
                      Upper Bound             4.078          4.645      2.026         1.734
                                             [5.914]        [7.462]    [3.316]       [3.036]

                      Lower Bound             0.344          0.394      0.016         0.005
                                             [0.384]        [0.411]    [0.040]       [0.018]

                      N                       417               417     858           858
                      Controls                No                Yes     No            Yes

Note: Estimates for δ and β are calculated using the results from Tables (6) and (10). includes reassigned group
members not reached by phone and a group of individuals enrolled at the tax site. One, two and three stars denote
statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level respectively.



                                                           49
                       Table 13: Estimates of βδ – Accounting for Risk Aversion
                      (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)                        (6)
                                     OLS                                         Tobit
                  4ω = 0% 4ω = 10% 4ω = 25% 4ω = 0% 4ω = 10% 4ω = 25%
         γ=1          0.430∗∗∗       0.451∗∗∗       0.489∗∗∗        0.361∗∗∗      0.378∗∗∗       0.405∗∗∗
                     [0.055]        [0.060]        [0.069]         [0.057]       [0.062]        [0.071]

         γ=2          0.277∗∗∗       0.306∗∗∗       0.359∗∗∗        0.196∗∗∗      0.214∗∗∗       0.246∗∗∗
                     [0.071]        [0.081]        [0.102]         [0.062]       [0.070]        [0.086]

         γ=3          0.178∗∗∗       0.207∗∗∗       0.263∗∗∗        0.106∗∗∗      0.121∗∗∗       0.150∗∗∗
                     [0.068]        [0.082]        [0.112]         [0.051]       [0.060]        [0.078]

         γ=4          0.115∗∗∗       0.140∗∗∗       0.193∗∗∗        0.058∗∗∗      0.069∗∗∗       0.091∗∗∗
                     [0.059]        [0.074]        [0.109]         [0.037]       [0.045]        [0.063]

         N             20            20              20             46            46              46

Note: Estimates for βδ are calculated using the methods described in Section 5.5. One, two and three stars denote
statistically significant difference from 1 at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level respectively.




                             Table 14: Changes in Expected Income Growth
                                   (1)                    (2)                    (3)                     (4)
                              Full Sample    Non-Commitment Group        Commitment Group       Consistent Panel
  Expected Growth (DEC)           0.096∗∗               0.058                    0.134∗                  0.066
                                 [0.046]               [0.047]                  [0.079]                 [0.043]

  Expected Growth (Feb)           0.124∗∗∗              0.174∗∗∗                 0.104∗∗∗                0.098∗∗∗
                                 [0.025]               [0.059]                  [0.027]                 [0.036]

  Difference                      0.028                 0.116                  −0.029                    0.032
                                 [0.053]               [0.075]                  [0.083]                 [0.056]


  N                               225                     87                     120                     88

Note: Expected growth in income is collected via survey during a second year of data collection. All agents are
asked about the flow of income in February and October. In the first row, the question is asked prior to the tax
season and in the second row the question is asked on site during the tax season.




                                                          50
Appendix A: Additional Figures
A.1     Timeline

                                Figure A.1: Experimental Timeline
         Mid Nov:        Mid Jan:                                           Mid Oct to Mid Dec:
         Initial Mailing Participants Reminded                       Earliest Withdrawal from Account
         to All Groups of Tax Season


                    Jan
   Late Nov - Mid Dec:                 Mid Feb - Mid Apr:
     Phone Outreach                     Tax Filing Season
     to All Groups &                  Savings Decision Made
Soft-Commitment Elicited                  for All Groups
 for Commitment Group




A.2     Extensive Form Representation of SaveUp and SaveUpFront Ac-
        counts
The examples below correspond to a tax filer who is deciding whether or not to save $600 of the income
tax refund.

                          Figure A.2: Non-Commitment Control Group (T1)

                                    February                          October

                                                                  Withdraw $600
                                 Deposit -$600
                                                                  SaveUP Match $150
                   Save
                                 Net -$600
                                                                  Net $750



                                                                  No Transaction
                                 No Transaction
                   No
                   Save
                                 Net $0
                                                                  Net $0


                                                  51
 Figure A.3: Immediate Incentive Treatment Group (T2)

              February                       October

            Deposit -$600                 Withdraw $600
            Immediate Incentive           SaveUP Match $150
Save        $50
            Net -$550                     Net $750



                                          No Transaction
            No Transaction
No
Save
            Net $0
                                          Net $0




   Figure A.4: Delayed Incentive Treatment Group (T3)

              February                       October

                                          Withdraw $600
            Deposit -$600
                                          SaveUP Match $150
Save                                      Delayed Incentive $50
            Net -$600
                                          Net $800



                                          No Transaction
            No Transaction
No
Save
            Net $0
                                          Net $0




                             52
           Figure A.5: Commitment Control Group (T4)

November                  February                     October
                                                  Withdraw $600
                             Deposit -$600        SaveUP Match $150
                                                  Commitment Reward
                   Save                           $100
 Commit                      Net -$600
                                                  Net $850
 to
 Save                                             No Transaction
                             No Transaction
                   No
                   Save
                             Net $0
                                                  Net $0



                                                  Withdraw $600
                             Deposit -$600
                                                  SaveUP Match $150
                   Save

 Commit                      Net -$600
                                                  Net $750
 to Not                                           Commitment Reward
 Save                        No Transaction       $75
                   No
                   Save
                             Net $0
                                                  Net $75




                              53
           Figure A.6: Early Incentive Treatment Group (T4)

November                     February                         October
                                                      Withdraw $600
                                Deposit -$600         SaveUP Match $150
                                Early Incentive       Commitment Reward
                      Save      $50                   $100
 Commit                         Net -$550
                                                      Net $850
 to
 Save                                                 No Transaction
                                Early Incentive
                      No        $50
                      Save
                                Net $50
                                                      Net $0



                                                      Withdraw $600
                                Deposit -$600
                                                      SaveUP Match $150
                      Save

 Commit                         Net -$600
                                                      Net $750
 to Not                                               Commitment Reward
 Save                           No Transaction        $75
                      No
                      Save
                                Net $0
                                                      Net $75




                                 54
           Figure A.7: Late Incentive Treatment Group (T5)

November                    February                         October
                                                      Withdraw $600
                                Deposit -$600         SaveUP Match $150
                                                      Commitment Reward
                     Save                             $100
 Commit                         Net -$600             Late Incentive $50
 to                                                   Net $900
 Save                                                 Late Incentive $50
                                No Transaction
                     No
                     Save
                                Net $0
                                                      Net $50



                                                      Withdraw $600
                                Deposit -$600
                                                      SaveUP Match $150
                     Save

 Commit                         Net -$600
                                                      Net $750
 to Not                                               Commitment Reward
 Save                           No Transaction        $75
                     No
                     Save
                                Net $0
                                                      Net $75




                                 55
Appendix B: Model of Time-Inconsistent Preferences
B.1     Solving the Model with No Uncertainty
To illustrate our result, we solve the model working backward from period 2. Here the decision on whether
to save or not, a2 is made. Next, we solve the model in period 1, where the soft-commitment decision, a1
is made. We remind the reader of the stream of payoffs for members of the commitment option (C) group
over periods 2 and 3 as a function of actions in period 1 and 2:
                                                                       
                                                                       
                                                                           −cn + βδbn     if a1 = 0, a2 = 1
                                                                               βδp         if a1 = 0, a2 = 0
                                                                       
        v2C (a1 , a2 ; β, n) = uC                    C
                                2 (a1 , a2 ; n) + βδu3 (a1 , a2 ; n) =
                                                                       
                                                                        −cn + βδ (bn + p) if a1 = 1, a2 = 1
                                                                                0          if a1 = 1, a2 = 0
                                                                       

where n indexes individuals, the superscript C denotes the commitment groups, the subscript 2 indi-
cates that v is evaluated from the perspective of period 2, and the parameter β captures potential time-
inconsistency. We have normalized the stream of utility when (a1 , a2 ) = (1, 0) to zero in periods 2 and
3. Recall that the experimental incentives (i, d, e, l) have for the time being been suppressed. Payoffs for
members of the non-commitment option (N C) group can be thought of as a special case where p ≡ 0, i.e.
there is no soft-commitment mechanism:
                                                                           
              NC                    NC                   NC                  −cn + βδbn if a2 = 1
             v2 (a1 , a2 ; β, n) = u2 (a1 , a2 ; n) + βδu3 (a1 , a2 ; n) =
                                                                                 0      if a2 = 0

Note that for completeness, we include the variable a1 as argument in the utility function even though it is
irrelevant for members of the N C group. For convenience, we use as shorthand u (c) ≡ cn , u (b) ≡ bn and
u (b + p) ≡ bn + p. Note, however, we do not need to assume quasilinear preferences in the case with no
uncertainty. The marginal utility of the commitment reward p can be defined as pn R p for each individual,
and the results will still hold.

B.1.1    Period 2
Consider an agent in the commitment option (C) group. In period 2, there are two possible states of
the world. In the first state, a soft-commitment to save has been made — a1 = 1. Thus, an additional
“commitment reward” of p is realized in period 3 if she saves. Alternatively, in the case that a soft-
commitment to not save has been made — a1 = 0 — an additional “commitment reward” of p is realized
in period 3 if she does not save. She therefore employs the following strategy:
                                    
                                     1 if a1 = 1 and − cn + βδbn ≥ −βδp
                              a2 =     1 if a1 = 0 and − cn + βδbn ≥ βδp
                                       0 otherwise
                                    

    Next, consider an agent in the non-commitment option (N C) group. This agent has no previous
soft-commitment history and therefore employs the following strategy:
                                        
                                           1 if − cn + βδbn ≥ 0
                                   a2 =
                                           0 otherwise

That is, she will save if the cost in period 2 (cn ) is smaller than the discounted benefit of saving in period
3 (βδbn ).
    It follows that the soft-commitment is reinforcing in that it makes the decision in period 2 of C group
members more likely to follow the soft-commitment relative to an identical member of the N C group. This

                                                      56
fully characterizes behavior in the N C group, where β = 1 is substituted for time-consistent agents.

B.1.2     Period 1
We now turn to period 1 decisions, which are only made by members of the C group. The agents’
strategies
              now
                 depend on their preferences in period 1 and beliefs in period 1 regarding period 2 preferences
  β, β̂, bn , cn . We will restrict analysis to time-consistent agents (β = β̂ = 1), sophisticated, present-biased
agents (β = β̂ < 1) and fully naı̈ve, present-biased agents (β < β̂ = 1). Following the literature on “β-δ”
preferences, we solve the model as a sequential game between the period 1 and period 2 “selves”. That is,
the agent in period 1 solves the following problem:

                                max v1C (x1 , a1 ; β, n) = max βδ · v2C (a1 , a∗2 ; 1, n)
                                 a1                          a1

subject to the constraint:                                                
                                          a∗2 = argmax v2C a1 , a2 ; β̂, n
                                                    a2

That is, the agent in period 1 chooses a1 taking into account what she believes the best response will be
in period 2 of her future “self,” given her beliefs regarding the future self’s preferences, β̂. Note first that
the βδ in the maximization problem for period 1 is irrelevant for the choice of a1 .56 Also, note that in the
case of time-consistent preferences or full naı̈vete we have β̂ = 1, and therefore the period 1 strategy, i.e.
a1 , solves the collapsed problem:
                                             max v2C (a1 , a2 ; 1, n)
                                                a1 ,a2

That is, the time-consistent agent and naı̈ve agent behave identically in period 1 when choosing a1 . The
a2 that solves this collapsed problem will also describe period 2 behavior for the time-consistent agent.
However, the actual a2 chosen in period 2 for the naı̈ve agent may differ.

B.1.3     Identifying Time-Inconsistency
Consider the time-consistent agent. Her strategy in period 1 will be:
                                           
                                             1 if − cn + δbn ≥ 0
                                     a1 =
                                             0 otherwise

where we have assumed that the agent commits and saves when indifferent. Suppose instead that the
agent chooses a1 = 1 when −cn + δbn < 0. Then at best, the soft-commitment will induce the period 2
self to save, and the payoff will be −cn + δbn + δp < δp. In the worse case, the period 2 agent still does
not save and the payoff is zero. Had the agent chosen a1 = 0, then the period 2 agent would similarly
have chosen not to save, and the payoff would be δp, which is strictly higher. Thus, the introduction of
the soft-commitment has no effect on savings outcomes in period 2 for a time-consistent agent. Intuitively,
there is no time-inconsistency, and so the period 1 agent takes no steps to alter outcomes. Table B.1
summarizes outcomes for the time-consistent agent over a partitioned preference space.
     Now consider a sophisticated, present-biased agent. The outcomes for the sophisticated agent are
summarized using a slightly finer partition of the preference space in Table B.2. As in the case the time-
consistent agent, the sophisticated, period 1 self would like saving to take place whenever cn ≤ δbn . In
  56
     Again, we have included the state variable x1 as an argument in the period 1 value function, even though it is
irrelevant for our purposes. Our experimental variation is orthogonal to initial conditions. Nonetheless, we include
x1 to remain as consistent as possible in notation.

                                                          57
                              Table B.1: Time-Consistent Agent Outcomes

                                                      aC
                                                       1   aC
                                                            2       aN
                                                                     2
                                                                       C


                                         cn ≤ δbn     1    1        1

                                         cn > δbn     0    0        0



                      Table B.2: Present-Biased, Sophisticated Agent Outcomes

                                                                aC
                                                                 1      aC
                                                                         2   aN
                                                                              2
                                                                                C


                                 cn ≤ βδbn                      1       1    1

                                 βδbn < cn ≤ βδ (bn + p)        1       1    0

                                 βδ (bn + p) < cn ≤ δbn         0       0    0

                                 δbn < cn                       0       0    0




the first and last rows, all selves are in agreement. In the second row, the agent uses the soft-commitment
to alter the period 2 outcome (i.e. aC         NC
                                        2 6= a2 ). However, when βδbn + p < cn in row 3, she understands
that soft-committing to saving is futile. Even though the period 1 self prefers to save — cn ≤ δbn , she
understands that the period 2 self will disregard the commitment reward and not save — −cn + βδ(bn + p).
Therefore, the period 1 self only soft-commits when the soft-commitment reward p is large enough, i.e.
cn ≤ βδbn + p as in rows 1 and 2. Note, we are only able to distinguish the present-biased, sophisticated
agent from the time-consistent agent when Pr (βδbn < cn ≤ βδbn + p) > 0, i.e. when there are agents in
row 2 we have aC          NC
                    2 6= a2 .
     Finally, consider the present-biased, naı̈ve agent. We know her period 1 choice for a1 will follow the
same decision rule as the time-inconsistent agent. However, her period 2 outcomes may differ, due to the
presence of β < 1 in the decision rules described above in Section B.1.1. The outcomes for the naı̈ve agent
are summarized in Table B.3. Again, the aC      1 column follows from the previous table for time-consistent
agents. Intuitively, the naı̈ve agent would like to always reinforce her counterfactual decisions in period 2.
Comparing aC            NC
                 1 to a2 , we see that this is not always the case. In the first and last rows, reinforcement is
achieved. In the second row, the naı̈ve agent soft-commits to saving. The actual outcome aC       2 is born out,
but this is due to naı̈ve luck. The soft-commitment reward p is large enough to be self-fulfilling. However,
an identical member of the (NC) does not save, and thus the presence of the soft-commitment has altered
period 2 outcomes. In the third row, the agent again mis-predicts period 2 preferences. Furthermore, the
soft-commitment reward is no longer large enough to alter period 2 outcomes. In this case, the reward
is forfeited due to overconfidence. Thus, compared to the naı̈ve agent, the sophisticated agent does not
commit the error of overconfidence in the third row. We are only able to distinguish the naı̈ve agent
from the sophisticated agent if Pr (βδ (bn + p) < cn ≤ δbn ) > 0. In other words, if there are no agents in
the third row of table, whenever the agent soft-commits to saving the reward of p is large enough to be
self-fulfilling.

                                                      58
                          Table B.3: Present-Biased, Naı̈ve Agent Outcomes

                                                                   aC
                                                                    1   aC
                                                                         2   aN
                                                                              2
                                                                                C


                                 cn ≤ βδbn                         1    1    1

                                 βδbn < cn ≤ βδ (bn + p)           1    1    0

                                 βδ (bn + p) < cn ≤ δbn            1    0    0

                                 δbn < cn                          0    0    0



    The support restrictions on (bn , cn ) illustrate a key tension in the experimental design. As the commit-
ment reward p grows in size, it becomes easier to distinguish between time-consistent and time-inconsistent
agents, as the likelihood of falling in the second row of the Tables B.2 and B.3 increases. However, the
ability to distinguish between na´’ive and sophisticated agents becomes more difficult, as the likelihood of
being in the third row of those tables decreases. We therefore make use of the following definition:
Definition B.1. Given a distribution of preferences with CDF G (c, b) and current period discount factor
βδ, a soft-commitment reward is:

(1) Sufficiently Strong if
                                       Pr (βδbn < cn ≤ βδbn + p) > 0
and is

(2) Sufficiently Weak if
                                       Pr (βδ (bn + p) < cn ≤ δbn ) > 0


    To gain further intuition regarding these support restrictions, note that sufficient strength requires that
there exist agents for whom cn > βδbn . Otherwise, all agents and all selves would be in agreement that
saving is the preferred action. In this case, there would be no variation in savings or soft-commitments
available to aid in identifying time-inconsistency. In addition, sufficient strength requires that p > 0.
Otherwise, soft-commitment actions in period 1 have no bearing on period 2, and we therefore lose our
ability to learn about beliefs. Turning to sufficient weakness, we see that a necessary condition is that
βδ (bn + p) < δbn . In other words, the soft-commitment cannot be so strong that the naı̈ve agent never
makes an observably mistaken prediction (a1 6= a2 ). To see this note that soft-committing to saving
imposes a negative externality (or perhaps internality) on the period 2 self. The externality is equal to
the difference between the net value of saving to the period 1 self and the net value of saving from the
standpoint of the period 2 self:

                                  [−c + δb ] − [−c + βδbn ] = (1 − β)δbn .                               (B.1)
                                  | n {z n} | n {z       }
                                 Period 1 Value   Period 2 Value



    If the discounted value of the commitment reward, βδp, is larger than the right-hand side of (B.1), then
the cost to the period 2 self of complying with an overconfident commitment decision by a naı̈ve period

                                                       59
1 self will be outweighed by the benefit of honoring the commitment. Thus, in order to detect naı̈vete,
we we need βδp < (1 − β)δbn . Rearranging this inequality, we have the necessary condition for sufficient
weakness: βδ (bn + p) < δbn .
    We are now in a position to prove Proposition 1. Note that due to random assignment, the distribution
of preferences is identical for the C and N C groups. Thus, integrating over the preference space, within
in each column of Table B.1, we have:57

                                     E aC       = E aC
                                                            
                                        1 TC            2 TC
                                                = E aN
                                                       C        
                                                        2    TC
                                                     = Pr (cn ≤ δbn |T C ) ,                                   (B.2)

where T C denotes time-consistent agents. This establishes the first result of Proposition 1. Likewise,
integrating within the columns of Table B.2, we can show:

            E aC            = E aC
                                          
                 1 P B, S           2 P B, S
                               = Pr (cn ≤ βδbn |P B, S ) + Pr (βδbn < cn ≤ βδ (bn + p) |P B, S )
                               ≥ Pr (cn ≤ βδbn |P B, S )
                               = E aN
                                   C           
                                      2  P B, S ,                                                              (B.3)

where the P B, S denotes a present-biased, sophisticated agent and the inequality in the third line is strict
if Pr (βδbn < cn ≤ βδ (bn + p) |P B, S ) > 0. This establishes the second result of Proposition 1. Finally,
using Table B.3, we have:

            E aC
                         
                1 P B, N     = Pr (cn ≤ βδbn |P B, N ) + Pr (βδbn < cn ≤ βδ (bn + p) |P B, N )
                                   + Pr (βδ (bn + p) < cn ≤ δbn |P B, N )
                               ≥ Pr (cn ≤ βδbn |P B, N ) + Pr (βδbn < cn ≤ βδ (bn + p) |P B, N )
                               = E aC
                                              
                                      2 P B, N
                               ≥ Pr (cn ≤ βδbn |P B, N )
                               = E aN
                                   C           
                                      2  P B, N ,                                                              (B.4)

where the P B, N denotes a present-biased, naı̈ve agent. If Pr (βδbn < cn ≤ βδ (bn + p) |P B, N ) > 0, the
first inequality is strict, and if Pr (βδ (bn + p) < cn ≤ δbn |P B, N ) > 0, the second inequality is strict. This
demonstrates the last result in Proposition 1.


B.2      Solving the Model with Uncertainty
We now relax the assumption of no uncertainty. In particular, in period 1, agent n does not exactly know
the cost and benefits of saving (cn , bn ) , but instead faces a distribution of costs and benefits with CDF
Gn (cn , bn ). In contrast to standard models of dynamic choice: (i) we do not place any restrictions on this
joint distribution other than assuming it is smooth enough to allow the application of Leibniz’s rule, (ii)
we do not assume that dGn (bn , cn ) is known to the econometrician and (iii) We also make the simplifying
assumption that all uncertainty about both costs in period 2 and benefits in period 3 is resolved in period
2, before action a2 is taken. In return for relaxing these assumptions, we must now assume homogeneity
in time preferences, i.e. everyone has the same value for β. We also make the structural assumption of
quasilinear utility. We again solve the model by backward induction, beginning in period 2, where the
  57
    Note that this integration over the unobserved heterogeneity is carried out by the econometrician, since she only
observes actions, but not by the agent who is assumed to know is values of (bn , cn ).


                                                         60
decision on whether to save or not, a2 is made. Next, we turn to period 1, where the soft-commitment
decision, a1 is made. In this case, we require the additional experimental payoffs (i, d, e, l) to achieve
identification of time-inconsistency.

B.2.1    Period 2
Now that the full set of experimental incentives are featured, we have the following payoffs for members
of the commitment option (C) group:
                                                                
                                                                
                                                                       −cn + βδbn          if x2 ≡ a1 = 0, a2 = 1
                                                                            βδp             if x2 ≡ a1 = 0, a2 = 0
                                                                
 v2C (a1 , a2 ; β, n) = uC                    C
                         2 (a1 , a2 ; n) + βδu3 (a1 , a2 ; n) =
                                                                
                                                                 −cn + e + βδ (bn + l + p) if x2 ≡ a1 = 1, a2 = 1
                                                                          e + βδl           if x2 ≡ a1 = 1, a2 = 0
                                                                

Note that the early and late payoffs (e, l) in periods 2 and 3 respectively do not depend upon the action
take in period 2 and this is key for the identification argument below. Next, combined with the quasilinear
assumption, the decision in period 2 is the same as in Section B.1.1. This is because all of the uncertainty
in the model has been resolved at the start of period 2. The agent in the C group will employ the following
strategy:                            
                                      1 if a1 = 1 and − cn + βδbn ≥ −βδp
                               a2 =     1 if a1 = 0 and − cn + βδbn ≥ βδp                              (B.5)
                                        0 otherwise
                                     

     Now consider a member of the non-commitment option (N C) group. Payoffs for this group are as
follows:
                                                                     
         NC                   NC                   NC                  −cn + i + βδ (bn + d) if a2 = 1
       v2 (a1 , a2 ; β, n) = u2 (a1 , a2 ; n) + βδu3 (a1 , a2 ; n) =
                                                                                0            if a2 = 0

where the state variable a1 is irrelevant since there is no soft-commitment decision for this group. Similar
to the case of no uncertainty, this agent will use the follow strategy:
                                        
                                           1 if − cn + βδbn ≥ −i − βδd
                                   a2 =                                                                (B.6)
                                           0 otherwise

B.2.2    Period 1
Only members of the commitment (C) group make decisions in period 1. As before, we solve the model as
a sequential game between the period 1 and period 2 selves. Let v1C (x1 , a1 ; β) denote the value function
in period 1. The expected value of soft-committing to save, i.e. a1 = 1, is:

                  v1C (x1 , 1; β, n) = βδE v2C (1, a∗2 ; 1, n) |n
                                                                
                                          ZZ
                                     = βδ    v2C (1, a∗2 ; 1, n) dGn (cn , bn )
                                          ZZ                                   
                                                 C        ∗         C        ∗
                                     = βδ      u2 (1, a2 ; n) + δu3 (1, a2 ; n) dGn (cn , bn )


where                                                                    
                                         a∗2 = argmax v2C a1 , a2 ; β̂, n
                                                  a2




                                                        61
Using the strategy in (B.5) for a∗2 in Section B.2.1 above, we can rewrite the value function as
                                                                                                                    
                               ZZ                                                    ZZ
v1C (x1 , 1; β, n) = βδ ·               [−cn + e + δ (bn + l + p)] dGn (cn , bn ) +          [e + δl] dGn (cn , bn )
                                                                                                                    

                               −cn +β̂δbn ≥−β̂δp                                                   −cn +β̂δbn <−β̂δp

    The first component of this expression is the payoff in the event that the agent actually follows through
with the soft-commitment to save and the second component is the payoff should the agent fail to follow
through. Note that the argument inside the integral features a discount factor of δ, as it reflects the
agent’s preferences in period 1 over payoffs in period 2 and 3. However, the limits of integration feature a
discount factor of β̂δ, as the likelihood of following through with the commitment is based on the period
1 agent’s beliefs about period 2 preferences over payoffs in period 2 and 3. Put another way, the limits of
integration reflect the period 2 self’s best response. Using a similar line of reasoning, the expected value
of soft-committing to not save is

       v1C (x1 , 0; β, n) = βδE v2C (0, a∗2 ; 1, n) |n
                                                        
                               ZZ
                          = βδ       v2C (0, a∗2 ; 1, n) dGn (cn , bn )
                               ZZ                                      
                                         C        ∗         C        ∗
                          = βδ         u2 (0, a2 ; n) + δu3 (0, a2 ; n) dGn (cn , bn )
                                                                                                          
                                        ZZ                                           ZZ
                          = βδ ·                   [−cn + δbn ] dGn (cn , bn ) +       [δp] dGn (cn , bn )
                                                                                                          

                                       −cn +β̂δbn ≥β̂δp                                −cn +β̂δbn <β̂δp

The first part of this expression corresponds to the case where saving takes place despite the soft-
commitment to not save, while the second component covers the case where the agent follows through
with the soft-commitment to not save. The agent’s strategy in period 1 will then be:

                                    1 if v1C (x1 , 1; β, n) ≥ v1C (x1 , 0; β, n)
                                  
                             a1 =
                                    0 otherwise

Rearranging v1C (x1 , 1; β, n) ≥ v1C (x1 , 0; β, n) we have that a1 = 1 if:
                ZZ                                        ZZ
  e + δl +                   [δp] dG (cn , bn ) +                        [−cn + δbn ] dG (cn , bn )
          −cn +β̂δbn ≥β̂δp                      β̂δp>−cn +β̂δbn ≥−β̂δp
                                                                                       ZZ
                                                                               +                   [−δp] dG (cn , bn ) ≥ 0 (B.7)
                                                                                −β̂δp>−cn +β̂δbn

The first two terms, e+δl, are the incentives received simply for soft-committing to save. These are received
with certainty in period 2. The next component reflects draws of preferences (c, b) such that saving would
have happened with or without the soft-commitment. In this case, the additional difference in payoffs is the
added commitment reward of p. The second integral reflects draws of preferences where saving would not
have happened but for the soft-commitment. We can refer to this as the “region of influence.” As p gets
larger, this region, the states of the world where the soft-commitment actually affects outcomes in period 2,
gets larger. In this case, the additional difference in utility is the net benefit of saving −c + δb. Finally, the
third integral reflects draws of preferences for which saving never happens, even with the soft-commitment
to save. Thus, soft-committing to save only results in a forfeiture of the commitment reward p.


                                                               62
B.2.3    Identifying Time-Inconsistency
We now demonstrate the result in Proposition 2, i.e. our estimation strategy for β and δ. First, using
variation in (i, d), we estimate βδ from the N C group members in period 2. Note from (B.6) that

                                   E aN
                                      C
                                       2    = Pr ( a2 = 1| N C)
                                                     ZZ
                                            =                 dG (cn , bn )
                                                    −cn +βδbn ≥−i−βδd

It follows from Leibniz’s Rule that
                                                 ∂E aN
                                                    C 
                                                             ∂d
                                                    2N C     = βδ
                                                 ∂E a2       ∂i
That is, the response to the delayed incentive is smaller than the response to the immediate incentive by
a factor of βδ.
    Next, using variation in (e, l), we estimate δ among members of the G group. Using (B.7) we see that:

   E aC
      
       1    = Pr ( a1 = 1| C)
            = Pr v1C (x1 , 1; β, n) ≥ v1C (x1 , 0; β, n)
                                                         
                  
                                   ZZ                                ZZ
            = Pr e + δl ≥                  [−δp] dGn (cn , bn ) −             [−cn + δbn ] dGn (cn , bn )
                  

                             −cn +β̂δbn ≥β̂δp                      β̂δp>−cn +β̂δbn ≥−β̂δp
                                                          
                            ZZ
                     +                   [δp] dGn (cn , bn )
                                                            

                      −β̂δp>−cn +β̂δbn

Again, using Leibniz’s Rule we can show that

                                                   ∂E aC
                                                      
                                                             ∂l
                                                      C1     =δ
                                                   ∂E a1 ∂e

This result relies on the assumption of quasi-linearity and the fact that the early and late incentives (e, l)
are independent of period 2 actions. Therefore, they only impact period 1 decisions through their impact
on the period 1 self’s valuation of saving, which is in turn a function of the long-run discount factor δ.


Appendix C: Treatment Bounding Method
C.1     Setup
   • Define Z to be treatment assignment, which is binary valued and equal to 1 if the unit is assigned
     to the treatment group and 0 if the unit is assigned to the control group. In our case, the control
     group is the commitment control group or the non-commitment control group, and the treatment is
     one of the early/immediate or late/delayed incentive groups.

   • Define Cz , a binary variable, which indicates participation in the study. This is either phone contact
     status or site appearance for a unit if her treatment is assigned to z. Define the observed random
     variable
                                             C = C1 Z + C0 (1 − Z)


                                                           63
   • Define Yz to be the pre-commitment decision or savings decision if the unit’s treatment assignment
     is set to z and define
                                         Y = Y1 Z + Y0 (1 − Z)
      Note, we only observe Y when C = 1.

   • We assumed that (Y1 , Y0 , C1 , C0 ) ⊥ Z

   • The following distributions are identified

                                                   Pr (Y, Z|C = 1)
                                                   Pr (Z, C)


C.2     Bounding θ2 ≡ E [Y1 − Y0 |C1 = 1]
We can place bounds on the treatment effect for a subgroup, namely those who are successfully contacted
by phone or appearing at the tax site. Following Behaghel, Crépon, Gurgand, and Le Barbanchon (2009),
we can see that:

                        θ2 ≡ E [Y1 − Y0 |C1 = 1]
                             E [(Y1 − Y0 ) C1 ]
                           =
                                Pr (C1 = 1)
                             E [Y1 C1 − Y0 C0 − Y0 (C1 − C0 )]
                           =
                                         Pr (C1 = 1)
                             E [Y1 C1 ] − E [Y0 C0 ] − E [Y0 (C1 − C0 )]
                           =
                                            Pr (C1 = 1)
                             E [Y C|Z = 1] − E [Y C|Z = 0] − E [Y0 (C1 − C0 )]
                           =
                                                Pr (C = 1|Z = 1)

   To further simplify, use an assumption of monotonicity:

Assumption C.1. C1 ≥ C0

   Now, assuming C1 ≥ C0 and using the fact that Y0 ∈ {0, 1}

                               0 ≤ E [Y0 (C1 − C0 )]
                                  ≤ E [C1 − C0 ]
                                  = Pr (C1 = 1) − Pr (C0 = 1)
                                  = Pr (C = 1|Z = 1) − Pr (C = 1|Z = 0)

    Thus, we have bounds on θ2 :
                                                           
                   1
 θ2,ub =                      E [Y C|Z = 1] − E [Y C|Z = 0]
           Pr (C = 1|Z = 1)
                                                                                                   
                   1                                                                             
 θ2,lb =                      E [Y C|Z = 1] − E [Y C|Z = 0] − Pr (C = 1|Z = 1) − Pr (C = 1|Z = 0)
           Pr (C = 1|Z = 1)

   Note, if monotonicity is in the other direction, i.e. C1 ≤ C0 , then we simply switch the order of the
bounds.



                                                    64
Appendix D: Convex Time Budget Method
In this appendix, we demonstrate the application of the Convex Time Budget (CTB) method developed
by Andreoni and Sprenger (2010). In general, this method allows for identification of both time preference
parameters, (β, δ), and risk preferences, e.g. the coefficient of relative risk aversion, (γ). We show below
that using the variation in our experimental incentives, we are able to recover the composite discount factor
βδ, conditional on the value of γ and the level of income flows in period 2 and 3. The present value, in
period 2, of utility over periods 2 and 3 will be:

                                   v2 (c2 , c3 ) = u (c2 + ω2 ) + βδu (c2 + ω3 )

where ω2 and ω3 are the flows of income in periods 2 and 3. The choice variables, c2 and c3 , are additional
consumption funded out of the income tax refund received in period 2, R. The agent can either consume
all of the refund, or use it to open a SaveUp/SaveUpFront account, which yields a return of r for every
dollar deposited above a minimum deposit of D and below the maximum deposit of D̄. The intertemporal
budget set is therefore:
                                            c3               d+l+p
                                    c2 +         =R+i+e+
                                         (1 + r)              (1 + r)
where (i, d, e, l, p) are the experimental payoffs described in Section 5. We assume a Constant Relative
Risk Aversion (CRRA) functional form for flow utility, u (·):

                                                          c1−γ − 1
                                                u (c) =
                                                            1−γ
where γ is the coefficient of relative risk aversion. The maximization problem is therefore

                                        (c2 + ω2 )1−γ − 1      (c3 + ω3 )1−γ − 1
                              max =                       + βδ
                              c2 ,c3          1−γ                    1−γ
subject to the constraints:
                                      c3               d+l+p
                         [λ] : c2 +        =R+i+e+
                                   (1 + r)               (1 + r)
                                                                
                         [µ] : c2 ≥ R + i + e − min R + i + e, D̄ · 1 {c3 > 0}
                         [ν] : c2 ≤ R − [D − i − e] · 1 {c3 > 0}
                         [κ] : c3 ≥ 0

The first constraint is again the intertemporal budget constraint. The second constraint captures the fact
that if a savings account is opened, i.e. c3 > 0, any money left over after depositing the maximum amount,
D̄, is consumed in period 2. If there is no savings account opened, then we only require c2 to be positive.
The third constraint requires c2 to be small enough to allow the minimum deposit D, when an account is
opened, i.e. c3 > 0. The final constraint reflects an assumed borrowing constraint.
     The Kuhn-Tucker conditions include the following:

                                          (c∗2 + ω2 )−γ    = λ∗ − µ∗ + ν ∗
                                                               λ∗
                                       βδ (c∗3 + ω3 )−γ    =         − κ∗
                                                             (1 + r)

where c∗t is the potentially unobserved optimal net consumption choice in period t ∈ {2, 3}. The two




                                                          65
equations can be combined to yield:

                          c2 + ω2 −γ
                         ∗                                     ∗
                                                                 λ − µ∗ + ν ∗
                                                                               
                      ln ∗           = ln (1 + r) + ln βδ + ln                                                               (D.8)
                          c3 + ω3                               λ∗ − κ∗ (1 + r)

   For those at an interior solution — i.e. saving a positive amount strictly within the minimum and
maximum deposit — µ∗ = ν ∗ = κ∗ = 0 and equation (D.8) reduces to:
                                                                    −γ
                                                         c∗2 + ω2
                                                     
                                                ln                        = ln (1 + r) + ln βδ                               (D.9)
                                                         c∗3 + ω3
    For known values of r, γ, ω2 and ω3 , we can identify βδ in a regression using the observed amounts
of c2 and c3 among interior savers. We use average monthly income, based on the prior year’s tax return,
as the value of ω2 and set ω3 = (1 + 4ω) ω2 , 4ω ∈ {0, 0.1, 0.25}. We report the results of these OLS
regressions in columns (1)–(3) of Table 13. This approach, however, ignores the savers at corner solutions
of the maximum deposit, the minimum deposit or no saving. Following Andreoni and Sprenger (2010), we
incorporate those at a corner solution using a doubly censored Tobit regression with variable limits. The
contributions to the likelihood function are as follows:

                        −γ
             c∗2 + ω2
         
    ln                        = ln (1 + r) + ln βδ                                               if   µ∗ = ν ∗ = κ∗ = 0
             c∗3 + ω3

                        −γ                                                     !−γ
             c∗2 + ω2                           max R + i + e − D̄, 0 + ω2
         
    ln                        > ln                                                               if   µ∗ > 0, ν ∗ = κ∗ = 0
             c∗3 + ω3
                                                                      
                                         d + l + p + (1 + r) min R, D̄ − rD + ω3

                        −γ                                         −γ
             c∗2 + ω2
                                    
                                         R + i + e − D + ω2
    ln                        < ln                                                               if   ν ∗ > 0, µ∗ = κ∗ = 0
             c∗3 + ω3                    d + l + p + D + ω3
                                                                                                 or ν ∗ > 0, κ∗ > 0, µ∗ = 0

The first row, again, corresponds to interior savers. The second row holds for those saving the maximum
deposit amount and the third row holds for either those saving the minimum deposit amount or those who
have chosen to not save at all. The results of the doubly censored Tobit regression are reported in columns
(4)–(6) of Table 13.




                                                                          66
     Appendix E: Experimental Treatment Materials
67
                                                  Figure E.8: Initial Mailing: Non-Commitment Control (T1) – Year 1


                                                                                                                                                                                                         February	                                                      September	  
                                                                                                                                                        	                                               	                                                              	  
                                                                                                                                                        	  
                                                                                                                                                        	  
                                                                                                                                                        	                                                                                                             Withdraw	  $800	  
                                                                                                                                                        	                               	                                                                                                 +	  
                                                                                                                                                        	                                      Deposit	  $800	  	  
                                                                                                                                                                                         	                                         Save	                                               $250	  
                                                                                                                                                        	  
                                                                                                                                                        	                                                                                                            (Save	  UP	  Match)	  
                                                                                                                                                        	  
                                                                                                                                                        	                                                                                                                                  =	  
     Save
                                                                                                            Rewarding Saving                            	                                                                                                               Total:	  $1,050	  
      	  
      	  
      	  
      	  
      	  
      	  
               UP            The	  Financial	  Clinic	  would	  like	  you	  to	  participate	  in	  our	  pilot	  test	  of	  a	  
                                                                                                                                                        	  
                                                                                                                                                        	  
                                                                                                                                                        	  
                                                                                                                                                        	  
                                                                                                                                                        	                               If	  you	  deposit	  $800	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       	  



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     You	  	   can	  withdraw	  
                             new	  savings	  account:	  Save	  UP.	                                                                                	                               in	  February	  …	                                                       $1,050	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        	          in	  September	  
      	                     	  
      	                                                                                                                                                	  
                             In	  about	  a	  week,	  we	  will	  contact	  you	  by	  phone	  to	  discuss	  Save	  UP	  in	            	  
      	                     more	  detail.	  
      	                                                                                                                                                       √ If	  you	  deposit	  $800,	  then	  you	  have	  put	  in	  $500	  above	  the	  required	  $300.	  
                             	  
      	                     If	  you	  decide	  to	  participate	  in	  our	  pilot,	  file	  your	  taxes	  with	  us	  and	  use	            √ An	  additional	  50%	  of	  this	  $500	  will	  be	  put	  in	  the	  Save	  UP	  account	  
      	                     the	  Save	  UP	  account,	  you	  can	  earn	  up	  to	  $375.	  
      	                                                                                                                                                       √ That	  means	  an	  additional	  $250	  will	  be	  put	  in	  the	  account	  
      	                                                                                                                                                       √ When	  you	  withdraw	  from	  the	  account	  after	  8	  months,	  you	  will	  have	  a	  total	  of	  $1,050	  
      	  
      	                                                                                                                                                       √ If	  you	  withdraw	  your	  money	  early,	  you	  will	  forfeit	  the	  Save	  UP	  match	  
      Here	  is	  how	  the	  Save	  UP	  account	  works:	  
      	  
           √ You	  have	  to	  file	  your	  taxes	  at	  one	  of	  our	  designated	  Money	  UP	                                        Group	  6	  
68




                 sites	  and	  have	  an	  income	  tax	  refund	  of	  more	  than	  $300	  
             √ You	  have	  to	  deposit	  at	  least	  $300	  in	  the	  Save	  UP	  account	  
             √ You	  must	  keep	  your	  money	  in	  the	  account	  for	  at	  least	  8	  months	  
             √ For	  every	  dollar	  above	  $300,	  we	  will	  deposit	  an	  additional	  50%	  
                 match	  in	  the	  account	  
      	                                                                                                                                                	                                        February	                                                                     September	  
                                                                                                                                                        	                                        	                                                                             	  
      For	  Example,	  if	  you	  deposit	  $600	  in	  a	  Save	  UP	  account	  in	  February	  and	  
                                                                                                                                                        	  
      leave	  your	  money	  in	  that	  account	  until	  September,	  you	  will	  be	  able	  to	                                       	                                                                                                                                     	  
      withdraw	  $750	  in	  September.	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Withdraw	  $400	  
                                                                                                                                                        	  
      	                                                                                                                                                                                 	                                                                                                         +	  
                                                                                                                                                        	                                                     	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                Deposit	  $400	  
      Take	  a	  look	  at	  the	  visual	  aids	  in	  included	  to	  see	  more	  examples	  of	  how	                                	                               	                                         Save	                                                    $50	  
      the	  Save	  UP	  account	  works.	                                                                                                          	  
                                                                                                                                                        	                                                                                                               (Save	  UP	  Match)	  
                                                                                                                                                        	                                                                                                                                          =	  
                                                                                                                                                        	  
                                                                                                                                                        	                                                                                                                              Total:	  $450	  
                                                                                                                                                        	                                                                                                    	  
                                                                                                                                                        	                                                                                                    	  
                                                                                                                                                        	  
                                                                                                                                                        	                                                                                                                  	  
                                                                                                                                                                                         If	  you	  deposit	  $400	                                                 You	  can	  withdraw	  
                                                                                                                                                        	                               in	  February	  …	                                                           	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        $450	   in	  September	  
                                                                                                                                                        	                                                          	  
                                                                                                                                                        	  
      Group	  6	  
                                                                                                                                                               √ If	  you	  deposit	  $400,	  then	  you	  have	  put	  in	  $100	  above	  the	  required	  $300.	  
                                                                                                                                                               √ An	  additional	  50%	  of	  this	  $100	  will	  be	  put	  in	  the	  Save	  UP	  account	  
                                                                                                                                                               √ That	  means	  an	  additional	  $50	  will	  be	  put	  in	  the	  account	  
                                                                                                                                                               √ When	  you	  withdraw	  from	  the	  account	  after	  8	  months,	  you	  will	  have	  a	  total	  of	  $450	  	  
                                                                                                                                                               √ If	  you	  withdraw	  your	  money	  early,	  you	  will	  forfeit	  the	  Save	  UP	  match	  



                                                                                                                                                        Group	  6	  
                                                               Figure E.9: Initial Mailing: Immediate Incentive (T2) – Year 1

                                                                                                                                                                                                      February	                                                        September	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                      	                                                                	  

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Withdraw	  $800	  
                                                                                                                                                        	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              +	  
                                                                                                                                                        	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Deposit	  $800	                                                      $250	  
                                                                                                                                                        	                                                                          Save	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                Receive	  $50	  Back	                                      (Additional	  Save	  UP	  Match)	  
                                                                                                                                                        	                               	                                                                                   =	  
                                                                                                                                                        	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Total:	  $1,050	  
                                                                                                                                                        	                                                           	                                	  
                                                                                                                                                        	                                                                                             	  
                                                                                                                                                        	  
                                                                                                                                                        	                               If	  you	  deposit	  $800	                                You	  can	  withdraw	  $1,050	  in	  
                                                                                                                                                        	                               in	  February,	  you	  get	                               September	  
     Save
                                                                                                            Rewarding Saving                            	                               $50	  back	  ….	  
      	  
      	  
      	  
      	  
      	  
      	  
               UP            The	  Financial	  Clinic	  would	  like	  you	  to	  participate	  in	  our	  pilot	  test	  of	  a	  
                                                                                                                                                        	  
                                                                                                                                                        	  
                                                                                                                                                        	  
                                                                                                                                                        	  
                                                                                                                                                        	                                                                                                              	  
                             new	  savings	  account:	  Save	  UP.	                                                                                       √ For	  depositing	  at	  least	  $300	  you	  get	  $50	  back	  in	  February	  
      	                     	  
      	                     In	  about	  a	  week,	  we	  will	  contact	  you	  by	  phone	  to	  discuss	  Save	  UP	  in	                   √ If	  you	  deposit	  $800,	  then	  you	  have	  put	  in	  $500	  above	  the	  required	  $300	  
      	                     more	  detail.	  
      	                                                                                                                                                       √ An	  additional	  50%	  of	  this	  $500	  will	  be	  put	  in	  the	  Save	  UP	  account	  
                             	  
      	                     If	  you	  decide	  to	  participate	  in	  our	  pilot,	  file	  your	  taxes	  with	  us	  and	  use	            √ That	  means	  an	  additional	  $250	  will	  be	  put	  in	  the	  account	  
      	                     the	  Save	  UP	  account,	  you	  can	  earn	  up	  to	  $425.	  
      	                                                                                                                                                       √ When	  you	  withdraw	  from	  the	  account	  after	  8	  months,	  you	  will	  have	  a	  total	  of	  $1,050	  
      	                                                                                                                                                       √ If	  you	  withdraw	  your	  money	  early,	  you	  will	  forfeit	  the	  Save	  UP	  match,	  including	  the	  $50	  
      	  
      	                                                                                                                                                       	  
      Here	  is	  how	  the	  Save	  UP	  account	  works:	  
      	  
           √ You	  have	  to	  file	  your	  taxes	  at	  one	  of	  our	  designated	  Money	  UP	                                        Group	  4	  
69




                 sites	  and	  have	  an	  income	  tax	  refund	  of	  more	  than	  $300	  
             √ You	  have	  to	  deposit	  at	  least	  $300	  in	  the	  Save	  UP	  account	  
             √ You	  will	  get	  $50	  cash	  back	  for	  depositing	  the	  required	  $300	  
             √ You	  must	  keep	  your	  money	  in	  the	  account	  for	  at	  least	  8	  months,	                                                                                   February	                                                        September	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                      	                                                                	  
                 and	  you	  will	  receive	  $50	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Withdraw	  $400	  
             √ For	  every	  dollar	  above	  $300,	  we	  will	  deposit	  an	  additional	  50%	                                                  	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              +	  
                                                                                                                                                               	                                 Deposit	  $400	                                                          $50	  
                 match	  in	  the	  account	                                                                                                                                                Receive	  $50	  Back	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Save	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (Additional	  Save	  UP	  Match)	  
                                                                                                                                                               	  
      	                                                                                                                                                                                 	                                                                                   =	  
                                                                                                                                                               	                                                                                                     Total:	  $450	  
      For	  Example,	  if	  you	  deposit	  $600	  in	  a	  Save	  UP	  account	  in	  February,	  you	                                                                                                                                  	  
      receive	  $50	  back	  immediately,	  and	  if	  you	  leave	  your	  money	  in	  that	                                                     	                                                                                      	  

      account	  until	  September,	  you	  will	  be	  able	  to	  withdraw	  $750	  in	                                                            	  
      September.	                                                                                                                                                                       If	  you	  deposit	  $400	                                You	  can	  withdraw	  $450	  in	  
                                                                                                                                                               	                        in	  February,	  you	  get	                               September	  
      	  
                                                                                                                                                                                         $50	  back	  ….	  
      Take	  a	  look	  at	  the	  visual	  aids	  in	  included	  to	  see	  more	  examples	  of	  how	                                       	  
      the	  Save	  UP	  account	  works.	                                                                                                                 	  
                                                                                                                                                               √ For	  depositing	  at	  least	  $300	  you	  get	  $50	  back	  in	  February	  
                                                                                                                                                               √ If	  you	  deposit	  $400,	  then	  you	  have	  put	  in	  $100	  above	  the	  required	  $300	  
                                                                                                                                                               √ An	  additional	  50%	  of	  this	  $100	  will	  be	  put	  in	  the	  Save	  UP	  account	  
                                                                                                                                                               √ That	  means	  an	  additional	  $50	  will	  be	  put	  in	  the	  account	  
      Group	  4	  
                                                                                                                                                               √ When	  you	  withdraw	  from	  the	  account	  after	  8	  months,	  you	  will	  have	  a	  total	  of	  $450	  
                                                                                                                                                               √ If	  you	  withdraw	  your	  money	  early,	  you	  will	  forfeit	  the	  Save	  UP	  match,	  including	  the	  $50	  




                                                                                                                                                        Group	  4	  
                                                                  Figure E.10: Initial Mailing: Delayed Incentive (T3) – Year 1

                                                                                                                                                                                                   February	                                                             September	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                   	                                                                     	  


                                                                                                                                                        	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Withdraw	  $800	  
                                                                                                                                                        	  
                                                                                                                                                                                         	                                                                                     +	  
                                                                                                                                                        	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                Deposit	  $800	                                                              $50	  
                                                                                                                                                        	                                                                          Save	  
                                                                                                                                                                                         	                                                                          (Save	  UP	  Match)	  
                                                                                                                                                        	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                +	  
                                                                                                                                                        	                                                        	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           $250	  
                                                                                                                                                        	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (Additional	  Save	  UP	  Match)	  
                                                                                                                                                        	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                =	  
                                                                                                                                                        	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Total:	  $1,100	  
                                                                                                                                                        	                                                                                               	  
     Save
                                                                                                            Rewarding Saving                            	                                                                                               	  
      	  
      	  
      	  
      	  
      	  
      	  
               UP            The	  Financial	  Clinic	  would	  like	  you	  to	  participate	  in	  our	  pilot	  test	  of	  a	  
                                                                                                                                                        	  
                                                                                                                                                        	  
                                                                                                                                                        	  
                                                                                                                                                        	  
                                                                                                                                                        	  
                                                                                                                                                                                         If	  you	  deposit	  $800	  
                                                                                                                                                                                         in	  February	  …	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      You	  can	  withdraw	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      $1,100	  in	  September	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             	  
                             new	  savings	  account:	  Save	  UP.	                                                                                	  
      	                     	  
      	                                                                                                                                                       √ For	  depositing	  at	  least	  $300	  you	  get	  a	  match	  of	  $50	  
                             In	  about	  a	  week,	  we	  will	  contact	  you	  by	  phone	  to	  discuss	  Save	  UP	  in	  
      	                     more	  detail.	                                                                                                                 √ If	  you	  deposit	  $800,	  then	  you	  have	  put	  in	  $500	  above	  the	  required	  $300	  
      	                     	  
      	                                                                                                                                                       √ An	  additional	  50%	  of	  this	  $500	  will	  be	  put	  in	  the	  Save	  UP	  account	  
                             If	  you	  decide	  to	  participate	  in	  our	  pilot,	  file	  your	  taxes	  with	  us	  and	  use	  
      	                     the	  Save	  UP	  account,	  you	  can	  earn	  up	  to	  $425.	                                                        √ That	  means	  an	  additional	  $250	  will	  be	  put	  in	  the	  account	  
      	  
      	                                                                                                                                                       √ When	  you	  withdraw	  from	  the	  account	  after	  8	  months,	  you	  will	  have	  a	  total	  of	  $1,100	  	  
      	                                                                                                                                                       √ If	  you	  withdraw	  your	  money	  early,	  you	  will	  forfeit	  the	  Save	  UP	  match,	  including	  the	  $50	  
      	  
      Here	  is	  how	  the	  Save	  UP	  account	  works:	  
      	  
           √ You	  have	  to	  file	  your	  taxes	  at	  one	  of	  our	  designated	  Money	  UP	                                        Group	  5	  
70




                 sites	  and	  have	  an	  income	  tax	  refund	  of	  more	  than	  $300	  
             √ You	  have	  to	  deposit	  at	  least	  $300	  in	  the	  Save	  UP	  account	  
             √ You	  must	  keep	  your	  money	  in	  the	  account	  for	  at	  least	  8	  months	  
             √ You	  will	  get	  $50	  for	  depositing	  the	  required	  $300	                                                                                                         February	                                                             September	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                   	                                                                     	  
             √ For	  every	  dollar	  above	  $300,	  we	  will	  deposit	  an	  additional	  50%	  
                 match	  in	  the	  account	                                                                                                               	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Withdraw	  $400	  
                                                                                                                                                               	                        	                                                                                     +	  
      	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       $50	  
                                                                                                                                                               	                               Deposit	  $400	  
      For	  Example,	  if	  you	  deposit	  $600	  in	  a	  Save	  UP	  account	  in	  February	  and	                                                                     	                                         Save	                           (Save	  UP	  Match)	  
      leave	  your	  money	  in	  that	  account	  until	  September,	  you	  will	  be	  able	  to	                                              	                                                                                                               +	  
      withdraw	  $800	  in	  September.	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   $50	  
                                                                                                                                                               	  
      	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (Additional	  Save	  UP	  Match)	  
      Take	  a	  look	  at	  the	  visual	  aids	  in	  included	  to	  see	  more	  examples	  of	  how	                                       	                                                                                                               =	  
      the	  Save	  UP	  account	  works.	                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Total:	  $500	  
                                                                                                                                                               	                                                                                        	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         	  
                                                                                                                                                               	  
                                                                                                                                                               	  
                                                                                                                                                                                         If	  you	  deposit	  $400	                                               You	  can	  withdraw	  
                                                                                                                                                               	                        in	  February	  …	                                                        $500	  in	  September	  
                                                                                                                                                        	  
                                                                                                                                                               √ For	  depositing	  at	  least	  $300	  you	  get	  a	  match	  of	  $50	  
                                                                                                                                                               √ If	  you	  deposit	  $400,	  then	  you	  have	  put	  in	  $100	  above	  the	  required	  $300	  
      Group	  5	  
                                                                                                                                                               √ An	  additional	  50%	  of	  this	  $100	  will	  be	  put	  in	  the	  Save	  UP	  account	  
                                                                                                                                                               √ That	  means	  an	  additional	  $50	  will	  be	  put	  in	  the	  account	  
                                                                                                                                                               √ When	  you	  withdraw	  from	  the	  account	  after	  8	  months,	  you	  will	  have	  a	  total	  of	  $500	  
                                                                                                                                                               √ If	  you	  withdraw	  your	  money	  early,	  you	  will	  forfeit	  the	  Save	  UP	  match,	  including	  the	  $50	  




                                                                                                                                                        Group	  5	  
                                                        Figure E.11: Initial Mailing: Commitment Control (T4) – Year 1

                                                                                                                                                      If	  you	  pre-­commit	                      February	                                                          September	  
                                                                                                                                                      to	  saving:	                                 	                                                                  	  
                                                                                                                                                      	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Withdraw	  $800	  
                                                                                                                                                             	                                                                                                                        +	  
                                                                                                                                                             	                                                                                                                     $100	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Deposit	  $800	                                                     (Commitment	  Bonus)	  
                                                                                                                                                             	                              	                                         Save	  
                                                                                                                                                             	                                                                                                                        +	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    $250	  
                                                                                                                                                             	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (Save	  UPfront	  Match)	  
                                                                                                                                                             	                              If	  you	  deposit	  $800	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       =	  
                                                                                                                                                             	                              in	  February	  …	                                                            Total:	  $1,150	  
                                                                                                                                                             	                                                                                            	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           	  
                                                                                                                                                             	                                                                                            You	  can	  withdraw	  $1,150	  in	  
                                                                                                                                                             	                                                                                            September	  
     Save
                                                                                                    Rewarding Saving                                         	  
      	  
      	  
      	  
      	  
      	  
      	  
              UPfront                                                                                           	  
                                                                                                   Rewarding Planning

                           The	  Financial	  Clinic	  would	  like	  you	  to	  participate	  in	  our	  pilot	  test	  of	  a	  
                                                                                                                                                             	  
                                                                                                                                                             	  
                                                                                                                                                             	  
                                                                                                                                                                    √ If	  you	  pre-­‐commit	  to	  saving,	  you	  have	  the	  option	  of	  saving	  in	  February	  
                                                                                                                                                                    √ Since	  you	  have	  pre-­‐committed,	  you	  get	  a	  $100	  bonus	  for	  saving	  at	  least	  $300	  
                           new	  savings	  account:	  Save	  UPfront.	  
                	         	  
                	                                                                                                                                                  √ If	  you	  deposit	  $800,	  then	  you	  have	  put	  in	  $500	  above	  the	  required	  $300.	  
                           In	  about	  a	  week,	  we	  will	  contact	  you	  by	  phone	  to	  discuss	  Save	  UPfront	  
      	                   in	  more	  detail.	                                                                                                                  √ An	  additional	  50%	  of	  this	  $500	  will	  be	  put	  in	  the	  Save	  UPfront	  account	  
      	                   	  
      	                                                                                                                                                            √ That	  means	  an	  additional	  $250	  will	  be	  put	  in	  the	  account	  
                           If	  you	  decide	  to	  participate	  in	  our	  pilot,	  file	  your	  taxes	  with	  us	  and	  use	  
      	                   the	  Save	  UPfront	  account,	  you	  can	  earn	  up	  to	  $425.	                                                          √ When	  you	  withdraw	  from	  the	  account	  after	  8	  months,	  you	  will	  have	  a	  total	  of	  $1,150	  
      	  
      	                                                                                                                                                            √ If	  you	  withdraw	  your	  money	  early,	  you	  will	  forfeit	  the	  Save	  UPfront	  match,	  including	  the	  $100	  
      	  
      	  
      Here	  is	  how	  the	  Save	  UPfront	  account	  rewards	  saving:	  
      	  
            √ You	  have	  to	  file	  your	  taxes	  at	  one	  of	  our	  designated	  Money	  UP	                                            Group	  3	  
71




               sites	  and	  have	  an	  income	  tax	  refund	  of	  more	  than	  $300	  
            √ You	  have	  to	  deposit	  at	  least	  $300	  in	  the	  Save	  UPfront	  account	  
            √ You	  must	  keep	  your	  money	  in	  the	  account	  for	  at	  least	  8	  months	  
            √ For	  every	  dollar	  above	  $300,	  we	  will	  deposit	  an	  additional	  50%	  
               match	  in	  the	  account	  
      	                                                                                                                                              If	  you	  don’t	  pre-­                     February	                                                          September	  
      Here	  is	  how	  the	  Save	  UPfront	  account	  rewards	  planning:	                                                                commit	  to	  saving:	                       	                                                                  	  

      	                                                                                                                                              	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Withdraw	  $800	  
            √ If	  you	  pre-­‐commit	  now	  to	  saving	  in	  February,	  your	  savings	  match	                                              	                                                                                                                         +	  
                                                                                                                                                             	                                                                         Save	                                       $250	  
               will	  increase	  by	  $100	                                                                                                                                                     Deposit	  $800	                                                      (Save	  UPfront	  Match)	  
                                                                                                                                                             	  
            √ If	  you	  don’t	  pre-­‐commit	  now	  to	  saving,	  you	  still	  have	  the	  option	  to	                                    	  
                                                                                                                                                                                             	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        =	  
               save,	  but	  will	  get	  $75	  even	  if	  you	  don’t	  save	                                                                    	                                                                                                                Total:	  $1,050	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           	  
      	                                                                                                                                                     	                              If	  you	  deposit	  $800	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      	                                   	  
      For	  Example,	  if	  you	  pre-­‐commit	  to	  saving	  in	  December,	  deposit	  $600	  in	                                             	                              in	  February	  …	                                         You	  can	  withdraw	  $1,050	  in	  
      a	  Save	  UPfront	  account	  in	  February	  and	  leave	  your	  money	  in	  that	                                                     	                                                                                            September	  
      account	  until	  September,	  you	  will	  be	  able	  to	  withdraw	  $850	  in	                                                          	  
                                                                                                                                                             	                                                                         Or	                                     $75	  
      September.	  
                                                                                                                                                             	                                                                                                      (Non-­‐Commitment	  Payment)	  
      	                                                                                                                                                     	                                                                                            	  
      Take	  a	  look	  at	  the	  visual	  aids	  in	  included	  to	  see	  more	  examples	  of	  how	                                     	  
      the	  Save	  UPfront	  account	  work	                                                                                                                                                                                                          If	  you	  do	  not	  save,	  you	  receive	  $75	  in	  
                                                                                                                                                             	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           September	  
      	                                                                                                                                                     	                                                                                                             	  
                                                                                                                                                             	  
                                                                                                                                                                    √ If	  you	  do	  not	  pre-­‐commit	  to	  saving,	  you	  will	  be	  given	  a	  different	  savings	  option	  in	  February	  
                                                                                                                                                                    √ If	  you	  deposit	  $800,	  then	  you	  have	  put	  in	  $500	  above	  the	  required	  $300.	  
      Group	  3	  
                                                                                                                                                                    √ An	  additional	  50%	  of	  this	  $500	  will	  be	  put	  in	  the	  Save	  UPfront	  account	  
                                                                                                                                                                    √ That	  means	  an	  additional	  $250	  will	  be	  put	  in	  the	  account	  
                                                                                                                                                                    √ When	  you	  withdraw	  from	  the	  account	  after	  8	  months,	  you	  will	  have	  a	  total	  of	  $1,050	  
                                                                                                                                                                    √ If	  you	  withdraw	  your	  money	  early,	  you	  will	  forfeit	  the	  Save	  UPfront	  match	  
                                                                                                                                                                    √ However,	  if	  you	  do	  not	  save	  at	  all,	  since	  you	  did	  not	  pre-­‐commit,	  you	  will	  receive	  $75	  in	  September	  



                                                                                                                                                             Group	  3	  
                                                                     Figure E.12: Initial Mailing: Early Incentive (T5) – Year 1
                                                                                                                                                      If	  you	  pre-­commit	                               February	                                                        September	  
                                                                                                                                                      to	  saving:	                                          	                                                                	  
                                                                                                                                                      	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Withdraw	  $800	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Deposit	  $800	                                                                 +	  
                                                                                                                                                             	                                           Receive	  $50	  Back	                                                         $350	  
                                                                                                                                                             	                                         (Commitment	  Bonus)	             Save	                               (Save	  UPfront	  Match)	  
                                                                                                                                                             	                                                      	                                                                       =	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                 	                                                                                  Total:	  $1,150	  
                                                                                                                                                             	                                                                                                  	  
                                                                                                                                                             	                                 If	  you	  deposit	  $800	                                   	  
                                                                                                                                                             	                                 in	  February,	  you’ll	                                      You	  can	  withdraw	  $1,150	  in	  
                                                                                                                                                             	                                 get	  $50	  …	                                                September	  
                                                                                                                                                             	  
                                                                                                                                                             	                                                                             Or	  
                                                                                                                                                             	  
     Save
                                                                                                    Rewarding Saving                                         	  
      	  
      	  
      	  
      	  
      	  
      	  
              UPfront                                                                                           	  
                                                                                                   Rewarding Planning

                           The	  Financial	  Clinic	  would	  like	  you	  to	  participate	  in	  our	  pilot	  test	  of	  a	  
                                                                                                                                                             	  
                                                                                                                                                             	  
                                                                                                                                                             	  
                                                                                                                                                             	  
                                                                                                                                                             	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                 	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Receive	  $50	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                        (Commitment	  Bonus)	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            If	  you	  do	  not	  save,	  you	  still	  receive	  the	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            $50	  Commitment	  Bonus	  



                           new	  savings	  account:	  Save	  UPfront.	                                                                                  	  
      	                   	                                                                                                                                       √ If	  you	  pre-­‐commit	  to	  saving,	  you	  have	  the	  option	  of	  saving	  in	  February	  
                                                                        	  
                           In	  about	  a	  week,	  we	  will	  contact	   you	  by	  phone	  to	  discuss	  Save	  UPfront	  
      	                                                                                                                                                            √ Since	  you	  have	  pre-­‐committed,	  you	  get	  a	  $50	  bonus	  in	  February	  no	  matter	  what	  
                           in	  more	  detail.	  
      	                   	                                                                                                                                       √ If	  you	  deposit	  $800,	  then	  you	  have	  put	  in	  $500	  above	  the	  required	  $300.	  
      	                   If	  you	  decide	  to	  participate	  in	  our	  pilot,	  file	  your	  taxes	  with	  us	  and	  use	  
      	                                                                                                                                                            √ An	  additional	  50%	  of	  this	  $500	  will	  be	  put	  in	  the	  Save	  UPfront	  account	  
                           the	  Save	  UPfront	  account,	  you	  can	  earn	  up	  to	  $475.	  
      	                                                                                                                                                            √ That	  means	  an	  additional	  $250	  will	  be	  put	  in	  the	  account,	  plus	  another	  $100	  for	  pre-­‐committing	  
      	  
      	                                                                                                                                                            √ When	  you	  withdraw	  from	  the	  account	  after	  8	  months,	  you	  will	  have	  a	  total	  of	  $1,150	  
      	                                                                                                                                                            √ If	  you	  withdraw	  your	  money	  early,	  you	  will	  forfeit	  the	  Save	  UPfront	  match,	  including	  the	  $100
      Here	  is	  how	  the	  Save	  UPfront	  account	  rewards	  saving:	  
      	  
           √ You	  have	  to	  file	  your	  taxes	  at	  one	  of	  our	  designated	  Money	  UP	                                             Group	  1	  
72




               sites	  and	  have	  an	  income	  tax	  refund	  of	  more	  than	  $300	  
           √ You	  have	  to	  deposit	  at	  least	  $300	  in	  the	  Save	  UPfront	  account	  
           √ You	  must	  keep	  your	  money	  in	  the	  account	  for	  at	  least	  8	  months	  
           √ For	  every	  dollar	  above	  $300,	  we	  will	  deposit	  an	  additional	  50%	  
               match	  in	  the	  account	  
      	                                                                                                                                              If	  you	  don’t	  pre-­                                 February	                                                     September	  
      Here	  is	  how	  the	  Save	  UPfront	  account	  rewards	  planning:	                                                                commit	  to	  saving:	                                   	                                                             	  
      	                                                                                                                                              	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Withdraw	  $800	  
           √ If	  you	  pre-­‐commit	  now	  to	  saving	  in	  February,	  you	  will	  receive	  $50	                                                      	                                                                                                                   +	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Deposit	  $800	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Save	                                         $250	  
               in	  February,	  no	  matter	  what	                                                                                                     	                               	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (Save	  UPfront	  Match)	  
           √ If	  you	  pre-­‐commit	  now	  to	  saving,	  your	  savings	  match	  will	  increase	                                             	                                 If	  you	  deposit	  $800	                                                                =	  
               by	  $100	                                                                                                                                  	                                 in	  February	  …	                                                                Total:	  $1,050	  
           √ If	  you	  don’t	  pre-­‐commit	  to	  now	  to	  saving,	  you	  still	  have	  the	  option	                                     	                                                                                                  	  
                                                                                                                                                             	                                                                   	                             	  
               to	  save,	  but	  will	  get	  $75	  even	  if	  you	  don’t	  save	                                                                                                                                                                  You	  can	  withdraw	  $1,050	  in	  
                                                                                                                                                             	                                                                                                  September	  
      	                                                                                                                                                     	  
      For	  Example,	  if	  you	  pre-­‐commit	  to	  saving	  in	  December,	  you	  get	  $50	  in	                                           	  
      February.	  AND,	  if	  you	  deposit	  $600	  in	  a	  Save	  UPfront	  account	  in	                                                                                                                                    Or	                                       $75	  
                                                                                                                                                             	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (Non-­‐Commitment	  Payment)	  
      February	  and	  leave	  your	  money	  in	  that	  account	  until	  September,	  you	                                                     	                                                                                                  	  
      will	  be	  able	  to	  withdraw	  $850	  in	  September.	                                                                                     	  
      	                                                                                                                                                     	                                                                                             If	  you	  do	  not	  save,	  you	  still	  receive	  $75	  
                                                                                                                                                             	                                                                                             in	  September	  
      Take	  a	  look	  at	  the	  visual	  aids	  in	  included	  to	  see	  more	  examples	  of	  how	                                     	                                                                                                              	  
      the	  Save	  UPfront	  account	  work                                                                                                                     √ If	  you	  do	  not	  pre-­‐commit	  to	  saving,	  you	  will	  be	  given	  a	  different	  savings	  option	  in	  February	  
                                                                                                                                                                    √ If	  you	  deposit	  $800,	  then	  you	  have	  put	  in	  $500	  above	  the	  required	  $300.	  
      Group	  1	                                                                                                                                                  √ An	  additional	  50%	  of	  this	  $500	  will	  be	  put	  in	  the	  Save	  UPfront	  account	  
                                                                                                                                                                    √ That	  means	  an	  additional	  $250	  will	  be	  put	  in	  the	  account	  
                                                                                                                                                                    √ When	  you	  withdraw	  from	  the	  account	  after	  8	  months,	  you	  will	  have	  a	  total	  of	  $1,050	  
                                                                                                                                                                    √ If	  you	  withdraw	  your	  money	  early,	  you	  will	  forfeit	  the	  Save	  UPfront	  match	  
                                                                                                                                                                    √ However,	  if	  you	  do	  not	  save	  at	  all,	  since	  you	  did	  not	  pre-­‐commit,	  you	  will	  receive	  $75	  in	  September	  



                                                                                                                                                             Group	  1	  
                                                                       Figure E.13: Initial Mailing: Late Incentive (T6) – Year 1
                                                                                                                                                      If	  you	  pre-­commit	                        February	                                                              September	  
                                                                                                                                                      to	  saving:	                                   	                                                                      	  
                                                                                                                                                      	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Withdraw	  $800	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    +	  
                                                                                                                                                             	                                                                                                                                   $50	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Deposit	  $800	                                                                (Commitment	  Bonus)	  
                                                                                                                                                             	                                	                                           Save	                                                  +	  
                                                                                                                                                             	                                                                                                                                  $350	  
                                                                                                                                                             	                                                                                                                        (Save	  UPfront	  Match)	  
                                                                                                                                                             	                                If	  you	  deposit	  $800	                                                                       =	  
                                                                                                                                                                                               in	  February	  …	                                                                       Total:	  $1,200	  
                                                                                                                                                             	                                                                                                  	  
                                                                                                                                                             	                                                                                                  	  
                                                                                                                                                             	                                                                                                 You	  can	  withdraw	  $1,200	  in	  
                                                                                                                                                             	                                                                                                 September	  
                                                                                                                                                             	  
     Save
                                                                                                    Rewarding Saving                                         	  


              UPfront
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Or	                                       $50	  
      	                                                                                                        	  
                                                                                                                                                             	                                                                                                                 (Commitment	  Bonus)	  
      	                                                                                           Rewarding Planning                                        	                                                                                                  	  
      	  
                                                                                                                                                             	  
      	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        If	  you	  do	  not	  save,	  you	  still	  receive	  the	  
                                                                                                                                                             	  
      	                   The	  Financial	  Clinic	  would	  like	  you	  to	  participate	  in	  our	  pilot	  test	  of	  a	                                                                                                                   $50	  Commitment	  Bonus	  
                                                                                                                                                             	  
      	                   new	  savings	  account:	  Save	  UPfront.	                                                                                  	  
      	                   	                                                                                                                                       √ If	  you	  pre-­‐commit	  to	  saving,	  you	  have	  the	  option	  of	  saving	  in	  February	  
                	         In	  about	  a	  week,	  we	  will	  contact	  you	  by	  phone	  to	  discuss	  Save	  UPfront	  
      	                                                                                                                                                            √ Since	  you	  have	  pre-­‐committed,	  you	  get	  a	  $50	  bonus	  in	  September	  no	  matter	  what	  
                           in	  more	  detail.	  
      	                   	                                                                                                                                       √ If	  you	  deposit	  $800,	  then	  you	  have	  put	  in	  $500	  above	  the	  required	  $300.	  
      	                   If	  you	  decide	  to	  participate	  in	  our	  pilot,	  file	  your	  taxes	  with	  us	  and	  use	  
      	                                                                                                                                                            √ An	  additional	  50%	  of	  this	  $500	  will	  be	  put	  in	  the	  Save	  UPfront	  account	  
                           the	  Save	  UPfront	  account,	  you	  can	  earn	  up	  to	  $475.	  
      	                                                                                                                                                            √ That	  means	  an	  additional	  $250	  will	  be	  put	  in	  the	  account,	  plus	  another	  $100	  for	  pre-­‐committing	  
      	  
      	                                                                                                                                                            √ When	  you	  withdraw	  from	  the	  account	  after	  8	  months,	  you	  will	  have	  a	  total	  of	  $1,200	  
      	                                                                                                                                                            √ If	  you	  withdraw	  your	  money	  early,	  you	  will	  forfeit	  the	  Save	  UPfront	  match,	  including	  the	  $100
      Here	  is	  how	  the	  Save	  UPfront	  account	  rewards	  saving:	  
      	  
            √ You	  have	  to	  file	  your	  taxes	  at	  one	  of	  our	  designated	  Money	  UP	                                            Group	  2	  
73




               sites	  and	  have	  an	  income	  tax	  refund	  of	  more	  than	  $300	  
            √ You	  have	  to	  deposit	  at	  least	  $300	  in	  the	  Save	  UPfront	  account	  
            √ You	  must	  keep	  your	  money	  in	  the	  account	  for	  at	  least	  8	  months	  
            √ For	  every	  dollar	  above	  $300,	  we	  will	  deposit	  an	  additional	  50%	  
               match	  in	  the	  account	  
      	                                                                                                                                              If	  you	  don’t	  pre-­                       February	                                                              September	  
      Here	  is	  how	  the	  Save	  UPfront	  account	  rewards	  planning:	                                                                commit	  to	  saving:	                         	                                                                      	  

      	                                                                                                                                              	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Withdraw	  $800	  
            √ If	  you	  pre-­‐commit	  now	  to	  saving	  in	  February,	  you	  will	  receive	  $50	                                                     	                                                                                                                  +	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          $250	  
               in	  September,	  no	  matter	  what	                                                                                                    	                                       Deposit	  $800	                                                         (Save	  UPfront	  Match)	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Save	  
            √ If	  you	  pre-­‐commit	  now	  to	  saving,	  your	  savings	  match	  will	  increase	                                            	                                	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             =	  
               by	  $100	                                                                                                                                  	                                                                                                                     Total:	  $1,050	  
            √ If	  you	  don’t	  pre-­‐commit	  to	  now	  to	  saving,	  you	  still	  have	  the	  option	                                    	                                If	  you	  deposit	  $800	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 	  
                                                                                                                                                             	                                in	  February	  …	   	  
               to	  save,	  but	  will	  get	  $75	  even	  if	  you	  don’t	  save	                                                                                                                                                                 You	  can	  withdraw	  $1,050	  in	  
                                                                                                                                                             	                                                                                                 September	  
      	                                                                                                                                                     	  
      For	  Example,	  if	  you	  pre-­‐commit	  to	  saving	  in	  December,	  deposit	  $600	  in	                                             	  
      a	  Save	  UPfront	  account	  in	  February	  and	  leave	  your	  money	  in	  that	                                                                                                                                    Or	                                      $75	  
                                                                                                                                                             	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (Non-­‐Commitment	  Payment)	  
      account	  until	  September,	  you	  will	  be	  able	  to	  withdraw	  $900	  in	                                                          	                                                                                                  	  
      September.	                                                                                                                                           	  
      	                                                                                                                                                     	                                                                                             If	  you	  do	  not	  save,	  you	  receive	  $75	  in	  
                                                                                                                                                             	                                                                                             September	  
      Take	  a	  look	  at	  the	  visual	  aids	  in	  included	  to	  see	  more	  examples	  of	  how	                                     	                                                                                                              	  
      the	  Save	  UPfront	  account	  work                                                                                                                     √ If	  you	  do	  not	  pre-­‐commit	  to	  saving,	  you	  will	  be	  given	  a	  different	  savings	  option	  in	  February	  
                                                                                                                                                                    √ If	  you	  deposit	  $800,	  then	  you	  have	  put	  in	  $500	  above	  the	  required	  $300.	  
      Group	  2	                                                                                                                                                  √ An	  additional	  50%	  of	  this	  $500	  will	  be	  put	  in	  the	  Save	  UPfront	  account	  
                                                                                                                                                                    √ That	  means	  an	  additional	  $250	  will	  be	  put	  in	  the	  account	  
                                                                                                                                                                    √ When	  you	  withdraw	  from	  the	  account	  after	  8	  months,	  you	  will	  have	  a	  total	  of	  $1,050	  
                                                                                                                                                                    √ If	  you	  withdraw	  your	  money	  early,	  you	  will	  forfeit	  the	  Save	  UPfront	  match	  
                                                                                                                                                                    √ However,	  if	  you	  do	  not	  save	  at	  all,	  since	  you	  did	  not	  pre-­‐commit,	  you	  will	  receive	  $75	  in	  September	  



                                                                                                                                                             Group	  2	  
                                                             Figure E.14: Initial Mailing: All Groups – Year 2
     Save
                                                                      Rewarding Saving
      #
      #
      #
      #
      #
      #
           UP        >*%#?/9:9;/:<#@</9/;#35.<A#</7%#B5.#'5#C:6'/;/C:'%#/9#5.6#C/<5'#'%&'#58#:#
                     9%3#&:D/9=&#:;;5.9'E#!"#$%&,#
      #              #
      #              F9#:G5.'#:#3%%7-#3%#3/<<#;59':;'#B5.#GB#C*59%#'5#A/&;.&&#!"#$%&#/9#
      #              H56%#A%':/<,#
      #              #
      #              F8#B5.#A%;/A%#'5#C:6'/;/C:'%#/9#5.6#C/<5'-#8/<%#B5.6#':I%&#3/'*#.&#:9A#.&%#
      #              '*%#!"#$%&#:;;5.9'-#B5.#;:9#%:69#.C#'5#JK0",#
      #
      #
      #
      #
      L%6%#/&#*53#'*%#+:D%MN#:;;5.9'#3567&E#                                                                                  !"#$%&$'(                                         +,-.#"$(
      #                                                                                                                       )()*(                                             (
                                                                                                                              (
        ! 45.#*:D%#'5#8/<%#B5.6#':I%&#:'#59%#58#5.6#A%&/=9:'%A#O59%BMN#&/'%&#                      #                                                                          $/'*@6:3#BC))#
                                                                                                   #                   #
             :9A#*:D%#:9#/9;5H%#':I#6%8.9A#58#H56%#'*:9#J())#
74




                                                                                                                                                                                      O#
                                                                                                   #                        N%A5&/'#BC))#
                                                                                                                                                       +:D%#                        B1")#
          ! 45.#*:D%#'5#A%C5&/'#:'#<%:&'#J())#/9#'*%#+:D%MN#:;;5.9'#                               #                   #

                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                              P+:D%IJ#Q:';*R#
          ! 45.#H.&'#7%%C#B5.6#H59%B#/9#'*%#:;;5.9'#856#:'#<%:&'#P#H59'*&#                         #                                      #
                                                                                                   #                                                                                  S#
          ! ?56#%D%6B#A5<<:6#:G5D%#J())-#3%#3/<<#A%C5&/'#:9#:AA/'/59:<#")Q#                        #
                                                                                                                                                                               K5':<T#B!-)")#
             H:';*#/9#'*%#:;;5.9'#                                                                 #
                                                                                                   #                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                     #
      #                                                                                            #                   >8#?5.#@%A5&/'#BC))#                                 45.#;:9#3/'*@6:3#
      ?56#RI:HC<%-#/8#B5.#A%C5&/'#JS))#/9#:#+:D%MN#:;;5.9'#/9#?%G6.:6B#:9A#                        #                   /9#U%E6.:6?#V#                                       B!-)")#/9#W;'5E%6#
      <%:D%#B5.6#H59%B#/9#'*:'#:;;5.9'#.9'/<#T;'5G%6-#B5.#3/<<#G%#:G<%#'5#                         #
                                                                                                   #
      3/'*A6:3#J0")#/9#T;'5G%6,#
                                                                                                       ! >8#?5.#@%A5&/'#BC))-#'*%9#?5.#*:D%#A.'#/9#B"))#:E5D%#'*%#6%F./6%@#B()),#
      #
      >:7%#:#<557#:'#'*%#D/&.:<#:/A#/9#'*/&#H:/</9=#'5#&%%#H56%#%I:HC<%&#58#*53#                       ! G9#:@@/'/59:<#")H#58#'*/&#B"))#3/<<#E%#A.'#/9#'*%#+:D%#IJ#:;;5.9'#
      '*%#+:D%MN#:;;5.9'#3567&,#                                                                       ! K*:'#L%:9&#:9#:@@/'/59:<#B1")#3/<<#E%#A.'#/9#'*%#:;;5.9'#
      #                                                                                                ! $*%9#?5.#3/'*@6:3#865L#'*%#:;;5.9'#:8'%6#C#L59'*&-#?5.#3/<<#*:D%#:#'5':<#58#B!-)")#
      F8#B5.#*:D%#:9B#U.%&'/59&-#B5.#;:9#;59':;'#.&#GB#C*59%#:'#'()*+,-(./
      -*)0-#56#GB#%H:/<#:'#&:D%.CV'*%8/9:9;/:<;</9/;,56=,#                                             ! >8#?5.#3/'*@6:3#?5.6#L59%?#%:6<?-#?5.#3/<<#8568%/'#'*%#+:D%IJ#L:';*#
                                                                                                       ! $*%9#3%#;59':;'#?5.-#3%#3/<<#@/&;.&&#:@@/'/59:<#5A'/59&#'*:'#L:?#:<<53#?5.#'5#%:69#.A#'5#BM0"#




          !!"#$%&'#()'*#+',-#+./'%#0)1-#2%3#4567#24#!))!#!#333,'*%8/9:9;/:<;</9/;,56=#
                                                                                                                           !!"#$%&'#()'*#+',-#+./'%#0)1-#2%3#4567#24#!))!#!#333,'*%8/9:9;/:<;</9/;,56=#
      #                                                                                            #
Appendix F: Additional Results

                          Table F.4: ITT Estimates – Precommitment Decision
                                            (1)       (2)      (3)        (4)
                                              Treatment Group 5         Treatment Group 6
                                               (early incentive)          (late incentive)
                     Treatment Effect           0.092      0.091     0.092      0.089
                                                      ∗∗∗        ∗∗        ∗∗∗
                                               [0.035]    [0.035]   [0.035]    [0.035]∗∗
                                               (0.038)∗∗∗ (0.038)∗∗ (0.039)∗∗ (0.039)∗∗

                     Control Mean                0.051      0.052      0.051      0.052
                                                       ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
                                                [0.019]    [0.019]    [0.019]    [0.019]∗∗∗

                     Treatment Bounds

                     Upper Bound                 0.885      0.881      0.892      0.890
                                                       ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
                                                [0.028]    [0.029]    [0.027]    [0.028]∗∗∗

                     Lower Bound              −0.770      −0.767      −0.770      −0.769
                                                      ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
                                               [0.038]     [0.039]     [0.038]     [0.038]∗∗∗

                     N                           417          417          417          417
                     Controls                    No           Yes          No           Yes

Note: Intent-to-Treat effects on soft-committing to save for treatment arms 5 and 6 are relative to control arm 4.
Upper and lower bounds are calculated using methods outlined by Horowitz and Manski (2000). Robust standard
errors for the treatment effects are reported in brackets and randomization inference standard errors are reported in
parentheses. One, two and three stars denote statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level respectively.




                                                         75
                                Table F.5: ITT Estimates – Savings Decision
                                             (1)        (2)         (3)                    (4)
                                              Treatment Group 2              Treatment Group 3
                                             (immediate incentive)           (delayed incentive)
                    Treatment Effect          −0.001             0.000         0.006       0.008
                                               [0.025]          [0.025]       [0.025]     [0.027]
                                               (0.023)          (0.026)       (0.025)     (0.026)

                    Control Mean                0.044            0.043         0.044       0.043
                                               [0.018]∗∗        [0.018]∗∗     [0.018]∗∗   [0.018]∗∗

                    Treatment Bounds

                    Upper Bound                 0.956            0.955         0.928      0.928
                                               [0.018]∗∗∗       [0.018]∗∗∗    [0.023]∗∗∗
                                                                                         [0.022]∗∗∗

                    Lower Bound               −0.898      −0.896      −0.892      −0.887
                                                      ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
                                               [0.027]     [0.027]     [0.027]     [0.028]∗∗∗

                    N                           416              416           416         416
                    Controls                    No               Yes           No          Yes

Note: Intent-to-Treat effects on saving for treatment arms 2 and 3 are relative to treatment arm 1. Upper and
lower bounds are calculated using methods outlined by Horowitz and Manski (2000). Robust standard errors for
the treatment effects are reported in brackets and randomization inference standard errors are reported in
parentheses. One, two and three stars denote statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level respectively.




                                                           76
                                  Table F.6: Beta Delta Estimates – ITT
                                    (1)             (2)              (3)                       (4)
                                                 δ                                    β
         Point Estimates             1.000              0.981            −9.846               58.960
                                    [0.456]∗∗          [0.449]∗∗        [405.169]         [11103.555]

         N                          417                 417                833                 833
         Controls                   No                  Yes                No                  Yes
         Upper Bound                 9.718              9.792            −1.42e+04 69566.732
                                    [3.617]∗∗∗         [3.674]∗∗∗         [5.53e+05]  [1.32e+07]

         Lower Bound                 0.104              0.101               0.001              0.001
                                    [0.039]∗∗∗         [0.038]∗∗∗          [0.003]            [0.003]

         N                          417                 417                833                 833
         Controls                   No                  Yes                No                  Yes

Note: Estimates for δ and β are calculated using the results from Tables (F.4) and (F.5). One, two and three stars
denote statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level respectively.




                                                       77
Appendix G: Second Year Data Analysis
In the year following our first study, we returned to the field in order to collect additional data. In the fall
of 2011, we recruited participants from a pool of 994 tax filers from the 2010 tax filing season. Table G.7
demonstrates balance in predetermined observables. We conducted essentially the same field experiment
as in our first year.


G.1      Addressing Attrition
In an effort to overcome issues with high attrition and differential attrition, we increased the number of RAs
used to make phone calls and also made a small change to the initial information mailing sent out. Instead
of including experimental arm-specific information in the initial mailing, we sent out a uniform description
of the savings product prior to our first phone call. The uniform mailing sent out in the second year is
illustrated in Figure E.14. The uniform mailing appears to have eliminated the problem of differential
attrition — in Table G.8 there is no statistically significant difference in attrition across the experimental
arms. Though the additional outreach effort may have decreased overall attrition some, the low levels of
attrition experienced in the first year appear to be a fixture of the sample at hand.


G.2      Outcomes by Experimental Arm
We present the analogue of Tables 3-5 for year 2 outcomes below in Tables G.9-G.11. A key difference
to note in Table G.9 is that share who soft-commit to save in the commitment groups is overall higher,
but the difference between the control and treatment arms is no longer statistically significant. In fact,
treatment arm 5 has a lower level of soft-committing to save than the control arm. We return to this
pattern in more detail below. The share saving across the different experimental arms is comparable to
that in year 1, while the average savings amounts are somewhat higher in year 2. Conditioning on phone
contact or site appearance in Tables G.10 and G.11 has the expected effect on the scale of the outcomes.


G.3      Treatment Effects Conditional on Non-Attrition and Ceiling Ef-
         fects for Soft-Commitment
Tables G.12-G.13 for year 2 correspond to Tables 6-7 for year 1. As noted above, the treatment effects for
soft-committing to save among treatment arms 5 and 6 are no longer statistically significant in Table G.12.
In fact, the soft-commitment rate is slightly lower in most cases relative to the control arm 1. We attribute
this phenomenon to a “ceiling effect” — the baseline rate of soft-committing to save among members of
control arm 1 is much higher in year 2 at about 68%. This rate of soft-committing to save is almost as high
as the rate among the treatment arms 5 and 6 in year 1. It appears that relative to such a high baseline,
we are unable to incentivize much more soft-commitment to save among the treatment arms in year 2. The
negative treatment effects in some sense violate the law of demand, but not in a statistically significant
way. Ultimately, the presence of this ceiling effect prevents us from using variation in soft-commitment
outcomes to estimate our δ parameter using the method outlined in Section 5.4.
    In Table G.13, we find that the baseline savings rate among the control arm 1 in year 2 is very similar
to that of year 1 — 40% and 43%, respectively. We estimate a much smaller treatment effect for saving in
year 2 — 5 and 3 percentage points for treatment arms 2 and 3 in year 2, compared to 57 and 20 percentage
points in year 1. However, we still detect a similar qualitative pattern: the immediate effect (treatment
arm 1) is relatively large compared to the delayed effect (treatment arm 2) in both years. The patterns
also yield similar quantitative estimates of the composite discount factor, βδ, as we will see below.




                                                      78
G.4     Estimation Results
We conduct our test for time-inconsistency under no uncertainty using data from the year 2 in Table
G.14,which
           corresponds    to Table 9 in year 1. We again find evidence consistent with time-inconsistency
        C
                   NC
— E a2 > E  a2      — and additionally find evidence consistent with the presence of naı̈ve agents —
E aC 1  >  E   aC . The differences, however, are not statistically different.
                2
    As noted above, ceiling effects preclude us from using the early and late treatment effects to estimate
δ in year 2. Furthermore, the negative signed effects immediate reject our model. For this reason, we do
not use the soft-commitment outcomes in year 2 to estimate our parameters of interest. We can, however,
pool saving outcomes across years 1 and 2 when estimating βδ using the method in Section 5.4. We show
pooled results, using only soft-commitment outcomes in year 1, in Table G.15. Our estimates of β are only
slightly different when pooling data over the two years. We estimate values of β ranging from 0.48-0.50 in
when pooling year 1 and 2 savings outcomes, as compared to 0.34-0.45 when using only year 1 outcomes.
    Finally, we estimate βδ in Table G.16 using the Convex Time Budget method described in Section D
with year 2 savings outcomes. Our estimates of the discount factor using data from year 2 are comparable to
those in year 1, especially when looking at the OLS results. However, when incorporating corner outcomes,
the estimates are now higher, as more individuals are now found at the upper limit than at the lower limit
on savings. For reasonable levels of risk aversion — γ ∈ {1, 2} — the estimates for βδ range from 0.23-0.54
in year 2, as compared to 0.20-0.49 in year 1. The sightly higher values of βδ in year 2 relative to year 1
is consistent with the pattern observed when comparing Tables 11 and G.15 — the alternative estimates
of β using only year 1 or both year 1 and 2 data, respectively.




                                                    79
                             Table G.7: Baseline Descriptive Statistics, Year 2
                                      (1)        (2)            (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)
                                      Non-Commitment Groups                   Commitment Groups
                                   Group 1     Group 2     Group 3        Group 4   Group 5     Group 6
              Age                   48.07       47.01          43.36∗∗∗   45.62      45.40      43.90∗∗
                                    [1.22]      [1.21]         [1.19]     [1.13]     [1.13]     [1.07]

              AGI                   19, 536   16, 654∗∗   15, 515∗∗∗      18, 477   16, 522∗∗   17, 790
                                    [1,016]     [912]       [916]          [908]      [932]      [998]

              Federal Refund        1, 845      1, 857         1, 963      2, 013    1, 872      1, 691
                                    [138]       [154]          [160]       [149]     [150]       [134]

              NY Refund               532        560            659         633       590         514
                                      [56]       [60]           [65]        [59]      [56]        [57]

              Depedents               0.52       0.58           0.73∗       0.52      0.62        0.54
                                     [0.07]     [0.08]         [0.08]      [0.07]    [0.08]      [0.07]

              Married                 0.19       0.17           0.15        0.16      0.19        0.13
                                     [0.03]     [0.03]         [0.03]      [0.03]    [0.03]      [0.03]

              High School             0.76       0.75           0.73        0.76      0.76        0.76
                                     [0.03]     [0.04]         [0.04]      [0.03]    [0.03]      [0.03]

              College+                0.24       0.25           0.27        0.24      0.24        0.24
                                     [0.03]     [0.04]         [0.04]      [0.03]    [0.03]      [0.03]

              African-American        0.46       0.39           0.41        0.44      0.39        0.37
                                     [0.04]     [0.04]         [0.04]      [0.04]    [0.04]      [0.04]

              Asian                   0.15       0.20           0.17        0.14      0.17        0.13
                                     [0.03]     [0.03]         [0.03]      [0.03]    [0.03]      [0.03]

              Hispanic                0.27       0.25           0.27        0.27      0.28        0.34
                                     [0.04]     [0.03]         [0.04]      [0.04]    [0.04]      [0.04]

              White                   0.05       0.10           0.07        0.06      0.08        0.06
                                     [0.02]     [0.02]         [0.02]      [0.02]    [0.02]      [0.02]

              Bank Account            0.83       0.87           0.87        0.89      0.84        0.88
                                     [0.03]     [0.03]         [0.03]      [0.03]    [0.03]      [0.03]


              N                       165        166            166         165       166         166

Note: Descriptive statistics for 6 treatment groups are tax year 2009 and tax-filing season 2010 variables
established prior to the intervention. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. One, two and three stars
denote statistically significant difference from treatment group 1 at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels respectively.




                                                          80
                         Table G.8: Experimental Group Survival Rates, Year 2
                                         (1)       (2)       (3)        (4)                      (5)          (6)
                                            Non-Commitment Groups                     Commitment Groups
                                          Group 1      Group 2      Group 3      Group 4      Group 5      Group 6
 Reached by Phone                            0.22         0.25         0.16        0.22         0.17         0.24
                                            [0.03]       [0.03]       [0.03]      [0.03]       [0.03]       [0.03]

  p-value between                             .          0.54         0.20         1.00         0.25         0.62
  p-value within                              .          0.54         0.20          .           0.25         0.62

 Consented to Study on Phone                 0.17         0.20         0.14        0.17         0.15         0.22
                                            [0.03]       [0.03]       [0.03]      [0.03]       [0.03]       [0.03]

  p-value between                             .          0.49         0.43         1.00         0.64         0.28
  p-value within                              .          0.49         0.43          .           0.64         0.28

 Appeared On Site                            0.12         0.12         0.13        0.19         0.16         0.20
                                            [0.03]       [0.03]       [0.03]      [0.03]       [0.03]       [0.03]

  p-value between                             .          0.98         0.88         0.09∗        0.35         0.04∗∗
  p-value within                              .          0.98         0.88          .           0.45         0.70

 Consented to Study on Phone                 0.78         0.80         0.85        0.78         0.89         0.90
 (Conditional on Phone Contact)             [0.07]       [0.06]       [0.07]      [0.07]       [0.06]       [0.05]

  p-value between                             .          0.77         0.45         1.00         0.21         0.15
  p-value within                              .          0.77         0.45          .           0.21         0.15

 Appeared On Site                            0.43         0.41         0.50        0.61         0.62         0.63
 (Conditional on Phone Contact)             [0.07]       [0.07]       [0.08]      [0.07]       [0.08]       [0.07]

  p-value between                             .          0.79         0.54         0.08∗        0.08∗        0.05∗∗
  p-value within                              .          0.79         0.54          .           0.91         0.82

 N                                           165          166          166          165          166         166

Note: Sample survival rates are the probability of remaining in the study at each stage of the experiment. Two sets
of p-values are reported. The “between” p-value measures compares each experimental group to group 1, while the
“within” p-value compares either treatment groups 2 and 3 to group 1 or treatment groups 5 and 6 to group 4.
One, two and three stars denote statistically significant differences at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level respectively.




                                                        81
                          Table G.9: Outcomes by Experimental Group, Year 2
                                 (1)       (2)      (3)        (4)       (5)                         (6)
                                   Non-Commitment Groups                        Commitment Groups
                                Group 1      Group 2       Group 3      Group 4      Group 5      Group 6
         Pre-commit                0.00         0.00          0.00        0.12          0.08         0.14
                                   [.]          [.]           [.]        [0.02]        [0.02]       [0.03]

          p-value within            .            .              .           .          0.26          0.43

         Saving                    0.05         0.05           0.05       0.07          0.08         0.13
                                  [0.02]       [0.02]         [0.02]     [0.02]        [0.02]       [0.03]

          p-value between           .           0.81          0.81        0.36         0.26          0.01∗∗
          p-value within            .           0.81          0.81         .           0.85          0.10

         Saving Amount            34.62        33.48        42.20        56.86        51.54       101.51
                                 [12.50]      [11.69]      [14.57]      [16.61]      [14.75]      [22.37]

          p-value between           .           0.95          0.69        0.28         0.38          0.01∗∗∗
          p-value within            .           0.95          0.69         .           0.81          0.11

         N                         165          166            166         165          166          166

Note: Table reports the soft-committment outcomes for treatment groups 1-3, and the saving and saving amount
outcomes for all treatment groups. Two sets of p-values are reported. The “between” p-value measures compares
each experimental group to group 1, while the “within” p-value compares either treatment groups 2 and 3 to group
1 or treatment groups 5 and 6 to group 4. One, two and three stars denote statistically significant differences at the
10, 5 and 1 percent level respectively.




                                                         82
      Table G.10: Outcomes by Experimental Group, Conditional on Phone Consent, Year 2
                                    (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)
                                            Non-Commitment Groups                      Commitment Groups
                                         Group 1      Group 2      Group 3     Group 4      Group 5      Group 6
 Pre-commit                                 0.00        0.00         0.00         0.68         0.52        0.67
 (Conditional on Phone Contact)             [.]         [.]          [.]         [0.09]       [0.10]      [0.08]

  p-value within                             .            .           .            .           0.24        0.92

 Saving                                     0.21         0.18        0.17         0.18         0.28        0.36
 (Conditional on Phone Contact)            [0.08]       [0.07]      [0.08]       [0.07]       [0.09]      [0.08]

  p-value between                            .          0.75         0.72         0.74        0.58         0.19
  p-value within                             .          0.75         0.72          .          0.38         0.09∗

 Saving Amount                           162.96       130.55      136.96       147.57       180.00       273.61
 (Conditional on Phone Contact)          [62.57]      [51.80]     [67.95]      [62.33]      [63.44]      [69.54]

  p-value between                            .          0.69         0.77         0.86        0.85         0.23
  p-value within                             .          0.69         0.77          .          0.71         0.17

 N                                           28          33           23           28           25          36

Note: Table reports the soft-committment outcomes for treatment groups 1-3, and the saving and saving amount
outcomes for all treatment groups, conditional on initially consenting to the study by phone. Two sets of p-values
are reported. The “between” p-value measures compares each experimental group to group 1, while the “within”
p-value compares either treatment groups 2 and 3 to group 1 or treatment groups 5 and 6 to group 4. One, two and
three stars denote statistically significant differences at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level respectively.




                                                       83
     Table G.11: Outcomes by Experimental Group, Conditional on Site Appearance, Year 2
                                    (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)       (6)
                                             Non-Commitment Groups                       Commitment Groups
                                           Group 1      Group 2     Group 3      Group 4      Group 5     Group 6
 Pre-commit                                  0.00           0.00       0.00         0.29        0.27         0.50
 (Conditional on Site Appearance)            [.]            [.]        [.]         [0.08]      [0.09]       [0.09]

  p-value within                               .             .          .            .          0.86         0.08∗

 Saving                                       0.40        0.45         0.43         0.39        0.50         0.62
 (Conditional on Site Appearance)            [0.11]      [0.11]       [0.11]       [0.09]      [0.10]       [0.08]

  p-value between                              .            0.75       0.85        0.93         0.50         0.12
  p-value within                               .            0.75       0.85         .           0.39         0.06∗

 Saving Amount                    285.65               277.90       333.62       302.65       329.08      495.59
 (Conditional on Site Appearance) [85.74]              [79.21]      [94.83]      [74.45]      [74.24]     [79.36]

  p-value between                              .            0.95       0.70        0.88         0.70         0.07∗
  p-value within                               .            0.95       0.70         .           0.80         0.07∗

 N                                            20            20          21          31           26           34

Note: Table reports the soft-committment outcomes for treatment groups 1-3, and the saving and saving amount
outcomes for all treatment groups, conditional on showing up at the tax preparation stie. Two sets of p-values are
reported. The “between” p-value measures compares each experimental group to group 1, while the “within”
p-value compares either treatment groups 2 and 3 to group 1 or treatment groups 5 and 6 to group 4. One, two and
three stars denote statistically significant differences at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level respectively.




                                                       84
 Table G.12: ITT Estimates Conditional on Phone Consent, Year 2 – Soft-Commitment Decision
                                               (1)       (2)        (3)      (4)
                                                        Treatment Group 5        Treatment Group 6
                                                         (early incentive)         (late incentive)
          Treatment Effect                              −0.159       −0.088       −0.012         0.093
                                                         [0.136]      [0.136]      [0.120]      [0.122]
                                                         (0.139)      (0.130)      (0.116)      (0.126)

          Control Mean                                     0.679      0.616      0.679      0.616
                                                          [0.090]∗∗∗ [0.093]∗∗∗ [0.090]∗∗∗ [0.093]∗∗∗

          N                                                  89         89           89          89
          Controls                                           No         Yes          No          Yes
          Non-Attrition Rate - Phone Consent

          Treatment Effect                              −0.019       −0.014         0.047        0.053
                                                         [0.040]      [0.040]      [0.043]      [0.044]
                                                         (0.041)      (0.042)      (0.041)      (0.042)

          Control Mean                                     0.170      0.167      0.170      0.167
                                                          [0.029]∗∗∗ [0.029]∗∗∗ [0.029]∗∗∗ [0.029]∗∗∗

          Treatment Bounds

          Upper Bound                                   −0.118       −0.052         0.136        0.242
                                                         [0.168]      [0.175]      [0.160]      [0.145]∗

          Lower Bound                                   −0.245       −0.146       −0.082         0.001
                                                         [0.239]      [0.217]      [0.119]      [0.123]

          N                                                  497        494         497          494
          Controls                                           No         Yes         No           Yes

Note: Treatment effects on soft-committing to save for treatment arms 5 and 6 are relative to control arm 4 and
conditional on non-attrition — i.e. being contacted for the initial phone interview. Non-attrition rates in arms 5
and 6, relative to arm 4 are estimated among the entire sample. Upper and lower bounds are calculated using
methods outlined by Behaghel, Crépon, Gurgand, and Le Barbanchon (2009). Robust standard errors for the
treatment effects are reported in brackets and randomization inference standard errors are reported in parentheses.
One, two and three stars denote statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level respectively.




                                                        85
      Table G.13: ITT Estimates Conditional on Site Appearance, Year 2 – Savings Decision
                                                (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)
                                                        Treatment Group 2            Treatment Group 3
                                                       (immediate incentive)         (delayed incentive)
        Treatment Effect                                  0.050         0.046          0.029       0.012
                                                         [0.160]       [0.177]        [0.158]     [0.179]
                                                         (0.162)       (0.165)        (0.165)     (0.168)

        Control Mean                                      0.400          0.407         0.400      0.407
                                                         [0.112]∗∗∗     [0.125]∗∗∗    [0.112]∗∗∗ [0.125]∗∗∗

        N                                                    61          61            61           61
        Controls                                             No          Yes           No           Yes
        Non-Attrition Rate - Site Appearance

        Treatment Effect                                −0.001          0.004          0.005       0.002
                                                         [0.036]       [0.035]        [0.036]     [0.036]
                                                         (0.034)       (0.036)        (0.033)     (0.037)

        Control Mean                                      0.121          0.121         0.121      0.121
                                                         [0.025]∗∗∗     [0.024]∗∗∗    [0.025]∗∗∗ [0.024]∗∗∗

        Treatment Bounds

        Upper Bound                                       0.054          0.059         0.045        0.020
                                                         [0.238]        [0.202]       [0.188]      [0.209]

        Lower Bound                                       0.048          0.027         0.003        0.001
                                                         [0.197]        [0.225]       [0.226]      [0.230]

        N                                                  497           494           497          494
        Controls                                           No            Yes           No           Yes

Note: Treatment effects on saving for treatment arms 2 and 3 are relative to control arm 1 and conditional on
non-attrition — i.e. appearing at the tax site. Non-attrition rates in arms 2 and 3, relative to arm 1 are estimated
among the entire sample. Upper and lower bounds are calculated using methods outlined by Behaghel, Crépon,
Gurgand, and Le Barbanchon (2009). Robust standard errors for the treatment effects are reported in brackets and
randomization inference standard errors are reported in parentheses. One, two and three stars denote statistical
significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level respectively.




                                                        86
              Table G.14: Testing for Time-Inconsistency Under No Uncertainty, Year 2
                                                     (1)       (2)       (3)
                                                                  E[aC
                                                                     1]       E[aC
                                                                                 2]         E[aN C
                                                                                               2 ]

                     Conditional on Non-Attrition                  0.629       0.505          0.426
                                                                  [0.052]     [0.053]        [0.064]

                     N                                             89           91             61
                     Balanced Sample                               0.750       0.568          0.426
                                                                  [0.066]     [0.075]        [0.064]

                     N                                             44           44             61

Note: Mean outcomes for commitment and non-commitment group members. Means conditional on non-attrition
for soft-commitment and saving decision are among those reached by phone and those who appear on site,
respectively. The balanced sample conditions all means on appearing on site.




           Table G.15: Beta Delta Estimates, Conditional on Participation, Years 1 and 2
                                        (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)
                                                         δ                             β
                       Point Estimates          1.077      1.152      0.496                  0.479
                                                      ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
                                               [0.395]    [0.428]    [0.645]                [0.645]

                       N                        76                76          168            168
                       Controls                 No                Yes         No             Yes
                       Upper Bound              4.078          4.645         11.712         12.554
                                               [5.914]        [7.462]       [73.428]       [88.536]

                       Lower Bound              0.344          0.394          0.039          0.030
                                               [0.384]        [0.411]        [0.129]        [0.118]

                       N                        417               417        1330           1327
                       Controls                 No                Yes         No            Yes

Note: Estimates for δ are calculated using Table 6 and estimates for β are calculated using the results from Tables
6, 7 and G.13. One, two and three stars denote statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level respectively.




                                                             87
                 Table G.16: Estimates of βδ – Accounting for Risk Aversion, Year 2
                     (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)          (5)           (6)
                                    OLS                                         Tobit
                  4ω = 0% 4ω = 10% 4ω = 25% 4ω = 0% 4ω = 10% 4ω = 25%
         γ=1         0.395∗∗∗       0.414∗∗∗       0.447∗∗∗       0.464∗∗∗      0.490∗∗∗       0.536∗∗∗
                    [0.056]        [0.060]        [0.069]        [0.066]       [0.072]        [0.083]

         γ=2         0.234∗∗∗       0.257∗∗∗       0.300∗∗∗       0.323∗∗∗      0.360∗∗∗       0.430∗∗∗
                    [0.066]        [0.075]        [0.092]        [0.091]       [0.105]        [0.133]

         γ=3         0.139∗∗∗       0.160∗∗∗       0.201∗∗∗       0.225∗∗∗      0.265∗∗∗       0.346∗∗∗
                    [0.059]        [0.070]        [0.093]        [0.096]       [0.116]        [0.161]

         γ=4         0.082∗∗∗       0.099∗∗∗       0.135∗∗∗       0.157∗∗∗      0.195∗∗∗       0.278∗∗∗
                    [0.047]        [0.058]        [0.083]        [0.089]       [0.114]        [0.172]

         N            27             27             27            56             56             56

Note: Estimates for βδ are calculated using the methods described in Section 5.5. One, two and three stars denote
statistically significant difference from 1 at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level respectively.




                                                         88
