                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      GROWING UP TO STABILITY? FINANCIAL GLOBALIZATION, FINANCIAL
                  DEVELOPMENT AND FINANCIAL CRISES

                                        Michael D. Bordo
                                     Christopher M. Meissner

                                       Working Paper 21287
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21287


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2015




Paper prepared for the conference “Financial Systems and Economic Growth: Conference in Honor
of Richard Sylla” Stern School of Business, New York University March 27-28 2015. We thank Peter
Rousseau, Gianni Toniolo, Paul Wachtel, and participants at the conference for comments. Remaining
errors are attributable to the authors. Disclosure statement: No financial support was received from
any entity in carrying out this research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Michael D. Bordo and Christopher M. Meissner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Growing Up to Stability? Financial Globalization, Financial Development and Financial Crises
Michael D. Bordo and Christopher M. Meissner
NBER Working Paper No. 21287
June 2015
JEL No. E44,E58,E65,F32,F33,F34,F43,F6,N10,N20

                                              ABSTRACT

Why did some countries learn to grow up to financial stability and others not? We explore this question
by surveying the key determinants and major policy responses to banking, currency, and debt crises
between 1880 and present. We divide countries into three groups: leaders, learners, and non-learners.
Each of these groups had very different experiences in terms of long-run economic outcomes, financial
development, financial stability, crisis frequency, and their policy responses to crises. The countries
that grew up to financial stability had rule of law, democracy, political stability and other institutional
features highlighted in the literature on comparative development. We illustrate this by way of case
studies for three kinds of financial crises for four countries (Argentina, Australia, Canada, and the
United States) over the long-run.


Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Jersey Hall
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu

Christopher M. Meissner
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
cmmeissner@ucdavis.edu
   1. Introduction


       An important literature on comparative long-run economic growth focusses on
financial development. This work in economic history strongly complements the extensive
empirical research by King and Levine (1993) and many others who have established a
strong connection between financial development and subsequent economic growth.
Rousseau and Sylla (2003) develop the concept of financial revolutions. They argue based on
the history of the Netherlands, Great Britain, the United States, France, Germany, and
Japan, that these countries grew rapidly after financial revolutions which created “good”
financial systems. Such systems have five key components: sound public finance and public
debt management; a stable monetary regime; a banking system; a central bank; and well-
functioning securities markets.
       Financial development in the past three centuries has also been accompanied by two
other complementary important phenomena: financial globalization and financial crises.
Financial globalization is a term for the opening up of international capital markets and the
export of capital from advanced to emerging countries. More recently financial globalization
has seen capital flowing in both directions (from poor to rich and rich to poor) with very
high gross flows being the hallmark of the last two decades. Capital inflows to capital scarce
regions have long been crucial to the economic development of the recipient countries.
Financial crises (banking, currency, and debt) also became more of an issue along with each
successive wave of financial development and globalization. Recently it has been argued that
capital inflows often lead to an expansion of bank lending which can create an asset price
boom, especially in real estate, an asset price bust, and a financial crisis (Borio, James and
Shin 2014). In this paper we focus on the interface between financial development,
globalization and financial crises. We are also interested in the prospects and determinants of
the learning required to make policies to harness finance for growth while avoiding financial
instability. In our case studies, we concentrate primarily on the years from the mid-19th
century to 1914, the first era of globalization, but we also explore these issues in the
twentieth century and earlier in the 19th century to some degree. We ask several questions:
    1. Why were some emerging markets able to access international capital markets and
        successfully use these funds to finance their development?



                                                                                              2
    2.    Why are some countries hit by financial crises which delay their development and
         increase economic volatility?
    3.    Why have some countries been able to avoid financial crises altogether?
    4.    Why is it that some countries have learned from their crisis experience and
         developed ways to reduce the likelihood and impact of financial crises while others
         have not?
In sum the question we ask is “Why did some countries learn to grow up to financial stability
and others not?”
         In this paper we survey the empirical and narrative evidence on the experience of
emerging market countries from the 19th century into the 20th and 21st century.            We
complement this evidence with case studies on four emerging countries (U.S., Canada,
Australia, and Argentina) which were all recipients of capital flows, experienced significant
financial development but had very different experiences with financial crises and policy
changes in the wake of these major events.


   2. Overview:         Capital     Flows,      Financial      Crises     and       Financial
         Development


    International capital flows have a long history, but they increased significantly beginning
in the 1820s. With the advent of the telegraph in the 1840s and other advances in
transportation and communication, international capital flows progressively increased (albeit
in waves or even cycles) across the 19th century. The period 1870–1914 was the first era of
globalization characterized by the rapid growth of international trade, extensive international
financial integration and massive international migration comparable to the present era of
globalization (Bordo, Williamson and Taylor 2003). Key elements of this era were: adherence
to the gold standard and stable exchange rates; political stability attributable to Pax
Britannica and the balance of power; it was an era of limited government involvement in the
economy. During this period many of today’s advanced countries were essentially emerging
market economies. Many also went through financial revolutions (Rousseau and Sylla 2003).
         Financial globalization raises real economic growth in emerging market countries but
it is also often accompanied by financial crises (sudden stops, currency crises, banking crises
and sovereign debt defaults). Indeed there has been considerable recent debate on whether

                                                                                             3
financial integration contributes to growth or whether positive growth effects were negated
by financial crises. Gourinchas and Jeanne (2006) argued that capital flows had limited
effects on growth. 1 Others have argued that on net capital flows aid growth and that crises
only have temporary effects (Tornell and Westerman, 2003 and Bordo and Meissner, 2011).
     Bordo and Meissner (2011) found that the British Dominions and Northern Europe did
better than Southern Europe and Latin America in absorbing capital flows and avoiding
financial crises or learning from them. The British Dominions and Northern European
countries were more financially developed, and based on their development and institutional
arrangements they learned from their financial crisis experience to improve their institutions
and policies. Crises could not be eliminated, but their frequency and severity seems to have
been reduced when comparing these countries to a set that included Argentina, Brazil, Chile
and Greece amongst others. In addition, regulatory and legislative efforts in these countries
usually attempted, at the very least, to redress the deficiencies that caused the last crisis.
While regulators might be accused of “fighting the last war” such a strategy in a complex
world may be better than no or only cosmetic reform. 2
     Other countries (e.g., Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and Greece) to cite some extreme
examples, faced two centuries of capital inflows, asset booms and busts and recurrent
financial crises whose origins and causes were strikingly similar from one crisis to the next.
Sovereign debt crises were a particular problem, but currency instability and banking crises
also were quite prevalent. In many instances, minimal efforts at reform were undertaken and
quite often policy change was superficial such that subsequent crises unfolded in dramatically
similar ways. Outcomes such as high or hyper-inflation, debt default, and financial system
collapse were common and remain so up to today.
        The successful countries were more financially developed and had the following
attributes: political stability, competitive political systems, lower income inequality,
adherence to the rule of law; well defined property rights and democracy. There is of course
an extensive literature on the origins and impacts of the institutional environment (e.g.,
North and Weingast, 1989, Rajan and Zingales, 2003b, North, Wallis and Weingast, 2009,
Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, 2004, Engerman and Sokoloff, 1997, and Calomiris and

1 Also see Henry (2007) and Brooks et al (2006).
2 Hubbard, Glen “How to Stop the Next Financial Crisis: The Fed Might Be Our Last Great Hope”
9/12/2013 The Atlantic http://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2013/09/how-to-stop-the-next-
financial-crisis-the-fed-might-be-our-last-great-hope/279594/


                                                                                                   4
Haber, 2014). Relatively little attention has been paid however to the impact these
institutions had on the ability to learn from financial meltdowns and hence on long run
financial stability
        To fully understand the process of growing up to financial stability and of learning
and adapting while under the pressure of finicky financial markets, one needs to understand
the drivers of market and policy responses to moments of great financial stress. Political
institutions, the constitutional framework, legal traditions and property rights help shape
how the economic landscape might respond to these and other shocks. Before that however
we also need to understand the drivers of financial crises, what the historical record shows
regarding the frequency of crises and how this informs our ideas on learning or growing up
to financial stability.


3.Foreign Capital, Economic Growth and Financial Crises in the Long-
Run: A Long-Run Comparative View


        A useful long-run typology identifies three main types of crises: banking crises,
sovereign debt crises, and currency crises. Banking crises are often associated with large asset
losses and significant bank failures, large deposit withdrawals, and government interventions
in the banking sector either via fiscal or monetary support (Laeven and Valencia, 2013).
Sovereign debt crises are defined by partial default, outright repudiation or significant de
facto default caused by monetary expansion and inflation; all of these are breaches in the
original terms of the nominal debt contracts that sovereigns contract. Currency crises
involve large and sudden nominal depreciations, intense (negative) pressure on reserve assets
and possibly an interest rate defense of the currency (Eichengreen, Rose, Wyplosz, 1996).
Other categories of crises exist. For instance, twin crises involve banking and currency crises
with one crisis preceding the other and one often being the proximate cause of the other.
Triple crises witness a banking, currency and a debt crisis. We discuss the mechanics of each
kind of crisis below indicating some instances from the historical record where such crises
occurred.


3.1 Banking Crises



                                                                                              5
        The fundamental vulnerability of the banking sector is a maturity mismatch
(Diamond and Dybvig, 1983). The types of shocks that can cause bank failures include
shocks to the underlying assets leading to outright insolvency, or in a model of imperfect
information, concerns about the solvency of a bank. 3 True banking crises are systemic
events, and the historical evidence suggests that direct economic linkages, financial market
shocks and information cascades within the depositor network are all prime drivers of a
banking collapse. Hanes and Rhode (2013) specify a monetary channel for systemic banking
panics in the US prior to World War I.
        Banking crises can also have an international dimension as for example during the
Baring Crisis of 1890-1891, the global instability of 1907, the Credit Anstalt crisis of 1931,
the Asian Financial crisis, or the sub-prime crisis of 2007. In all of these cases, cross-border
claims and faltering foreign banks or counterparties led to solvency or liquidity problems at
home. In addition, interest rate shocks (e.g., US interest rate rises via monetary policy shocks
in 1980-81 or in 1929) may contribute directly or indirectly to starting or exacerbating
financial stress.
        Notwithstanding these attempts, as we discuss below, only a handful of countries
were able to strike the right balance of preventative and palliative mechanisms and ultimately
avoid financial crises.      This observation indicates two things. First, and foremost, the
maturity mismatch is the fundamental driver of financial fragility. Second, financial instability
can arise even where the banking system is ostensibly regulated. This could be due to
political capture of the financial regulator or because of financial innovation that avoids or
actively evades regulatory authority. Moral hazard and the excessive risk taking it encourages
has also been cited as a driver in some cases (Hautcoeur, Riva, and White, 2014). Third, in an
open economy, the financial system is often affected by systemic effects via “contagion”
whose origins are likely to be outside of the country in question.


3.2 Debt Crises
        Over the long run, governments have issued debt on international markets for the
following reasons: cash flow, infrastructure investment and public goods expenditures and
wars. Since World War II, counter-cyclical initiatives have also been in play. Whatever the

3See Calomiris and Mason (2003) on liquidity versus insolvency in the Great Depression. See Ó Gráda and
White (2003) on information and bank panics in the 1850s in the United States.


                                                                                                          6
reason, the fundamental problem in a world of incomplete markets remains maturity
mismatch and imperfect risk-sharing. Sovereigns in the post-World War II environment
typically have borrowed at short-term maturities, but prior to World War II this problem
seems to have been less crucial (Bordo, Meissner and Redish, 2005). Still, prior to World
War II, the following hazards contributed to debt defaults: variable or surprisingly weak
revenue outturns, poor oversight in choosing projects, and currency mismatch.
        A wave of sovereign defaults tied to international capital flows occurred in the 1820s
in many Latin American Republics as over-optimistic investors form Europe lent these
fledgling republics more than their weak public finances could handle (Flandreau and Flores,
2009). In the 1840s eight US states (and one territory) defaulted on their foreign debts when
development plans proved over-optimistic (Wallis, Sylla, and Grinath III, 2004). In the
1930s, a series of global demand and commodity price shocks, mis-use of funds, global
recession and a sharp shift backwards in the international supply of capital led to a series of
defaults by commodity exporters (Eichengreen and Portes, 1986). In addition Germany
defaulted on its reparations payments to the Allies in 1933 causing the Allies to default on
their war debts to the United States and other allies (Reinhart and Rogoff, 2013). In the
1980s a number of Latin American countries and financial and non-financial firms in those
countries defaulted when US interest rates skyrocketed.
        As in the private sector, the currency mismatch problem has also caused problems.
Foreign currency denominated debt was common in 19th century sovereign debt contracts
with rare exceptions to the rule (Bordo, Meissner and Redish, 2005 and Flandreau and
Sussman, 2005). Eichengreen, Hausman, and Panizza (2005) argue that in recent decades
currency instability and foreign capital flows have induced financial instability.
        Although small open economies can rarely avoid issuing debt in foreign currency,
they have in fact been able to rely on domestic debt markets to some extent even in the 19th
century (Bordo, Meissner and Redish 2005). Building local debt markets is one strategy to
avoid the currency mismatch problem. However, up to World War II, domestically issued
debt frequently contained a gold clause which could cause the burden of debt to rise when
the local currency price of gold fell. Even during commodity money regimes, governments
often had a free hand and issued local currency denominated debt without gold clauses. With
domestically denominated liabilities, inflation induced by the printing press could and did
lead to implicit default as for instance in Austria (1811, 1868), Argentina (1890), Brazil


                                                                                             7
(1889-1891) Chile (1887), Italy (1890s), Spain (c. 1900), and Russia (1870s) amongst many
others. 4


3.3 Currency Crises
            Over the long run, sharp changes in nominal exchange rates and speculative attacks
or “runs” on currencies have challenged economic stability. While most advanced nations
adopted and stuck to the gold standard between 1880 and 1914, nearly all countries faced
some level of currency instability at some point. However, in many countries of Latin
America, governments or “banks of issue” periodically allowed note issues to expand more
rapidly than reserves generating significant depreciation and inflation in the process. “Forced
currencies” appeared in the 19th century in Greece, Italy, Japan, Portugal, Spain, and Russia
not due to wars but to financial mis-management.
            In the US case, there were periods of inflation particularly during the Civil War and
World War I. These episodes conform more closely with the escape clause view of Bordo
and Kydland (1995) and were not associated with financial crises per se. However, a long
political battle about whether the US should adhere to a gold standard, a silver standard or a
fiat regime culminated in the 1890s with a drawn out speculative attack on the dollar (Miller,
1996). Even the leading countries of Europe had to appeal to ad hoc reserve pooling
arrangements on specific dates. France borrowed reserves from the Bank of England in
1882; Great Britain borrowed from the Bank of France and the Bank of Russia in 1890;
Sweden borrowed from the Bank of France in 1907. Such operations relaxed the constraints
for central banks attempting liquidity support under the gold standard.
            Currency crises have often been systemic and international, and this was especially so
in the 1930s. By the 1920s, the gold standard had evolved into a gold exchange standard.
Nations as diverse as Brazil, Denmark, and Great Britain, amongst many others, were forced
off the gold standard by “destabilizing speculation”. Currency instability did not disappear in
the Bretton Woods period (Edwards and Santaella, 1993). 5 Although capital and exchange
controls were used extensively, offshore currency markets and delayed remittances


4See Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) for a survey of default through inflation over the long-run.
5This paper identified 69 large devaluation episodes in developing economies 1948-1971. In the developed
world depreciation and “re-alignment” also occurred frequently. Amongst others the United Kingdom faced
currency crises in 1964, 1967, again in the 1970s, and in 1992, France in 1957 and 1968, and 1992, the US in
1960 and 1971, Sweden in 1992, and Italy in 1964, 1976, 1992 and 1995.


                                                                                                               8
associated with trade (“leads and lags”) allowed pressure to be exerted. Many crises could be
classified as “first generation crises” in the spirit of Krugman (1979).
         A number of super-sized speculative attacks on currencies occurred in the early
1990s occurred especially within the European Exchange Rate Mechanism. This wave of
crises led to the notion that many governments, committed to full employment as they had
been since the end of World War II, would not be able to stand the economic and political
costs of an exchange rate defense. This became referred to as “the second generation
speculative attack model”. Eichengreen (1992) identifies this as a key problem in the interwar
gold standard.


3.4 Third Generation Crises
         Continuing into the 1990s and into the first decade of the 21st century, many other
nations faced currency crises. In many instances these crises were the product of the
following sequence of events: nations pegged their exchange rates and liberalized their
financial systems; capital inflows contributed to credit growth and increased indebtedness
with liabilities payable in dollars. The potential that a shock or a change in expectations
could disrupt this process and create large losses was directly related to the deterioration in
the net international investment position; when a change in expectations occurred, a sudden
stop in capital inflows made for significant pressure on the currencies of these countries and
led to depreciation; the expectation and realization of these exchange rate changes led to
private sector defaults as the real depreciation enlarged foreign obligations faster than export
revenue could rise. 6 Many countries either explicitly or implicitly guaranteed the liabilities of
the financial system generating enhanced risk-taking and endogenous fiscal crises. In this
way the currency and banking crisis problem become intertwined with a strong potential for
sovereign difficulties too. This dynamic, and variants of it, have been described and analyzed
in the case of East Asia and the 1990s and other small open economies (Burnside,
Eichenbaum, and Rebelo 2005).
         Once again, it would be a mistake to think that such dynamics were not present prior
to the 1990s. Bordo (2006) and Bordo, Cavallo and Meissner (2010) study sudden stops in


6 This is a simplified version of events in 1996/97 in Thailand and in 1997 in several other countries in East
Asia. See Krugman (1999a), Krugman (1999b), Dooley (1994) and Corbett, Irwin and Vines (1999). The story
is applicable to Argentina in 2001-2002 as well and Mexico in 1994-1995.


                                                                                                                 9
the 19th century and find that the size of the lagged current account deficits and foreign
currency debt interact to heighten the probability of a financial crisis. Moreover, Bordo and
Meissner (2006) and Bordo, Meissner, and Stuckler (2010) find that weak financial
fundamentals contributed to even higher predicted probabilities of crises in the presence of
significant current account deficits. These “fundamentals” include the level of public debt to
GDP, the ratio of foreign currency debt to total public debt, the ratio of reserves relative to
narrow money, and openness to trade. The implication is that countries that keep debt
down, are not exposed to foreign currency debt and can accumulate reserves can withstand
the turning tides of international capital markets much better than countries which cannot
do so.


3.5 Avoiding Financial Crises over the Long-Run
         Over the long run, financial crises have had both domestic and international causes.
What have we learned about the causes of financial crises? How do these lessons relate to
repeat offenders versus countries that have learned to avoid crises or have always had lower
propensity to have such crises?
         Banking stability has numerous determinants. What the record shows is that
countries like Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Sweden, Denmark, Japan, the UK and others
have over the long run had fewer banking crises than another set of countries such as Spain,
Portugal, Argentina, Brazil, Italy, Austria etc. Some of these countries are more comparable
than others. We think that the emerging markets classification that compares new world
countries like Canada, Australia and New Zealand with Argentina, Brazil and Chile is very
apt. In Europe, the northern periphery such as the Nordics in the 19th century might be
compared to the Southern and Eastern European nations who had approximately similar
levels of development in the mid-19th century.
         What proximate sources of success can we identify? 7 In many of these countries,
entry was limited and tightly regulated in the financial sector. Governance was usually sound

7
  Between 1945 and the 1970s, banking crises were largely regulated out of existence with financial repression.
Most countries limited international financial flows and imposed strict regulations on banking activity. Such
controls included partial or complete nationalization of the financial sector, strict limits on competition in the
financial sector, and interest rate ceilings. Prior to World War II and after the 1970s, regulation was less
restrictive. It took many forms and evolved over time. The following were methods used: market discipline,
clearing house membership, and government regulation, capital and reserve requirements, limits on note issues,
branching restrictions, unlimited liability, financial reporting, and government supervision. All of these were


                                                                                                               10
and transparent at the bank level and at the industry level. Political favoritism may be the
hallmark of the banking sector (Calomiris and Haber, 2014), but the first set of countries
managed to limit the pernicious venality that has plagued other less developed countries. 8
Market-based regulations, or strong and relatively impartial government regulations, have
helped.
          Ex post, liquidity support and government guarantees are common tools to fight
liquidity crunches and avoid systemic crises. Liquidity support became common in the late
19th century (Bignon, Flandreau and Ugolini, 2012). Bordo and Eichengreen (1999) highlight
numerous instances of domestic and foreign liquidity support in systemic banking crises of
the 19th century. Outright government guarantees of the liabilities of financial institutions
were used already in the 19th century as for instance in Denmark in 1908, France 1888-1889,
Great Britain 1890-91, amongst many others (Bordo and Eichengreen, 1999 and Grossman
2010). 9 But these techniques have become more preponderant over time as deposit
insurance and direct government intervention has increased. 10
          In terms of avoiding instability due to entanglement with finicky international capital
flows a number of factors can be identified. Strong development and economic growth to
ensure repayment of accumulated debts were without a doubt the prime driver of success. At
the macro level, stable monetary policy and credible exchange rate commitments short-
circuited twin crises. As in the recent crisis of 2007, where international swap lines mattered,
international cooperation in the first wave of globalization helped stave off many systemic
liquidity problems when all else failed. Numerous times, large and systemically important
nations as well as trustworthy smaller open economies have relied on informal reserve
pooling and liquidity.
          As has been highlighted in the literature on modern and historical financial stress,
small open economies faced special challenges when capital flows became finicky (Catão,


common instruments that were intended to keep the banking system from becoming precariously
overleveraged or committing outright fraud in an environment of imperfect information. Our research is more
applicable to economies without financial repression.
8 See Catão (2005, pp. 264-265). He notes that for Brazil was exceptional in Latin America prior to 1890 in that

entry in the banking sector was limited, but that government demands for liquidity and entry caused an
unprecedented monetary expansion. 1890-91 witnessed a severe financial crisis despite Brazil having
experienced no previous debt default or major problems in the banking sector for the entire 19th century.
9 Hickson and Turner (2002) report that the government of Victoria (Australia) had been urged to (partially)

guarantee deposits during the crisis of 1893. In the end it refused to do so.
10 Laeven and Valencia (2013) provide a comprehensive data set for the 1970-2012 period showing the size and

nature of various forms of guarantees.


                                                                                                             11
2005). In the 19th century, playing by the rules of the game meant raising interest rates,
cutting the growth of credit, and hoping that capital flows would be stabilizing in the sense
that an anticipated appreciation would incentivize them to return to the country. Most small
open economies lacked the financial depth to engineer anything like such a defensive
position not to mention the political mettle. On the other hand, special relationships with
the leading financial centers of the period worked time and again to the advantage of places
like Australia and Canada. Not only did the colonial banks maintain close contact with the
London financial markets but their debt was issued under the Colonial Stock Acts and the
Trustee Act. These Acts incentivized investment by Savings Trusts in the colonies expanding
the supply of funds available to them.. In the US, large financiers like JP Morgan and others
often rose to the occasion and swayed market sentiment towards optimism by giving a seal
of approval to government and financial institutions’ action plans. Additional proximate
factors that mattered were strong reserve positions, exports responsiveness in times of
financial and economic stress, and credibility of the monetary regime.
        To avoid sovereign defaults, nations have taken many strategies. In the leading
countries, the 19th century was crucial in terms of building fiscal capacity. Leroy-Beaulieu
(1883) long ago highlighted the importance of the consolidation of central government
finances. Dincecco (2009, 2011) has argued that centralization and limited government,
along the lines of controls on the executive contributed to the ability to avoid fiscal financial
catastrophe. Countries in Europe and the settler colonies led the way in this regard.
        While currency mismatch was a central theme of recent studies, it stands to reason
that this potential weakness interacted with other variables. Even in the face of currency
mismatch countries as disparate as Canada, the US and Australia avoided sovereign defaults
from the mid-19th century onwards. Instead sound public finances and an ability to maintain
price stability mattered more. These forces have deeper institutional determinants than might
at first be realized and as we illustrate below. Examples of such deep institutional
determinants include the much-discussed turn towards limitation on the executive in the
Glorious Revolution which was an institutional innovation that diffused to the settler
colonies more readily than to Latin America, independent Asian nations and former colonies
in Latin America or Africa.
        During the 19th century, many emerging markets and less developed countries
offered collateral on their sovereign obligations. They did so by pledging particular revenue


                                                                                              12
streams to repayment of foreign debt. In many cases debt was offered on the understanding
that creditors would have the opportunity to appropriate revenue by taking over revenue
collection for the sovereign. This occurred in the Ottoman Empire after default in 1876, as
well as Egypt (1880s), Greece (1897-1898), Morocco, Santo Domingo, and Tunis (Mitchener
and Weidenmier, 2010). In many smaller Central American nations in the late 19th century,
the US threatened takeover of revenue collection and in some cases actually imposed such
sanctions. In the late 19th century, China attempted to modernize revenue collection and
make repayment of debts more credible by allowing foreigners control over customs revenue
collection ex ante. Around the world, railway debt contracts included explicit guarantees by
host governments or control of the railway to creditors in the case of default.
          Despite these best efforts, default occurred frequently in these places revealing that
risk was an inherent factor in international lending of the time. Mitchener and Weidenmier
(2010) argue that fiscal takeover heralded credibility and capital flows could eventually
resume. As time progressed, nations began to lay blame for default and economic
backwardness on such foreign controls. The principle of sovereignty evolved in international
law such that such super-sanctions were not possible by the 20th century. Market discipline
substituted for direct oversight. Indeed Eichengreen and Portes (1986) suggest that risk
premia compensated investors such that ex post calculations of yields on defaulted bonds
were about the same as in less risky assets. By the late 20th century the IMF began to play a
role not totally dis-similar to earlier fiscal takeovers often lending its credibility to sovereigns
in times of crisis.
          Leading figures almost surely played a role too. Alexander Hamilton in late 18th
century America generated financial stability for the long-run with a number of key reforms.
Here a strong re-orientation of public finances as well as a plan to distribute domestic debt
as widely as possible amongst ordinary citizens in order to align the incentives and ensure
fiscal solvency of the nation seems to have worked. Summerhill (2006) reports similar
success in Brazil prior to the 1890s. The triumph of innovative policies geared towards
better revenue collection and financial system governance in Japan and other leading nations
in Europe like France helped promote these nations from the ranks of serial defaulters that
are identified in the work Reinhart, Rogoff and Savastano (2003) and Reinhart and Rogoff
(2009).




                                                                                                 13
3.6 Institutions and Learning from Financial Crises


        What does it take to learn and graduate from financial crises? North (1997)
emphasizes adaptive efficiency as a key force for long-run economic performance with a
direct relation to financial stability
             “The keys to the story are the way beliefs are altered by feedback from changed
             perceived reality as a consequence of the policies enacted, the adaptive efficiency
             of the institutional matrix--how responsive it is to alteration when outcomes
             deviate from intentions--and the limitations of changes in the formal rules as
             correctives to perceived failures.”


Learning implies that institutions and policies can be changed in the wake of a crisis in an
attempt to eliminate past deficiencies and avoid future trouble. To succeed, collective action
problems need to be overcome. Entrenched incumbents (political, market based or both)
must either be willing to make changes or else their coalitions must be overcome by other
more powerful actors either in a regular and orderly transfer of power or via regime change.
Rajan and Zingales (2003a) suggest that global capital markets fashioned “good behavior” by
allowing entry into the financial sector and disciplining “bad behavior” by leaving nations
without capital.
        In any case, the past casts a long shadow and may not be easily overcome. Property
rights systems have evolved over the long-run. Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2004)
focus on the persistence of property rights in former European colonies. Where Europeans
from countries with strong property rights settled, institutions that protected property rights
developed thus fomenting economic development. Well-defined property rights are a key
factor in deciding what investor protections there are in the event of defaults. They provide
organizing principles for settling contentious claims on collateral and other assets. Property
rights systems and impartial judicial systems also constrain actors within financial markets so
as to eliminate the potential for malfeasance. A strong judiciary also provides redress for
those maligned in fraud as well as supplying aligning incentives ex ante. If property rights
can be protected, then the types of crises and instability nations face may also be altered and
thus changes in the wake of such crises may be less problematic.
        The political system sets the stage for what can and cannot be achieved. A fully
functioning democracy defined by established political parties and regular, peaceful elections


                                                                                                   14
is likely to be more beneficial to learning from crises than an autocracy. The assurance that
leaders will be held accountable for regulatory failing or corrupt business dealing will reduce
the chances that previous inefficiencies remain. 11 The process of political competition allows
political entrepreneurs to emerge and take advantage of popular discontent. Democracies
surely do better at adaptation than autocracies where policy, rules and outcomes express the
arbitrary preferences of an entrenched elite. Moreover, democracies have regularly scheduled
handovers of power, and with party competition, the policies implemented are more likely to
be centrist in orientation. Without such an institutional apparatus, governance by a minority
elite largely provides private goods for its supporters while pouring the social costs of crises
and instability off to other groups. While democracies can surely exhibit such patterns of
behavior, the constraints are surely much tighter, and deficiencies can be expected to be
remedied by popular discontent sooner rather than later.
         The determinants of the political and legal aspects of a nation might act to influence
learning. Engerman and Sokoloff (1997) present a factor endowment hypothesis: factor
endowments give rise at an early stage to different levels of inequality. The level of inequality
was directly related to the formation of institutions that protected a rent seeking and rent-
defending elite. These institutions persisted over time as well. In this regard, the long-run
record on financial crises is very suggestive.


    4. Empirical Evidence on Crises over the Long-Run


         Bordo, Eichengreen, Klingebiel and Martinez-Peria (2001) first provided a
comprehensive chronology of banking, currency and twin crises from 1880 to 1997. Recent
work by Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) extends these series back into the early 19th century and
forward into the 21st century. Although these studies disagree about the exact timing and
dating of several smaller banking and currency crises, by and large, they are consistent in
dating major crises.
         Based off of the historical record, we propose to classify countries into three groups
in order to illustrate the long-run record on financial stability. One could be considered the

11 Kohlscheen (2010) shows that sovereign defaults usually occur in presidential systems rather than in

parliamentary systems where the executive is much more worried about the immediate continuation value
holding office which often depends on the state of the economy. This assumes the economic costs of
sovereign default in terms of lost output and political reputation are high.


                                                                                                          15
“leaders” in terms of institutional outcomes, financial development and stability. This group
includes Belgium, France, Germany, Netherlands, Switzerland and Great Britain/UK. A
second group might be termed “learners”. These were historically settler colonies, but they
worked their way up the economic ladder from the ranks of the emerging markets of the day
to first-class citizens in terms of financial stability and development. This set includes:
Australia (or its component colonies prior to 1901), Canada (its component colonies prior to
1867), Denmark, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden and the USA. Finally a third group a
“non-learners” or “repeat offenders” includes: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Greece, Italy,
Portugal, Spain. These countries form a representative sample of reasonably sized nations
that have been independent over the long-run and which have had significant engagement
with international capital markets or market access.
        In Figures 1-3 we present evidence on financial development as measured by the
population weighted averages of the ratio of broad money to GDP for these three groups of
countries 1880 to circa 1995. 12 In the period 1880 to 1913 the leaders show the highest ratios
and the steadiest growth rates. In the same period the learners make great progress though
they show some evidence of instability particularly centered around the mid-1880s and the
1907 period during moments of great international financial stress. The non-learners show a
boom and bust in the 1890s leading to a secular decline up to World War I. The Interwar
period illustrates greater levels of similarity in these ratios with the non-learners having the
lowest levels in most years. Since the US is included in the “Learners” category, it is not
surprising to see that this group posts the highest values. By the post-World War II period,
the learners have clearly taken the lead in terms of financial development with high and
stable ratios. The countries we classify as leaders are in second place although a comeback is
evident at the tail end driven by the UK and financial deregulation in the 1980s. Finally the
non-learners are behind. The gap between the first two groups increases from the 1980s
beginning with the debt crises of the 1980s. As in the post-1890s period, these ratios show a
secular decline in the wake of major financial crashes.
        In Figure 4 we present the sample probability that a country would experience a
financial crisis of any kind (banking, debt, currency, or twin) in each of four periods (1880-
1913, 1919-1939, 1945-1972, and 1973-2011) This value is calculated as the total number of

12There are missing data on the ratio of money to GDP for France and Germany from 1990 to 1997. For
similar reasons our series for the learners ends in 1994 and that for the non-learners ends in 1995


                                                                                                      16
country years in which countries in each of the country subsets is in the first year of a
financial crisis divided by the total number of country years within that sub-sample. 13 We see
significant heterogeneity between the groups. Two facts emerge from this figure. First, the
non-learners have, with the exception of the interwar period, always had a greater likelihood
of experiencing a crisis. In both periods of globalization, a clear ranking emerges with the
leaders having the lowest probabilities, the learners occupying the middle range and the non-
learners having the highest values. If we pool all years we find the probabilities are 0.068,
0.061 and 0.118. We cannot reject that the means across the first two groups are different
but we can reject that the mean of the non-learners is different from that of the leaders (p-
value = 0.07) and the learners (p-value=0.05).
         Figure 5 pools across all years and breaks the sample by category and type of crisis.
In every category the non-learners have a higher sample likelihood of having a financial
crisis. In some cases, such as banking crises, these means are not too dis-similar. Pooling
across years, we cannot reject equality of means by category for banking, currency and twin
crises. For debt crises we can reject the hypothesis that the frequencies are similar in the
non-learners and in the other two categories.
         Figures 6 to 9 reveal differences across categories by period for each type of crisis.
Figure 6 shows that with the exception of the period 1825-1913 the non-learners were more
likely to have banking crises. This group of countries is the only group to have such crises in
the so-called quiet period 1945-1972. As regards the lower frequency prior to 1913, we
believe that two forces may be at work. First, some of the non-learners’ banking crises in the
period 1825-1880 have yet to be identified by economic historians. This research remains to
be done in a careful way and we hope to do so in future research. It may also be the case that
at low levels of financial development when the formal banking sector is small and capital
markets are not highly integrated, countries may not be as prone to financial crises. To have
a financial crisis, a country must have a financial sector by definition, and these countries
were at very primitive stages in their monetary development prior to the 1870s.
         In Figure 7 we note that the non-learners always have a higher propensity for a
currency crisis with the exception of the 1930s. The rise and decline in the probability of

13Data are taken from several sources. For banking, currency and twin crises between 1880 and 1997 we rely
on Bordo et. al. (2001). For banking and currency crises post-1997 we rely on Laeven and Valencia (2013). For
debt crises and banking crises prior to 1880 we rely on Reinhart (2010). For Greece 1825-2012 we rely on
Lazaretou (2012).


                                                                                                           17
currency crises in the leading and learning countries is attributable to the problems
highlighted by Eichengreen (1992) in the interwar. In the post-War period, imbalances were
a non-trivial problem. The data display some learning in the leading two groups of countries
as these nations have moved to floating exchange rates or more solid pegs such as currency
union in Europe.
         Figure 8 shows that twin crises emerged as a major problem for all countries in the
1930s. While the non-learners have not progress much in post-1972 compared to the levels
seen in the 1930s the other two groups of countries have made some progress since the
1930s albeit unevenly with a trough in the 1945-1972 period and a slight rise post-1972.
Finally, Figure 9 suggests that sovereign debt crises are recurrent in the non-learners. In the
other two groups only a handful of defaults are recorded and those are associated with the
Great Depression (Germany in 1933, Australia in 1932 in a debt conversion and the US in
1933 with the rescinding of the gold clause). 14
         Figures 10 and 11 zoom in and show the record on financial crises for a select set of
countries. Each bar represents a particular kind of crisis and its width records the duration of
the crisis. 15 It is notable that banking crises are historically extremely rare events in Canada
and Australia. The United Kingdom shows a number of banking crises prior to 1866 but a
long-quiet period associated with substantial learning that took place in during the Overend-
Gurney in 1866. From this period onwards the Bank of England acted deftly in accordance
with Bagehot’s rule. Only two more crises are recorded in the subsequent 145 years. Canada
stands alone amongst these seven countries in terms of its ability to avoid banking crises.
The United States, as we detail below undertook some learning but faced significant setbacks
along the way.
         Currency crises are visible in the first set of countries, but the nature and frequency
of these countries is almost surely different from the record in Figure 11 for the non-
learners. The United States has been the weakest performer in some respects, but Canada
has also faced pressure. Notably the UK maintained currency stability for the greater portion
of the 19th century. It is very likely that this contributed to London’s financial pre-eminence

14 One could include the defaults of the allies on the war debts with the US and others. The allies argued that it
was understood that repayment was conditional on German payments of reparations. This is admittedly a grey
area. The same could be said for the US and Australia’s voluntary conversion.
15 Duration for banking, currency and twin crises was defined by Bordo et. al. (1999) as the number of years

from the start of the crisis until GDP began growing at its pre-crisis trend rate. The duration of debt crises is
measured as the number of years until a definitive settlement and restructuring occurs.


                                                                                                               18
but it may also be the case that being a financial center helped ensure currency stability by
providing a deep and liquid financial system.
        In Figure 11 three non-learners (Argentina, Brazil and Chile) show patterns
consistent with our previous figures. Debt crises predominate. In this case we also can see
the length of time until settlement of default is often quite high and much higher compared
to the few debt crises evident in Figure 10. The period between 1970 and 2011 also presents
itself as a highly unstable period for these three countries in the Southern Cone of South
America.
        In Figure 7 we present Kaplan-Meier non-parametric survivor curves for our three

sub-sets of countries over the long run. The survivor curve gives the probability that a

country within the subset (or set of countries) would experience a financial crisis after a given

numbers of years since the last crisis. If there is evidence of successful learning, then the

survivor curves should shift out over time as the time between crises lengthens. Also the

higher the survivor curve within a period the less likely a country is to quickly relapse into

another crisis. Analysis time here runs over four periods: period 1 (1825-1913), period 2

(1919-1939), period 3 (1945-1972), period 4 (1973-2012). For the top two sets of countries,

the ranking for highest survivor curves is period 1, period 4, period 2, and then period 3.

Period 2, the Great Depression years, and the Period 3, the Bretton Woods period, are very

close in crisis frequency. The Bretton Woods period after 1950 was largely tranquil in these

countries, so the closeness to the Depression years is associated with the currency crises and

devaluations of the 1945-1950 period. However, nations in the leaders largely learned to

avoid these crises later in the Bretton Woods period.

        The panel pertaining to the learners shows a two-step forward, one step back

dynamic. The first period has the highest survivor curve. The interwar period represents a

major shift downward. Following that, the Bretton Woods period has a survivor curve akin

to that in the first wave whereupon the recent period sees a shift downwards. While these



                                                                                              19
countries were not crisis free, there is some evidence of a learning dynamic. For the non-

learners, most of the survivor curves lie on top of each other for all periods suggesting there

is not much change. The exception perhaps is the Bretton Woods period where the curve

has shifted out somewhat.

        We can also compare within-period survivor curves across groups of countries. In

nearly all periods the leaders survivor curves are higher than learners which are themselves

higher than the non-learners. One large difference is visible in period 4-- the most recent

period. For the non-learners there is a 75% chance that a country would experience a crisis

prior to 10 years since the last crisis. This probability is significantly lower in the leaders

panel standing at less than 40%. In the learners panel, the figure is 50%. From this we

conclude that while few countries can avoid crises, the upper two panels (the leaders and the

learners) seem to have a lower likelihood of relapsing than the bottom panel of countries

(the repeat offenders).




5.      Case Studies
        In this section we study the cases of four emerging countries in the pre-World War I
era. In some cases we extend the story into the twentieth century. Each country had a
different political and institutional history and each had a different response to the waves of
capital flows and financial crises of the era. As will be seen, some did better than others and
learned from their crisis experience and others did not. The four cases are: the United States,
Canada, Australia, and Argentina . We study the crisis history of these countries and try to
infer the learning process. For each country we focus on their history of banking, currency
and debt crises.


5.1     The United States
5.1.1   The United States: Banking Crises



                                                                                            20
The U.S. Constitution of 1787 gave the Congress the power “to coin money and regulate the
value there of” but it did not explicitly give the federal government the power to begin
chartering commercial banks. That was left to the states. Alexander Hamilton, the first
Secretary of the Treasury, chartered the First Bank of the United States amid protest from
populists and states’ rights advocates. In many ways it was modeled after the Bank of
England. It was established as a bank of issue, as the government’s bank to help it fund its
debt and also to make loans to the private sector to promote commerce. It was allowed to
have branches in every state. It may also have been an early lender of last resort. It was well
capitalized and had considerable financial power. Considerable opposition to the First Bank
by the Jeffersonians led to the revocation of its charter in 1811. A brief chaotic period
followed when the States chartered a large number of banks and contributed to the inflation
of the War of 1812. The Second Bank was chartered in 1816 to stabilize the country’s
finances, to unify the currency and to act as a lender of last resort. In the first four decades
of the Republic, the number of banks chartered by the states grew rapidly and there were
banking panics in 1792 and 1811. Sylla and Wright (2002 ) argue that the crisis of 1792 was
effectively headed off by Bagehot (1873) style lender of last resort actions by Alexander
Hamilton and the First Bank.
       The Second Bank was undermined and transformed into an emasculated state bank
in the 1830s by Andrew Jackson, an ardent populist and opponent to centralized federal
financial power. For the next 80 years there was no federally chartered institution to act as
lender of last resort and to provide other central banking functions had been performed by
the two Banks of the United States and which were common at the time in Europe.
       After the demise of the Second Bank, the states controlled the creation of
commercial banks. Most states adopted Free Banking laws which greatly eased entry to
provide credit to the rapidly growing country (Rockoff 1974). The banking system,
characterized by a plethora of undercapitalized unit banks issuing notes of varying quality, a
prohibition on interstate banking, and weak oversight, was easily subject to local/regional
shocks which led to numerous bank failures, some fraud and a series of banking panics
(1837, 1839 , 1857 and 1861).
        During the Civil War, when the southern states who had most vociferously opposed
a federal presence in banking were absent, Congress created the National banking system to
help finance the war, but also to create a uniform note issue and improve upon the flawed


                                                                                             21
payments mechanism of the pre-Civil War banking system, under which a myriad of state
bank notes circulated at varying rates of discount. It was also supposed to reduce the
incidence of banking panics by requiring national banks to have higher capital and reserve
ratios and to be stringently regulated. In some respects it could be viewed as an example of
institutional learning from the earlier experience of banking crises.
          Under the National Banking System, the Federal Government chartered unit
national banks which issued U.S. government bond backed notes. This created a uniform
currency and a viable payments system. But the National Banking system also had serious
flaws which made it crisis prone. The flaws included the persistence of unit banking
(Calomiris and Haber 2014), the inverted pyramid of credit which linked the stock market to
the banking system and created a source of systemic risk, and a strong seasonal in money
market interest rates which made the system crisis prone (Bordo and Wheelock 2011). The
most serious flaw was the ‘inelasticity of high powered money’ (i.e., there was no lender of
last resort to quickly meet the demand for high powered money in the face of a banking
panic).
          In addition the inability of the unit banking system to provide sufficient credit to
finance the growth of large enterprises led to the development of securities markets and
non-bank financial intermediaries (i.e., non-regulated shadow banks like trust companies)
which in turn became sources of systemic risk (Rockoff 2014). The National Banking
system competed with the state banking systems after the Civil war. The latter made a
comeback as these institutions could lend against real estate. The regulatory environment
varied substantially across states, but at the same time, regional and local financial markets
were tied to the national market via the New York money market, correspondent bank
networks, and reserve pyramiding.
          The national banking era had three serious banking panics (1873, 1893 and 1907) and
four minor crises. Private sector innovations helped allay the minor panics—Clearing house
loan certificates pooled the resources of the member banks and provided emergency
currency (Gorton, 1985). The U.S. Treasury also did some limited LLR actions as did JP
Morgan in 1893 and 1907, but their interventions were insufficient to allay the panics, which
only ended after suspension of convertibility of deposits into currency.
          The Crisis of 1907 was ‘the straw that broke the camel’s back’ and led to a successful
movement towards reform of the U.S. financial system. The Aldrich Vreeland Act of 1908


                                                                                             22
institutionalized the clearing house loan certificates into National Currency Associations. It
also created the National Monetary Commission to recommend on the creation of a U.S.
style central bank. A secret meeting at Jekyll Island, Georgia in 1910 led to a blue print for a
new central bank in the Warburg Plan which became the Aldrich bill in 1912, which after
some modifications became the Federal Reserve Act in 1913 (Bordo and Wheelock 2011).
        The Federal Reserve System was made up of 12 regional Federal Reserve Banks,
coordinated by the Federal Reserve Board in Washington DC. The Fed was designed to
serve as a lender of last resort, smooth the seasonal in short-term interest rates, manage the
gold standard and conduct countercyclical monetary policy. The Fed was able to smooth the
interest rate seasonal and moderate the business cycle (Miron 1988) in its initial two decades
of operation. It also may have prevented banking panics by its discount rate policy (Gorton
and Metrick 2013). In that sense, considerable institutional learning was accomplished.
        However, going beyond the Golden Age, major flaws in the design of the Federal
Reserve Act which did not appear in the relatively benign conditions of the 1920s led to the
Great Contraction in 1929-33. These include the real bills doctrine (Meltzer 2003); structural
flaws (Friedman and Schwartz 1963); adherence to the gold standard (Eichengreen 1992)
and an inadequate discount window (Bordo and Wheelock 2011). The Fed failed to prevent
a series of banking panics in 1930-33 which turned a serious recession into the Great
Depression.
        The debacle of the Great Contraction led to major institutional adaptation and
learning. The newly elected Franklin Delano Roosevelt blamed the Fed and the banks for
the Depression. Major legislation in 1933 and 1935 increased the power of the Federal
Reserve Board relative to the regional Reserve banks; created federal deposit insurance and
many regulations on the banking system. These reforms ushered in four decades of financial
stability and financial repression. The Great Inflation of the 1960s and 1970s, (largely a
consequence of Fed policies Bordo and Orphanides 2013) undermined the New Deal
regulations and led to a return to banking instability. By the 1980s, deregulation and lax
oversight in some instances led to significant losses in the Savings and Loan industry and
several other hiccups such as the run on Continental Illinois in 1984. Too big to fail, further
de-regulation, a number of new financial innovations, and a rogue shadow banking sector led
to the crisis of 2007-2008. The latest crisis was centered in the shadow banking system




                                                                                             23
where maturity mismatch in the repo markets led to an “invisible” banking panic that
eventually spilled over into the commercial banking sector to a degree.


5.1.2    United States: Currency Crises
         The U.S. was on the specie standard (gold and silver bimetallism) since 1791. There
were no currency crises until the Civil War in 1861 when it became apparent that the
Treasury would issue fiat money to finance the war and that it would threaten specie
convertibility. A run on the specie reserves of the New York commercial banks and then on
the Treasury led to a suspension of convertibility in December and the U.S. went on the
Greenback standard and a floating exchange rate. Resumption to the specie standard (de
facto gold) at the pre-war parity occurred on January 1 1879 following a vociferous political
debate between the advocates of hard money (a return to specie at the original parity) and
the advocates of soft money (either staying on the fiat money regime, resumption at a
devalued parity, or bimetallism at a mint ratio below the rapidly rising world silver price of
gold).
         The specie standard that was restored was de facto a gold standard because silver had
been under valued at the mint since the gold discoveries of the 1840s and moreover
convertibility of the standard silver coin had been removed by the Currency Act of 1873 (the
Crime of 1873). By 1879 following massive silver discoveries in Colorado and Nevada,
which reduced the market value of silver to the point where under bimetallism silver would
have begun to enter the currency supply, led to a new debate between those who advocated
Free Silver and those who advocated that the US be on the gold standard. The passage of
the Bland Allison Act in 1878 and the Sherman Silver Purchase act in 1890 greatly increased
the share of silver in the US monetary base. This led to a run on the Treasury’s gold reserves
in January 1895 when speculators became concerned that the US would be forced to
abandon the gold standard. The Treasury was rescued by a syndicate organized in February
1895 by JP Morgan and August Belmont (two prominent investment bankers) to market US
Treasury bonds in Europe in exchange for gold to be transferred to the Treasury (Garber
and Grilli 1986).
         The Gold Standard Act of 1900 put the US on the gold standard de jure at $20.67
per ounce and ended bimetallism. The outbreak of World War I in the summer of 1914 led
to a massive global scramble for liquidity and gold. A major banking panic and currency


                                                                                           24
crisis was headed off by Treasury Secretary McAdoo and the newly formed Federal Reserve
(Silber 2007) and the US did not suspend gold convertibility as did virtually every country in
the world. However in September 1917, after the US entered the war, an embargo was
placed on gold exports, to preserve gold reserves. It was removed two years later.
       The Fed followed a very expansionary monetary policy during World War I which
led to high inflation. After hostilities ceased in November 1918, the inflation continued.
After the gold embargo was removed in June 1919, continued inflation led to a growing
balance of payments deficit and a significant decline in the Fed’s gold reserve ratio towards
the legal limit. In fear of a possible attack on its reserves, the Fed shifted to a very tight
monetary policy stance in early 1920 which both restored the gold reserves and led to the
serious but short-lived recession of 1920-21.
       The next threat to the dollar was during the Great Contraction in September 1931
when the UK left the gold standard. This led to an attack on the dollar and a massive gold
drain. The Fed reacted by raising its discount rate by 200 basis points in the midst of a
banking panic. The gold reserves were protected but the Depression deepened. A second
attack on the dollar occurred in the winter of 1932-33 in the midst of a massive banking
panic which both involved attempts by the public to convert deposits into currency and
attempts by both domestic residents and foreigners to convert dollars into gold. The run
threatened the reserves of the New York Fed. After Roosevelt’s inauguration one of his first
actions was to suspend the gold standard in April 1933 . The dollar was then devalued by
60% in January 1934 and the gold standard was officially restored at $35 per ounce, but until
World War II it became a managed gold standard (Friedman and Schwartz, 1963).
       After World War II, the US became part of the Bretton Woods adjustable peg
exchange rate system. Under the Bretton Woods Articles of Agreement, the U.S. would peg
the dollar to gold at $35 per ounce and the rest of the world would peg their currencies to
the dollar. Once the Western European countries adopted current account convertibility in
December 1958, the Bretton Woods system evolved into a gold dollar standard under which
the rest of the world increasingly used dollars as international reserves. This created the
Triffin Dilemma which stated that as the outstanding amount of dollars held by the rest of
the world increased relative to US gold reserves, the likelihood of a run on the dollar would
increase (Triffin 1960). In an attempt to prevent this from happening, the US Treasury
imposed capital controls and made other arrangements including the Gold Pool. The Federal


                                                                                           25
Reserve created an extensive swap network with the central banks of other advanced
countries (Bordo, Humpage and Schwartz 2015). These policies were effective in protecting
the gold reserves until the mid-1960s when the Fed shifted to an inflationary policy to both
reduce unemployment and finance growing fiscal deficits. A run on the dollar in 1968 led to
the creation of a two tiered gold market to insulate official gold reserves from private
speculation. These arrangements quickly broke down and when the UK and France began
converting their outstanding dollars into gold in 1971 President Nixon closed the gold
window on August 15. The Bretton Woods par value system ended in 1973 and most
countries, including the US, let their exchange rates float which inaugurated the present
system of managed floating.


5.1.3   United States: Debt Crises
        The United States began with a debt crisis. The Revolutionary war was financed by
paper money (the continental) and some Dutch and French debt to the States and the
Congress. This debt was defaulted on. The Confederacy (1782 to 1787) did not resolve the
debt problem. It was resolved after the Constitution was adopted by Alexander Hamilton in
his Stabilization Plan of 1790. In this plan the Federal government assumed the States’ debts
at par and consolidated them into specie denominated consols. The European creditors were
paid in full in specie. The US debt was to be serviced by import tariffs and excise taxes. A
concerted effort to reduce debt and to rely as much as possible on domestic debt markets so
that democratic politics would lead to an electorate vested in financial stability helped
eliminate federal debt crises. The new US debt issue proved to be so successful that within a
few years US bonds sold in Europe at prices comparable to that of many European
countries (Perkins 1994)
        The next US debt crisis involved many of the States in 1841. In the first half of the
nineteenth century the federal government played only a minimal role. Its budget was no
more than one per cent of GDP. By contrast, the States were actively involved in developing
infrastructure improvements (canals and later railroads) and much of this was financed by
British capital inflows. The loans were made on the assumption that economic growth would
generate the needed tax revenue to service the debt. The financial crises of 1837 and 1839
led to a serious recession which prevented 10 States from being able to service their debt
(Wallis 2004). The Federal government refused to bail them out leading them to default on


                                                                                          26
their loans to the British. As a consequence, the US was cut off from British capital (a
sudden stop). This worsened the recession. Since then most states adopted, by popular
approval, balanced budget rules and other mechanisms to limit similar self-dealing and
corruption. This represented major institutional learning.
        After the Civil War, a number of confederate states defaulted on their debt. There
was no federal bailout. In the twentieth century, Arkansas defaulted on some of its debt in
1936. Again there was no federal bailout. Today states continue to borrow but at relatively
low levels. Most states have balanced budget rules and they ask their voters to approve any
significant borrowing which is typically backed by dedicated revenue streams. There is no
direct federal bailout although the fiscal federal arrangement worked out in the 1930s and
has taken pressure off states in hard times.


5.2     Canada
5.2.1 Canada: Banking Crises
        Canada adopted the Scottish banking system of note issuing branch banks with
double liability and the real bills doctrine of short–term lending. The Bank of Montreal, first
chartered in 1817, may have been modeled after the First Bank of the United States
(Calomiris and Haber 2014). Other banks were chartered in later years. The Canadian
banking system never experienced a banking panic although there were a number of large
bank failures such as the Bank of Upper Canada which failed in 1866 (Bordo, Redish and
Rockoff, 1994). It had engaged in real estate lending in a land boom and failed in the bust. In
reaction, the Bank Act of 1871 made mortgage lending illegal.
        The British North America Act of 1867 leading to Confederation gave the Federal
government the power to charter banks. This is very different from the U.S. where the States
chartered commercial banks. According to Calomiris and Haber (2014) the difference
between the two countries reflected the different political bargain struck between the
principal players in the “game of banks” (i.e., the government, the bankers and the public).
In the U.S. where the Constitution gave the states the power to charter banks, the states’
rights and populist forces controlled the political economy of banking from 1832 until the
1980s. This led to the predominance of unit banks and the prohibition of interstate
branching. This created a weak undercapitalized and crisis prone system. In contrast the
English and Scottish merchants dominated the banking industry and preferred central


                                                                                            27
government control of banking. According to Calomiris and Haber, central government
control of banking was done to prevent conservative French Canadian interests from
blocking economic development.
       In Canada, bank charters were renewed and reviewed every decade in successive
Bank Acts which became avenues to incorporate intervention. They enforced the Grand
Bargain whereby the banks would deliver stability in exchange for government enforced
barriers to entry (Bordo, Redish and Rockoff 2015).
       Large losses to note holders and deposit holders in the 1870s and 1880s also led to
institutional learning. The Bank Act of 1890 authorized the creation of the Bank Circulation
Redemption Fund in which each bank was required to contribute 5% of its average note
circulation. This Fund would protect note holders from losses.
       Subsequent Bank Acts beginning in 1900 allowed and encouraged mergers within
and between provinces. The merger movement in the next two decades, as had occurred in
the UK a decade before, led to the creation of a small number banks (10) with branches
nationwide by the eve of World War I. These banks developed a number of safeguards
against failures, most notably a consortium of banks would agree to take over the assets of a
failing bank to protect its depositors and note holders.
       The Canadian nationwide branch banking system provided a strong bulwark against
both bank local and regional shocks, but it did not create a complete safeguard against
nationwide liquidity shocks. Canada did not create a central bank until 1935, but a number of
safeguards against global financial crises were developed beforehand. These included:
holding reserves in the New York money market; asset backed notes; and the Bank of
Montreal on occasion acted as a quasi-lender of last resort by arranging lifeboat operations
as had been done by the Bank of England in the Baring Crisis of 1890. The Canadian
government first acted as a lender of last resort in the Crisis of 1907 by issuing Dominion
notes as an emergency currency. The Finance Act in 1914 created a discount window facility.
When the Home Bank, a large Winnipeg bank, failed in 1923 its assets were assumed by the
other banks without creating a panic. In the Great Depression there were no bank failures or
panics in Canada. Canada finally established a central bank, the Bank of Canada in 1935--not
to provide financial stability or to fight the depression--but because other Commonwealth
countries had adopted them (Bordo and Redish, 1987).




                                                                                          28
5.2.2 Canada: Currency Crises


        Canada was on the gold standard before 1914 and there were no actual currency
crises, but there were several periods of stress (Bordo, et. al., 2001). Canada left gold with the
UK at the outbreak of World War I and returned in 1926 at the original parity. Canada left
the gold standard in September 1931 after the UK, and the Canadian dollar floated until
World War II when it was pegged to the US dollar. Canada joined the Bretton Woods
System in 1945 at a parity of 90.9 cents US. The Canadian dollar was revalued to parity with
the US dollar in 1946. Then in 1949 it was devalued back to 90.9 cents after the UK
devalued sterling. In the face of massive capital inflows from the US at the start of the
Korean War, Canada allowed the Canadian dollar to float in September 1950 in violation of
the Bretton Woods articles. It returned to the par value system at a devalued peg of 92.5
cents in May 1962 after a speculative attack on the Canadian dollar in April which ended
with a rescue by the IMF and the U.S. (Bordo, Dib and Schembri, 2010). It then left the
Bretton Woods system in 1970 as the system was unraveling and has floated ever since.


5.2.3 Canada: Debt Crises
        Canada did not have any debt crises in the pre-1914 era. In 1929 in the face of the
collapse in world trade, Canada did not follow other commodity producing countries and
default on its debt. It maintained the servicing of its outstanding foreign debt in gold, but it
stopped paying domestic debt holders in gold (Bordo and Redish, 1990). Reinhart and
Rogoff (2009) would categorize this as a domestic default.
        The Canadian fiscal federal system, unlike that in the US, did not have a “no bailout
clause”. The provinces have always borrowed extensively on global markets and have relied
on market discipline. In 1936 Alberta defaulted on its debt after rejecting the conditions of a
federal bailout. In the 1980s and 1990s, a number of provinces ran large deficits and built up
high debt to GDP ratios. This led to high risk premia and downgrades by the credit rating
agencies. In the 1990s both the Federal government and the provinces undertook a major
fiscal retrenchment in the face of external pressure. Canada has had the strongest fiscal
position of the G-10 ever since. These actions suggest significant policy and institutional
learning and a persistent ability to avoid going over the brink with outright default.




                                                                                               29
5.3     Australia
5.3.1   Australia: Banking Crises
        Like Canada, Australia adopted British/Scottish banking institutions including
branch banking and the real bills doctrine (Davis and Gallman, 1999). The Australian trading
banks relied heavily on British deposits in the 19th century. There were two types of banks:
Imperial banks were headquartered in London; Colonial banks were headquartered in
Australia with offices in London. Australia also had other types of non-bank financial
intermediaries including building societies, mortgage banks, land banks, savings banks, and
pastoral companies. Banking regulation came under the purview of the colonies by the
1860s. Typical restrictions included limited or double liability on capital, unlimited liability on
note issue and a limit on lending for real estate (Hickson and Turner, 2002).
        Australia experienced a massive land boom in the 1870s and 1880s in the face of
rapid immigration and British demand for wool. Capital flows from London funneled
through the trading banks financed the building of cities and the extension of pastoral land.
The trading banks funded the non-bank financial intermediaries that financed mortgages, so
that de facto they violated the real bills doctrine and they were exposed to a maturity
mismatch. Hickson and Turner (2002) report that while real estate lending had long been
banned or discouraged the colony of Victoria removed this restriction in 1888.
        The trading banks actively solicited deposits in England and Scotland, offering a
higher rate of interest on savings accounts than the domestic British banks. In a sense they
fooled the British (mainly Scottish ) savers into believing that the Australian banks were
similar to the Scottish banks. The “Law of Gravity” kicked in in the late 1880s when the
terms of trade turned against Australian wool. The commodity boom of the 1880s (which
was worldwide) led to the failures of many pastoral companies and mortgage companies in
1891-92.
        The crisis spread to the trading banks in 1892-93 (the Mercantile Bank of Australia,
the Federal Bank of Australia and the Commercial Bank of Australia) leading to a full-
fledged banking panic. Although the Associated Banks were supposed to pool the assets of
the Melbourne banks to save banks from liquidity problems, they failed to do so for the
Federal Bank. The government of Victoria tried to collaborate with the Associated Banks in
Melbourne to save the Commercial Bank. While the forum re-iterated its intentions, the
Commercial Bank was soon also allowed to fail. In New South Wales, bank notes were given


                                                                                                30
legal tender status to ease access to means of payment, and the government declared a 5 day
banking holiday (Bordo and Eichengreen, 1999). Depositors were forced to exchange their
demand and savings deposits for long-term deposits and debentures and hence lost liquidity.
        British depositors also were caught by the crisis and pulled their funds from the
Australian banks. In consequence, Australia was hit by a classic sudden stop of international
capital and Australia suffered a serious depression for much of the 1890s. This was
aggravated by a severe drought.
        In reaction to the crisis, unlike what occurred in the US and Canada, the banks were
not regulated by the government. The surviving banks retrenched heavily; raised their capital
and liquidity ratios and gave up mortgage lending. The colonial governments set up their
own mortgage banks and thereby funded agricultural expansion and urban building.
        Australia federated in 1901. The Federation set up the Commonwealth bank to help
fund the government. It also competed with the trading banks for private business and had
an advantage since its notes were not taxed. It became more like a central bank over time
and was eventually superseded by the Reserve Bank of Australia founded in 1959. During
the 1930s Australia suffered greatly from the Great Depression although there were no bank
failures or panics. The banks and the rest of the financial system were heavily regulated (as in
the U.S.) and financial repression prevailed until the 1980s.


5.3.2   Australia : Currency Crises
        Australia, like Canada was on the gold standard, and effectively in a monetary union
with Great Britain prior to the establishment of the Commonwealth Bank, throughout the
nineteenth century. There were no currency crises before 1914. Like the UK, Australia left
the gold standard at the outbreak of World War I and returned to gold at the original parity
in 1925. Australia was hard hit by the global collapse of commodity prices in the late 1920s
and left the gold standard in 1929.
        After World War II, Australia joined the Bretton Woods system and maintained pegs
until 1983. It devalued its currency in 1949 along with Great Britain and experienced a
currency crises in 1971, when the Bretton Woods system was in collapse, and then in 1976,
1983 and 1985.


5.3.3   Australia: Debt Crises


                                                                                             31
        Australia did not have any sovereign debt crises before 1914, but one of the states,
New South Wales defaulted in 1931. However, the federal government maintained debt
service the next day (Reinhart and Rogoff, 2010). The Australian Loan Council had been
established in December 1927 which formalized state cooperation that had existed since
World War I. It set limits on state borrowing at the national level. Cooperation via a
Gentlemen’s Agreement ‘between national and sub–national governments also kept the
borrowing of the cities and municipalities in line (Grewal, 2000). In addition the Australian
government forced conversion of its internal/domestic debt and implemented a voluntary
loan conversion on its external debt in the 1930s.


5.4 Argentina
5.4.1 Argentina: Banking Crises
        Argentina has had a long history of banking instability: 10 banking crises between
1880 and the present according to Reinhart and Rogoff (2009). The largest historic crisis was
the Baring crisis in 1890. It precipitated a global financial crisis. Argentina in the 1880s was
the largest borrower in terms of the share of GDP and it accounted for almost half of
British foreign lending. The crisis followed a foreign capital induced land boom to develop
the pampas. It was funded by a massive expansion of bank credit .
        The explosion in bank credit was facilitated by the creation of the National
Guaranteed Banking System in 1887. Under the law, banks were required to buy National
Gold Bonds directly from the Treasury as a requirement for note issue. 16 The banks raced to
borrow as much as they could on foreign markets, mostly in London, and deposited the gold
with the Treasury. They could then use the banknotes as a basis for domestic bank credit
expansion. After 1887 money creation surged (Cortes Conde, 1989). The land price bust in
1889 led to a 50% decline in land prices. The Banco de la Nacion, a quasi-central bank,
found itself unable to pay its dividend triggering a run. All banks suspended convertibility in
the wake of this event. The peso fell by 36 per cent against sterling in 1890 and by 37 per
cent in 1891.
        To cope with the crisis, the government created the Bank of the Argentine Nation
from the ruins of the old Bank of the Nation and other provincial banks. It took bad loans

16Della Paolera (1994) notes that in the US National Banking System banks were to purchase government
bonds on a secondary market.


                                                                                                        32
off their books while requiring the old banks to surrender their specie and bonds and declare
a three year moratorium on interest payments. The twin crisis led to a serious depression
with real GDP falling by 15 percent. Underpinning this crisis and most of the others in the
nineteenth and twentieth century was a faulty system of banking regulation.


5.4.2 Argentina: Currency Crises
           Argentina had 19 currency crises between 1880 and the present. Before 1914 it,
along with other Latin American countries, had considerable difficulty in adhering to the
fixed parity of the gold standard. Between 1865 and 1914, Argentina was off gold in three
episodes of suspension totaling twenty four years (Bordo and Schwartz, 1994). In each case
expansionary monetary and fiscal policy inconsistent with adherence to the peg was the
culprit.
           Gold convertibility in Argentina began after a failed attempt in 1863. Convertibility
was suspended in May 1876 after several years of political unrest and rising government
deficits. Convertibility was restored in 1883 but lasted only until January 1885 following a
period of expansionary fiscal policy. Inconvertibility was associated with lax fiscal policy
leading to debt default in 1890. In 1899 convertibility was restored with the return to fiscal
orthodoxy in 1896 and the establishment of a form of currency board. Argentina suspended
convertibility in 1914 at the outbreak of World War I. It resumed convertibility at a changed
parity in August 1927, and suspended again in 1929. Inconvertibility prevailed during the
balance of the interwar period (Bordo and Schwartz, 1994 page 16). In the post-World War
II period, Argentina like the other Latin American countries had high inflation, frequent
currency crises and devaluations.


5.4.3 Argentina: Debt Crises
           Argentina had two major debt crises before 1914. In 1825 Argentina, along with
other Latin American countries, defaulted on British debt. Much of the capital flows were
used to fund government expenditures on infrastructure. As in the case of the American
states in 1841, when the economy didn’t perform well enough to service the debt, defaults
ensued. It took four decades before debt servicing began during which time there were no
capital inflows.




                                                                                             33
       The second major default occurred in 1890 along with the banking and currency
crises described above. Much of the foreign capital flowed into fiscal expansion and growing
fiscal deficits. The recession associated with the financial crisis led to a collapse in tax
revenues. This was aggravated by the money induced run up in inflation which made
Argentina uncompetitive , reducing tax revenues.
       The Province of Buenos Aires and the national government defaulted on their debt
in 1890 as did the other provinces. This led to a sudden stop that lasted through the 1890s.
In January 1891, Argentina secured a 15 million pound sterling funding loan in London at 6
per cent. As conditions, investors demanded that the government not incur additional
liabilities for three years and that it retire 15 million pesos worth of notes in any year in
which the gold premium exceeded 50 per cent. Although this loan provided breathing space,
by 1892 it was clear that the plan would not sustain the public finances. The Rothschild
orchestrated ‘Romero fix’      (arreglo Romero) of 1893 rescheduled Argentina’s debt
repayment plan. Under this agreement, Argentina was obligated to pay only half of its
contractual obligations until 1901, when the amortization of principal resumed (Bordo and
Eichengreen, 1999 page 51).
       It is interesting to note that Argentina, nearly unique among Latin American
countries, did not default during the Great Depression although it did suspend the gold
standard, and it had heavy provincial borrowing. It may have been aided by heavy exchange
controls. In the post-World War II period, Argentina defaulted five times, the latest episode
began in 2001 and still has not been fully resolved (Reinhart and Rogoff, 2010).


6. Conclusion
       Our paper seeks to provide an answer to the question “Why did some countries
learn to grow up to financial stability and others did not? Our survey of the theory of
financial crises in the context of history and our tabulations for the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries, combined with the narratives of four countries suggests that the answer is not so
simple. The empirical evidence shows clear differences between “leaders”, “learners” and
“repeat offenders”. The narratives based on four emerging countries back up the
nomenclature of the last two categories.
       The U.S. experience in banking is one of institutional and policy learning from
financial crises. The process was not linear. It involved both progress and regression. The


                                                                                            34
instability of the pre-Civil War period led to the institution of the National Banking System
which was an improvement in the sense that it created a uniform national currency and a
safe payments system. However, there was retrogression namely in the inability to deal with
the bank panic problem. The creation of the Federal Reserve was a major institutional step
forward to dealing with the banking panic problem. But the Fed failed during the 1930s.
Progress in the bank stability front occurred with the New Deal reforms but they in turn led
to serious problems in the Great Inflation period which ultimately created Too Big to Fail
and seeds of the recent crisis.
        Like the case of banking crises, there was nonlinear institutional/policy learning with
respect to currency crises in the U.S. The specie standard instituted in 1791 brought long run
price stability and sanctity of long term contracts, but it had to be temporarily abandoned to
efficiently finance the Civil War (Bordo and Kydland, 1995). The U.S. returned to the specie
standard (gold) after Resumption in 1879, but uncertainty over the possible adoption of a
silver standard led to a speculative attack on the dollar in 1895 which was offset by a private
intervention. The Federal Reserve became the protector of the currency in 1914, successfully
(with the Treasury) holding off a speculative attack in July 1914. It also did so in September
1931 at the expense of a banking panic. During Bretton Woods, the Fed and the US
Treasury preserved the dollar peg to gold for a decade but failed when the Fed changed its
priorities from price stability to full employment and began monetizing the fiscal deficit.
This led to a shift to floating exchange rates in the 1970s, and with some trial and error in
the use of exchange market intervention, the Fed achieved price and exchange rate stability
by the 1980s. With this innovation, currency crises were by definition assigned to the dustbin
of history.
        The U.S. was very successful in dealing with sovereign debt crises. Alexander
Hamilton’s Stabilization Plan in 1790 resolved the Revolutionary War debt default and put
the country on a sound fiscal footing. However the states ran into fiscal difficulties in the
early 1840s and were not bailed out by the Federal government, leading them to default.
From that experience, the states learned over the subsequent century to adopt balanced
budgets making them also models of fiscal probity.
        Canada was the most successful in institutional learning with respect to banking
crises of all of our countries. From the very beginning, it adopted the Scottish model of
nationwide branch banking which provided insurance against regional and local shocks


                                                                                            35
which can produce banking panics. Via successive Bank Acts, innovations, often responding
to near miss-systemic events, improved the soundness of the Canadian chartered banks
which have avoided systemic banking instability to the present day.
          Canada also had a successful experience with respect to currency crises. It had none
under the gold standard and only one during the Bretton Woods period. It was brought on
in 1962 by the Finance Minister who wanted to end Canada’s float and return it to its
Bretton Woods peg. He announced that he would like to see the value of the Canadian
dollar reduced, leading speculators to dump Canadian dollars. Since then, the government
and the Bank of Canada have learned to let the exchange rate be determined by
fundamentals.
          Canada also had an excellent record with respect to avoiding debt crises. Moreover it
avoided a sovereign default in 1929 when most countries in their league could not. Fiscal
difficulties by several provinces in the 1980s led to a Federal Provincial compact in the 1990s
that has made Canada one of the most fiscally prudent countries in the world.
          The Australian experience with banking crises in the golden age was quite different
from its sister Dominion, Canada. Like Canada its banking system was modeled on the
Scottish system of nationwide branch banking but it violated the prohibition on real estate
lending, leading to the crisis of 1893. Institutional learning occurred via private sector
retrenchment but also in the creation of new government financial institutions. Later during
the Great Depression, Australia followed the model of other countries of adopting extensive
regulation and financial repression which was only removed later than many other advanced
countries. The Australian banking system, like that of Canada, avoided the recent financial
crisis.
          The Australian experience with currency crises was different from Canada’s. There
were no crises in the golden age. But Australia ran into trouble during the Great Depression
and Bretton Woods by following the UK’s example. Since the 1980s, Australia has deepened
its financial markets and followed monetary rules towards price stability. Australia is no
longer vulnerable to speculative attacks per se but its currency does follow the vagaries of
commodity markets.
          Like Canada, Australia had an excellent record with respect to fiscal probity during
the golden age but there were some relatively small problems with the states during the
Depression. Because the British pound sterling was devalued, Australia avoided some of the


                                                                                            36
perils of currency mismatch. In addition it was able to increasingly shift towards domestic
debt and thereby strike better bargains with bondholders.
         Argentina’s experience with banking crises was very different from the other
countries. It had many more crises than the others. Its record of learning from crises was
dismal. It did adopt institutions from other countries like Free banking and it attempted to
imitate the National Banking System of the United States. But these institutions did not
transfer well into the southern hemisphere where substantive changes to the prototype
policies were introduced leading ultimately to greater potential for instability (Della Paolera,
1994).
         Argentina’s record with currency crises was also different and much more turbulent
from the learners. It had a bad experience under the gold standard because it could not
follow the monetary and fiscal orthodoxy consistent with a hard currency regime. Some
learning did occur after the crisis of 1890, but by the 1930s Argentina had once again lost its
ability to ensure stability when engaged with the global economy. It had much worse
problems in the late twentieth century regime of fiat money and high inflation. Finally, the
Argentine experience with debt crises was also disastrous. There appears to be very little
evidence of institutional learning. Many of the crises being repeats of the older ones
combining hard pegs, currency and maturity mismatch, sudden stops and lax regulatory
environments.
         In conclusion we ask “how much did the four countries learn from their crises?” The
US did learn from its experience with crises but not enough to prevent their reoccurrence.
One can characterize its experience as two steps forward and one step back. Canada had an
exemplary record. It had adopted sound institutions from the beginning and it always
learned from its crisis/near crisis experience. Its learning can be characterized as two steps
forward, no steps back.
         Australia was more like the U.S. It can be characterized as two steps forward, one
step back. Argentina was very different from the other three. It rarely learned from its crisis
experience. Its experience can be characterized as no steps forward or even worse, as one
step forward, two steps back.
         What explains the experiences of the different countries? The extensive literature on
institutions and economic performance suggests that precisely the countries that successfully
financially developed had greater political stability, adherence to the rule of law, well defined


                                                                                              37
property rights, and better democracy. The three successful countries that we describe
certainly have these attributes. By contrast, Argentina has been deficient in all respects.
        It would appear that the lesson from history is that financial stability is in part also
determined by these forces. This is natural since sound financial and monetary policies can
minimize the problems inherent in a world of incomplete markets, and maturity mismatch.
These institutional determinants help in many ways. Political stability and rule of law can
help avoid excessive rent seeking and limit corruption. Rule of law gives rise to better
regulatory frameworks regardless of “legal origins” (Musacchio, 2008). Democracy gives
those aggrieved by the market externalities of financial instability a chance for redress via
civil interaction and consensus. Political stability leads to longer time horizons in financial
and political “markets” and it may also enhance the credibility of monetary authorities.
        Financial crises can never be fully eliminated and in the same way complex machines
and complex systems cannot avoid occasional failure. In addition, the environment is never
constant in an evolutionary sense. Financial market participants, as well as regulators, may
act rationally, but market failures and unforeseen complexities make for new challenges
analogous to the battle against constantly evolving pathogens that each living species faces.
What we assert is that certain constellations of political, institutional and economic variables
increase the possibility that countries redress earlier failures and attempt to look ahead to
avoid future crises.
     We end with two final thoughts. Barry Eichengreen (2014) recently argued that:
                 “The experience of the 1930s suggests that radical reform is possible only in
                 the wake of an exceptional crisis. Absent that crisis, business as usual
                 remains the order of the day …. The problem starting in 2009, if it can be
                 called a problem, was that policy makers managed, just barely, to prevent a
                 1930s-style crisis”. (p. 324)


While there is much to agree with here, we do not think that the long-run record from the
non-learners is totally consistent with this argument. Major crises rocked the non-learners
over the last two centuries and yet reform was largely feeble. We suggest that, while a large
crisis is a necessary condition for significant reform and learning, institutions are also a key
variable. In the absence of the factors we discuss above, large crises cannot alone spark
major changes.
        Second, following the insightful work of Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) the ironic
mantra “This time is different” has become common place. We think the long-run record


                                                                                                 38
shows that less irony may be required. The crisis of 2007-2008 in the US and other leading
countries had its roots, as all crises do, in an environment of imperfect information and
maturity mismatch (e.g., in the repo market). A number of contributing factors like
deregulation, mis-guided regulation, opportunism, overly loose monetary policy, global
imbalances, and moral hazard probably enhanced the likelihood of a crisis. But given the
supreme complexity and disagreement about the leading causes of the crisis in the literature
to date, the fact that the repo market was largely un-documented by regulators, historically
un-paralleled levels of securitization and financial innovation such as CDS and associated
options were all present suggest that it would have been hard to foresee exactly how the
crisis would unfold. Few observers believed it would be systemic in nature. Also, what can
explain the fact that Australia, Canada and New Zealand sat this crisis out despite their
ostensible similarities to the US and the UK? So much cannot be said for the real estate
booms in Spain and Ireland or the excessive borrowing based on falsified national accounts
that occurred in Greece. These crises bear much more similarity to previous crises as our
selective analysis of the long-run illustrates. The crisis in 2001 in Argentina, that of Brazil in
2002 and those of the 1980s and the 1990s in Latin America and Asia bear significant
resemblance to previous crises despite “real time” optimism. What we conclude is that next
time may very well be different in the leading countries, but in others it may not be so
different.




                                                                                               39
References


Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S. and Robinson, J.A. 2001. “The Colonial Origins Of Comparative
Development: An Empirical Investigation," American Economic Review, v91 (5,Dec), 1369-
1401.

Acemoglu, D.Johnson. S. and Robinson, J. 2004. “Institutions as the Fundamental Cause of
Long-run Economic Growth” NBER Working paper 10481 May

Bagehot, W. (1873 ) Lombard Street. London.

Bignon, V., Flandreau, M, and Ugolini, S. 2012. “Bagehot for beginners: the making of
lender‐of‐last‐resort operations in the mid‐nineteenth century1.” The Economic
History Review 65.2: 580-608.

Bordo, M.D. 2006 “Sudden stops, financial crises, and original sin in emerging countries:
Deja vu?”. No. w12393. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bordo, M.D., Cavallo, A.F. and Meissner, C.M. 2010. “Sudden stops: Determinants and
output effects in the first era of globalization, 1880–1913." Journal of Development
Economics 91.2: 227-241.

Bordo, M.D. Dib, A. and Schembri, L. 2010. “Canada’s Pioneering Experience With a
Floating Exchange Rate in the 1950s; (Hard) Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Small Open
Economy” International Journal of Central Banking 6(3) pp 51-99.

Bordo, M.D. Eichengreen, B. 1999. “Is Our Current Economic Environment Unusually
Crisis Prone? David Gruen and Luke Gower , Capital Flows and the International Financial
System. Reserve Bank of Australia

Bordo, M.D., Eichengreen, B. Klingebiel, D. Martinez-Peria, S. 2001. “Is the crisis problem
growing more severe?.” Economic policy 16.32: 52-82.

Bordo, M.D. Humpage, O, and Schwartz, A.J. 2015. Strained Relations : U.S. Foreign Exchange
Operations and Monetary Policy in the Twentieth Century. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Bordo, M.D. and Kydland, F. 1995. “The Gold Standard as a Rule; An Essay in
Exploration” Explorations in Economic History. 32.4 (1995): 423-464.

Bordo, M.D. and Meissner, C.M. 2006. “Financial Crises and Foreign Currency Debt: 1880-
1913 vs. 1972-1997” Journal of Banking and Finance. December. vol. 60 pp. 3299-3329.

Bordo, M.D. Meissner, C.M. 2011. “Foreign Capital , Financial Crises and Incomes in the
First Era of Globalization” European Review of Economic History Vol 15 Issue 1 April, pp 61-91.



                                                                                            40
Bordo, M. D. Meissner, C.M. and Redish, A. 2005. “How ‘Original Sin’ Was Overcome: The
Evolution of External Debt Denominated in Domestic Currencies in the United States and
the British Dominions 1800-2000” in Other People’s Money Debt Denomination and
Financial Instability in Emerging Market Economies. Barry Eichengreen and Ricardo
Hausmann eds. pp. 122-153. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Bordo, M.D., Meissner, C.M., and Stuckler, D. 2010. “Foreign Capital and Economic
Growth: A Long-Run Comparative Perspective” Journal of International Money and
Finance vol. 29 (4) pp. 642-665.

Bordo, M.D. and Orphanides, A. 2013. The Great Inflation: The Rebirth of Modern Central
Banking. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Bordo, M.D. Redish, A. 1990. “Credible Commitment and Exchange Rate Stability: Canada’s
Interwar Experience” Canadian Journal of Economics Vol XXIX No. 1 (May) pp 357-380.

Bordo, M.D. Redish, A. 1987. “Why Did the Bank of Canada Emerge in 1935?” Journal of
Economic History Vol 47. No.2 June pp 405-417.

Bordo, M.D. Redish. A. and Rockoff, H. 2015. “ Why Didn’t Canada have a Banking Crisis
in 2008 (or in 1930, or 1907, or… ) ?” Economic History Review 68.1 (2015): 218-243.

Bordo, M.D., Redish, A., and Rockoff, H. 1994. “The U.S. Banking System from a Northern
Exposure; Stability vs Efficiency” Journal of Economic History 54: 325-41.

Bordo, M.D. and Schwartz, A.J. 1994. “The Specie Standard as a Contingent Rule: Some
Evidence for Core and Peripheral Countries, 1880-1990” NBER Working paper 4860
September.

Bordo, M.D., Taylor, A.M. and Williamson, J.G. 2003. Globalization in Historical Perspective.
Chicago; University of Chicago Press.

Bordo, M.D. and Wheelock, D. 2013. “The Promise and Performance of the Federal
Reserve as Lender of Last Resort 1914-1933” in Michael Bordo and Will Roberds (eds) The
Origins, History and Future of the Federal Reserve. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Borio, C. James, H. and Shin, H.S. 2014. “The International Monetary and Financial system :
A Capital Account Historical Perspective” BIS Working paper 457.

Brooks, R., Edison, H., Kumar, M. S., and Sløk, T. 2004. “Exchange rates and capital flows.”
European Financial Management, 10.3. pp. 511-533.

Calomiris, C. W., and Haber ,S. 2014. Fragile by Design: The Political Origins of Banking Crises and
Scarce Credit. Princeton University Press.

Calomiris, C.W., and Mason, J.R. 2003. “Fundamentals, panics, and bank distress during the
depression.” American Economic Review: 1615-1647.



                                                                                                 41
Catão, L. 2005. “Sudden Stops and Currency Drops: A Historical Look.” in “The Decline of
Latin American Economies: Growth, Institutions, and Crises” Sebastian Edwards, Gerardo
Esquivel and Graciela Márquez eds. Pp. 243-289

Corbett, J, Irwin, G. and Vines, D. 1999. “From Asian Miracle to Asian Crisis: Why
Vulnerability, Why Collapse? In ?." Gruen, D and Gower, L. (eds.) Capital flows and the
international financial system pp. 190-213. Reserve Bank of Australia: Canberra.

Cortes Conde, R. 1989. Dinero, Dueda y Crisis: Evolucion Fiscal y Monetaria En La Argentina ,
1862-1890, Buenos Aires: Editorial Sudamericana Instituto Torcuata di Tella

Davis, L. and Gallman, L. 2001. Evolving Financial Markets and International Capital Flows :
Britain, the Americas and Australia: 1865-1914. Cambridge :Cambridge University Press

Della Paolera, G. 1994. “Experimentos monetarios y bancarios en Argentina: 1861–1930”,
Revista de Historia Económica, 12, (3), pp. 539- 590.

Diamond, D. W., and Dybvig. P.H. 1983. “Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquidity." The
journal of political economy: 401-419.

Dincecco, M. 2009. "Fiscal centralization, limited government, and public revenues in
Europe, 1650–1913." The Journal of Economic History 69.01: 48-103.

Dincecco, M. 2011. Political Transformations and Public Finances: Europe, 1650–1913.
Cambridge University Press.

Dooley, M. 1999. “Are Recent Capital Inflows to Developing Countries a Vote for or
Against Economic Policy Reforms?” in Gruben. W. Gould, D., and Zarazaga,C. (eds.)
Exchange Rates, Capital Flows, and Monetary Policy in a Changing World Economy.
Kluwer: Boston, pp. 211-221.

Drelichman, M., and Voth, H.J. 2011 "Lending to the Borrower from Hell: Debt and
Default in the Age of Philip II*." The Economic Journal 121.557: 1205-1227.

Edwards, S. and Santaella, J. 1993. Devaluation Controversies in the Developing Countries:
Lessons from the Bretton Woods Era” in M.D. Bordo and B. Eichengreen (eds.) A
Retrospective on the Bretton Woods System: Lessons for International Monetary Reform, University of
Chicago Press, Chicago. pp. 405-460

Engerman, S. and Sokoloff, K. 1997. “Factor Endowments, Institutional and Differential
Paths of Growth among New World Economies ; A View from Economic Historians of the
United States” in S. Haber (ed) How Latin America Fell behind: Essays in the Economic Histories of
Brazil and Mexico. Stanford University Press.

Eichengreen, B. 1992. Golden Fetters. New York: Oxford University Press




                                                                                                42
Eichengreen, B. Hausmann, R. and Panizza, U. 2005. “The Pain of Original Sin” in Other
People’s Money Debt Denomination and Financial Instability in Emerging Market
Economies. Barry Eichengreen and Ricardo Hausmann eds. pp. 13-47. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.

Eichengreen, B. and Portes, R. 1986. “Debt and Default in the 1930s” European Economics
Review, 30, pp. 599-640

Eichengreen, B., Rose, A.K. and Wyplosz, C. 1996. “Contagious Currency Crises: First
Tests." The Scandinavian Journal of Economics: 463-484.

Flandreau, M. and Flores, J. 2009. Bonds and Brands: Foundations of Sovereign Debt
Markets, 1820-1830. Journal of Economic History 69. Pp. 646-684.)

Flandreau, M. and Sussman, N. 2005 “Old Sins Exchange Clauses and European Foreign
Lending in the Nineteenth Century” in Other People’s Money Debt Denomination and
Financial Instability in Emerging Market Economies. Barry Eichengreen and Ricardo
Hausmann eds. pp. 154-189. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Friedman, M. and Schwartz, A.J. 1963. A Monetary History of the United States. Princeton:
Princeton University Press

Garber, P. and Grilli, V. 1986. “The Belmont-Morgan Syndicate as an Optimal Investment
Banking Contract” European Economic Review 30.3 pp 649-677.

Gorton, G. 1985. “Clearing Houses and the Origins of Central Banking in the United States”
Journal of Economic History Vol 45 No.2 pp277-283.

Gorton, G. and Metrick, A. 2013. “ The Federal Reserve and Panic prevention: The Roles of
Financial Regulation and Lender of Last Resort” Journal of Economic Perspectives. Vol 27
(9) pp 45-64.

Gourinchas, P.O. and Jeanne, O. 2006. “The Elusive Gains from International Financial
Integration” Review of Economic Studies 72 (3) , pp 715-41.

Grewal, B. 2000. “Australian Loan Council: Arrangements and Experience with Bailouts”
Inter-American Development Bank Research network Working paper #R-397.

Grossman, Richard S. 2010. Unsettled Account: The Evolution of Banking in the
Industrialized World since 1800: The Evolution of Banking in the Industrialized World since
1800. Princeton University Press.

Hanes, C., and Rhode, P.W. 2013. “Harvests and Financial Crises in Gold Standard
America.” The Journal of Economic History 73.01: 201-246.

Hautcoeur, P.C., Riva, A. and White, E. 2014. “Can Moral Hazard Be Avoided? The Banque
de France and the Crisis of 1889 “ Mimeo Rutgers University.



                                                                                        43
Henry, P.B. 2007. “Capital Account Liberalization: Theory, Evidence, and Speculation’
Journal of Economic literature 45(4), pp 887-935.

Hickson, C. R., and Turner, J.D. 2002. “Free banking gone awry: the Australian banking
crisis of 1893.” Financial History Review 9.02: 147-167.

King, R.G. and Levine, R.W. 1993. “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter might Be Right”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 108 93) pp 713-37.

Kohlscheen, E. 2010. “Sovereign risk: Constitutions rule." Oxford Economic Papers 62.1:
62-85.

Krugman, P. 1979. “A model of balance-of-payments crises." Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking: 311-325.

Krugman, P. 1999a. “Analytical Afterthoughts on the Asian Crisis,” mimeo.
http://web.mit.edu/krugman/www/MINICRIS.htm

Krugman, P. 1999b. “Balance Sheets, The Transfer Problem and Financial Crises”
http://web.mit.edu/krugman/www/FLOOD.pdf

Laeven, L., and Valencia, F. 2013. “Systemic banking crises database.” IMF Economic
Review 61.2: 225-270.

Lazaretou, S. 2012., ‘Financial crises and financial market regulation: the long record of an
‘emerger’, in Yüksel Görmez, Şevket Pamuk and M. İbrahim Turhan (eds) Monetary policy
during economic crises: a comparative and historical perspective, 85–112, SEEMHN and
Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, Ankara.

Leroy-Beaulieu, P. 1883. Traité de la science des finances, 3. ed.. Paris, Guillaumin et cie, Paris.

Miller. V.M., 1996. “Exchange rate crises with domestic bank runs: evidence from the
1980s,” Journal of International Money and Finance, Volume 15, Issue 4, Pages 637-656.

Meltzer, A. 2003. A History of the Federal Reserve Volume I Chicago; University of
Chicago Press.

Miron, J. 1988. “The Founding of the Fed and the Destabilization of the Post 1914
Economy” NBER Working Paper 2701.

Mitchener, K. J. and Weidenmier, M., 2010. “Supersanctions and Sovereign Debt
Repayment”, Journal of International Money and Finance 29 (1) pp. 19-36.

Musacchio, A. 2008. “Can civil law countries get good institutions? Lessons from the history
of creditor rights and bond markets in Brazil.” Journal of Economic History 68.01: 80-108.

North, D. C. 1997. “The Historical Evolution of Polities.” Economics Working Paper
Archive Working Paper ewp-eh/9411007.

                                                                                                       44
North, D.C. and Weingast, B. 1989. “Constitutions and Commitment; the Evolution of
Institutions Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth Century England” Journal of
Economic History 49 (4) pp 803-832.

Ó Gráda, C., and White, E.N. 2003. “The panics of 1854 and 1857: A view from the
emigrant industrial savings bank.” The Journal of Economic History 63.01: 213-240.

Perkins, E.J. 1994. American Public Finance and Financial Services. 1790-1815. Columbus Ohio:
Ohio State University Press.

Rajan, R.G., and Zingales, L. 2003a. “The great reversals: the politics of financial
development in the twentieth century.” Journal of financial economics 69.1: 5-50.

R. Rajan and l. Zingales 2003b. Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists. New York; Crown
Business

Reinhart, C. 2010. “This Time is Different Chart Book: Country Histories on Debt, Default,
and Financial Crises” NBER Working paper 15815 March

Reinhart, C. and Rogoff, K. 2009. This Time is Different: A History of Financial Crises.
Princeton; Princeton University Press.

Reinhart, C. and Rogoff, K. 2013. “Financial and Sovereign Debt Crises: Some Lessons
Learned and Those Forgotten” IMF working paper 13/266.

Reinhart, C., Rogoff, K., and Savastano, M.. 2003. “Debt intolerance.” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 1 (2003): 1-74.

Rockoff, H. 2014. “It is Always the Shadow Banks; The Failures that Ignited America’s
Financial Panics” Rutgers University (mimeo)

Rousseau, P., and Sylla, R. 2003. “Financial Systems, Economic Growth and Globalization”
in MD Bordo, A Taylor and J.G. Williamson (eds) Globalization in Historical Perspective.
pp. 373-416.Chicago; University of Chicago Press.

Silber, W. 2007. When Washington Shut Down Wall Street: The Great Financial Crisis of 1914 and
the Origins of America’s Monetary Supremacy.Princeton; Princeton University Press.

Summerhill, W. 2006. “Political Economics of the Domestic Debt in Nineteenth Century
Brazil” mimeo UCLA.

Sylla, R., Wright, R.E., and Cowen, D. 2009. “Alexander Hamilton, Central Banker: Crisis
Management During the US Financial Panic of 1792” Business History Review 83 (spring) pp
61-86.

Tornell, A. and Westerman, F. 2005. Boom-Bust Cycles and Financial Liberalization. Cambridge
MA MIT Press.

                                                                                           45
Wallis, J.J. Sylla, R., Grinath II, A. Wallis, J.J. 2004. “Sovereign Debt and Repudiation: The
Emerging –Market Debt Crisis in the U.S. States, 1839-1843’ NBER Working paper No.
10753.




                                                                                           46
Figure 1 Ratio of M2 to GDP for Three Sub-sets of Countries, 1880-1913


                           70

                           65

                           60

                           55

                           50
            (M2/GDP)*100




                           45

                           40

                           35

                           30

                           25

                           20
                                1880
                                       1881
                                              1882
                                                     1883
                                                            1884
                                                                   1885
                                                                          1886
                                                                                 1887
                                                                                        1888
                                                                                               1889
                                                                                                      1890
                                                                                                             1891
                                                                                                                    1892
                                                                                                                           1893
                                                                                                                                  1894
                                                                                                                                         1895
                                                                                                                                                1896
                                                                                                                                                       1897
                                                                                                                                                              1898
                                                                                                                                                                     1899
                                                                                                                                                                            1900
                                                                                                                                                                                   1901
                                                                                                                                                                                          1902
                                                                                                                                                                                                 1903
                                                                                                                                                                                                        1904
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1905
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1906
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1907
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1908
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1909
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1910
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1911
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1912
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1913
                                                                                                                                                 Year

                                                                                        Leaders                                    Learners                                        Non-learners




Notes: Figure shows the population-weighted average ratio of broad money (M2) to GDP. Data are from Bordo et. al. (1999) Leaders include Belgium,
France, Germany, Netherlands, Switzerland and Great Britain/UK. Learners include Australia (or its component colonies prior to 1901), Canada (its
component colonies prior to 1867), Denmark, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden and the USA. Non-learners include: Argentina, Brazil, Chile,
Greece, Italy (post-1861 only), Portugal, and Spain.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              47
Figure 2 Ratio of M2 to GDP for Three Sub-sets of Countries, 1919-1939


                 65

                 60

                 55

                 50
  (M2/GDP)*100




                 45

                 40

                 35

                 30

                 25

                 20
                      1919 1920 1921 1922 1923 1924 1925 1926 1927 1928 1929 1930 1931 1932 1933 1934 1935 1936 1937 1938 1939
                                                                        Year

                                              Leaders            Learners             Non-learners




Notes: Figure shows the population-weighted average ratio of broad money (M2) to GDP. Data are from Bordo et. al. (1999) Leaders include Belgium,
France, Germany, Netherlands, Switzerland and Great Britain/UK. Learners include Australia (or its component colonies prior to 1901), Canada (its
component colonies prior to 1867), Denmark, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden and the USA. Non-learners include: Argentina, Brazil, Chile,
Greece, Italy (post-1861 only), Portugal, and Spain.




                                                                                                                                                48
Figure 3 Ratio of M2 to GDP for Three Sub-sets of Countries, 1950-1995


                  60


                  55


                  50


                  45


                  40
   (M2/GDP)*100




                  35


                  30


                  25


                  20


                  15


                  10
                       1950
                       1951
                       1952
                       1953
                       1954
                       1955
                       1956
                       1957
                       1958
                       1959
                       1960
                       1961
                       1962
                       1963
                       1964
                       1965
                       1966
                       1967
                       1968
                       1969
                       1970
                       1971
                       1972
                       1973
                       1974
                       1975
                       1976
                       1977
                       1978
                       1979
                       1980
                       1981
                       1982
                       1983
                       1984
                       1985
                       1986
                       1987
                       1988
                       1989
                       1990
                       1991
                       1992
                       1993
                       1994
                       1995
                                              Year


                          Leaders       Learners       Non-learners




Notes: Figure shows the population-weighted average ratio of broad money (M2) to GDP. Data are from Bordo et. al. (1999) Leaders include Belgium,
France, Germany, Netherlands, Switzerland and Great Britain/UK. Learners include Australia (or its component colonies prior to 1901), Canada (its
component colonies prior to 1867), Denmark, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden and the USA. Non-learners include: Argentina, Brazil, Chile,
Greece, Italy (post-1861 only), Portugal, and Spain.




                                                                                                                                                49
Figure 4 Probability of Experiencing any Kind of Financial Crisis, 1825-2012


                       0.18



                       0.16



                       0.14



                       0.12
    Sample Frequency




                        0.1



                       0.08



                       0.06



                       0.04



                       0.02



                         0
                              1825-1913             1919-1939                 1945-1972     1973-2012
                                                                    Period

                                          Leaders        Learners            Non-Learners




Notes: The probability of experiencing a crisis is calculated as the ratio of the number of country years in which countries in each sub-sample are in the
first year of a banking, currency, twin, or debt crisis to the total number of country years within the period. Leaders include Belgium, France, Germany,
Netherlands, Switzerland and Great Britain/UK. Learners include Australia (or its component colonies prior to 1901), Canada (its component colonies
prior to 1867), Denmark, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden and the USA. Non-learners include: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Greece, Italy (post-1861
only), Portugal, and Spain.




                                                                                                                                                             50
Figure 5 Probability of Experiencing Various Types of Financial Crisis, 1825-2012



                        0.12




                         0.1




                        0.08
      Sample fequency




                        0.06




                        0.04




                        0.02




                          0
                               Any crisis    Banking Crisis      Currency Crisis        Twin Crisis   Debt Crisis
                                                                 Type of Crisis


                                            Leaders           Learners             Non-learners




Notes: The probability of experiencing a crisis is calculated as the ratio of the number of country years in which countries in each sub-sample are in the
first year of either a banking, currency, twin, debt crisis or any kind of crisis to the total number of country years within the period. Leaders include
Belgium, France, Germany, Netherlands, Switzerland and Great Britain/UK. Learners include Australia (or its component colonies prior to 1901),
Canada (its component colonies prior to 1867), Denmark, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden and the USA. Non-learners include: Argentina, Brazil,
Chile, Greece, Italy (post-1861 only), Portugal, and Spain. Each probability is calculated for all years between 1825 to 2012.




                                                                                                                                                         51
Figure 6 Probability of Experiencing a Banking Crisis, 1825-2012


                      0.14




                      0.12




                       0.1
   Sample frequency




                      0.08




                      0.06




                      0.04




                      0.02




                        0
                             1825-1913             1919-1939                    1945-1972     1973-2012
                                                                      Period


                                         Leaders               Learners        Non-Learners




Notes: The probability of experiencing a crisis is calculated as the ratio of the number of country years in which countries in each sub-sample are in the
first year of a banking crisis to the total number of country years within the period. Leaders include Belgium, France, Germany, Netherlands, Switzerland
and Great Britain/UK. Learners include Australia (or its component colonies prior to 1901), Canada (its component colonies prior to 1867), Denmark,
Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden and the USA. Non-learners include: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Greece, Italy (post-1861 only), Portugal, and Spain.




                                                                                                                                                        52
Figure 7 Probability of Experiencing a Currency Crisis, 1825-2012



                       0.12




                        0.1




                       0.08
    Sample frequency




                       0.06




                       0.04




                       0.02




                         0
                              1825-1913         1919-1939               1945-1972         1973-2012
                                                               Period


                                          Leaders           Learners       Non-learners




Notes: The probability of experiencing a crisis is calculated as the ratio of the number of country years in which countries in each sub-sample are in the
first year of a currency crisis to the total number of country years within the period. Leaders include Belgium, France, Germany, Netherlands, Switzerland
and Great Britain/UK. Learners include Australia (or its component colonies prior to 1901), Canada (its component colonies prior to 1867), Denmark,
Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden and the USA. Non-learners include: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Greece, Italy (post-1861 only), Portugal, and Spain.




                                                                                                                                                       53
Figure 8 Probability of Experiencing a Twin Crisis, 1825-2012

                           0.045



                            0.04



                           0.035



                            0.03
        Sample frequency




                           0.025



                            0.02



                           0.015



                            0.01



                           0.005



                              0
                                   1825-1913         1919-1939              1945-1972              1973-2012
                                                                  Period



                                               Leaders           Learners           Non-learners




Notes: The probability of experiencing a crisis is calculated as the ratio of the number of country years in which countries in each sub-sample are in the
first year of a twin crisis to the total number of country years within the period. Twin crises occur when a banking crisis and a currency crisis affect a
country within a span of two years. Leaders include Belgium, France, Germany, Netherlands, Switzerland and Great Britain/UK. Learners include
Australia (or its component colonies prior to 1901), Canada (its component colonies prior to 1867), Denmark, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden
and the USA. Non-learners include: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Greece, Italy (post-1861 only), Portugal, and Spain.




                                                                                                                                                             54
                           Figure 9 Probability of Experiencing a Debt Crisis, 1825-2012


                   0.045



                    0.04



                   0.035



                    0.03
Sample frequency




                   0.025



                    0.02



                   0.015



                    0.01



                   0.005



                      0
                                   1825-1913                  1919-1939               1945-1972         1973-2012
                                                                             Period

                                                    Leaders               Learners       Non-learners




                           Notes: The probability of experiencing a crisis is calculated as the ratio of the number of country years in which countries in each sub-sample are in the
                           first year of a debt crisis to the total number of country years within the period. No bar signifies no debt crisis occurred within the period. Leaders
                           include Belgium, France, Germany, Netherlands, Switzerland and Great Britain/UK. Learners include Australia (or its component colonies prior to
                           1901), Canada (its component colonies prior to 1867), Denmark, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden and the USA. Non-learners include: Argentina,
                           Brazil, Chile, Greece, Italy (post-1861 only), Portugal, and Spain.



                                                                                                                                                                                    55
Figure 10 Long-Run Frequency of Crises for Four Countries

                                            Australia, 1880-2011                                                                        Canada, 1860-2011




           1880   1892    1904    1916     1928     1940    1952       1964   1976    1988   2000     1860   1872   1884   1896     1908     1920    1932    1944      1956       1968   1980   1992

                                   Banking Crises    Currency Crises    Debt Crises                                         Banking Crises     Currency Crises      Debt Crises




                                    United Kingdom, 1800-2011                                                                         United States, 1820-2011




          1800 1812 1824 1836 1848 1860 1872 1884 1896 1908 1920 1932 1944 1956 1968 1980 1992 2004
                                                                                                         1820 1832 1844 1856 1868 1880 1891 1903 1915 1927 1939 1951 1963 1975 1987 1999
                                  Banking Crises    Currency Crises    Debt Crises
                                                                                                                                  Banking Crises    Currency Crises    Debt Crises



Notes: Bars represent the incidence of a given type of crisis. The width represents the time in years until a country resumed growing at its pre-crisis trend
as in Bordo et. al. (2001).




                                                                                                                                                                                                       56
Figure 11 Long-Run Frequency of Crises for 3 “non-learning” Countries




Notes: Bars represent the incidence of a given type of crisis. The width represents the time in years until a country resumed growing at its pre-crisis trend
as in Bordo et. al. (2001).




                                                                                                                                                           57
Figure 12 Kaplan-Meier Survivor Curves for Three sets of Countries

                          Leaders: BEL, CHE, FRA, DEU, NLD, GBR                                                                     Learners: AUS, CAN, DNK, JPN, NZL, NOR, SWE, USA




                                                                                                                       1.00
          1.00




                                                                                                                             0.75
               0.75




                                                                                                                 probability
   probability




                                                                                                                    0.50
      0.50




                                                                                                                       0.25
          0.25




                                                                                                                       0.00
          0.00




                      0      20           40             60                    80          100                                      0        20           40             60            80          100
                                            analysis time                                                                                                   analysis time

                              period = 1825-1913                      period = 1919-1939                                                      period = 1825-1913              period = 1919-1939
                                                                                                                                              period = 1945-1972              period = 1973-2012
                              period = 1945-1972                      period = 1973-2012



                                                                           Non-learners: ARG, BRA, CHL, GRC, ITA, PRT, ESP
                                                               1.00 0.75
                                                        probability
                                                           0.500.25
                                                               0.00




                                                                           0         20           40             60                     80        100
                                                                                                    analysis time

                                                                                      period = 1825-1913                    period = 1919-1939
                                                                                      period = 1945-1972                    period = 1973-2012




Notes: Figures show the Kaplan-Meier non-parametric survivor function for three sets of countries. The curve represents the empirical likelihood that a
country will have any kind of financial crisis in T years’ time after the last crisis.

                                                                                                                                                                                                         58
