                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  COMOVEMENT REVISITED

                                          Honghui Chen
                                           Vijay Singal
                                        Robert F. Whitelaw

                                       Working Paper 21281
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21281


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2015




We would like to thank Oleg Rytchkov and seminar participants at Temple University, the University
of Texas, Austin, Virginia Tech, the 2014 FMA meetings, and the 2013 SFA meetings, particularly
the discussant Ferhat Akbas, for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Honghui Chen, Vijay Singal, and Robert F. Whitelaw. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Comovement Revisited
Honghui Chen, Vijay Singal, and Robert F. Whitelaw
NBER Working Paper No. 21281
June 2015
JEL No. G14

                                             ABSTRACT

Recent evidence of excessive comovement among stocks following index additions (Barberis, Shleifer,
and Wurgler, 2005) and stock splits (Green and Hwang, 2009) challenges traditional finance theory.
Based on a simple model, we show that the bivariate regressions relied upon in the literature often
provide little or no information about the economic magnitude of the phenomenon of interest, and
the coefficients in these regressions are very sensitive to time-variation in the characteristics of the
return processes that are unrelated to excess comovement. Instead, univariate regressions of the stock
return on the returns of the group it is leaving (e.g., non-S&P stocks) and the group it is joining (e.g.,
S&P stocks) reveal the relevant information. When we reexamine the empirical evidence using control
samples matched on past returns and compute Dimson betas, almost all evidence of excess comovement
disappears. The results in the literature are consistent with changes in the fundamental factor loadings
of the stocks. One key element to understanding these striking results is that, in both the examples
we study, the stocks exhibit strong returns prior to the event in question. We document the heretofore
unknown empirical regularity that winner stocks exhibit increases in betas. Thus, much of the apparent
excess comovement is just a manifestation of momentum.


Honghui Chen                                        Robert F. Whitelaw
University of Central Florida                       New York University
College of Business Administration                  Stern School of Business
4000 Central Florida Blvd                           44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-190
Orlando, FL 32816                                   New York, NY 10012-1126
honghui.chen@bus.ucf.edu                            and NBER
                                                    rwhitela@stern.nyu.edu
Vijay Singal
Virginia Tech
Pamplin College of Business
Blacksburg, VA 24061
vs@vt.edu
1. Introduction

In a perfect and frictionless financial market, asset prices change to reflect new information
about future cash flows and discount rates. To the extent that there are common factors
affecting either cash flows or discount rates, asset prices will move together to reflect innovations
in such common factors.

         However, there is growing evidence that prices move together for reasons that are
seemingly unrelated to fundamentals. Evidence of this excess comovement has been found
among S&P500 index additions and deletions (Vijh, 1994; Barberis, Shleifer, and Wurgler, 2005),
changes in S&P500 value and growth indices (Boyer, 2011), changes in the Nikkei 225 index
(Greenwood and Sosner, 2007), changes in UK indices (Mase, 2008), changes in Nikkei 225 index
weights (Greenwood, 2008), additions to many national market indices (Claessens and Yafeh,
2011), stock splits (Green and Hwang, 2009), stocks with correlated trading among retail
investors (Kumar and Lee, 2006), stocks with corporate headquarters in the same geographic
area (Pirinsky and Wang, 2006), stocks with similar institutional ownership (Pindyck and
Rotemberg, 1993), stocks in closed-end country funds (Hardouvelis et al., 1994; Bodurtha et al.,
1995), stocks in closed-end domestic funds (Lee et al., 1991), sovereign bonds (Rigobon, 2002),
and commodity futures (Tang and Xiong, 2012).

         Though excessive comovement in stock returns is attributed to several non-fundamental
factors,1 the primary explanation is an asset class effect, which is created by correlated demand
unrelated to fundamentals for assets in a particular class. Theoretical models developed by Basak
and Pavlova (2013), DeMarzo, Kaniel and Kremer (2004), and Barberis and Shleifer (2003), among


1
  Barberis, Shleifer, and Wurgler (2005) propose three sources of friction and investor sentiment. Excess investor
demand for a particular group of securities may arise because of investor awareness (habitat) or because those
stocks form an asset class that is easy to follow (category). Third, the speed of information diffusion may increase
for stocks included in the index. Similar arguments are in Hou and Moskowitz (2005) and Pindyck and Rotemberg
(1993). Improvement in price discovery would cause the added stock to comove more strongly with index stocks
than with non-index stocks. Since it is difficult to empirically distinguish between the first two views, Greenwood
(2008) combines them into a single demand-based theory, or an asset class effect. The last source of friction,
quicker adjustment in prices to new information is a desirable outcome of index additions because it makes prices
more efficient even though it may increase comovement. In other words, there was too little comovement in the
absence of efficient information diffusion, which has now been increased to an appropriate level (Claessens and
Yafeh, 2011). Other explanations relate to transactions costs at an index level versus an individual stock level.
However, we focus on the asset class effect as the generally accepted source of comovement.

                                                         1
others, are consistent with such an asset class effect. However, the sources of this correlated
demand are varied: investor behavior that causes investors to choose stocks based on styles or
categories (Barberis and Shleifer, 2003); agents who care about relative wealth choosing assets
held by other members of the community (DeMarzo, Kaniel and Kremer, 2004); or institutional
investors who care about their performance relative to an index tilting their portfolios towards
stocks that are in that index (Basak and Pavlova, 2013).

       Two papers, von Drathen (2013) and Kasch and Sarkar (2013), challenge the empirical
evidence mentioned above in the context of two specific events, FTSE 100 and S&P500 index
turnover, respectively.   They both point out that these events coincide with changes in
fundamentals. Our focus is on providing a more general view of the issue and regression results
in the existing literature and on understanding the mechanisms that underlie the link between
momentum and comovement, as explained below.

       In this paper, we reexamine the evidence on comovement, focusing on two studies that
document what appears to be strong support for this phenomenon, but in apparently unrelated
contexts. The first is Barberis, Shleifer, and Wurgler (2005), which is considered a classic paper
on comovement. Their sample consists of stocks that enter or leave the S&P500, an event that
has been used by many other studies because index changes are generally believed to have little
fundamental effect on the firm being added to or deleted from the index (Chen et al., 2004; Elliott
et al., 2006). Their hypothesis is that stocks in the index comove more with index stocks, whereas
those not in the index comove more with non-index stocks. The second paper is Green and
Hwang (2009), who study comovement before and after stock splits. Specifically, their argument
is that stocks with similar price levels comove more than would be justified by fundamentals, i.e.,
that a stock moves more with high-priced stocks prior to a split and more with low-priced stocks
after a split. As with index changes, splits appear to be useful events to study because they do
not affect splitting firms in any fundamental way, although the announcement may signal private
information.

       In both cases, the primary evidence is in the form of differences between the coefficients
in two regressions conducted before and after the event: (1) a univariate regression of the stock
return on the return of the group it is joining, and (2) a bivariate regression of the stock return
                                                2
on the returns of both the old group and the new group. The bivariate regression results in
Barberis, Shleifer, and Wurgler (2005) show that for additions to the S&P500 index, their
coefficient on S&P500 returns increases dramatically after they join the index while the
coefficient on non-index stocks declines. In a similar vein, the bivariate regression results in
Green and Hwang (2009) show that stocks after a split load more heavily on low-priced stocks
(the new group) and less on high-priced stocks (the old group).

       In order to better understand the implications of the excess comovement hypothesis for
stock returns, we first develop a model closely related to that of Barberis, Shleifer, and Wurgler
(2005). Some implications of our model are similar to those derived in their paper, but we
highlight four additional important implications.

       First, the model suggests that a univariate regression of the stock return on the return of
the old group after the event can be very informative, a specification not examined in Barberis,
Shleifer, and Wurgler (2005) or Green and Hwang (2009).

       Second, the model indicates that the results of the bivariate regressions estimated by
Barberis, Shleifer, and Wurgler (2005) and Green and Hwang (2009) are extremely sensitive to
small changes in parameters. The sensitivity of these types of regression coefficients has been
documented in the literature (Spanos and McGuirk, 2002). Most critically for our analysis, this
sensitivity implies that the interpretation of these coefficient estimates is not straightforward,
and that they may well provide little or no information about the question of economic interest—
how much, if at all, is excess comovement responsible for the variation in stock returns.

       Third, the model shows that changes in the parameters around the events, in particular
shifts in loadings on the fundamental factor, can affect the univariate regression results. For
example, an increase in the beta of a stock in the sample will generate an increase in the
coefficient of the stock on the new group return after the event. In other words, these empirical
results are also consistent with a change in fundamental comovement not just excess
comovement. Of course, this phenomenon also has implications for the univariate regression of
the stock return on the old group return discussed above, and, in fact, it is this regression that
allows us to distinguish between the two competing explanations.


                                                3
        Finally, the model shows that shifts around the event in the fundamental loadings and
idiosyncratic risk of the group returns can cause significant shifts in the bivariate regression
coefficients, even in a world with no excess comovement. For example, if the idiosyncratic risk of
the return on one group increases, the bivariate regression will shift weight from the return of
this group to that of the other. In this regression both groups serve as proxies for the fundamental
factor. The magnitude of idiosyncratic risk relative to fundamental risk determines a group’s
quality as a proxy and thus also the relative magnitude of its coefficient.

        We begin our empirical analysis by reexamining comovement following index changes.
We expand the Barberis, Shleifer, and Wurgler (2005) sample period of 1976-2000 to 1976-2012,
using daily data, where they report their strongest results.2 In general, based on the two
univariate regressions, we find that stocks added to the S&P500 index move more with the
S&P500 index but they also move more with the old group of non-S&P index stocks. The
difference in beta changes is not significant for the 1976-87 period, nor is it significant for the
2001-12 period. The difference in beta changes is, however, significant for the 1988-2000 period.
As in Barberis, Shleifer, and Wurgler (2005), the bivariate regression results show a significant
increase in beta relative to the S&P500 index and a significant decrease in beta relative to the old
group

        For the stock split sample, evidence in support of comovement is essentially non-existent
when the univariate regressions are analyzed: the increase in beta between returns on splitting
stocks and returns on the new group (i.e., low-priced stocks) is almost equal to the increase in
beta between returns on splitting stocks and returns on the old group (i.e., high-priced stocks).
The bivariate regressions again show an increase in the beta with the new group, though there is
no statistically significant decrease in beta relative to the old group.

        These initial empirical results for the univariate regressions indicate that it may be
increases in the fundamental betas of the stocks around the events that are driving much of the
results reported in the literature as excess comovement. The natural question is why do these



2
 We end the S&P additions sample one year prior to the end of our data because we need one year of data after
the event to compute regression coefficients.

                                                      4
betas increase, i.e., what do stocks added to the S&P500 and those undergoing splits have in
common? The answer is that both groups of stocks exhibit exceptional performance prior to the
event. In the language of the literature on cross-sectional momentum effects, they are winners.
Following the usual momentum methodology, we find that betas of winner stocks increase
during the formation period and continue to increase during the holding period, before declining
at longer horizons. Therefore, it is likely that at least some of the results reported by Barberis,
Shleifer, and Wurgler (2005) and Green and Hwang (2009) are caused by the inclusion of
momentum stocks in their samples.

       For the bivariate regression results, shifts around the event in the fundamental loadings
and idiosyncratic risk of the group returns can cause exactly these types of effects, even in a
world with no excess comovement.

       Given the apparent importance of fundamental stock betas and shifts in the
characteristics of the group returns, we next turn to a more refined analysis that attempts to
better measure and control for these changes. First, we improve the estimation of the betas by
employing a Dimson (1979) approach to adjust for non-synchronous trading using leads and lags
of the relevant indices in the regressions. Though the S&P500 index consists of some of the
largest stocks in the U.S. economy, index changes are concentrated mainly among the smaller
stocks in the index. Similarly, the trading frequency of stocks that split may differ from that of the
stocks in either the low- or high-priced indices that we construct. We add two leads and lags of
the index returns to pick up these effects.

       Second, we control for the additional effects of changes in the idiosyncratic risk and
fundamental factor loading of group returns on measured comovement using a matched sample
approach. For each index change and stock split, we choose a firm in the same size decile that
comes closest based on momentum, i.e., has a similar return over the past year. If beta changes
are driven primarily by momentum, these stocks will exhibit similar changes to those in the S&P
addition and stock split samples. We then adopt a difference in difference in difference approach,
examining the differences in the changes of the betas before and after the event across the stocks
in the original sample and the matched sample. If changes in the properties of group returns are


                                                  5
driving the bivariate regression results, then matched stocks will exhibit similar patterns in their
regression coefficients, even though they did not change groups around the event.

       The empirical results from this refined analysis are striking. For both S&P500 index
additions and stock splits, the original sample and matched sample stocks exhibit differences in
beta changes that are not significantly different. In other words, the differences between the
changes across the two univariate regressions are statistically indistinguishable for the sample
and control stocks. This result is compelling evidence that the apparent excess comovement is
actually driven by changes in loadings on the fundamental component of returns, not by asset
class effects. The control stocks also show similar changes in bivariate regression coefficients
before and after the event to which the sample stocks are subject. Thus, the properties of group
returns, not excess comovement, are clearly responsible for the anomalous results in the original
samples. Moreover, this result is not simply an artifact of limited statistical power. The point
estimates indicate that excess comovement is not economically significant either.

       A breakdown of our two adjustments, i.e., the Dimson adjustment and the matched
control adjustment, shows that their importance differs dramatically for the two samples. For
the stock split sample, the Dimson adjustment does little, but the momentum control is critical
because these stocks exhibit very strong past performance and resulting beta changes. In
contrast, for the S&P500 index addition sample, the momentum effect is somewhat weaker and
both adjustments are necessary.        The differential momentum effect is consistent with a
significantly greater proportion of winner stocks that split than the proportion of winner stocks
that are added to the S&P500 index. The Dimson adjustment becomes more important for
S&P500 additions because the added stocks are among the smallest firms in the index, which can
induce spurious cross-serial correlation between additions and the index, unlike for stock splits
where relative sizes of splitting stocks and other stocks are not likely to be different.

       The paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we introduce the model and
examine its implications for univariate and bivariate regressions. Section 3 describes the data
and methodology for momentum, index changes, and stock splits. Section 4 contains the main
empirical results for the original sample. In Section 5, we revisit the model in light of these initial
results, investigating specifically the effects of shifts in the parameters. In Section 6 we examine
                                                  6
the link between momentum and beta changes and then reexamine the data in the light of this
evidence. We perform several robustness checks in Section 7, and conclude in Section 8.



2. A Model

In order to understand the implications of the regression results reported in the literature for the
economic importance of the excess comovement phenomenon, it is useful to write down a
relatively simple and stylized model in which the coefficients in these regressions can be
calculated in closed form. Our goal is not to fully capture reality, but rather, in the spirit of the
model in Barberis, Shleifer, and Wurgler (2005), to generate some general insights and
predictions that we can use to interpret the subsequent empirical results. Our model is not
identical to that in Barberis, Shleifer, and Wurgler (2005), although the key predictions are
similar, because we want to construct the simplest possible model that both highlights the
features of the univariate and bivariate regressions that we believe are important and captures
the essence of the excess comovement hypothesis.



2.1 Setup and Assumptions

Denote as yt the return on a stock that is changing membership between groups 1 and 2 with
returns x1t and x2t, respectively, e.g., non-S&P and S&P stocks or high-priced and low-priced
stocks:

                            yt  byt f t  c1t u1t  c2t u 2t  e yt
                            x1t  b1t f t  u1t  e1t
                                                                                                  (1)
                            x2t  b2t f t  u2t  e2t
                            var(eit )   eit2   var(uit )   uit
                                                               2
                                                                       var( f t )   2ft

where f is the fundamental, common return shock, which could easily be extended to a multi-
factor context; ui are group-specific, non-fundamental return shocks; and ei are idiosyncratic
fundamental return shocks.

          For identification purposes assume

                                                         7
                            cov(u1t , u2t )  0
                            cov(uit , f t )  cov(e jt , f t )  0 i, j                       (2)
                            cov(uit , e jt )  0 i, j

That is, non-fundamental, group-specific shocks are assumed to be uncorrelated across groups;
the common fundamental factor is uncorrelated with the other shocks; and the idiosyncratic,
fundamental shocks are uncorrelated with the non-fundamental shocks.

       The economic content of the excess comovement hypothesis is a statement about the
loadings of stock y on the two non-fundamental, group-specific shocks, u1 and u2. Specifically,
using underbars and overbars to denote values prior to and after the stock switches from group
1 to group 2, the theoretical predictions of this hypothesis are

                                     c1t  c1  0 c 2t  0
                                                                                               (3)
                                     c1t  0 c2t  c2  0

i.e., there is a zero loading on the group-specific shock of the group to which the stock does not
belong, and a positive loading on the group-specific shock of the group to which the stock does
belong. We also assume that all the other parameters of the model are constant in each sub-
period, i.e., the periods before and after the move of stock y between the groups, but that they
can vary across the sub-periods. As above, we use underbars and overbars to designate these
parameters.



2.2 Assessing the Economic Magnitude of Excess Comovement

The goal of our empirical analysis is to assess the economic magnitude of excess comovement.
In the context of the model above, a natural measure of this quantity is the fraction of the
variation in stock y’s return that is due to excess comovement, both prior to and after the event:

                                     c 1  u1         c 22 u22
                                       2      2

                                                  and                                          (4)
                                        2y              y2




                                                      8
This measure is equivalent to the R-squared one would get if one regressed the stock return on
the non-fundamental component of the corresponding group return. The analogous quantities
for the group returns are

                                  u21  u21  u2 2                          u22
                                                                 and                              (5)
                                  2x1  x21  2x 2                          x22

i.e., the fraction of the variance of group returns explained by the non-fundamental component

       In the literature, the focus is on two regressions run both before and after the stock
switches groups—a univariate regression of the stock return on the return of the group that it is
joining and a bivariate regression on the returns of both groups. As we argue below, a third
regression—a univariate regression of the stock return on the group that it is leaving—is also
informative. Therefore, consider the following three regressions run pre- and post-switch:

                                      yt    1 x1t   t
                                      yt     2 x 2 t   t                                    (6)
                                      yt    1b x1t   2b x2t   t

The probability limits of the univariate regression coefficients under the model above are

                                  b y b1 f  c1 u1                    by b1 f2
                                               2         2

                            1                                  1 
                                            2x1                              x21
                             2x1  b12  2f   u21   e21  x21  b12 f2   u21   e21
                                                                                                  (7)
                                   b y b2                    by b2  c2
                                                   2                    2            2

                            2                    f
                                                       2              f            u2

                                         2
                                          x2
                                                                        x22
                             2x 2  b 22  2f   u2 2   e22  x22  b22 f2   u22   e22

For the bivariate regression




                                                             9
                                 1                            x2                            1                            x1 
                  1b                        1   x1, x 2                    2b                      2   x1, x 2      
                          1   x1, x 2
                                    2
                                                              x1 2                    1   x1, x 2
                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                            x 2 1 
                                1                     x2                   1                           x1 
                 1b                 1   x1, x 2       2   2b                    2   x1, x 2      1 
                           1    2
                                     
                                  x1, x 2              x1               1   2
                                                                                x1, x 2                   x2                           (8)
                             cov( x1 , x 2 )
                  x1, x 2                  cov( x1 , x 2 )  b1 b 2  f  cov(e1 , e 2 )
                                                                        2

                                  x1 x 2
                               cov( x1 , x2 )
                  x1, x 2                             cov( x1 , x2 )  b1b2 f2  cov(e1 , e2 )
                                  x1 x 2

(see the appendix for detailed derivations).

        Furthermore, if the basic parameters of the model (the weights on the common factor,
the variances of the non-fundamental shocks, and the variances of the fundamental shocks) are
constant over time, which is the motivation behind looking at events that are apparently
unconnected to fundamentals, i.e.,

                b i  bi  bi  ui   ui2   ui2  0  ei   ei2   ei2 i  1, 2
                                            2                                2

                                                                                                                                          (9)
                b y  b y  b y  ey   ey2   ey2  f   f2   2f
                                                2                        2



then

                                                     1  1      2  2
                                                                                                                                         (10)
                                                     1b  1b      2b   2b

(again, see the appendix for details). Intuitively, when the stock switches from group 1 to group
2, it begins to move with the non-fundamental shock to group 2 and ceases to move with the
non-fundamental shock to group 1; therefore, its coefficient on group 1 returns decreases and
its coefficient on group 2 returns increases, both in a univariate and a bivariate context.

        If we further assume that (i) the groups are fundamentally well-diversified, i.e., there is
no idiosyncratic fundamental shock at the group level (  e21   e22  0 ), (ii) stock y has a loading of

one on the non-fundamental group shock, i.e., c1  c2  1 , and (iii) the loadings on the




                                                                    10
fundamental shocks are all equal to unity, i.e., b y  b1  b2  1 , then we duplicate the more

specific results contained in Prediction 2 of Barberis, Shleifer, and Wurgler (2005):3

                                 1b  1,  2b  0 1b  0,  2b  1                                              (11)

         This result is important because it illustrates a flaw in the interpretation of the bivariate
regression coefficients. From an economic standpoint, we are not directly interested in these
coefficients; the key parameters are the loadings of the stock return on the various factors in
equation (1) and the variances of these factors, which determine the measures of excess
comovement defined in equations (4) and (5) above. However, under the assumptions outlined
above, the bivariate regression coefficients are completely independent of the variances of the
non-fundamental component of group and stock returns as long as these quantities are strictly
positive. Thus, even when the non-fundamental component of both stock y and group returns is
economically meaningless, in the sense that it contributes essentially nothing to the variability of
returns, the bivariate coefficients appear to suggest a dramatic and economically meaningful
change in the comovement properties of stock returns as a stock switches groups.

         Of course, this extreme invariance result does depend on the assumed factor loadings,
specifically the fact that the stock y and the groups load equally on both the fundamental and
non-fundamental factors.4 However, in more general settings, it is still the case that the
coefficients in the bivariate regression are sensitive to small changes in the parameters of the
driving processes, and their magnitudes do not reflect the quantities of economic interest. The
intuition is that all reasonably well-diversified stock portfolios tend to be very highly correlated.
Thus, the correlation between the returns on the two groups of stocks will be close to one. This
issue is the multi-collinearity in the bivariate regression that is discussed in Barberis, Shleifer, and


3
 See the appendix for details. This result is not identical to that in Barberis, Shleifer, and Wurgler (2005).
Specifically, their result is slightly weaker:   1,   0 0  1b  1, 0   2b  1, 1b   2b  1
                                              1b      2b

This difference is due to the fact that Barberis, Shleifer, and Wurgler (2005) assume a multi-factor structure for
fundamentals, where each group loads on a common factor and its own, unique fundamental shock. Barberis,
Shleifer, and Wurgler (2005) also allow for correlation across the group-specific, non-fundamental shocks.
4
  While this appears to be a strong assumption, it is essentially equivalent to saying that stock y is an “average”
stock in both groups 1 and 2. This assumption is unlikely to be strictly true, but it may be a reasonable first
approximation.

                                                           11
Wurgler (2005). As they rightly point out, multi-collinearity does not affect the consistency of the
estimates in OLS. But, as the example above illustrates, the magnitudes of the coefficients in the
bivariate regression may tell us very little, or even nothing, about what we really want to know,
i.e., how much excess comovement affects returns. This concern is especially relevant if the
strong assumptions above about the stability of the parameters across the two sub-periods,
which are critical in deriving the results, are not valid.

        Fortunately, the coefficients in the univariate regressions isolate precisely the quantities
of interest. Going back to the more general assumptions about stability of the parameters across
the sub-periods, but making no assumptions about the magnitudes of the factor loadings, the
differences between these coefficients pre- and post-switch are (see the appendix for details):

                                                   c1 u21
                                    1   1  
                                                     x21
                                                                                               (12)
                                                 c2 u22
                                    2   2 
                                                    x22

Thus, empirical evidence that the coefficient on the return of the group to which a stock is moving
(group 2) increases after the switch would appear to be strong evidence of excess comovement.
The magnitudes of these differences are also informative about the economic importance of this
phenomenon. Assuming the loadings on non-fundamental group shocks equal one, which will be
true on average since the shock at the group level is the value-weighted average of the shocks to
the stocks within the group, these quantities are the fraction of the variation of group returns
explained by excess comovement. For example, an increase of 0.1 in the beta on group 2 or a
similar decrease in the beta on group 1 would indicate that 10% of the variation in group returns
is due to excess comovement. Multiplying this number by the ratio of group variance to stock
variance will yield the corresponding R-squared for individual stocks.

        Finally, one might think that the problems in the bivariate regression are due solely to the
multi-collinearity problem associated with the high correlation between the group returns. This
conjecture is not true, since orthogonalizing the variables is not a complete solution. Consider,
for example, a trivariate regression of the stock return on the fundamental factor and the
components of the two group returns that are orthogonal to this factor—the non-fundamental

                                                      12
factor and the idiosyncratic shock. In this regression, the magnitudes of the coefficients on these
orthogonal components are relatively uninformative about the economic magnitude of excess
comovement, completely so when the group returns are perfectly well-diversified. These
coefficients will equal the stock’s loadings on the non-fundamental shocks, ci , but they contain

no information about the variance of these shocks,  ui2 , the key terms in equations (4) and (5).

In the more general setting, changes in the magnitude of idiosyncratic volatility at the group level
also affect these coefficients.



3. Data and Empirical Methodology

Given these preliminary theoretical results, we turn to a reexamination of the empirical evidence
in the next section, preceded in this section by a brief description of the data and the empirical
methodology. The CRSP stock files at the University of Chicago and Standard and Poor’s are the
primary sources of data. In general, we follow the methodologies in Barberis, Shleifer, and
Wurgler (2005) and Green and Hwang (2009) for constructing our tests. For index changes, we
follow the methodology of Barberis, Shleifer, and Wurgler (2005) except that we use only daily
data because their results are weaker with weekly and monthly data. Barberis, Shleifer, and
Wurgler (2005) use additions to the S&P500 from 1976 to 2000 and deletions from 1979 to 2000,
whereas our initial sample extends from 1976 to 2012 for index additions.5 However, subperiod
analysis corresponds to their subperiods. Index deletions are evaluated for robustness in Section
7. Like Barberis, Shleifer, and Wurgler (2005), we estimate betas in the pre-inclusion period using
12 months of data ending the month before the announcement of the stock’s addition to the
S&P500 and betas in the post-inclusion period using 12 months of data starting the month after
the inclusion of the stock in the S&P500.

        For stock splits, we follow the methodology in Green and Hwang (2009) and the
clarifications obtained directly from the authors, though some differences in methodology
persist. Like Green and Hwang (2009), our sample consists of all common stocks where the stock


5
 We limit our main analysis to index additions with share codes of 10 and 11 to remain consistent with Barberis,
Shleifer, and Wurgler (2005). However, the results are similar if the sample contains all index additions.

                                                       13
price was $10 or more before the stock split.6 The high-price index consists of stocks whose
prices are ±25% of the price of the splitting stock just prior to the split. The low price index
consists of all stocks whose price is above $5 and within ±25% of the post-split price calculated
based on the pre-split price and the split ratio. The Green and Hwang (2009) sample covers the
period 1971-2004. We extend this sample to 2012, and, after replicating their results for their
original subperiods, we use the same subperiods as in the S&P additions sample for the
subsequent analysis.

         For momentum, which will become an important control variable, we follow a
methodology that is similar to that in Jegadeesh and Titman (2001) and form momentum
portfolios using a 12-month formation period, one skip month, and 12-month holding period.
More specifically, at the end of each June from 1976 through 2011, stocks with a price of at least
$10 that do not fall into the bottom size decile of NYSE stocks are assigned to 10 momentum
deciles based on their cumulative returns over the preceding 252 days.7 We estimate betas for
each stock based on a rolling window of 252 days from two years before formation of momentum
portfolios through two years after formation, and compare beta changes for the top and bottom
momentum portfolios. Thus, betas for years -2 and -1 are estimated over rolling windows ending
504 and 252 trading days before portfolio formation, respectively. Post-formation momentum
portfolio betas allow for a 21-trading day skip, and are estimated over 252 days ending 273 and
525 trading days after portfolio formation. The top return decile and the bottom return decile in
the formation period are identified as winner stocks and loser stocks respectively.



4. Reexamining the Empirical Evidence

The first step in our analysis is to recreate, extend, and reexamine the univariate and bivariate
regressions reported in the literature for the S&P500 index addition and stock split samples, given
the insights from the model in Section 2. These are the regressions specified in equation (6), and


6
  For consistency with their results, we only include stock splits identified by CRSP with a distribution code ‘5523’.
However, inclusion of stocks splits with a CRSP distribution code ‘5533’ produces similar results.
7
  The sample ends in 2011 because we are evaluating beta changes up to two years after formation of momentum
portfolios.

                                                          14
they are estimated twice, once before the event and once after. Note that the first regression,
the return on the stock on the return of the group that it is leaving, is not examined in the
literature. The implications of the coefficients in these regressions for the excess comovement
hypothesis are discussed in Section 2.2.

        The results are presented in Tables 1 and 2 for S&P500 index additions and stock splits,
respectively. In each case, Panel A shows the univariate regression results and Panel B the
bivariate regression results. In Panel A, the set of 3 columns beginning with the third column
contain the betas relative to the old group portfolio (non-index stocks or high-priced stocks)
before and after the event and the associated changes, the next set of 3 columns contain the
analogous numbers relative to the new group portfolio, and the final column shows the
difference between the changes in the two coefficients across the event. Panel B is organized in
the same way except that the coefficients are those on the two group returns in the bivariate
regressions before and after the event.

        Turning first to the S&P500 additions sample, the results from the univariate regressions
on the S&P500 index (the new group, i.e., group 2) for two sub-periods, 1976-87 and 1988-2000,
are consistent with those reported by Barberis, Shleifer, and Wurgler (2005) in their Panel A of
Table 1.8 For 1976-87, we report a change in beta of 0.062 (Δβ2) based on a sample of 197 index
additions compared with 0.067 in Barberis, Shleifer, and Wurgler (2005) based on a sample of
196 index additions. For 1988-2000, we and Barberis, Shleifer, and Wurgler (2005) both find an
increase in beta of 0.214 after stocks are added to the S&P500 index. This increase in the
difference is consistent with the excess comovement hypothesis since the latter period coincides
with an increase in indexing. Interestingly, however, this difference is less than a third as large
(0.071 vs. 0.214) for the very last sub-period, 2001-2012, which was not covered in the original
sample, when indexing gained even more importance. Notwithstanding this anomaly, on their
own, these results would naturally be interpreted, in the context of the model in Section 2, as
evidence of excess comovement: The stock begins to load more heavily on the index return after
it joins the index. Moreover, the economic magnitude of this effect, particularly in the 1988-2000

8
 Standard and Poor’s did not publicly announce index changes until September 1976. Therefore, the first period
begins in September 1976. However, for ease of reference, we term the period 1976-87.

                                                      15
sub-period, is large. Specifically, a coefficient of 0.214, assuming that we can interpret this
average across stocks as the effect at the group level, implies that more than 20% of the variance
of S&P500 returns is explained by excess comovement, i.e., the non-fundamental group-specific
shock. Of course, individual stock returns are more variable than those of diversified portfolios,
so the corresponding R-squareds at the stock level would be significantly smaller.

       Looking at the univariate results with the non-index returns as the independent variable
shows that this simple interpretation is not completely accurate. To be consistent with excess
comovement, the change in the coefficient relative to the old group from before to after the
stock joins the index (Δβ1) should be negative. That is, the stock should load less heavily on non-
index returns when it is in the index, a change not examined in prior studies. Instead, we find that
this change (Δβ1) is approximately equal in magnitude to the coefficient change for the other
regression (Δβ2) for the 1976-87 and 2001-12 periods. Consequently, the measure of total excess
comovement, the difference between these changes (Δβ2-Δβ1), is small and statistically
insignificant for these two subperiods. Taken together, these results suggest that it may be
changes in loadings on the fundamental factor that are more important, except for the 1988-
2000 subperiod. In other words, it is not that stocks are moving more with S&P500 returns after
they join the index, simply that they are moving more with all stocks.

       The model in Section 2 implies that the bivariate results are unreliable in terms of
assessing the economic magnitude of any excess comovement, but, for completeness, we
present results from the bivariate regressions in Panel B. These results are similar to those
reported in Barberis, Shleifer, and Wurgler (2005) for matching subperiods. Their bivariate
regressions show an increase in the beta with the S&P index (new group) and a decrease in the
beta with non-S&P500 stocks (old group). For example, for the full sample the average beta on
the non-S&P group decreases by 0.305, while the beta on the S&P500 increases by 0.338.

       Interestingly, these results are very different from those in the univariate regressions,
where both coefficients increase. The bivariate regression coefficients may say little about the
magnitude of excess comovement, but this discrepancy suggests that there are additional shifts
in the model parameters across the events. Changes in the fundamental loadings of the group


                                                16
returns and in the idiosyncratic risk of these portfolios will affect the bivariate coefficients much
more than their univariate counterparts, as we demonstrate in the next section.

       The results for stock splits are reported in Table 2, first with the Green and Hwang (2009)
sub-periods. The changes in beta relative to the new group reported in Table 2, columns 6-8, for
matching sub-periods are very close to those reported by Green and Hwang (2009) in their Panel
A of Table 2: we report a change of 0.196 for 1971-1990 with a sample of 2,350 splits compared
to their change in beta of 0.204 with a sample of 2,302 splits for the same period. For the 1991-
2004 period, the samples are marginally different: Green and Hwang (2009) report an increase
of 0.255 in beta with a sample of 2,303 splits compared to 0.248 with a sample of 2,478 splits in
this paper. The second sets of results use the subperiods in Table 1 for consistency in the
following tables; the results are very similar, and there is little variation over time. As for index
changes, the univariate regressions results are striking. The coefficient on low-priced stocks
increases significantly after the split for all sub-periods and is consistent with the notion of excess
comovement documented in the earlier studies.

       We also examine the change in beta relative to the old, high-priced group before and after
the split. From Panel A of Table 2, columns 3-5, we can see that Δβ1 is significantly positive for
all sub-periods, which suggests that the beta of the splitting stock increases not only relative to
the new group (low-priced stocks) but also relative to the old group (high-priced stocks). Turning
to the difference in the change in betas, Δβ2-Δβ1, we find that these numbers are small. For two
of the sub-periods they are negative. Although the differences of 0.03 and 0.01 are statistically
significant in the 1988-2000 period and the full 1976-2012 sample, the economic magnitudes are
very small and unimportant. Overall, the evidence is that the splitting stocks move more with
both the old group and the new group to approximately the same extent. Thus, there is little or
no reliable evidence of excess comovement following stock splits. The vast majority of the
apparent effect is attributable to an increase in the fundamental beta of these stocks.

       The unreliable bivariate regressions show an increase in comovement with the new
group. For example, over the full period the beta on high-priced stocks falls by 0.026, while the
beta on low-priced stocks increases by 0.239. However, as with the S&P500 additions sample,
this discrepancy between the univariate and bivariate regression results may be an indication of
                                                  17
shifts in the properties of the group returns in addition to the increase in the fundamental beta
of the individual stocks suggested by the univariate regression results.



5. Model Implications and Parameter Instability

The empirical results in Section 4 suggest that the fundamental betas of the stocks in the two
samples are increasing around the event. Moreover, there are more complex patterns in both
the univariate and bivariate coefficients that are potentially consistent with changes in the
parameters of the model that are not associated with excess comovement. Specifically, in one
subperiod the S&P additions sample shows an increase in the relative beta on the S&P500 in the
univariate regression, and both samples show shifts in the loadings from the group that the stock
is leaving to the group that it is joining in the bivariate regressions.

         In this section, we again turn to the model from Section 2 to consider in more detail the
effects of three forms of parameter instability that can potentially explain these results—(1)
changes in the fundamental betas of the stocks, (2) changes in the idiosyncratic risk of group
returns, and (3) changes in the fundamental betas of group returns. Throughout this analysis we
assume that there is no excess comovement at all, i.e.,

                                         ui2   ui2  0 i  1, 2                                              (13)

so that all the changes in the coefficients are driven by changes in fundamentals.

         While the univariate and bivariate are available in closed form, as shown in Section 2, it
is easier to get the economic intuition for the effects of parameter instability in the context of
some simple numerical examples, where the parameter values are chosen to be representative
of those in the data.9 We start with a base case and examine variants of this example in the
subsections to follow. For the base case we assume (1) no parameter instability, i.e., the
parameters are the same before and after the group switch, and (2) perfect symmetry across the


9
 In our stylized model there is a single unobservable fundamental factor. To calibrate this model we use the value-
weighted CRSP portfolio to proxy for this factor. The properties of the group returns, i.e., their betas with respect
to this factor and their residual risk, vary across the two samples and across the two groups within each sample, so
for ease of exposition we use parameter values within the range spanned by the data.

                                                         18
two groups, i.e., the parameters governing the two group returns are the same. More specifically,
we assume

                      b i  bi  1  ei   ei  0.2% i  1, 2
                                                                                               (14)
                      b y  b y  1  ey   ey  1.73%  f   f  1%

with volatilities computed on a daily basis. These daily volatilities imply an annualized volatility
of the fundamental factor of 15.9% and annualized total (idiosyncratic) volatilities at the group
and stock levels of 16.2% (3.2%) and 31.7% (27.5%), respectively. The qualitative nature of the
results below are not affected by the precise parameterization. For convenience, we further
assume that the idiosyncratic shocks at the group level are uncorrelated

                              cov(e1, e2 )  cov(e1, e2 )  0                                  (15)

This covariance influences the bivariate regression coefficients, but this assumption has no
qualitative effect on the key results, i.e., the changes in coefficients across the event.

       The resulting univariate and bivariate regression coefficients are

                    1   2  1   2  0.962 1   1   2   2  0.000
                                                                                               (16)
                    1b   2b  1b   2b  0.490 1b   1b   2b   2b  0.000

These base case results and the associated parameter inputs are summarized in the first row of
Table 3, Panels B and A, respectively, along with the corresponding inputs and results for the
three other numerical examples discussed in Sections 5.1-5.3 in the succeeding rows. Due to the
assumptions of parameter stability and symmetry, the coefficients are identical across the two
groups and across the pre- and post-event period. The univariate coefficients are slightly less
than 1 because idiosyncratic risk at the group level causes a slight attenuation of the coefficient.
In other words, the group return is proxying for the fundamental factor, but it is not a perfect
proxy because there is a small amount of idiosyncratic risk. In the bivariate regressions, the
fundamental loading is split equally across the two groups with similar but somewhat smaller
attenuation.




                                                  19
5.1 Changes in Stock Betas

First, consider the case where the loading of stock y on the fundamental factor, b yt , is allowed

to vary across the sub-periods but all the other parameters are kept at their values in equations
(14) and (15). Specifically, assume

                                              b y  1.0 by  1.2                                      (17)

i.e., the fundamental loading of the stock increases by 20% after the event.

           The resulting univariate and bivariate regression coefficients are10

                    1   2  0.962 1   2  1.154 1   1   2   2  0.192
                                                                                                      (19)
                    1b   2b  0.490 1b   2b  0.588 1b   1b   2b   2b  0.098

The increase in the fundamental loading of the stock from 1.0 to 1.2 shows up almost one for
one in the regression coefficients, with this change being split equally between the two bivariate
coefficients.

           For the univariate regressions, these results coincide closely with those in Table 2, Panel
A for the stock split sample. With the exception of the 1988-2000 sample period, they also look
like those in Table 1, Panel A for the S&P additions sample. In other words, there is clear evidence
of an increase in the fundamental loadings of the stocks across the events. However, the bivariate
results paint a more complex picture in both cases. It is clearly not the case that this increase
shows up equally in both coefficients in these regressions. Thus, for the bivariate regression
results to be consistent with the absence of excess comovement, there must be other shifts in
the parameters. We turn next to the effect of changes in the idiosyncratic risk of the group
returns.




10
     For ease of reference, we tabulate these results in the second row of Table 3, Panels A and B.

                                                           20
5.2 Changes in Group Idiosyncratic Risk

Let us return to the base case parameter values, with the exception that we now allow the
idiosyncratic risk of the group 1 returns to vary across the event. Specifically,

                        e21  0.20%  e1  0.24%  e22   e22  0.20%                         (20)

i.e., the idiosyncratic volatility of group 1 returns increases by 20%. Note that because the group
is well-diversified and thus idiosyncratic risk is small to begin with, this increase moves the total
annualized volatility of group 1 returns from 16.2% to only 16.3%.

       The resulting univariate regression coefficients are

          1  0.962 1  0.946  2   2  0.962 1   1  0.016  2   2  0.000          (21a)

and the bivariate regression coefficients are

   1b   2b  0.490 1b  0.400  2b  0.577 1b   1b  0.090  2b   2b  0.086         (21b)

(see the third row of Table 3, Panels A and B). The group one return is now a slightly poorer proxy
for the fundamental factor after the event. This effect shows up in the univariate regression as a
small decline of 0.016 in the group one beta. However, the effects on the bivariate regression
coefficients are much more dramatic. After the event, the regression shifts substantial weight
from the group one return to the group two return. Even though the volatility of the group one
return has only gone up slightly, this return is highly correlated with the group two return, so
even a small deterioration in its ability to proxy for the fundamental factor causes a large move
in the coefficients. Specifically, the coefficient on the group one return declines by 0.1, more than
5 times the magnitude of the move in its univariate counterpart, and in sharp contrast to the
result in Section 5.1 above where, as expected, the bivariate coefficients move by about half as
much as those in the univariate regressions. There is also a roughly corresponding increase in the
coefficient on the group two return. Note that we obtain these spurious results with bivariate
regressions though we explicitly assumed no excess comovement in the setup.

       There are two additional features to note about changes in the idiosyncratic volatility of
group returns. First, at these parameter values the magnitude of the percentage change in the

                                                 21
bivariate coefficients is approximately equal to the percentage change in idiosyncratic volatility—
20% in the numerical example above. Second, a qualitatively and quantitatively similar effect
arises if the idiosyncratic volatility of group two returns declines. The key point is that
economically small movements in volatility can produce shifts in the coefficients in the bivariate
regressions as documented for both the S&P500 and stock split samples. However, these shifts
cannot explain the differences between the changes in the univariate coefficients in the 1988-
2000 subsample for S&P500 additions. To resolve this anomaly, we next consider shifts in the
fundamental betas of the group returns.



5.3 Changes in Group Betas

Finally, to see the effects of a change in the fundamental beta of the group returns, consider
again the base case with parameter stability and symmetry across the groups, except that the
beta of group 2 (the group that the stock is joining) changes across the event. Specifically,

                          b1  b1  1.0 b 2  1.0 b2  0.8                                      (22)

i.e., the fundamental loading of the group 2 returns declines by 20% across the event.

       The resulting univariate and bivariate regression coefficients, as also reported in the final
row of Table 3, Panels A and B, are

    1  1  0.962  2  0.962  2  1.176 1   1  0  2   2  0.215
                                                                                                (22)
    1b   2b  0.490 1b  0.595  2b  0.476 1b   1b  0.105  2b   2b  0.014

Given these parameter values, the increase in the univariate coefficient on group 2 (0.215) is
approximately equal to the decrease in the fundamental beta of the group 2 returns (0.200). The
primary effect is that the group two return is now less sensitive to the fundamental factor after
the event and therefore the loading on this return must increase in order to explain the
unchanged fundamental loading of the stock.

       In the bivariate regression, this increase shows up as a smaller 0.105 increase in the
coefficient on the group one return with little change in the coefficient on the group two return.


                                                22
As in the univariate regression, the loadings are adjusting so that the fundamental loading of the
stock is almost fully captured. However, after the event the regression favors the group one
return as a proxy for the fundamental factor because, with a decreased beta but unchanged
idiosyncratic volatility, the group two return has now become a relatively poorer proxy.



5.4 A Matched Sample Approach

Subsections 5.1-5.3 illustrate that parameter instability can generate effects on the univariate
and bivariate regression coefficients similar to those seen in the data, even in our stylized model
and, more importantly, in the complete absence of excess comovement. Of course, excess
comovement can also generate movements in the coefficients. The question is whether we can
distinguish between these competing explanations. We can potentially identify shifts in the
parameters in the data that are consistent with the logic above, but it is important to remember
that our numerical results are in the context of a stylized model. The real data generating
processes are undoubtedly more complex. However, there is a different approach that will allow
us to determine if the empirical results are driven by excess comovement. In particular, shifts in
the properties of the group returns will show up in the regression results regardless of the
identity of the stocks whose returns are used as the dependent variables. If we can find a sample
of stocks that match the key features of the changes in properties of the stock returns in the two
samples, i.e., the movements in their fundamental betas, then all the other effects associated
with the group returns will show up in regressions using this matched sample. We pursue this
exercise in Section 6.



6. Comovement Revisited

It would be a remarkable coincidence if selecting samples based on S&P500 index additions and
stock splits was independently choosing stocks whose betas increase after the event. However,
as it turns out, these two samples have something in common. The stocks in both samples have
abnormally good performance before the event. This phenomenon is well known for stock
splits—only companies whose stock price goes up split their stocks—but it is also intuitive for

                                                23
index additions—S&P is biased towards larger, better-performing stocks for inclusion in their
flagship index, holding other criteria constant. Moreover, the goal of making the index
representative of the market in terms of industry balance also leads to the inclusion of industries
and firms within these industries that have performed relatively well.

         To examine the extent of these effects, for each stock in the two samples we record in
which momentum decile it falls. In other words, when stocks are ranked into 10 portfolios based
on returns over the past year (i.e., from losers to winners), how many of our sample stocks are
in each portfolio? These results, along with the mean and median returns of the sample stocks
are reported in Table 4. If the decision to include a stock in the S&P500 or to split were
independent of past returns, we would expect approximately 10% of the sample to fall in each
decile. In contrast, both samples are tilted heavily towards winner stocks, with the effect being
more pronounced for the split sample. For example, 57% of the split sample falls into the top 2
deciles, while the corresponding number for S&P500 additions is 37%. Average returns for these
samples are 109.1% and 41.6%, although the medians are lower, suggesting a right-skewed
distribution.

         Given this evidence, the questions are (1) whether selecting on positive past performance
can explain the beta increases that are consistent with the initial empirical results in Section 4,
and (2) whether controlling for this effect eliminates the appearance of excess comovement. We
look at the former question in Section 6.1 and the latter in Section 6.2.



6.1 Momentum and Beta

In examining changes in beta following periods of good performance, we follow the momentum
methodology described in Section 3. While our focus is on winners, we report the winner and
loser stock betas beginning 2 years before the holding period and continuing up to 2 years after
the beginning of the holding period.11 The results, in Table 5 and Figure 1, show that betas of
winner stocks increase dramatically during the formation period and continue to increase during


11
   These tests require a long trading period potentially leading to a survivorship bias. The results, however, are
virtually unaffected even when shorter periods are used.

                                                          24
the holding period. They stabilize thereafter for a few months and begin to decline. Specifically,
we find that betas of winner stocks increase from 0.976 to 1.143 (a statistically significant change
of 0.167) from Year-1 to Year 0, and from 0.964 in Year-2 to 1.143 in Year 0, a statistically and
economically significant increase of 0.179. The betas continue to increase further during the
holding period to 1.271 (a statistically significant change of 0.128) from Year 0 to Year+1 before
declining to 1.166 in Year+2.

       This pattern of consistently increasing betas for stocks with high past returns has the
potential to explain the results in Section 4. The betas of the stocks in the sample increase around
the event in question, and therefore they comove more with all stocks after the event, both
stocks in the group they are joining and stocks in the group they are leaving.



6.2 Comovement with Momentum Matched Firms (and Dimson’s betas)

For the analysis in this subsection, we make two adjustments in order to better assess the
magnitude of excess comovement, if any, present in the data. First, because we are using daily
data, nonsynchronous trading may limit our ability to get accurate regression coefficients. To the
extent that stocks do not all trade simultaneously at the end of each day, the observed return on
a stock will be potentially correlated with leads and lags of the returns on a given portfolio (Denis
and Kadlec (1994)). The correct adjustment for this effect in order to uncover the true regression
coefficient is to sum the coefficients in a regression which includes these leads and lags (Dimson
(1979)). Nonsynchronous trading is likely more important for the stock splits sample since these
stocks are smaller and less liquid on average than those added to the S&P500. However, this
adjustment is likely to be more important for the S&P500 additions sample when we examine
changes in coefficients pre- and post-event. The intuition is that it is changes in nonsynchronous
trading across the two periods that matter for examining differences in coefficients, and while
there is little evidence of major liquidity effects associated with stock splits that is not true for
index additions. Throughout the analysis in this section, we use two leads and lags for all portfolio
returns used as independent variables.




                                                 25
        Second, following up on the Section 6.1 results, where we find evidence of increasing
betas in momentum stocks, and the matched sample logic of Section 5.4, we also compare
comovement of sample stocks with a matched sample that exhibits similar momentum
characteristics. Barberis, Shleifer, and Wurgler (2005) use a sample of firms matched by size and
industry, but do not control for momentum, which appears to be the critical factor due to the
beta patterns associated with winner stocks. Consequently, for each addition, we select a
matched firm from the same size decile that is not a member of the S&P500 index and is closest
in terms of lagged 252-day return to the added firm at the time of inclusion.12 Due to the
exceptional performance of some firms in the sample, a perfect match is not possible. While the
average and median returns of the matched stocks are only slightly lower than those of the
original sample, for stocks in the top 10 percent of the sample, the matched stocks have returns
that are significantly lower, albeit still high, in some cases.13

        Like Barberis, Shleifer, and Wurgler (2005), Green and Hwang (2009) construct a sample
matched by size and industry without controlling for momentum. The matched sample that we
use in this paper for stock splits controls for both size and momentum. For each stock split, we
first select a group of firms from the high-priced portfolio that fall in the same size decile.
Thereafter, we choose firms that are closest to the splitting firm in terms of momentum. The
matched firm is the one that comes closest in price and momentum to the sample firm within
the same size decile. Given the more challenging matching criteria and the more extreme positive
returns of the stock split sample, it is not surprising that the match is somewhat worse than for
the S&P500 additions sample. In this case, even the median return of the matched sample is
more than 7% below that of the original sample, with much larger differences for stocks with the
most extreme returns. In spite of this issue, it is still worth examining the results, realizing that if
the magnitudes of beta changes are correlated with the magnitudes of returns, particularly for
very high returns, the matched sample will not exhibit quite the same shifts in fundamentals as
the original sample.



12
   In results not presented here, requiring the matched firm to be from the same industry as the sample firm does
not change the results.
13
   In the interests of brevity, these results are not tabulated in the paper.

                                                       26
       Tables 5 and 6 present the results for the S&P500 index addition and stock split samples,
respectively. In both cases, Panel A provides the univariate regression results, while those for the
bivariate regression are reported in Panel B. Within each panel, we first present the results for
the sample of event stocks. These results are comparable to those in Tables 1 and 2, except that
we now use the Dimson adjustment to estimate the coefficients. We then provide the estimation
results for the matched sample. Finally, we show the difference between the original and
momentum-matched samples.

       For the S&P500 index additions, the Dimson adjustment alone generally accounts for
more than 50% of the effect that appears in the original analysis. For example, Δβ2 in the most
significant sub-period (1988-2000) drops from 0.214 to 0.078. Not surprisingly, this large change
is primarily due to an increase in the estimated beta prior to the addition of the stock to the
index. It is prior to being included in the index that the stock is likely to be less liquid, and
therefore the Dimson adjustment is also likely to be more important. Looking at the differences
between the coefficient changes across regressions, Δβ2-Δβ1, only in this same sub-period is the
coefficient statistically positive with a value of 0.129 and a t-statistic of 2.55. However, a similar
result holds for the matched sample in 1988-2000. For these firms we get a value of 0.111 with a
t-statistic of 2.23. Across all sub-periods there is no single difference above 0.020 between the
original and matched samples. To put it succinctly, there is absolutely no evidence of any excess
comovement once we control for the momentum effect.

       That said, one might legitimately wonder why, in the 1988-2000 subperiod, both the
sample and matched stocks exhibit univariate regression coefficients that vary so much across
S&P500 and non-S&P500 stocks. The answer, as discussed in Section 5, is a shift in fundamental
parameters over the event period. First, it is important to note that the anomalous result above
is confined to the years 1999 and 2000. For the other years in the subperiod, there are no
statistically significant effects. However, in these two years the effect reported in Panel A of Table
6 is much larger. The explanation is a shift in the fundamental betas of the two groups of stocks,
S&P500 stocks and non-S&P500 stocks, across the event dates. The betas of these portfolios with
respect to the value-weighted market behave very differently. In results not tabulated here, we
find that the average beta of the S&P500 portfolio decreases by 0.06 while that of the non-

                                                 27
S&P500 portfolio increases by 0.16. Depending on the other parameters, this effect alone would
suggest an increase in the beta of a stock on the S&P500 of more than 0.20 relative to that on a
portfolio of non-S&P500 stocks as shown in Section 5.3. This relative increase shows up primarily
as an increase in beta on the S&P500 because the fundamental betas of the stocks in both the
S&P500 addition and matched samples are also increasing. We speculate that the movements in
the fundamental betas of the group portfolios are due to the technology boom at that time. As
high risk technology stocks become more important in the overall market, the S&P500, which is
relatively light in these stocks, exhibits a declining beta throughout this period. Regardless of the
precise explanation, the fact that the effect shows up in the matched sample is clear evidence
that it is a result of parameter instability at the group level.

         For the bivariate regressions, the same basic results of no excess comovement hold. There
are no statistically significant differences between the beta changes associated with the S&P
addition sample and the matched sample. Moreover, while some of the individual beta changes
have magnitudes of 0.1 or slightly higher in both samples, none of these individual differences is
statistically significant. Again, the fact that similar patterns show up in the matched sample is an
indication it is the properties of the group returns not the stocks that is changing across the event.
In this case, the shifts in loadings across the two groups are consistent with changes in the relative
fractions of idiosyncratic risk as illustrated in Section 5.2.

         For stock splits, we have already established that even the original sample exhibits little
or no evidence of excess comovement when comparing the univariate regression results across
low-priced stocks (the new group) and high-priced stocks (the old group). Nevertheless, it is still
worthwhile looking briefly at the results with Dimson betas for a momentum matched sample.
Though we estimate Dimson betas for uniformity, we don’t anticipate Dimson betas making a
significant difference because non-synchronous trading is unlikely to be different for the high-
priced and low-priced groups. On the other hand, almost all splitting stocks are likely to be
momentum stocks so a properly matched sample should also exhibit similarly high changes in
betas.

         The basic results in Table 7 are affected little by the Dimson adjustment—comovement
with both portfolios increases after the split by similar amounts. Not surprisingly, the same
                                                   28
phenomenon shows up in the matched sample, although it is smaller than in the original sample.
We attribute these differences to our inability to match some of the high returns on the splitting
stocks in our matched sample. When taking differences across the samples, the values are
economically very small and predominantly statistically insignificant.

       Similar results obtain for the bivariate regressions and excess comovement is not evident
in any sub-period except during 1991-2004. We attribute this result to the imperfect match.
Nevertheless, the bivariate regression results are still puzzling. As an example, consider the
results for both samples (i.e., the stock split sample and the matched sample) over the full period.
In both cases, the coefficient on high priced stocks decreases, while that on low-priced stocks
increases, and the changes are statistically significant in all cases. Clearly this result is not due to
excess comovement since it shows up in the matched sample, and there is no change in group
membership for these stocks. However, as noted in Section 5.2, small changes in the
characteristics of the group portfolios can have large effects on these bivariate coefficients. In
particular, increases in the idiosyncratic volatility of the returns on the high-priced group relative
to that of the low-priced group are consistent with this phenomenon. A relative increase in
idiosyncratic risk makes the group return a poorer proxy for the common (fundamental) factor,
thus decreasing the weight that the regression puts on this return and increasing the weight on
the other group return.

       These results highlight the dangers of interpreting the coefficients from bivariate
regressions, but they only strengthen our overall conclusion that there is no meaningful evidence
of excess comovement.



7. Robustness Checks

We reconfirm the baseline results on comovement by repeating our analysis with weekly data
and for index deletions.




                                                  29
7.1 Weekly Data

Though Barberis, Shleifer, and Wurgler (2005) and Green and Hwang (2009) present evidence of
comovement using daily, weekly and monthly data, their results are strongest with daily data.
Accordingly, the main results in the paper are based on daily data. Here we test the results with
weekly data for S&P 500 additions and stock splits. Essentially, using weekly data has an effect
similar to adding two leads and two lags to the beta estimates, as we do above. Not surprisingly,
the results are much weaker with weekly data than with daily data. Once a matched sample is
used to control for changes in fundamental factors, there is no evidence of residual excess
comovement in univariate regressions for S&P 500 additions or for stock splits. In addition, there
is no evidence of comovement for stock splits in the bivariate regressions.14 However, there is
weak evidence of comovement in bivariate regressions for the S&P 500 additions sample, which
is not surprising given the prior discussion of instability of coefficients in bivariate regressions.



7.2 Index Deletions

Our baseline analysis has considered only S&P 500 index additions because they are more
interesting, important, and the focus of prior research. Since stocks are both added to and
deleted from the S&P500 index, usually at the same time, it is informative to also study index
deletions for a reverse comovement effect. Unlike index additions, which are always voluntary
and at the discretion of the Index committee of Standard and Poor’s, index deletions may be
voluntary or involuntary. Index deletions are involuntary when a firm ceases to exist (mergers
and bankruptcies) or when a firm ceases to meet primary criteria established by Standard and
Poor’s (reincorporation in a foreign country). Voluntary index deletions may occur because a
firm is no longer representative of the U.S. economy, the industry is less representative of the
economy, or the firm has become too small in size.




14
     Results are not reported in the interests of brevity.

                                                             30
        We repeat the analysis of S&P 500 index additions with a sample of primarily voluntary
deletions.15 Due to a smaller deletions sample and deleted firms potentially undergoing
structural changes, we expect evidence of comovement in index deletions to be weaker. In
addition, we anticipate that a significant fraction of the comovement may be explained by non-
synchronous trading. We duplicate the analyses in Tables 1 and 6 for index deletions,16 and find
that the results are consistent with our results for index additions. Relative to Table 1, we find
that the deleted firms move less with the S&P 500 index after deletion based on both univariate
and bivariate regression coefficients, and that the results are primarily derived from the 1979-
2000 period, as in Barberis, Shleifer, and Wurgler (2005). Relative to Table 6 with a matched
sample and Dimson adjustments, we find that there is no residual evidence of excess
comovement for the S&P 500 deletions sample.                      Thus, the analysis for index deletions
corroborates evidence for index additions to suggest an absence of excess comovement.



8. Conclusion

Motivated by a simple model that captures the essence of the excess comovement hypothesis,
we revisit the results of two well-known papers in the literature on comovement before and after
S&P500 index additions (Barberis, Shleifer, and Wurgler, 2005) and stock splits (Green and
Hwang, 2009). The model implies that looking at univariate regressions rather than bivariate
regressions is more informative about the economic magnitude of the effect of interest, and, in
particular, that the differences between the coefficients in univariate regressions on the returns
of the group that the stock is leaving and the group that it is joining identify this effect. When
we conduct this empirical exercise, the evidence points strongly to the conclusion that the
existing results are due not to excess comovement but to changes in the comovement of stocks
with fundamentals. These beta changes themselves are a feature common to winner stocks, an
empirical phenomenon the documentation of which may be new to the literature. By making
sure to measure these fundamental betas accurately, and controlling for this effect using a


15
   As for index additions, we extend the sample to 2012. The sample sizes for overlapping periods are similar to
those in Barberis, Shleifer, and Wurgler (2005).
16
   Results are not tabulated here for brevity.

                                                        31
matched sample of winner stocks, we show that there is no longer any evidence of meaningful
excess comovement from either an economic or statistical standpoint.




                                             32
Appendix: Proofs


Assume the driving processes for returns prior to the group switch are
                               y t  b y f t  c1u1t  e yt          c1  0
                               x1t  b1 f t  u1t  e1t
                               x 2t  b 2 f t  u 2t  e2t
                               var(eit )   ei        var(u it )   ui       var( f )  
                                                  2                       2                       2
                                                                                                  f


and similarly after the group switch
                               y t  b y f t  c 2 u 2t  e yt        c2  0
                               x1t  b1 f t  u1t  e1t
                               x 2t  b2 f t  u 2t  e2t
                               var(eit )   ei2       var(u it )   ui2      var( f )   f2


Univariate Regressions
In the univariate regressions
                                                  yt    1 x1t   t
                                                                               ,
                                                  yt     2 x2 t   t
the probability limit of the slope coefficient estimates are
                                              cov( yt , x1t )             cov( yt , x2t )
                                    1                          2                      .
                                                var( x1t )                  var( x2t )
       Computing the coefficients prior to and after the switch of stock y from group 1 to
group 2:
                          cov(b y f t  c1u1t  e yt , b1 f t  u1t  e1t )            b y b1 f  c1 u1
                                                                                                 2       2

                   1                                                             
                                      var(b1 f t  u1t  e1t )                                    2x1
                          cov(b y f t  c2u 2t  e yt , b1 f t  u1t  e1t )           by b1 f2
                   1                                                                                      .
                                       var(b1 f t  u1t  e1t )                           x21
                    2x1  b12  2f   u21   e21  x21  b12 f2   u21   e21
Similarly,
                                  b y b2                    b y b2 f2  c2 u22
                                              2

                          2                 f
                                                      2 
                                      2x 2                            x22
                           2x 2  b 22  2f   u2 2   e22         x22  b22 f2   u22   e22

                                                                33
       Assuming the parameters other than stock y’s loadings on the fundamental factor and
the non-fundamental group shocks are fixed across the 2 sub-periods, i.e.,

          b1  b1  b1 b 2  b2  b2  f   f2   2f  ui   ui2   ui2  ei   ei2   ei2
                                                2                         2                   2



then
                                                     (by  b y ) 2f  c1 u21
                                        1   1 
                                                                  x21
                                                       (by  b y ) 2f  c2 u22
                                        2   2 
                                                                   x22
If, in addition b y  by  by , then

                                                               c1 u21
                                               1   1                 0
                                                                 x21
                                                              c2 u22
                                               2   2                  0
                                                                 x22


Bivariate Regressions
Consider the bivariate regression:
                                          yt    1b x1t   2b x2t   t
The probability limits of the coefficients are
                            ( X T X ) 1 ( X T Y ) 
                                   cov( yt , x1t ) var( x2t )  cov( yt , x2t ) cov( x1t , x2t )
                          1b 
                                            var( x1t ) var( x2t )  cov( x1t , x2t ) 2
                                   cov( yt , x2t ) var( x1t )  cov( yt , x1t ) cov( x1t , x2t )
                           2b 
                                           var( x1t ) var( x2t )  cov( x1t , x2t ) 2
where the coefficients reflect a natural symmetry. It is convenient to rewrite these expressions
in terms of the univariate coefficients defined above:




                                                           34
                       cov( yt , x1t ) var( x2t )  cov( yt , x2t )corr ( x1t , x2t ) var( x1t ) var( x2t )
            1b 
                                          (1  corr ( x1t , x2t ) 2 ) var( x1t ) var( x2t )
                                1           cov( yt , x1t )                              var( x2t ) cov( yt , x2t ) 
                                                              corr     ( x   , x     )
                                            var( x )
                       1  corr ( x1t , x2t ) 2
                                                                             1t     2 t
                                                                                          var( x1t ) var( x2t ) 
                                                     1t

                                                                                           
                
                           1                  corr ( x1t , x2t ) var( x2t )  2 
                                        2  1
                  1  corr ( x1t , x2t )                                   var( x1t ) 
                             1                                               var( x1t ) 
             2b                                 corr ( x   , x     )                 1
                   1  corr ( x1t , x2t ) 2                                var( x2t ) 
                                                 2           1t     2 t



As above, computing these values prior to and after the switch of stock y from group 1 to group
2:
                          1                            x2                             1                                 x1 
          1b                         1   x1, x 2       2            2b                           2   x1, x 2      
                  1   x1, x 2
                              2
                                                       x1                        1   x1, x 2
                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                           x 2 1 

                         1                    x2                   1                           x1 
         1b                 1   x1, x 2      2   2b                     2   x1, x 2      1
                   1     2
                             
                           x1, x 2             x1               1   x1, x 2 
                                                                        2
                                                                                                   x 2 
                     cov( x1 , x 2 )
          x1, x 2                  cov( x1 , x 2 )  b1 b 2  f  cov(e1 , e 2 )
                                                                2

                           x1  x 2
                       cov( x1 , x 2 )
          x1, x 2                         cov( x1 , x 2 )  b1b2 f2  cov(e1 , e2 )
                           x1 x 2
Again assuming the parameters other than the weights on the non-fundamental group shocks
are fixed across the 2 sub-periods,
                                                                                                     
                          1b  1b 
                                           1 
                                                  1
                                                      2
                                                                          
                                                                   1  1   x1, x 2
                                                                                         x2
                                                                                         x1
                                                                                                 
                                                                                              2  2   0     
                                                      x1, x 2                                        
                                                                                                      
                          2b   2b 
                                            1 
                                                  1
                                                       2
                                                                              
                                                                   2   2   x1, x 2
                                                                                          x1
                                                                                          x2
                                                                                                     
                                                                                               1  1   0    
                                                       x1, x 2                                        
If we further assume
                                       e21   e22  0 c1  c2  1 by  b1  b2  1

then




                                                                          35
                 2f   u21             2f
             1 2            1 1  2
                 f   u21           f   u21
                     2f                  2f   u22
             2  2                  2  2           1
                  f   u22              f   u22
                                       2f
              x1, x 2 
                           ( 2f   u21 )( 2f   u22 )
                                                    2f   u22       2f 
              1b 
                           1
                      1   x1, x 2 
                            2
                                     1   x1, x 2
                                                                             
                                                                                      1
                                                     f   u1  f   u 2  1   x1, x 2
                                                       2      2     2      2            2
                                                                                                       
                                                                                             1  x21, x 2  1
                                                                            
                          1           2                            2f                2f   u21 
              2b                          f
                                                                                                   0
                      1   x21, x 2  2f   u22       ( 2
                                                                  2
                                                                       )( 2
                                                                               2
                                                                                    )    2
                                                                                              2
                                                                                                    
                                                           f       u1     f     u2       f     u 2
                                                                                                    
Similarly,
                                                    1b  0  2b  1




                                                            36
                                                 References


Barberis, N., & Shleifer, A., 2003. Style investing. Journal of Financial Economics, 68.

Barberis, N., Shleifer, A., & Wurgler, J., 2005. Comovement. Journal of Financial Economics, 75(2), 283–
        317.

Basak, S., & Pavlova, A., 2013. Asset prices and institutional investors. American Economic Review, 103(5),
        1728-1758.

Bodurtha, J. N., Kim, D. S., & Lee, C. M., 1995. Closed-end country funds and US market sentiment.
        Review of Financial Studies, 8(3), 879-918.

Boyer, B.H., 2011. Style-related comovement: Fundamentals or labels? Journal of Finance, 66(1), 307–32.

Chen, H., Noronha, G. & Singal, V., 2004, The Price Response to S&P 500 Index Additions and Deletions:
        Evidence of Asymmetry and a New Explanation, Journal of Finance, 59(4), 1901-1930.

Claessens, S., & Yafeh, Y., 2011. Additions to market indices and the comovement of stock returns
        around the world. IMF Working Paper, #11/47.

DeMarzo, P.M., Kaniel, R., & Kremer, I., 2004. Diversification as a public good: Community effects in
        portfolio choice. Journal of Finance, 59(4), 1677–1715.

Denis, D. J., & G. B. Kadlec, 1994, Corporate events, trading activity, and the estimation of systematic
        risk: Evidence form equity offerings and share repurchases, Journal of Finance, 49(5), 1787–
        1811.

Dimson, E., 1979. Risk measurement when shares are subject to infrequent trading. Journal of Financial
        Economics, 7(2), 197-226.

Elliott, W.B., Van Ness, B.F., Walker, M.D., & Wan, R.S., 2006. What drives the S&P 500 inclusion effect?
        An analytical survey. Financial Management, 35(4), 31-48.

Green, T.C., & Hwang, B., 2009. Price-based return comovement. Journal of Financial Economics 93, 37–
        50.

Greenwood, R., & Sosner, N., 2007. Trading patterns and excess comovement of stock returns. Financial
        Analysts Journal, 63, 69-81.




                                                      37
Greenwood, R., 2008, Excess comovement and stock returns; Evidence from cross-sectional variation in
         Nikkei 225 weights. Review of Financial Studies, 21, 1153-186.

Hardouvelis, G., Porta, R.L., & Wizman, T.A., 1994. What moves the discount on country equity funds?.
         In The internationalization of equity markets (pp. 345-403). University of Chicago Press.

Hou, K., & Moskowitz, T.J., 2005. Market frictions, price delay, and the cross-section of expected returns.
         Review of Financial Studies, 18(3), 981-1020.

Jegadeesh, N., & Titman, S., 2001. Proﬁtability of momentum strategies: An evaluation of alternative
         explanations. Journal of Finance, 56, 699–720.

Kasch, M., & Sarkar, A., 2012, Is there an S&P500 index effect? Federal Reserve Bank Working paper, SSRN 2171235.

Lee, M. C., Shleifer, A., & Thaler, R.H., 1991, Investment sentiment and the closed-end fund puzzle, Journal of Finance
         46, 76–110.

Mase, B., 2008. Comovement in the FTSE 100 index. Applied Financial Economics Letters, 4, 9-12.

Pindyck, R., & Rotemberg, J., 1993. The comovement of stock prices. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
         108, 1073-104.

Pirinsky, C., & Wang, Q., 2006. Does corporate headquarters location matter for stock returns? Journal
         of Finance, 61(4), 1991-2015.

Rigobon, R., 2002. The curse of non-investment grade countries. Journal of Development Economics,
         69(2), 423–49.

Spanos, A., & McGuirk, A., 2002. The problem of near-multicollinearity revisited: Erratic vs. systematic
         volatility. Journal of Econometrics, 108(2), 365-393.

Tang, K. & Xiong, W., 2012, Index investing and the financialization of commodities, Financial Analysts
         Journal, 68(6): 54-74.

Vijh, A., 1994. S&P trading strategies and stock betas. Review of Financial Studies, 7, 215-51.

Von Drathen, C., 2013. Is there really excess comovement? Causal evidence from FTSE 100 index turnover, Working
         paper, LSE.




                                                         38
                                        Table 1: S&P Additions

We estimate the univariate and bivariate regressions
                                        yt    1 x1t   t
                                        yt     2 x2t   t
                                        yt    1b x1t   2b x2t   t
for a sample of stocks that are added to the S&P 500 index from 1962 through 2012. The pre-event
estimation period covers a one year window ending at the end of the month preceding announcement,
while the post-event period covers the one year window starting the month after the effective date of
index change. x1t and x 2t are returns to non-S&P 500 index and S&P 500 index at time t. Panel A
reports the univariate regression results, and Panel B reports the bivariate regression results. In each
cell, the first number is the mean and the second number is the corresponding t-statistic, where
standard errors are clustered by month.
Panel A. Univariate Regressions

                                  Non-S&P500 Group                     S&P500             Diff. of Diff.
   Sample Period     nobs          1           1    1        2        2      2      2  1
                               1.271      1.313      0.042     0.962     1.024    0.062       0.020
     1976-1987        197
                              29.422     27.202      1.055    24.643    26.830    2.305       0.763
                               1.263      1.278      0.015     0.984     1.198    0.214       0.199
     1988-2000        269
                              29.839     27.503      0.313    24.669    23.830    6.243       4.938
                               1.050      1.125      0.075     1.086     1.157    0.071      -0.004
     2001-2012        214
                              30.548     28.736      2.496    27.526    35.741    2.439      -0.137
                               1.198      1.240      0.042     1.010     1.134    0.125       0.083
     1976-2012        680
                              49.851     46.610      1.734    43.566    44.294    6.556       4.080

Panel B. Bivariate Regressions

                                   Non-S&P Group                       S&P500               Diff. of Diff.
                                  1b     1b         1b       2b       2b     2b     2b  1b
  Sample Period    nobs
                              0.907      0.632       -0.274    0.340    0.602     0.262        0.537
    1976-1987       197
                             15.366     11.692       -4.627    5.884   10.626     5.733        5.377
                              1.011      0.647       -0.364    0.281    0.667     0.386        0.750
    1988-2000       269
                             23.314     11.554       -5.877   10.557   18.177     8.789        7.373
                              0.951      0.691       -0.260    0.127    0.473     0.347       0.607
    2001-2012       214
                             13.407      9.456       -4.323    2.229    9.323     6.379       5.414
                              0.962      0.657       -0.305    0.249    0.587     0.338       0.643
    1976-2012       680
                             29.394     18.504       -8.708    9.143   21.347    12.249       10.675




                                                     39
                                            Table 2: Stock Splits

We estimate the univariate and bivariate regressions
                                   yt    1 x1t   t ; yt     2 x2 t   t
                                   yt    1b x1t   2 b x2 t   t
for a sample of 2-for-1 stock splits from 1962 through 2012. Our sample include all ordinary common
stock two-for-one splits with a pre-split price of $10 or greater during our sample period. x1t and x 2t
are return to a portfolio of high priced stocks whose price belongs to [3p/4, 5p/4] and low price stocks
with prices within [1p/4, 3p/4] at time t, where p is the pre-split price before effective date of split. The
pre-event (post-event) window is defined as the one year ending (beginning) one month before (after)
the split date. Panel A reports the univariate regression results and Panel B reports the bivariate regression
results. In each cell, the first number is the mean and the second number is the corresponding t-statistic,
where standard errors are clustered by month.

Panel A. Univariate Regressions

                                  High-Priced Group                      Low-Priced Group          Diff. of Diff.
  Sample Period      nobs         1            1       1             2          2     2     2  1
                               0.736       0.929        0.193        0.847      1.043      0.196      0.002
    1971-1990       2,350
                              48.771      54.709       17.138       49.059     60.555     18.554      0.443
                               0.798       1.014        0.216        0.937      1.186      0.248      0.033
    1991-2004       2,478
                              45.714      43.778       11.102       43.783     39.479     12.020      3.448
                               0.729       0.919        0.190        0.847      1.036      0.189      -0.001
    1976-1987       1,867
                              40.663      45.952       14.620       40.182     50.304     15.136      -0.189
                               0.796       1.001        0.205        0.968      1.206      0.237      0.032
    1988-2000       2,383
                              44.584      42.256       10.371       46.228     39.782     11.141      3.256
                               0.932       1.141        0.209        0.887      1.084      0.197      -0.012
    2001-2012        794
                              30.602      36.926        8.553       28.309     36.203      8.518      -0.976
                               0.792       0.993        0.200        0.910      1.124      0.213      0.013
    1976-2012       5,044
                              63.604      66.954       17.930       64.844     63.436     18.142      2.281




                                                         40
Panel B. Bivariate Regressions

                                 High-Priced Group           Low-Priced Group       Diff. of Diff.
                                  1b     1b     1b       2b      2b    2b    2b  1b
  Sample Period   nobs
                            -0.013      -0.043   -0.030    0.865    1.085   0.220      0.250
    1971-1990      2,350
                            -0.724      -1.721   -1.011   38.366   41.082   7.235      4.231
                             0.041       0.003   -0.038    0.883    1.171   0.289      0.326
    1991-2004      2,478
                             1.379       0.092   -1.271   28.630   34.457   6.884      4.729
                            -0.016      -0.068   -0.052    0.863    1.101   0.238      0.290
    1976-1987      1,867
                            -0.938      -2.336   -1.539   34.684   35.398   6.884      4.311
                             0.001      -0.035   -0.036    0.951    1.224   0.273      0.309
    1988-2000      2,383
                             0.027      -1.096   -1.160   29.898   37.527   6.124      4.229
                             0.356      0.420    0.064     0.568    0.707   0.140      0.075
    2001-2012       794
                             6.585      8.493    1.594    14.599   17.584   3.841      1.036
                             0.050      0.024    -0.026    0.858    1.097   0.239      0.265
    1976-2012      5,044
                             2.598      1.085    -1.271   43.961   48.520   9.363      5.956




                                                  41
                                                              Table 3: Numerical Examples

We calculate the univariate and bivariate regression coefficients implied by the model in Section 2 for four numerical examples. In all cases,
we assume no excess comovement, no correlation between idiosyncratic shocks at the group level, the same amount of idiosyncratic risk at
the stock level, and the same amount of fundamental risk:
                          u21   u21   u2 2   u22  0 cov(e1 , e 2 )  cov(e1 , e2 )  0  ey   ey  1.73%  f   f  1%
The base case (top row) assumes perfect symmetry. The subsequent examples allow for parameter instability across the event, specifically
(1) a change in the stock beta, (2) a change in idiosyncratic risk at the group level, and (3) a change in group beta. In each case, the deviations
from the base case for both the input parameters and the regression coefficients are highlighted in bold.

Panel A. Inputs

                              Case types                        Fundamental Loadings                               Group Idiosyncratic Volatility
                                                        b1        b1  b2 b2 b y                       by       e1         e1         e2            e2
                     Base Case                          1.0         1.0    1.0       1.0     1.0      1.0     0.20%       0.20%     0.20%        0.20%
                     (1) Change in stock beta           1.0         1.0    1.0       1.0     1.0      1.2     0.20%       0.20%     0.20%        0.20%
                     (2) Change in group i-risk         1.0         1.0    1.0       1.0     1.0      1.0     0.20%       0.24%     0.20%        0.20%
                     (3) Change in group beta           1.0         1.0    1.0       0.8     1.0      1.0     0.20%       0.20%     0.20%        0.20%


Panel B. Regression Coefficients

                                                      Univariate                                                                         Bivariate
        Case types                      Coefficient                              Change                                 Coefficient                                 Change
                                1         1      2          2         1   1         2   2          1b       1b        2b          2b          1b -  1b    2b -  2b
 Base Case                    0.962    0.962      0.962       0.962        0.000            0.000       0.490         0.490      0.490       0.490           0.000         0.000
 (1) Change in stock beta     0.962    1.154      0.962       1.154       0.192             0.192       0.490         0.588      0.490       0.588          0.098          0.098
 (2) Change in group i-risk   0.962    0.946      0.962       0.962       -0.016            0.000       0.490         0.400      0.490       0.577          -0.090         0.086
 (3) Change in group beta     0.962    0.962      0.962       1.176        0.000            0.215       0.490         0.595      0.490       0.476          0.105         -0.014


                                                                                 42
                      Table 4: Past Return Performance of Sample Stocks

For each stock in the sample we record which momentum decile portfolio it would be in based
on its returns over the prior 12 months. The table reports the percentage of stocks in the S&P500
additions and stock splits samples that fall in each decile and the mean and median return on
these stocks over the prior year.


                                                  Frequency (%)
                                                 S&P500       Stock
                             Decile             Additions     Splits
                             Losers                  2.94      0.28
                             2                       3.68      0.89
                             3                       5.00      1.61
                             4                       4.12      2.92
                             5                      12.06      4.78
                             6                       9.12      7.66
                             7                      11.91    10.09
                             8                      14.12    14.75
                             9                      16.62    21.36
                             Winners                20.44    35.66
                             Mean Return           41.6% 109.1%
                             Median Return         25.0%     63.9%




                                               43
                                                   Table 5: Beta Changes and Momentum

At the end of each June from 1976 through 2011, stocks with a price of at least $10 that do not fall into the bottom size decile of NYSE stocks are
assigned into 10 momentum deciles based on their cumulative returns over the preceding 252 days. We estimate betas for each stock based on
a rolling window of 252 days from two years before formation of momentum portfolios through two years after formation, and compare beta
changes for both the top and bottom two momentum portfolios. Thus, betas for years -2 and -1 are estimated over rolling windows ending 504
and 252 trading days before portfolio formation, respectively. Post-momentum portfolio formation years allow for a 21-trading day skip, and
are estimated over 252 days ending 273 and 525 trading days after portfolio formation. In each cell, the first number is the time series average
of the mean, and the second number is the corresponding t-statistic.


             Momentum         Year        Year        Year        Year          Year     Year 0 –    Year 0 –    Year 1 –    Year 2 –
               Decile          -2          -1           0          1             2       Year -2     Year -1      Year 0      Year 0

                              0.964      0.976        1.143       1.271        1.166      0.179       0.167       0.128        0.023
            10 (Winners)
                             21.865      20.588      21.313      21.163        25.997     4.139       4.891       3.217        0.553
                              0.918      0.916        0.981       1.038        0.994      0.063       0.065       0.057        0.013
                  9
                             21.974      21.109      21.917      23.529        27.510     2.161       2.693       2.194        0.448
               Middle         0.818      0.829        0.832       0.834        0.841      0.014       0.003       0.002        0.009
              6 Deciles
                             29.606      28.510      27.432      26.003        25.132     0.642       0.221       0.150        0.438
                              0.903      0.925        0.917       0.876        0.888      0.014       -0.007      -0.042      -0.029
                  2
                             28.188      28.429      23.377      20.214        20.436     0.579       -0.373      -2.546      -1.251

                              1.047      1.094        1.092       1.031        1.015      0.045       -0.003      -0.061      -0.077
              1 (Losers)
                             31.351      32.901      21.759      20.707        21.423     1.229       -0.091      -1.977      -2.219




                                                                          44
             Table 6: S&P Additions with Matched Sample and Dimson Adjustments

We estimate the univariate and bivariate Dimson (1979) regressions for a sample of stocks that are added
to the S&P 500 index from 1976 through 2012 and for a portfolio of matched firms. The pre-event
estimation period covers a one year window ending at the end of the month preceding announcement,
while the post-event period covers the one year window starting the month after the effective date of
index change. x1t is return to non-S&P 500 index at time t, while x 2t is return to the S&P 500 index at
time t. The match firm for each addition is identified as the one with closest momentum from the same
size decile as the addition firms. The Dimson beta is defines as a simple sum of the lag, concurrent, and
lead coefficients from the following regressions with two leads and lags. In each cell, the first number is
the mean and the second number is the corresponding t-statistic, where standard errors are clustered by
month.
                                              2
                                 yt     1s x1,t  s   t
                                            s  2
                                              2
                                 yt      2s x2,t  s   t
                                            s  2
                                              2               2
                                 yt     1s x1,t  s    2s x2,t  s   t
                                            s  2          s  2




                                                      45
 Panel A. Univariate Regressions

                                     Non-S&P500 Group                   S&P500             Diff. of Diff.
         Sample Period   nobs        1        1      1       2        2       2     2  1
                                    1.190    1.272    0.081     1.156     1.190   0.033       -0.048
          1976-1987       187
                                   28.734   28.294    2.017    26.699    29.071   0.820       -2.096
                                    1.193    1.142    -0.051    1.161     1.239   0.078       0.129
          1988-2000       245
                                   27.716   23.419    -0.919   29.551    25.360   1.527       2.549
Sample
                                    1.007    1.020    0.013     1.187     1.168   -0.020      -0.033
          2001-2012       203
                                   26.383   25.779    0.348    29.117    27.880   -0.483      -1.187
                                    1.133    1.141    0.008     1.168     1.202   0.034       0.025
          1976-2012       635
                                   46.873   42.120    0.312    49.382    45.861   1.260       1.093
                                    1.060    1.066    0.006     0.985     0.989   0.004       -0.002
          1976-1987       187
                                   27.537   26.633    0.143    27.133    23.089   0.103       -0.085
                                    1.103    1.071    -0.031    1.087     1.167   0.080       0.111
          1988-2000       245
                                   23.047   19.611    -0.493   25.860    17.404   1.156       2.232
Match
                                    0.976    0.994    0.017     1.138     1.132   -0.006      -0.023
          2001-2012       203
                                   21.149   24.104    0.437    22.733    23.749   -0.126      -0.877
                                    1.050    1.045    -0.005    1.073     1.103   0.030       0.035
          1976-2012       635
                                   40.310   38.185    -0.160   42.135    33.184   0.916       1.552
                                    0.130    0.206    0.076     0.171     0.201   0.030       -0.046
          1976-1987       187
                                    2.721    3.783    1.321     3.965     3.752   0.550       -1.998
                                    0.090    0.070    -0.020    0.074     0.072   -0.002      0.018
          1988-2000       245
Sample                              1.821    1.363    -0.392    1.481     1.445   -0.029      0.601
-Match                              0.031    0.026    -0.004    0.050     0.036   -0.014      -0.009
          2001-2012       203
                                    0.537    0.506    -0.094    0.806     0.660   -0.247      -0.458
                                    0.083    0.096    0.013     0.095     0.099   0.004       -0.009
          1976-2012       635
                                    2.764    3.097    0.447     3.104     3.179   0.121       -0.631




                                                 46
Panel B. Bivariate Regressions

                                     Non-S&P500 Group                 S&P500            Diff. of Diff.
           Sample Period    nobs     1b     1b     1b       2b     2b     2b     2b  1b
                                    0.756    0.809    0.053   0.462   0.452    -0.010      -0.063
             1976-1987       187
                                   10.061   10.040    0.489   7.552   5.819    -0.100      -0.307
                                    0.803    0.693   -0.110   0.438   0.562     0.123      0.233
             1988-2000       245
                                   14.017    9.300   -1.271   8.225   8.152     1.579      1.473
  Sample
                                    0.901    0.791   -0.109 0.148 0.270        0.123       0.232
             2001-2012       203
                                   10.262    7.895   -1.220 1.765 2.817        1.219       1.241
                                    0.820    0.759   -0.062 0.352 0.436        0.084       0.146
             1976-2012       635
                                   19.467   15.474   -1.145 8.889 9.269        1.583       1.399
                                    0.844    0.803   -0.041   0.221   0.265    0.044       0.085
             1976-1987       187
                                   12.157   12.962   -0.491   3.462   4.522    0.558       0.542
                                    0.800    0.785   -0.015   0.368   0.406    0.038       0.053
             1988-2000       245
                                   12.115   10.199   -0.177   6.708   5.661    0.452       0.332
  Match
                                    0.893    0.808   -0.086   0.107   0.209    0.102       0.188
             2001-2012       203
                                    8.893    7.155   -0.819   1.087   1.918    0.905       0.881
                                    0.843    0.798   -0.045 0.241 0.301        0.060       0.105
             1976-2012       635
                                   18.253   15.937   -0.856 5.467 6.242        1.122       1.027
                                   -0.087    0.006    0.093   0.241   0.187    -0.054      -0.147
             1976-1987       187
                                   -0.816    0.059    0.648   2.806   1.886    -0.415      -0.550
                                    0.003   -0.092   -0.095   0.070   0.156     0.086      0.181
             1988-2000       245
  Sample                            0.040   -1.035   -1.019   0.942   1.955     0.930      1.014
  -Match                            0.008   -0.016   -0.024   0.041   0.061     0.020      0.044
             2001-2012       203
                                    0.067   -0.111   -0.188   0.392   0.432     0.147      0.170
                                   -0.022   -0.039   -0.017 0.111 0.135        0.024       0.041
             1976-2012       635
                                   -0.399   -0.598   -0.244 2.179 2.178        0.347       0.304




                                              47
              Table 7: Stock Splits with Matched Sample and Dimson Adjustments

We estimate the univariate and bivariate Dimson (1979) regressions for a sample of sample of 2-for-1
stock splits from 1976 through 2012. Our sample include all ordinary common stock two-for-one splits
with a pre-split price of $10 or greater during our sample period. x1t and x 2t are return to a portfolio of
high priced stocks whose price belongs to [3p/4, 5p/4] and low price stocks with prices within [1p/4, 3p/4]
at time t, where p is the pre-split price before effective date of split. The pre-event (post-event) window
is defined as the one year ending (beginning) one month before (after) the split date. The Dimson beta is
defines as a simple sum of the lag, concurrent, and lead coefficients from the following regressions with
two leads and lags. In each cell, the first number is the mean and the second number is the corresponding
t-statistic, where standard errors are clustered by month. In each cell, the first number is the mean and
the second number is the corresponding t-statistic, where standard errors are clustered by month.
                                              2
                                 yt     1s x1,t  s   t
                                            s  2
                                              2
                                 yt      2s x2,t  s   t
                                            s  2
                                              2               2
                                 yt     1s x1,t  s    2s x2,t  s   t
                                            s  2          s  2




                                                      48
 Panel A. Univariate Regressions

                                      High-Priced Group              Low-Priced Group        Diff. of Diff.
         Sample Period   nobs        1        1         1       2       2       2     2  1
                                    0.924    1.120        0.197    0.981    1.154    0.172      -0.024
          1976-1987      1,606
                                   55.306   42.904        8.486   55.824   51.170    8.603      -2.271
                                    0.963    1.132        0.168    1.056    1.267    0.211      0.043
Sample    1988-2000      2,097
                                   42.614   41.875        5.572   45.824   40.457    7.029      2.834
                                    1.042    1.222        0.180    0.961    1.135    0.174      -0.006
          2001-2012      727
                                   29.491   37.391        5.181   26.458   34.593    5.621      -0.411
                                    0.962    1.142        0.181    1.014    1.204    0.191      0.010
          1976-2012      4,430
                                   69.502   67.815       10.295   72.336   66.694   11.367      1.172
                                    0.858    0.957        0.099    0.901    0.981    0.080      -0.019
          1976-1987      1,606
                                   48.739   42.268        5.078   50.803   48.675    4.855      -2.349
                                    0.847    0.943        0.095    0.926    1.046    0.120      0.025
          1988-2000      2,097
                                   46.451   40.139        3.492   49.136   33.341    4.236      2.112
Match
                                    0.991    1.116        0.125    0.917    1.029    0.112      -0.013
          2001-2012      727
                                   30.774   42.113        4.538   29.015   37.387    4.852      -1.031
                                    0.875    0.976        0.102    0.915    1.020    0.104      0.003
          1976-2012      4,430
                                   70.200   66.242        6.620   75.350   59.093    6.856      0.375
                                    0.066    0.163        0.098    0.080    0.173    0.093      -0.005
          1976-1987      1,606
                                    4.459    8.755        4.774    5.694    9.602    4.620      -0.688
                                    0.116    0.189        0.073    0.131    0.222    0.091      0.018
          1988-2000      2,097
Sample                              6.757    9.134        3.493    7.490   10.703    4.638      1.619
-Match                              0.050    0.105        0.055    0.045    0.106    0.062      0.007
          2001-2012      727
                                    1.823    3.372        1.790    1.727    3.437    2.099      0.582
                                    0.087    0.166        0.079    0.098    0.185    0.087      0.008
          1976-2012      4,430
                                    8.081   12.819        5.911    9.204   14.350    6.826      1.249




                                                    49
 Panel B. Bivariate Regressions

                                     High-Priced Group            Low-Priced Group        Diff. of Diff.
          Sample Period   nobs      1b     1b        1b      2b       2b     2b    2b  1b
                                   0.262    0.152      -0.109    0.722    0.993   0.272      0.381
           1976-1987      1,606
                                   7.176    3.754      -1.915   20.178   25.398   4.645      3.349
                                   0.177    0.008      -0.170    0.866    1.238   0.372      0.542
           1988-2000      2,097
                                   4.073    0.161      -3.172   18.434   27.571   5.726      4.741
Sample                             0.471    0.464      -0.007    0.554    0.731   0.176      0.183
           2001-2012       727
                                   7.325    8.411      -0.101   11.453   13.473   3.055      1.513
                                   0.256    0.135      -0.121    0.762    1.066   0.304      0.425
           1976-2012      4,430
                                   9.363    4.514      -3.492   27.557   36.602   7.847      5.973
                                   0.317    0.172      -0.144    0.588    0.810   0.221      0.366
           1976-1987      1,606
                                   9.210    4.637      -2.832   17.657   20.767   4.132      3.549
                                   0.226    0.109      -0.117    0.698    0.941   0.243      0.360
           1988-2000      2,097
                                   6.847    3.114      -2.725   21.726   24.571   4.906      4.129
Match                              0.455    0.482       0.027    0.518    0.616   0.098      0.072
           2001-2012       727
                                   8.797    9.691       0.432   12.138   14.502   1.893      0.651
                                   0.296    0.193      -0.103    0.628    0.840   0.211      0.315
           1976-2012      4,430
                                  13.273    7.960      -3.482   29.628   33.409   6.631      5.314
                                  -0.055   -0.020       0.035    0.133    0.184   0.050      0.015
           1976-1987      1,606
                                  -1.279   -0.508       0.603    3.086    4.745   0.841      0.134
                                  -0.049   -0.101      -0.053    0.168    0.298   0.130      0.182
           1988-2000      2,097
Sample-                           -1.240   -2.548      -0.944    4.067    7.071   2.347      1.672
 Match                             0.015   -0.018      -0.033    0.037    0.115   0.078      0.112
           2001-2012       727
                                   0.231   -0.268      -0.470    0.604    1.745   1.116      0.813
                                  -0.040   -0.058      -0.018    0.134    0.226   0.092      0.110
           1976-2012      4,430
                                  -1.517   -2.228      -0.496    4.955    8.443   2.575      1.568




                                                  50
                               Figure 1: Beta Changes and Momentum

We estimate market betas of winner and loser stocks defined as the top and bottom deciles of stocks
sorted on past 12-month returns, skipping the most recent month, as in Jegadeesh and Titman (2001),
for the sample period 1976-2011. These betas are estimated over rolling windows of 252 days (1 year).




1.4


1.3


1.2


1.1


  1


0.9
                                                                          Losers       Winners

0.8
       216



       312
       120
       144
       168
       192

       240
       264
       288

       336
       360
       384
       408
       432
       456
       480
       504
       -96
       -72
       -48
       -24
      -504
      -480
      -456
      -432
      -408
      -384
      -360
      -336
      -312
      -288
      -264
      -240
      -216
      -192
      -168
      -144
      -120




         0
        24
        48
        72
        96




                               Days Relative to the momentum Formation Date




                                                  51
