                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    TAX POLICY, ASSET PRICES,
                     AND GROWTH: A GENERAL
                      EQUILIBRIUM ANALYSIS




                       Lawrence H. Goulder

                      Lawrence H. Summers




                     Working Paper No. 2128




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                           January 1987




We are grateful to participants in the NBER Applied General
Equilibrium Workshop in Palo Alto, California, April 18-19, 1986,
and the NBER Summer Session on Taxation and Business Finance, July
31, 1986, for helpful comments on previous drafts of this paper.
We would also like to thank the National Science Foundation for
finanical aupport, and Eduardo Bitran, Fernando Ramos, and Peter
Wilcoxer, for excellent research assistance. The research reported
here is part of the NBER's research program in Taxation. Any opin-
ions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #2128
                                                  January 1987




                      Tax Policy, Asset Prices, and Growth:

                          A General Equilibrium Analysis




       This paper presents a xnult.isector general equilibrium model that is
  capable of providing integrated assessments of the economy's short— and long—
  run responses to tax policy changes. The model contains an explicit treatment
  of firms' investment decisions according to which producers exhibit forward—
  looking behavior and take account of adjustment costs inherent in the
  installation of new capital. This permits an examination of both short—run
  effects of tax policy on industry profit and asset prices as well as long—term
  effects on capital accumulation. The model contains considerable detail on
  U.S. industry, corporate financial policies, and the US, tax system.

      Simulation results reveal that the effects of tax policy differ
 significantly depending on whether the policy is oriented toward new or old
 capital. Heasures like the investment tax credit stimulate investment without
 conferring significant windfall gains on corporate shareholders. Corporate
 tax rate reductions with the same revenue cost, on the other hand, yield large
 windfalls to shareholders while providing only a modest stimulus to investment
 in plant and equipment.




Lawrence H. Goulder                              Lawrence H. Summers
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
Harvard University                               Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138                              Cambridge, MA 02138
    The incidence and allocative effects of tax changes have long   been   a

principal concern of both policymakers and public finance economists. Tax

policies affect the industrial, composition of output, the extent to which

provision is made for the future through capital accumulation, and the

distribution of wealth and economic well being. While economists working over

the last two decades have made enormous progress in gaining an understanding

of the effects of taxation, it has proved surprisingly difficult to develop

realistic quantitative estimates of the effects of alternative tax policies on

the level and distribution of economic welfare. In large part, this is

because the models that are available either concentrate only on very long—run

issues, or consider only the short—run macroeconomic impact of alternative

policies. In this paper, we develop a computable general equilibrium model,

based on the asset price approach to taxation developed in Summers (1981,

1985), which is capable of providing an integrated treatment of

short— and long—run issues.

    Beyond intellectual coherence, the development of methods for looking

simultaneously at the short— and long—run effects of tax policies is important

for at least two reasons. First, short—run issues are of critical importance

in considering questions of tax incidence. In the standard general

equilibrium model of the type pioneered by Harberger (1962) and implemented

subsequently on a large scale by Shoven and Whalley (1972) and several other

authors,1 capital adjusts instantaneously to changes in tax policies so

that the return to capital is equalized in all sectors. This makes it

impossible to capture the capitalization effects that are central to tax



                                  1
incidence. Consider as an example a proposal to tax capital in a single

industry. The standard model implies that after the tax is enacted, returns

to capital in all sectors would be equalized immediately. This implies that

the tax reform would have the same effect on investors in the taxed industry

and in other industries. A moment's reflection reveals the unreality of this

supposition. Owners of capital in a given industry invariably are much more

concerned about capital tax increases in their industry than about capital tax

increases in general. These concerns reflect the fact that capital is not

perfectly mobile across sectors, so that increases in capital taxes in a given

sector particularly reduce the prospective profitability of capital in that

sector and lower its market value.

     A second virtue of developing an integrated short— and long—run model is

that it permits the analysis of a much wider range of policies than can be

considered using standard models. Policy announcements, or explicitly

temporary policies, cannot be analyzed using either general equilibrium models

which focus only on long—run reallocations of capital, or macroeconometric

models which do not incorporate forward—looking behavior. Nor do standard

models provide a way of distinguishing between tax policies like changes in

the corporate- tax rate, which affect new and old capital alike, and changes in

depreciation rules or the investment tax credit, which differentially treat

new and old capital. These limitations are serious given that substantial

changes in the relative tax burdens placed on old and new capital are a

principal feature of the recently legislated Tax Reform Act of 1986. The model

developed here, because it represents investment as being determined by

forward—looking optimizing managers, is capable of addressing these issues.



                                     2
    The asset price approach used in the construction of our model involves a

synthesis of the q theory of investment originated in Tobin (1969) and the

adjustment cost investment framework developed in Lucas (1967). FollowIng the

work of Hayashi (1982), we make extensive use of the fact that the q ratio as

Inferred from market value data, will after several tax adjustments, be equal

to the shadow price of newly installed capital. This permits us to estimate

the effects of alternative policies on investment by assessing their impact on

firms' market values.   It also enables us to take account of the wealth

effects of tax changes in evaluating alternative policies.

     While some attempts have been made previously at developing models for

studying the effects of tax policies in the presence of adjustment costs,

these have relied on somewhat arbitary assumptions and little effort has been

made to calibrate them to actual data. Fullerton (1983) analyzed the effects

of imperfectly mobile capital in a model with constraints limiting the scope

of capital adjustment in each industry within a given time interval. However,

the (zero or infinite) costs of adjustment in the model were not linked to

investment behavior, as investment was fully driven by savings. More

recently, Bovenberg (1983), Summers (1985) and Wilcoxen (1986) have

constructed general equilibrium models with forward—looking investment

behavior and adjustment costs. Bovenberg's model distinguishes two producing

sectors; Summers' model has three assets——corporate capital, land, and

housing——but only one type of consumption good; Wilooxen's model Identifies

five industries, but investment is only .earried out by two of the industries

and the model has not yet been applied to actual data. The model presented in

this paper differs from these earlier models by incorporating a more



                                  3
disaggregate treatment of U.S. industry, by specifying in more detail the

activities of the household, government, and foreign sectors, and by

incorporating considerable detail on the U.S. tax system and corporate

financial policies.

        In this paper we employ the model to simulate the effects of several tax

policy alternatives that alter the relative tax burdens between old and new

capital and between corporate and noncorporate capital. We examine

"surprise" policies as well as policies that are announced in advance. Our

results reveal significant differences in the effects across industries as well

as over time. An unannounced cut in corporate taxes, for example, benefits

the corporate sectors at the expense of the (noncorporate) housing sector in

the short run; in the long run, however, all industries benefit from the

policy change as the tax cut raises the overall capital intensity of the

economy, raises productivity and incomes, and leads to increased demand for

housing services. These iritersectoral and intertemporal effects are

attributable in large part to capital immobilities that prevent non—corporate

sectors from immediately sharing the gains associated with reduced taxation of

corporate capital and that regulate the speed at which the gains increase over

time.




        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section

presents a simple heuristic model intended to illustrate some potential

dynamic effects of tax policy changes ozi asset prices and investment. Section

II then describes the structure of the applied general equilibrium model. In

Section III we describe the model's data sources and parameterization methods,



                                     4
and in Section IV we present the solution method. Section V reports and

analyzes results from several policy simulations, and the final section

provides conclusions.



I.   ASSET PRICES AND INVESTMENT: AN ILLUSTRATIVE MODEL2



     Here     we present a simple partial equilibrium model in which the effects
of tax    policy   on   asset prices and investment may be analyzed graphically.

This model is a simplified version of the framework used in Summers' (1981)

analysis of the tax returns and corporate investment, and Poterba's (1981)

analysis of the effects of inflation on the price of owner occupied housing.

Assume that there is one type of capital which is supplied elastically because

of either internal or external adjustment costs3



        (1)      K =
                        1K         > 0



where         is the price of the capital asset relative to the numeraire good. Note

that K can be negative because of depreciation. Assume further that the

capital good K is used in a production process where it earns a total return

F'(K)K and that F"(K) is negative. Finally, assume that all returns are paid

out and that investors require some fixed rate of return, r, to induce them to

hold the capital assets. The returns to holding a unit of capital come in the

form of rents F'(K) and capital gains so that




                                         5
       (2) r =   F'(K)   +



       Equations (1) and (2) describe the dynamics of the adjustment of the
quantity and price of capital. The phase diagram is depicted in Figure 1.

Equilibrium occurs at the intersection of the two schedules at the point where

F'(K) =   r.
       Note that the system dispays saddle point stability. Except along a

unique path marked by the dark arrows, the system will not converge. Only

along this path does the supply of investment exactly validate the f'uture

returns capitalized into the market of capital goods. Such saddle point

stability is characteristic of asset price models. It implies there is a

unique path along which the capital stock and the asset price will approach

(long—run)     equilibrium.
       The phase diagram in Figure 1 can be used to examine the effects of
various types of tax         changes.   In Figure 2 we consider the effect of a tax on
the   asset's marginal product; a dividend tax or tax on profits might be

interpreted as this type of tax. Such a tax does not affect the asset's

supply curve; thus the K=O locus does not shift. However, the reduction

in after tax returns implies a leftward shift in the              locus. In the

short run, the stock of capital is fixed. However, the increase in the tax

rate implies a drop in the after—tax marginal product of capital. In order to

maintain the asset market equilibrium condition given by equation (2), the

asset price K must fall. Thus point B may represent the quantity of capital

and the capital asset price immediately following the policy change. Since B



                                           6
lies below the =O locus, capital begins to be decumulated, causing the

marginal product of capital to rise. The system converges from B to E2 where

K again equals its equilibrium value. Note that after the first instant

investors always receive a fixed return r as reduced rents are made up for by

capital gains and asset market equilibrium is restored. The position of the

adjustment path depends on the elasticity of supply of the capital good, that

is, the responsiveness of I to     in equation (1). If this elasticity is

substantial, adjustment is rapid and the tax change will have little effect on

the asset price of capital. If the supply of capita], is relatively inelastic,

there is a larger movement in the price of capital. In the extreme case of

costless adjustment, the equilibrium E2 is attained instantly after the policy

change and there is no change in          In   the other limiting case, where the

supply of capital is completely inelastic, the relative price of capital

declines to point A on the =0    locus,   and      remains below its long—run

equilibrium value.

     The effect of a subsidy to new capital investment that does not apply to

existing capital, such as accelerated depreciation or the investment tax

credit, is depicted in Figure 3. This shifts the K=O schedule but has no

effect on the return from owning capital and thus does not affect the p=O

locus. Such a subsidy leads to an increase in long—run capital intensity but

reduces the market value of existing capital goods. This illustrates the fact

that tax measures which encourage investment may hurt existing asset

holders.4 The magnitude of the loss will depend upon the elasticity of

the supply of capital. If it is high, owners of existing capital will suffer

a loss close to the subsidy rate. If not, they will continue to earn rents



                                   7
during the period of transition so the loss will be smaller.

     This result may at first seem counter—intuitive. It occurs because the

subsidy reduces the price of new capital, a substitute for existing capital.

The adverse effect of a reduction in new car prices on used car prices

exhibits the effect considered here.

     In this simple model, the supply of new capital goods is represented as a

simple function of the asset price, p. In the simulation model which we

describe below, the quantity of new capital goods supplied at any point in

time will depend on both the asset price and the costs of producing new

capital.



II. MODEL STRUCTURE



     The model presented in this paper represents the behavior of the

production, household, government, and foreign sectors. In this section we

describe the modeling of each sector. In Section IV we shall explain how the

model consolidates the behavior of the different sectors to obtain a general

equilibrium solution for every period of time.



A. The Product.on Sector



     1. General Features. The model distinguishes five producing industries:

(1) agriculture and mining, (2) manufacturing, (3) energy, (4) services,

trade, and utilities, and (5) housing services. Each industry produces a

single output using inputs of labor, capital, and Intermediate goods. The



                                  8
optimal short—run intensities for labor and long—run intensities for both

capital and labor are determined from constant elasticity of substitution

(CES) value added functions. The intensities of intermediate goods are fixed.

     The outputs of the five industries——producer goods——are demanded in

several different ways. First, they serve as intermediate goods for each of

the industries. In addition, they meet the demands for final goods by the

government and the export demands of the foreign sector. Third, they combine

according to fixed coefficients to produce a representative capital good; this

satisfies the total demand for new capital goods given by the aggregate level

of investment. Finally, they combine according to fixed coefficients to

create the fifteen types of consumer goods demanded by households. The

transformation of producer goods into consumer goods is necessary because the

categories for outputs from production data differ from the categories for

goods from consumer expenditure data.

        The model contains considerable detail on taxes. Each industry faces

taxes    on labor and intermediate goods inputs. Output taxes apply to producer
goods and sales taxes apply to consumer goods. The model also incorporates

profits taxes, depreciation deductions, and investment tax credits, as

described in detail below.



        2. Profit Maximization and Investment: The Corporate Sector. For the

first four industries, we represent firms as incorporated and as having

opportunities to issue new shares. The.fifth industry, housing, is largely

unincorporated and requires a different treatment, as described under (3)

below.



                                    9
     The fundamental assumption governing producer behavior is that managers

of firms seek to maximize the value of the firm. The managers' choice

variables at each point in time are the input levels for labor and

intermediate goods and the level of investment. The levels of labor and

intermediate inputs are selected to minimize costs, while the level of

investment is chosen in each period so as to approach optimally the long—run

(profit—maximizing) capital intensity. The length of time necessary to attain

the optimal capital intensity depends critically on the adjustment costs faced

by the firm.

     A starting point for specifying the firm's optimizing behavior is the

condition of asset market equilibrium that risk—adjusted expected returns be

the same across all assets. In particular, the expected returns from holding

equity must be in line with those from holding a "safe" asset such as bonds.

The return from holding equity is the sum of capital gains and dividends net

of tax. Thus asset market equilibrium requires that for any firm at any point

in time:



     (3)   (1-c)           +   (1-0)    =   1(1-0)   +



where V is the value of the firm, VN denotes new share issues, DIV is the

current dividend, c is the capital gains tax rate, 0 is the marginal income

tax rate, j    is   the nominal interest rate on the safe asset, and r   is   the

equity risk premium. The dot over a variable denotes its rate of change with

respect to time. Imposing a transversality condition ruling out eternal

speculative bubbles and integrating equation (3) yields the following



                                       10
expression for V:



                                       —                 —--
       (4) Vt =
                     J [DIv                v5] [exPf           dujds

where r (=         1(1—0) +   q) is the risk—adjusted rate of return. The value of the
firm    is   equal to the discounted value of the stream of after—tax dividends net

of new share Issues.5 It should be noted that the tax parameters 0 and a

used In      the   calculation of V are not restricted to be constant over time. In

addition, the risk—adjusted rate of return, r, will of course change over time

with changes in the nominal interest rate.

        The firm's dividends and new share issues in each period are related

through the cash flow identity that equates sources and uses of funds:


       (5)   EARN + BN    +   VN   = DIV + IEXP



In the above expression, EARN represents earnings after taxes and interest

payments, BN is the value of new debt issue, and IEXP Is the value of

investment expenditure. The firm's earnings are given by:


       (6) EARN = tpF(K,L,M) — wL —
                                              pMM
                                                    —
                                                        iDEBT] (1 —    )   +   D


where
               K and L =      inputs   of capita], and labor

               M =    vector   of inputs of intermediate        goods
               p =    output   price (net of output taxes)




                                             11
             F =   quantity of output by the firm (gross of
                   adjustment costs)

             w = wage rate (gross of indirect tax     on labor)
                =      vector of intermediate input prices (gross of
                       intermediate input taxes facing the industry)

             DEBT = nominal debt

                   =   corporate   tax rate
and

             D = value of currently allowable depreciation
                    allowances

      To determine the value of' the firm, it is necessary to specify the firm's

behavior regarding borrowing and the payment of dividends. Although there is

considerable debate on these issues, we adopt a specification in which firms

maintain a constant debt—capital ratio through time and pay dividends equal to

a constant fraction, a, of after—tax profits net of economic depreciation.

This specification conforms to the "traditional" view of dividend behavior.

Some empirical support for this view is presented in Poterba and Summers

(1985). Further evidence comes from the large volume of share repurchases in

recent years documented by Shoven (1986). Our specification implies that, at

the margin, increased investment is financed through new share issues (VN) and

the new debt issue (BN) necessary to maintain a constant ratio of debt to

capital. Thus, for the first four industries, we have:



      (7) DIV = a(EARN — &RpK)

      (8) DEBT =        bpKK
      (9)   BN =                   =
                         (bpKK)        b(PKK +PKK)




                                             12
In the above equation, K refers to the replacement price of capital goods.

     Finally, investment expenditure is the sum of the "direct" costs of the

new capital (net of the investment tax credit) and the adjustment costs

associated with Its installation:


    (10) IEXP = (1 —              —
                     ITC)pKI + (1

where ITC represents the investment tax credit rate, I is the quantity of

investment, and 6(1/K) represents adjustment costs per unit of investment.

Here we model adjustment costs as internal to the firm,   that   is, as involving

a loss in output.6 The notion is that in order to install new capital,

currently available resources (labor, existing capital, and intermediate

goods) must be devoted to the installation of new equipment and thus are

diverted from producing the firm's output. Our treatment of adjustment costs

assumes that output, X, is separable between inputs and adjustment costs:


    (11)   X = F(K,L,M) —

Using the condition
    (12) K =    I—

and substituting equations (7) — (10) and (12) into equation (5), we obtain

the following expression for new share Issues:


    (13) VN = (a — 1)EARN — aÔRpKK + (1 — ITC — b)pKI
            —         + (1— ) p$I
                bpK


Substituting (6) and (13) into (4) gives an expression for the value of the




                                    13
firm in terms of I, L, M, prices, and the technology. Firms maximize this

value subject to the capital accumulation condition (12). A detailed

discussion of the solution to this sort of problem is provided in Summers

(1981). If the production technology exhibits constant returns to scale and

the adjustment cost function         is homogenous of degree zero in I/K, then

optimal investment is a function of Q, or tax—adjusted q. Specifically,

optimal investment is given by


                         r
    (14)    K
              = h(Q) = hi    [- —   1 + ITC +   b + oZ]   [            I
                         I. P                                 (l—r)p


where h(') =   (   +   (I/K)'],     B is the present value of depreciation

allowances on existing capital, Z is the present value of depreciation

allowances on a dollar of new investment, and w = a(1—O)/(1—c) — a +         1.   It

can be shown that if the adjustment cost function takes the form



                        /2 (I/K—1)2
     (15) (I/K) =
                             I/K



then the relationship between the rate of investment and Q is simply:



     (16)




In the model employed for this study, we adopt the adjustment cost function

presented in (15). The rate of investment therefore increases with Q, and

higher adjustment costs (lower y, higher ) imply slower rate of investment



                                       14
for any given Q.

     Under this specification of firm behavior, given the "gross" production

function, F, and any set of prices and taxes, it is relatively straightforward

to calculate optimal demands for labor and intermediate goods.7 The

optimal level of investment, however, depends on Q, which in turn depends on

the variables V, B, and Z, as indicated by equation (14). These variables

incorporate expectations about the future, as they are defined in terms of

discounted streams of dividends or depreciation allowances. Clearly it is not

possible to evaluate the current Q on the basis of current magnitudes alone.

In Section IV we shall describe how the model calculates the correct value for

Q in each period.



     3. Housing Sector Behavior. In many ways, the treatment of firm

behavior in the housing industry parallels that of the other industries. As

in the other industries, owners of capital in the housing services industry

pursue forward—looking strategies intended to maximize the asset value of

their capital. The main differences in the treatment of housing stem from the

fact that the housing industry is largely unincorporated, with less than 2.5

percent of housing capital employed by corporations. This means that for most

of the housing services industry, it is not possible to finance new investment

through share issues. Thus, for this industry, new share issues (VN) do not

enter into the arbitrage condition (3) and the equity value of the firm (see

equation (4)) is simply the discounted value of after—tax dividends. For this

industry, we treat firms as financing additional investment by reducing

dividends and issuing new debt sufficient to maintain a constant debt—capital



                                 15
         8
ratio.

     The calculation of after—tax earnings, EARN, is also slightly different

from the approach given for the other industries in equation (6) above. Gross

earnings include the return from rental housing and the implicit returns from

owner—occupied housing. Since nearly all housing is non—corporate, the

corporate tax      rate   only applies to a small fraction of these returns. In

addition, most interest payments in this industry can be expressed at the

personal, rather than corporate, tax rate.9



B. The Household Sector



     1. Aggregate Consumption and Saving. Households, like producers,

exhibit forward—looking behavior and are regarded as having perfect foresight.

Aggregate consumption and saving derive from the utility maximizing behavior

of a representative household with an infinite time horizon. It will be

convenient to express the household maximization problem in discrete time. In

each period t, the household maximizes a utility function of the form
                            1

     (17)                               lnC
                                  s—t      s
                          (l+p)
                   st

where p is the rate of time preference and C is an index of overall

consumption. Households maximize utility subject to the wealth constraint


                   —
             r                                           A        A
                                                    Li (w38
     (18)     ) p C d =
             1.     SSs           W
                                      t
                                        + YK
                                            t
                                                +         L + TR5)dS
             s=1                                 s=1




                                                    16
where PS is the price index for consumption, W is nonhuman wealth, YK is

current capital income (dividends and bond interest income) net of all taxes,
A
w is the wage rate net of all, taxes, L is the labor supply, and TR is net

exogenous transfers. The variable d5 is the discounting operator for period

s, defined according to

                                s—i
                                 fl
                                           (l+r) —1—   , s>1
     (20) dS =                  u=1

                                 1
                       ,




where r is the rate of discount applied by the household between periods u and

u+1. We assume that households consider the future streams of labor and

transfer   income to involve some risk and therefore include a risk premium in
discounting these returns. Thus, while the consumer discounts future
consumption at the rate r = (1—0)1, future labor and transfer earnings are
                       A
discounted at the rate r = r + , where p is the consumer's risk premium.

Thus d3&d. As indicated by Blanchard (1985), the use of a risk premium

in discounting future labor earnings provides a way of approximating, within

an infinite—horizon model, the aggregate behavior of life—cycle individuals

with finite lifetimes.

     The utility function specified in (17) has the property that the optimal

value of consumption is homogeneous of degree one in total wealth. The

logarithmic utility function implies that the fraction of total wealth

represented by current consumption is independent of the expected rate of

return. Expected total wealth is the right—hand side of equation (18): we can

express expected total wealth in period t (TWt) by



                                      17
     (20) Nt = W + YKt +

           t
           '    A              A
where HW = )    (w L + TR )d and refers to expected human and
       t   L.       55      8 S
transfer weIh. Since HWt depends on future labor and transfer streams, it

cannot be evaluated simply from the current period prices. In Section IV we

describe how the model calculates the values for HW in every period.



     2. Consumption of Seeific Commodities. The variable C above refers to

overall consumption in period t. This is a composite of the consumption of

fifteen specific consumer goods. The composition of C in terms of specific

goods is according to fixed expenditure shares. The price of overall

consumption, p, is determined from the individual consumer good prices,

according to

                           a
           —     15Fi1
     (21) p=          I—
                1=1


where p is the price of consumer good I and a1 is the expenditure share of

consumer good i in overall consumption.



C. The Government Sector



     The government has three functions in the model: collecting taxes,

distributing transfers, and purchasing goods and services (producer goods).




                                   18
     1. Taxes. The model incorporates each of the major taxes              in   the United

States. Table 1 shows how these are modeled.

     The model Incorporates features of the U.S. tax code which introduce

different effective tax rates on new and old capital. The explicit treatment

of profit taxes,   Investment    tax   credits,   and capital gains taxes   allows    us to

capture   the effects of tax policy on investment and dividend payment
decisions. The model also       distinguishes     economic from tax   depreciation.     ifl
each industry j, real depreciation proceeds at an exogenously specified rate,

     A different parameter, 6, describes the rate at which capital may

be depreciated for tax purposes. Depreciation allowances (D) in a given

period are given by



     (22) Dt = 8TKDEP



where KDEP Is the capital stock basis for tax purposes. KDEP is calculated on

an historical (rather than real) cost basis. Thus, the model incorporates an

important non—neutrality of the tax code with respect to the rate of

inflation: the real value of XDEP erodes more quickly the greater is the

Inflation rate. The inflation rate itself is exogenous in the model.

     2. Transfers and Purchases. The level of overall government spending

(transfers plus purchases) is exogenous in every period. The model exhibits

steady—state growth in the base (or status auo) ease, and thus overall real

government spending is specified to increase at the steady—state rate of

growth, g. The model is calibrated so that in the base ease, the government

budget balances in each period. In revised case (policy change) simulations,



                                        19
the levels of real overall government spending are fixed at the same levels as
in   the base case. This facilitates welfare evaluations, since the household

utility functions do not account for welfare from the consumption

of government—provided goods and services. In revised case simulations, the

model scales personal tax   rates so   as to maintain budget balance.

      Transfers and purchases each represent a fixed share of overall spending.

Purchases divide into purchases of specific producer goods according to fixed

expenditure shares.



D, The Foreign Sector



       The treatment of foreign trade Is the same as the "constant elasticity

offer curve" formulation described in Goulder, Shoven, and Whalley (1983).

Constant elasticity import supply and export demand functions generate current

account flows. An exchange rate variable adjusts to bring about current

account balance in every period.



III. DATA SOURCES AND PARAMETERIZATION METHODS



A. Data Sources



       1. Production Data. The model integrates data from several different

sources to form a 1973 benchmark data set. Much of the information used in

the production side of the model derives from the data set developed by

Fullerton, Shoven, and Whalley and documented in Ballard et al. (1985). This



                                   20
is our source for information on production function elasticities, benchmark

labor intensities, intermediate good intensities, labor input taxes,

intermediate good taxes, output taxes, and sales taxes.

      We also employ data from Hulten and Wykoff (1981) on capital stocks in

each industry by asset type. We aggregate across assets to obtain total

capital stocks for the industries other than housing. Capital stock data for

the housing industry for 1973 derive from the February 1981 Survey of Current

Business (SCB).

      A simulation model by Auerbach and Hines (1986) contains much detail on

specific provisions of the U.S. tax code. This model converts detailed tax

provisions into overall economic depreciation rates, investment tax credit

rates, and the present value of depreciation deductions by asset type. We

apply these economic depreciation and investment tax credit rates to the

Hulten—Wykoff asset—industry data to obtain the corresponding rates (6R and

ITC) for the first four industries. In addition, we combine the depreciation

deductions from the Auerbach—Hjnes model with the Hulten—Wykoff data to obtain

tax depreciation rates by industry (8T)• For the housing sector, the values

for     and    were calculated based on information in DeLeeuw and Ozanne

(1979). The ITC is zero in this sector.

      Debt—capital ratios (b) by industry derive from Fullerton and Gordon

(1983) and Standard and Poor's Basic Statistics (1978); these are aggregated

to the five—sector level using capital stocks as weights. Dividend payout

ratios (a) by industry are calculated from dividends and profits as reported

in the July 1976 and July 1978 SCB. The adjustment cost parameters (7 and )

are taken from the estimates in Summers (1985). These are the only available



                                 21
econometric estimates for adjustment cost formulations comparable to the

specification employed in the model.

        We calculate the equity risk premium (q) for each sector using

information from Fullerton and Gordon. Here we invoke the capital asset

pricing model to infer equity risk premia by industry from equity betas and

the expected average return on the market portfolio.10

        Finally, we impose a value of 0.46 in the base case for the corporate

profit tax rate and a value of 0.05       for   the tax rate on capital gains.

        Table 2 presents the base case values for industry tax and behavioral

parameters employed in the model.



       2. Other Data. The data for the household, government, and foreign

sector components of the model derive from Fullerton, Shoveri, and Whalley.

This includes household disposable incomes, expenditure shares, marginal tax

rates, transfers, and income taxes paid; government purchases of producer

goods and capital endowments; and levels of imports and exports of each type

of'   good.


B. Parameterization



         The paraxneterization procedure must satisfy two sorts of requirements.

      Replication Requirement. In the base case, the model must generate an
      equilibrium solution with values matching those of the benchmark data set. In
      particular, the levels of inputs in each sector, the levels of factor incomes,
      and the magnitudes of various tax payments must be identical to those of the
      benchmark data set.

      Balanced Growth Requirement. In the base case, the model must generate a



                                     22
  steady—state growth path.



     The parameterization procedure involves selecting certain parameters from

outside sources and identifying remaining parameters or economic flows from

restrictions implied by the two requirements above. In this subsection we

briefly describe some main aspects of the parameterization procedure. For

convenience, we supress subscripts referring to a given sector.

     First, we specify exogenous].y the rate of inflation, 7T,   the   steady—state
growth rate, g, and the rate of time preference, p. In our standard

simulations, these take the values .062, .03, and .01, respectively. In the

steady state, the rate of gross investment, I/K, in each sector must satisfy



     (23) I/K=g+ 8R


                        R
Values for K, g, and 8 are contained in the benchmark data set. We use the

above equation to obtain the initial level of investment in each industry.

Given the parameters of the adjustment cost function, we apply (23) and invert

equation (16) to solve for the steady—state value of Q. The definition of KDEP

and the requirement of balanced growth imply that in the initial data set,


                    (1+n)(1+g) — (1_6T)
            K     — ___________________
           KDEP                   R
                            g+8



We employ (24) to solve for KDEP in each sector. Then, using the values for

K, KDEP, 0, r, 8T and a guess for the nominal interest rate, i, we calculate




                                      23
initial steady—state values for Z, B, and V. From the capital stocks, nominal

interest rate, and debt—capital ratios, we calculate bond interest payments

and new bond issues. Applying the arbitrage condition (3), the cash—flow

identity (5), and the steady—state condition that = (1+g)(1+n) —

1, we then obtain the initial new share issues and dividend payments in each
sector.

     On the household side, we determine total nonhuman wealth (W) by adding

up debt and equity ownership across sectors. From initial labor income and
                                       A
transfers, the household discount rate r, and the steady state growth
rate, we also calculate the present value of labor and transfer earnings (1*1).

The solution of the household utility maximization problem requires that



     (25) pC=jTW

where N =   W   +   11W.   In the benchmark, units are defined so that all   goods
prices are unity; thus equation (25) yields initial consumption. Consumption

is subtracted from initial income to obtain the initial value of household

savings.

     The value of household savings must equal total borrowing requirements of

firms. If the assumed interest rate does not bring these into balance, we

update the guess and repeat the calibration procedure until equality is

achieved.

     Tables 3 and 4 present the base case (calibrated) values for important

variables used in the model.




                                        24
IV. SOLVING THE MODEL



     The solution of the model satisfies two sorts of equilibrium conditions.

"Within period" equilibrium conditions require that, in any period, given any

set of expectations for future variables, current supplies and demands are in

balance. Intertempora]. equilibrium conditions require that expectations

conform to the values eventually realized in later periods.

     At any given point in time, t, expectations about the future are embedded

within the current period values of the variables V, 0' Z, B, and HWt. By

inverting equation (14), it is possible to express V in terms of Q, Bt, Z,

and prices and parameters from period t. In addition, Bt can be written in

terms of Z and current values. For the corporate sectors, for example, the

expression for Bt



     (26)   B = (
             t
                    1 — &
                            T          1—OF
                                ) KDEP a()
                                       1—c
                                           12 __
                                             t_5T

Thus, expectations held in period t about the future are fully summarized by

the values for Q, Z, and 1*! in period t. The time paths of each of these

variables have certain characteristics that can be exploited: as shown in the

appendix, it is possible to derive explicit relationships (in discrete time)

of the form:



               =




                                       25
       (28) Z =
                  Zt(A2t. Z1)


       (29)     =
                    t(A3ti   HW1)

where the variables Ait. A2t. and A3t refer to magnitudes (prices and

quantities) observed in period t, and
                                                 Z1, and HW41
refer to the values, expected in period t, for the variables V, Z, and HW in
                                         *   *             *
the   next period. We shall refer to         Z11, and          as

lead values.

      Solution of the model proceeds on two levels. First, we make guesses of

the lead variables Vt+i. Z÷1, and HW for t =        2,3,
T+i, where T is the last period simulated. Conditional on these guesses, we

calculate a general equilibrium solution for every period; this is the within—

period equilibrium problem. On the next level, we solve for the correct

values for the lead variables; this is the intertemporal equilibrium problem.

In the following two subsections, we outline the solution method for each type

of equilibrium problem.



A. Within—Period Equilibrium



      Figure 4 suggests the method for calculating each within—period solution.

The demand for labor in each sector depends on the current capital stock,

current prices and taxes, and the production technology. Given the interest

rate, current prices and taxes, and the lead values for V and Z, we

calculate current values for Q and Z in each sector (as detailed in the




                                    26
appendix). From the current Q we then derive investment, adjustment costs,

and borrowing for each sector. Once adjustment costs are known, we can

calculate each sector's output supply from the desired input level and the

current capital stock.

        Given the lead value for NW, current prices, and the interest rate, we

calculate the current value for expected human and transfer wealth, NW. From

Q,   Z, and   current magnitudes we calculate the values of   firms and noithuman

wealth,    W. Current prices and the variables NW and W    allow the calculation of

total    wealth, consumption, and saving.
        Import supplies and the demands for domestic   goods by the government and

foreign    sectors can be calculated from   current prices and tax rates.

        The demands for final goods by households,   the government, foreigners,
and   firms (investment) are combined to determine total final demands for each

produced good. This total implies a demand for gross output, given the

production technology.

        Within—period equilibrium requires that the overall demand for labor

equal its (exogenous) supply, that output demand equal output supply for each

sector, that firms' demands for funds (total borrowing exclusive of retained

earnings) equal total household saving, and that government expenditures equal

government     revenues. To obtain these equilities, we employ the Powell
(extension of Newton) algorithm which tries alternative values for the price
of    labor, the five output prices, the interest rate, and the scalar for

adjusting marginal income tax rates. TIus in any period, the Powell algorithm

tries eight "prices" and evaluates eight excess demands.

        Once the within—period equilibrium is obtained for the first period, we




                                     27
augment the   capital         stocks based on the levels of net investment and perform

the same equilibrium calculations for the next period. In this manner we

solve for every period in the simulation interval.



B. Intertemporal Equilibrium


                                                                                     *   *
     Perfect      foresight requires that the values of the lead variables HW , V
     S
and Z conform to realized values. To achieve this conformity, we implement

an algorithm which is similar in many respects to that of Fair and Taylor

(1983). Our algorithm               operates   as follows. First, we calculate the new

steady—state values for HW, V, and Z which ultimately prevail after a

policy change. In the base case, the steady—state values for these variables

emerge from the calibration procedure; in revised case simulations, a more

complex simulation procedure is required.11 We then assign the steady

state values to the terminal values for the lead variables, that is,


                   *
     (30)     HW          =   HW
                   Ti-i            ss



     (31) T+1
           V =Vss

               *
      (32)    Z
               T+1
                          =Z ss


where T is the last simulation period, and the subscript ss denotes the value

for a variable in the new steady state. Next, we assign an initial path for
                                                             *
the lead variables. For the lead variable, HW , for example, the path is



                                                28
represented by HW, NW3, ..., HW;÷1.

    We then solve the model for each within—period equilibrium given the

initial paths of lead variables. The within—period equilibrium solution

provides a path of derived values:                                              and
                                         NW1, NW2,      NWT' V1, V2, ..., VT;

Z1, Z2, ...,   Z.   At this point we compare the lead variables with

contemporaneous derived values; if the lead and derived values are riot

sufficiently close to one another,12 we update the paths of guesses in a
                                                         *
Gauss—Seidel fashion. For example, we adjust the NW path according to



     (34)             =   k)   +   (l)HW             t=2,T



where k represents the iteration number and X is a parameter between 0 and 1.

This procedure generally brings lead and realized values within .1 percent of

one another within fifty iterations)3

     The equilibrium paths for NW, V, and Z have the appropriate slope across

any two consecutive periods, since agents have perfect foresight and impose

the appropriate relationship across periods in determining a current value on

the basis of the corresponding lead variable. Each equilibrium path also has

the appropriate level, as determined by the terminal values for each variable.



V. SIMULATION RESULTS



     The "base case" sequence of equililria is the standard against which the

effects of policy changes are measured. As mentioned above, the economy

exhibits steady—state growth in the base case at an annual rate of three




                                    29
percent. We generally perform simulations over an interval of 75 years, with

the equilibria spaced one year apart. Thus T=75. In most simulations, the

economy approaches quite closely the new steady state well before the 75th

year, and we find that using larger values for T does not significantly affect

the simulation results.

     In all   simulations,   the path of real government spending is kept the same

as In the base case. Government budget balance is maintained in each period

by lump—sum   increases   or reductions in personal income taxes.



A. A Corporate Tax Cut



     1. UnanticIpated Policy Change. The first experiment evaluates the

effects of a reduction in the corporate income tax rate from 0.46 to 0.34 in

all industries. The reduction is assumed to be unanticipated and to take

effect in the first period. Figure 5a displays the effects of the policy

change in a "typical" sector, manufacturing. The figure compares the time

paths of investment, the capital stock, and the asset value of firms in the

policy change and base cases. The cut In the corporate tax raises the after—

tax marginal product of capital, allowing higher earnings and dividends in

every period. The stock or asset value for the industry, V, rises Immediately

to reflect the increases in the stream of earnings, or more specifically, in

the discounted stream of after—tax dividends less share issues. In the

initial period, V Increases by 18.5 percent over the base case. The Increase

in V is sustained over time, and in the new steady state the asset value

exceeds the base case steady—state value by 21.5 percent.




                                     30
       The higher asset values imply larger values for Q and stimulate

investment, which in the first period rises by 4.9 percent over the level of

the base case. Sustained higher rates of investment lead to steady increases

in the capital stock; by the fifth period, the capital stock exceeds the base

case level for the same period by 2.1 percent, and In the new steady state,

the capital stock is above the base case value by 9.1 percent. Although the

rate of investment (I/K) eventually returns to its value prior to the policy

change,    the level of investment remains above the base case level, in keeping
with   the higher capital stock.

       The pattern of results is similar for the other industries except for

housing, as indicated by Table 5. The table shows the effects of the policy

change    on investment, after—tax earnings, and stock values in each industry
for periods 1 and 5 and the new steady state. In sectors 1—4, the cut In the

corporate tax rate immediately stimulates investment demands and eventually

leads to a higher capital intensity in the steady state. The steady—state

percentage increases in investment in Table 5 are also the percentage

increases    in the capital stock, since the investment—capital ratio returns to
the benchmark value in the new steady state. The increased investment in
these sectors contributes to a 4.1 percent increase    in   the aggregate private
capital    stock in the new steady state. The corporate tax cut has an immediate

and sustained effect on asset values, yielding increases in industries 1—4 of

from 15 to 21 percent over the base case levels in the initial and later

periods.

       The situation differs for the housing sector. Since only a small

fraction (approximately 2.4 percent) of housing capital is employed by




                                    31
corporations, the corporate tax cut implies a much smaller reduction in the

overall rate of capital taxation in the housing sector than In other sectors.

While asset values rise in the other sectors, the reduced relative
attractiveness of housing capital causes asset values to decline initially
by 1.3 percent In the housing sector. The lower stock values discourage
investment, which initially declines by 1.2 percent relative to the base case.
Although      the housing sector suffers in the short run, over the longer term the

sector experiences increases in asset values and in the capital stock relative

to the base case. This seems to reflect the fact that the higher overall

capital intensity of the economy improves productiveness, raises incomes, and

ultimately calls for increases in the production of housing services.

Although the housing sector's share of output falls, in the long run the

corporate tax      cut   has a positive effect on the absolute level of output from

the sector.

        The different effects across sectors are attributable in large part to

the existence of capital immobilities that prevent the non—corporate

(especially housing) sectors from immediately sharing the gains associated

with reduced taxation of corporate capital.


        2.    Announcement Effects. We also consider the implications of   the   same


corporate       tax cut when the policy change is announced three full years prior
to   Its     implementation (the tax reduction takes effect in year 4). Results for

 sector      2 appear in Figure 5b. The cut in corporate taxes will reduce Z, the

 present value of depreciation allowances on a dollar of investment, once the

 policy change takes effect. This induces firms to invest at a more rapid rate

 prior to the policy change than after, and accelerates the movement in the


                                        32
capital stock toward its new steady—state intensity. The value of firm equity

rises immediately following the policy announcement, but by less than in the

case where the tax cut is immediately enacted.

     The steady—state consequences of this pre—announced policy change are the

same as those in the unnanounced case previously considered: in the long run,

the capital intensity of each sector changes (increases) by that amount

necessary to bring the after—tax marginal product of capital into its

appropriate relationship with the cost of new capital.

     These simulations indicate that the announcement of a prospective cut in

corporate taxes hastens the gains to be achieved in terms of capital

formation, productivity, and real incomes. Thus, for this policy change, the

prior announcement of the policy seems preferable to maintaining uncertainty

as to whether the policy will be implemented.



B. Eliminating the Investment Tax     Credit


     1. Unanticipated Policy Change. We next consider the effects of

eliminating the investment tax credit in each industry. The effects for

the manufacturing sector are presented in Figure 6a. These effects are fairly

typical of the effects occurring in sectors other than housing. Lowering the

ITC lowers Q directly and causes an immediate reduction in the rate of

investment. In the short run, the level of investment falls by approximately

seven percent. Over time, the capital stock declines relative to the base

case, as does the productiveness of capital. Thus, over the longer term,

earnings and the asset value of firms fall. In the long run, the rate of


                                 33
investment (I/K) returns to the steady—state value, but both the capital stock

arid the level of investment are lower than in the base case by about 12

percent.

     Table 5   reveals   the effects of this policy change across the five

industries. Repealing the ITC especially discourages investment in the

agriculture, manufacturing, and services sectors, where the initial ITC value

was relatively high (see Table 2). In the energy and housing sectors, the

initial ITC values were low (zero for housing), and thus repealing the ITC has

a smaller impact. In fact, investment in housing actually increases somewhat

(relative to the base case) in the short term after the ITC is eliminated.

This reflects the increased relative attractiveness of investment in housing

and the decline in interest rates associated with the reduction in aggregate

investment demand. In the first year, nominal interest rates fall to a value

of 7.0 percent, as compared with 7.3 percent in the base case. The short—term

effects on asset values are similar to the effects on investment and reflect

the changes in the relative attractiveness of investment in the different

industries. While eliminating the ITC lowers firm values for the agriculture,

manufacturing, and services sectors, the policy change yields slight increases

in asset values for the energy and housing sectors.

      In the long run, repealing the ITC lowers investment and stock prices in

 all industries. Even the energy and housing sectors experience reductions in

 asset values in the new steady state; this seems to reflect the fact that

 the overall capital intensity of the economy is lower, implying lower capital

 productiveness, lower real incomes, and a diminished demand for the output

 from these industries.



                                     34
      2. Announcement Effects. In addition we consider the ITC elimination

when the policy change is announced three years before it is put into effect.

The results for the manufacturing sector appear in Figure 6b. The policy

announcement lowers the overall attractiveness of investment and leads to a

downward shift in the investment profile. However, the reduction in

investment is slight in the years prior to implementation of the new policy,

as firms continue to take advantage of the original investment credits right

up   to the time of the change. The steady—state effects of this policy change
are the same as in the pre—announced policy   case previously described:

lowered   investment leads to a reduced productiveness of capital, lower
earnings   and dividends, and a decline in the equity value of firms.

       Results for each industry appear in Table 5.



C.    Combined ITC Elimination and Corporate Tax Reduction



       Two key features of the Tac Reform Act of 1986 are the elimination of the

ITC and reductions in corporate income taxes. Here we consider the effects

of   a combined policy of this type, the elimination of the investment tax
credit    accompanied by a reduction of the corporate tax rate to 0.35.    In   the

model, this combined policy is "revenue neutral" over the first five

periods.14 However, it is revenue losing after this time as a result of

behavioral adjustments to the new tax regime, and thus offsetting lump—sum

increases in personal taxes are required to ensure government budget balance

in later periods.




                                    35
     The previous discussion indicates that eliminating the ITC and cutting

the corporate tax have opposite effects on Q and investment. Our simulation

results indicate that the effect of the ITC elimination predominates when the

two changes are combined. Figure 7 and Table 5 reveal that the combined

policy discourages Investment in the short run, despite the favorable

influence of a lower corporate tax. Aggregate private investment falls by 2.2

percent in the first period. In the long run, the combined policy reduces the

aggregate capital stock by 3.5 percent. Even though the ITC elimination and

corporate tax cut have revenue effects that essentially cancel each other

out, the ITC elimination has a greater effect on investment since

it-is targeted specifically to new capital, rather than all capital. These

results suggest that policies (like the new tax law) involving the elimination

of the ITC may be very costly in terms of capital formation, even if

accompanied by reductions in the corporate tax.

     As indicated in Table 5, this policy combination generates windfalls to

capital owners (higher asset values) in both the short and long run. What

makes these results particularly onerous Is that the windfall to capital

owners Is not accompanied by any increase in capital accumulation.

     These results suggest that the opposite type of combined policy —— a

doubling of the ITC combined with a revenue preserving increase in the

corporate tax —— would be preferable in terms of capital formation, leading to

higher investment and a higher long—run capital stock. Simulating this

"opposite" policy indicates that this is indeed the case: aggregate private

investment rises by 3.2 percent in the first period and the aggregate capital

stock is 6.9 percent higher in the long run. Of course, there are important




                                 36
issues of dynamic consistency associated with this combined policy and with

the policy reduction combination previously discussed. The

potential gains will depend significantly on whether the policy in question is

believed to be permanent and whether it is anticipated.15



D. An Increase in Gasoline Taxes



     In this experiment, we double the tax rate on gasoline. In the model,

gasoline is one of the 15 consumer goods produced by combining the five

industry or producer goods. Gasoline, in particular, Is produced in the model

using the producer goods from the energy and services sectors and no producer

goods from other sectors.

     Figure 8a displays the effects of the gasoline tax increase on the output

price, investment, the capital stock, and the stock price in the energy

sector. The output price is net of the gasoline tax (and other retail taxes).

In the short run, energy producers bear the burden of the tax as demands fall

and the net of tax price declines. The lower prices imply lower earnings and

dividends, and the value of equity in the energy sector falls by about eight

percent. The lower asset values make investment less attractive, and thus the

energy sector invests more slowly and the capital stock declines relative to

the base case. The slower growth (relative to the base case) of the energy

sector effectively reduces supply and causes prices to return toward original

levels. In the long run, the supply cutback transfers the burden of the

gasoline tax from energy producers to energy consumers.

     Figure 8b illustrates the fact that the gasoline tax has different




                                   37
incidence effects across sectors. The gas tax (if perceived to be permanent)

causes investors to reallocate their portfolios, giving rise to windfall

losses to owners of energy capital and windfall gains to owners of other

capital. The values of non—energy stocks rise by between 0.2 to 1.4 percent

in the short run. Over the longer term, the changes in the seotoral

allocation of capital bring about changes in output prices and cause asset

values to move back somewhat toward their base case levels. These different

effects across sectors underscore the importance of incorporating adjustment

costs and forward—looking behavior in general equilibrium models evaluating

tax incidence.

     It may seem contradictory that the variable V is permanently lowered in

the energy sector, despite the fact that in the long run, energy prices (net

of gasoline taxes) return to the original level. However, it should be noted

that V represents the total asset value of energy capital; since the quantity

of capital falls relative to the base case, the total value also falls.



E. Sensitivity Analysis



     Our   final   simulations explore the sensitivity of the model's results to

the adjustment cost parameters and to the tax replacement scheme. To consider

the implications of different adjustment cost assumptions, we alter the slope

of the adjustment cost function, (IfK). In a low adjustment cost

scenario, we reduce both y and       in a way that reduces by fifty

percent the first derivative of the 6     function   while leaving the value of

the function unchanged at the base case I—K ratio. Similarly, in a high adjustment




                                     38
cost scenario, we raise y and      so as to double the slope of the 6 function

while leaving its value unchanged in the base case. In Figure 9 we

present results from simulations of an unannounced elimination of the

investment tax credit under the low and high adjustment cost assumptions. The

solid line indicates the results under the central case adjustment cost

secenario already considered.

     The most important difference introduced by changing        the   adjustment cost

paramenters   is the length of the transition to the new steady state. Under
low adjustment costs, the capital—output    ratio moves halfway to its new

steady—state   value within eight years; under higher adjustment costs, this

takes approximately 17 years.

     The long—term incidence effects of this policy change are quite similar

across adjustment cost specifications. However, as Figure 9 illustrates, the

short—term effects can be quite different depending on the magnitude of

adjustment costs. The elimination of the ITC produces two opposing effects on

the equity    value of the firm.   On the one hand, the policy change makes

existing   capital   attractive relative to new capital and thereby has a positive

influence on the value of the firm in     the short term.   On   the other hand,
until the desired new capital intensity is attained, there will be
inframarginal    losses associated with existing capital, and this tends       to
reduce   V. This latter effect gains importance to the extent that adjustment

costs are high and the long—run capital intensity is realized slowly. Thus,

in the case of low adjustment costs, V rises in the short run, while in the

intermediate and high adjustment cost cases, it falls. These results indicate

 that more precise estimates as to the extent of adjustment costs across




                                     39
industries would be of considerable value for tax incidence analysis.



VI. CONCLUSIONS AND DIRECTIONS FOR FURTHER RESEARCH



     The simulation experiments presented above illustrate the importance of

Incorporating forward—looking investment behavior and accounting for short—run

immobillties in general equilibrium policy evaluation models. The incidence

patterns revealed by these simulations are consistent with economic theory and

yet would not have emerged from models with perfectly mobile capital or static

expectations. The results also highlight the significance of distinguishing

taxes on new capital from those on existing capital.

     One important result emerging from our simulations is that a combined

policy involving the elimination of the investment tax credit and the

reduction of corporate taxes generates windfalls to capital owners yet

produces no favorable effect on capital accumulation. This result may be

pronioted by the recently enacted tax reform package, which also combines these

 (and other) tax changes.

     We also observe significant differences across sectors in the effects of

various tax policy changes. For example, reducing the corporate income tax

 stimulates investment and raises firm values for most sectors, but has adverse

consequences for the housing sector, particularly in the short run. These

different effects are largely attributable to the existence of costs of

adjustment which prevent the benefits of reduced corporate taxes from being

 immediately shared with the (largely unincorporated) housing sector. The

model indicates that reducing the corporate tax from 46 to 34 percent would




                                 40
lower the stock value of' housing capital by approximately 1.3 percent in the

short run.



     The current model allows for several natural extensions. First, it would

be useful to disaggregate the capital goods producing industry and allow for

different types of capital goods. Distinguishing structures from equipment

would be particularly worthwhile, allowing for analysis of' the effects of tax

policy on the asset composition, as well as the industry composition, of'

investment.

     Incorporating liquidity constraints in the treatment of household

behavior also seems a worthwhile enterprise. Because these constraints are

absent in the current model, it may overstate the importance of wealth effects

on consumption and understate the potential effects of policy changes on

interest rates.

     Finally, expanding the treatment of the foreign sector might yield

significant rewards. The current model treats somewhat primitively the

interactions between domestic tax policy and the behavior of the foreign

sector. In the model, the effects of domestic tax initiatives on interest

rates occur mainly through the interactions of domestic saving and investment.

Recent experience demonstrates that changes in the supply of funds from

foreigners significantly influence U.S. interest rates. Thus one profitable

investment in model development might be to expand the current model to

capture the principal determinants of current and capital account flows.




                                  41
FOOTNOTES



1. Shoven and Whalley (1984) provide an excellent survey of computable general

equilibrium models applied to tax incidence and other issues.

2. Much of this section is taken from Summers (1985).

3. Under external adjustment costs, the costs of adjustment are borne through

payments to an agent (for example, an enterprise providing installation

services) external to the firm. Under internal adjustment costs, the costs of

adjustment take the form of reduced productiveness of the firm's own factors

of production. For a discussion of the different economic implications of the

twotypes of adjustment costs, see Mussa (1978).

4. Notice that the 1981 TEFRA tax legislation had as centerpiece a program of

accelerated depreciation which reduced the acquisition cost of purchasing new

capital goods. The analysis here implies that it should have had an ambiguous

effect on the stock market.

 5.   This expression for V is derived in Poterba and Summers (1985).
 6. An alternative is to incorporate external adjustment costs, as described in

 footnote 2.

 7. The quantity of labor demanded should yield a value marginal product equal to

 the wage. This quantity of' labor, combined with the current stock of capital,

 implies a particular level of value added. The ratio of value added to

 intermediate inputs is constant given the fixed coefficient nature of the

 technology, and thus the optimal intermediate input levels can be derived from

 K and L.

 8. Thus, in the housing industry, we adopt an alternative approach to the




                                     42
marginal source of finance. Dividends are determined according to:

      DIV = EARN + BN — IEXP

9. For the housing sector, we define

      h1 =
             =     +
      h2                   (1—s1)
as the effective tax          rates   for profits and interest payments, respectively, in

that sector. Here s is the share of housing services value added produced by

corporations. We then express after—tax earnings in this sector as

      EARN = EpF(X,L,M) — wL —                         —                +
                                                           iDEBT(1—2)       hlD
The adjusted rate rhl accounts for the fact that the implicit rentals from

owner—occupied     homes and the rentals from non—corporate tenant—occupied
housing escape taxation at the industry level. This rate also is appropriate
for   determining depreciation deductions (Wh1I in this sector. The rate

acknowledges the fact that interest payments made by non—corporate housing can

be expensed at the personal income tax rate. The resulting expression for Q

for this sector is also slightly different from that of equation (13).

Solving the optimization problem yields


       Q =
              f(1h3    )    (YZ) —
                             K
                                      I   + b + ITC + Z]
                                                            h1
where h3 Is the effective tax at the individual level on returns from the

housing      sector.
10.   The capital asset pricing model asserts that the risk premium for a given

industry is the product of the industry beta and the excess return on the

average market portfolio. From Fullerton and Gordon we derive the equity

betas and the average excess return.




                                                43
11. The simulation procedure involves the solution of the general equilibrium

model under steady—state constraints. In the constrained system we iterate

over capital stocks as well as prices to obtain a general equilibrium in which

the derived industry Q's are equal to the steady—state values.

12. We generally require the corresponding lead and derived values to differ by no

more than .1 percent.

13. Another algorithm for solving this type of intertemporal problem is the

multiple shooting algorithm presented in Lipton et al (1982). However, the

multiple shooting algorithm is significantly more difficult to implement than

the Fair—Taylor—type algorithm that we have employed. In addition, with the

large dimensionality of the intertemporal problem that we face, multiple

shooting is likely to be more costly in terms of computation time.

14. The combined policy is revenue—gaining in the first period and revenue—losing

in periods 2—5.     Over the first five periods the present value of the lump—

sum   adjustments   necessary to maintain benchmark tax revenues is approximately

zero.

15.   For   example, the combined policy of doubling the ITC and raising corporate

taxes   has   some unfavorable consequences in the short run if it is anticipated.

When we simulate this policy change as anticipated three years prior to its

implementation, aggregate investment drops by approximately 1.5    percent
(relative to the base case) in each of the three periods Immediately preceding

implementation. Once the policy takes place, investment rises relative to the

base case.




                                      44
REFERENCES

Auerbach, A.J. and J.R. Hines, Jr. (1986), "Tax Reform, Investment, and the
Value of the Firm," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.
1803, Cambridge, Mass. (January).

Ballard, C.L., D. Fullerton, J.B. Shoven, and J. Whalley (1985), A GENERAL
EQUILIBRIUM MODEL FOR TAX POLICY EVALUATION (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press).

Blanchard, O.J. (1985), Debt, Deficits, and Finite Horizons," Journal of'
Political Economy 93(2).

Bovenberg, A.L. (1983), "Capital Mobility, Capital Accumulation and Financial
Assets: Q—Theory in an Applied General Equilibrium Framework," niimeo,
University of California at Berkeley.

Deleeuw, F. and L. Ozanne (1979), "The Impact of the Federal Income Tax on
Investment in Housing," Survey of Current Business 59 (12), 50—61.

Fair, R.C., and J.B. Taylor (1983), "Solution and Maximum Likelihood
Estimation of Dynamic Nonlinear Rational Expectations Models" Econometrica 51
(4), 1169—1185.

Fullerton, D. (1983), "Transition Losses of Partially Mobile Industry Specific
Capital," Quarterly Journal of Economics 83(1), 10725.

Fullerton, D. and R.H. Gordon (1983), "A Reexamination of Tax Distortions in
General Equlibrium Models," in M. Feldstein, ed., BEHAVIORAL SIMULATION
METHODS IN TAX POLICY ANALYSIS (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

Goulder. L.H., J.B. Shoven, and J. Whalley (1983), "Domestic Tax Policy and
the Foreign Sector," in Martin Feldstein, ed., BEHAVIORAL SIMULATION METHODS
IN TAX POLICY ANALYSIS (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

Hayashi, F. (1982), "Tobin's Marginal q and Average q,"              50, 213—
224.

Hulten, C.R. and F. C. Wykoff' (1981), "The Measurements of Economic
Depreciation," in C. Hulten, ed,, DEPRECIATION, INFLATION, AND THE TAXATION OF
INCOME FROM CAPITAL (Washington: Urban Institute), 81—125.

Lipton, D., et al. (1982), "Multiple Shooting in Rational Expectations
Models," Econometrica (September).

Lucas, R.E., Jr. (1967), "Adjustment Costs and the Theory of Supply," urnal
of Political Economy 75 (August), 321—334.



                                  45
Mussa, M. (1978), "Dynamic Adjustment in a Fleckscher—Ohlin—SamuelsOfl Model,"
Journal of Political Economy 86(5), 775—91.

Poterba, J.M. (1980), "Inflation, Income Taxes and Owner—Occupied Housing,"
Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Poterba, J.M., and L,H. Summers (1985), "The Economic Effects of Dividend
Taxation," in Edward I. Altman and Marti G. Subramanyam, eds., RECENT
ADVANCES IN CORPORATE FINANCE (Homeward, Illinois: Richard 0. Irwin).

Shoven, J.B. (1986), "The Tax Consequences of Share Repurchases and Other Non—
Dividend Cash Payments to Equity Owners," mimeo, Stanford University.

Shoven, J.B., and J. Whalley, (1972), "A General Equilibrium Calculation
of the Effects of Differential Taxation of Income From Capital," TJournal of
Public Economies 1, 281—322.

Shoven, J,B., and J. Whalley, (1984), "Applied General Equilibruim Models
of Taxation and International Trade: An Introduction and Survey," Journal of
Economic Literature 22, 1007—1051.

Standard and Poor's Corporation (1978), Standard and Poor's Statistical
Service, Basic Statistics.

Summers, L,H. (1981), "Taxation and Corporate Investment: A q—Theory
Approach," Brookins Papers on Economic Activity (January), 67—127.

Summers, L.H. (1985), "Taxation and the Size and Composition of the Capital
Stock: An Asset Price Approach," Harvard Institute of Economic Research
Discussion Paper No. 1179.

Tobin, J. (1969), "A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory," Journal
of Money, Credit, and Banking I (February), 15—49.

Treadway, A.B. (1968), "On Rational Entrepreneurial Behavior and the Demand
for Investment," Review of Economic Studies 36, 227—239.

United States, Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department of Commerce, Survey of
Current Business, Washington: Government Printing Office (July 1976, July
1978, February 1981).

Wilcoxen, P.J. (1986), "Investment with Foresight in General Equilibrium,"
mimeo, Harvard University (January).




                                   46
Appendix: Deriving Q, Z, and HW from Lead Values



z


     The variable Z represents the present value of depreciation allowances,

evaluated at time t, per dollar of new investment. In discrete time we may

write Z as


                                 T s—t
                          (1—8 )

      A—i) Z=                s
                    s=t     1 (1+ru)
                           u=1      -


where 8T is the depreciation rate for tax purposes and rt is the rate of

return over the interval from period t to period t+1. Evaluating Z over two

successive time periods yields the relationship:


                                     T
                    T
     (A—2)     =                 +
                    t                l+rt



This relationship is employed to determine the current period Z on the basis

of a guessed value for the next period.



0


    • The determination of           requires more steps. First, an initial guess I




                                         47
is made of current investment. Using this guess it is possible to derive the

nominal depreciable capital stock, KDEP, for the next period, based on the

relationship




     (A—3) KDEPt+i =                 +
                       (1_&T)KDEPt




The values of B and Z for a given period are related according to



                                                t
                      T
     (A—4) Bt = (1 — 6 )KDEP w(Z +       6T
                                              1—6 T1

Using (A—3) and (A—4) it is possible to determine Bt+i on the basis of

     and        The guess of investment allows us to calculate

dividends and new share issues in the current period based on current prices

and taxes. The arbitrage condition expressed by equation (3) implies a

relationship for the values of V across successive periods:



                  (l—o)(Vt+i—VNt) + (1—O)DIVt
     (A—5) Vt =
                          1—c+r

Using the lead value        and the relationship in (A—5), we calculate

the current value for V. Then, using he derived values for V, Bti and Z, we

calculate the current value of Q using (13). This value of' Q implies a

certain level of investment. If this value does not match the initial guess




                                 48
of investment which helped to generate it, the initial guess is updated and

the entire sequence of derivations is performed again. This procedure is

repeated until the initial investment guess matches the derived investment

level.



NW


     Evaluating NW over two successive periods yields



                               NW
                 A                  t+1
     (A—6) HWt=wtLt+TRt+                A
                               1    +r


Thus, HWt can be calculated based on a lead variable for HWt and variables

observed in period t.




                                   49
                  Figure 1

Dynamics of Investment and Market Valuation




                                    <1
                                          K
             Figure 2

Response to a Capital Tax Increase




                                         0




                               = 0
                                     K
            Figure 3

Response to an Investment Subsidy




                                        0




                                        0




                                    K
                                   Table 1

                           Model Treatment of Taxes



        Tax                                             Treatment in Model


 1. Corporate income tax                         Ad valorem tax on profits by
                                                 industry; bond interest payments
                                                 are expensed


2. Property tax and corporate                    Ad valorem tax on capital stocks
    franchise taxes                              by industry


3. Investment tax credits                        Ad valorem subsidy to investment
                                                 by industry


4. Depreciation deductions                       Tax credit based on the value of
                                                 depreciable capital stock, tax
                                                 depreciation rate, and corporate
                                                 income tax rate


5. Contributions to Social Security,             Ad valorem tax on the use of
    Unemployment Insurance, and                  labor services by industry
    Workmen's Compensation


6. Motor vehicles tax                            Ad valorem tax on the use of
                                                 motor vehicles by industry


7. Excise taxes, other indirect business         Ad valorem taxes on output of
    taxes, and nontax payments to government     producer goods


8. Retail sales taxes                            Ad valorem tax on purchases of
                                                 consumer goods


9. Personal income taxes (including              Linear function of labor and
    state and local)                             capital income (net of capital
                                                 gains taxes)


10. Social Security benefits, unemployment       Lump—sum income transfer
     compensation, and other transfers           constituting a fixed share of
                                                 overall government spending
                                        Table 2

               Benchmark Values for Industry Tax and Behavioral Parameters

                       (1)        (2)              (3)      (4)        (5)


                      Agri—                              Services,
                    culture                                Trade
                      and       Manufac—                    and       Housing
Parameter           Mining      turing        Ener        Utilities   Services

rate of              .010       .089          .052        .067        .014
economic
depreciation (6


rate of              .179       .119          .100        .103        .070
tax            T
depreciation (6 )


                     .118        .062             .074    .083        .100
equity
risk
premium (ii)


effective            .072        .073             .033    .071        .0
investment
tax credit
rate (ITC)

                      .143       .153             .145     .422        .502
debt—capital
ratio (b)


scalars:

      corporate tax rate (w)         0.46
      capital gains tax rate (c)     0.05
      marginal income tax rate (0)   0.254
      steady—state growth rate (g)   0.03
      inflation rate (n)             0.062
      nominal interest rate (i)       0.073
      adjustment cost parameters
                                      0.076
                                     19.6
                                                               Table 31

                                                    Base Case Values for Each Industry


                          (1)                 (2)               (3)               (4)          (5)
                     Agriculture             Manufae—                           Services,   Housing
                     and Mining              turing            Energy           Trade and   Services    Total
                                                                                Utilities

X                             396.8          2,810.3             164.3          2,582.9       375.4     6,329.7
                              288.3            820.7             425.8          2,504.8     3,275.6     7,315.2
1.                             63.2            777.3              18.8          1,072.3         6.4     1,938.0
Adjustment Costs                8.2             15.1               1.1             10.6         2.5        37.4
KDEP                          137.1            461.0             179.0          1,232.9       881.0     2,891.0
V                             350.0            926.1             367.0          1,535.1     2,158.6     5,336.8
Z                               0.348            0.310             0.292            0.295       0.006
B                              41.4            126.3              45.3            308.8         5.6       527.4
                                1.057            0.851             0.320            0.407       0.173
           2
"Tobin's Q"                     1.137            1.281             1.007            1.035       1.161
I                              37.5             98.0              34.7            242.3       144.1       556.6
Bond Interest Paid              2.8              8.4               4.1             70.6       109.0       195.8
EARN                           72.8            120.2              47.9            225.1       151.3       617.3
DIV                            38.6             38.2              23.0             58.7       149.7       287.5
DIV/V                           0.110            0.041             0.063            0.038       0.069       0.054
Retained Earnings              31.6             76.9              25.5            166.6         3.0       303.6
BorrowIng                       3.2             13.9               8.1             19.4       141.1       185.7
Corporate Taxes Paid           32.6             444               25.0             66.8         0.7       169.5



1. To facilitate comparisons with recent historical values, we have scaled up
the 1973 benchmark values to 1985 levels by multiplying the original 1973
values by the ratio of 1985 to 1973 nominal GNP. All values in the table are
expressed in billions of 1985 dollars. Benchmark prices are equal to unity;
thus the figures given for quantity variables X, K, 1., and I can be
interpreted either as values or as quantities.

2. Defined as             +   b; base case      is equal to 1.
                V/(PxK)
3. Net of depreciation deductions and the investment tax              credit.
                          Table 4

      Base   Case Wealth. Income. Saving, and   Cpnsumttiofl1




Total Private Wealth (TW)                       260,075

     Non—human   Wealth (W + YK)2                 9,178

     Human   and Transfer Wealth (HW)           250,898


Household Income3

     Labor Income                                 2,344

     Capital Income4                                526

     Taxes Paid                                     366

     Transfers Received                              320



Total Private Saving

     Industry Retained Earnings                      304

     Household Saving                                248



Household Consumption                              2,575


 1. All values have been scaled to 1985 levels (see Note 1 from
    Table 3) and are expressed in billions of 1985 dollars.
 2. Includesvalue of privately owned capital employed by
    government.
 3. Income figures are gross of personal income taxes.
 4. Includes implicit rentals from owner—occupied housing.
                                        Figure 4

                      Outline of Within—Period Solution Structure




Within—Period Equilibrium Conditions

   aggregate labor demand = aggregate labor supply
   gross output demand = gross output supply (for each sector)
   firm borrowing = household saving
   government spending = government revenue


Intertemporal Equilibrium Conditions

   H14HWt
                     t = 2,3,...,T
    v* =     V
                 t   t = 2,3,...,T
     t
         =
             zt
             = HW5
    v*       =V ss
     T+l
    z*
     T+l
             =z ss
                                                                                           Table 5

                                                                 Results   from Alternative    T      rolicy_Epjjjpens1




                                                                                                                                                  ion   Doub11jpfGasQU
                                ppate     Tax Cut                                   ITC   Elimination                     TPOUII t
                                                                                                                             1      5      SS              1     5      SS
Period            1        5      SS        1       5      SS         1       5       SS          1       5     ss


Investment
                                7.63     7.76    5.58    7.63      —5.84    —6.72  —9.99       —1.49    —6.26    999      —1.26   —1.46   —2.72          0.21   0.21     0.13
sector 1        4.06     4.97
         2               5.97   9.15      9.26   6.61    9.15      —6.90    —8.02 —12.13       —1.95    —7.37 —12.13      —1.46   —1.71   —3.24          0.31   0.31     0.21
                4.91
         3      5.96     6.41   7.77     7.10    6.74    7.77      —3.00    —3.74  —6.28       —0.67    —3.29 —6.28        2.86    2.51    0.99         —7.25 —6.80     —6.02
         4      1.72     2.44   5.68     4.34    2.98    5.68      —7.78    —9.25 —15.17       —1.61    —8.51—15.17       —5.10   —5.79   —8.64          0.20  0.17     —0.01
         5     —1.19    —0.59   0.90    —2.13    —0.19   0.90       1.87     1.28 —1.42         0.27     1.62 —1.42        0.61    0.64   —0.29          0.77  0.73      0.56


Earnings After Tax
                                15.46     2.52   15.70   15.46     —1.93 —2.09 —2.79           —0.51    —2.02 —2.79       12.81   12.66   11.53          0.21   0.21  0.14
sector 1    16.35  16.02
       2    12.82  13.18        14.08     0.98   13.32   14.08     —0.95 —1.89 —4.93           —0.26    —1.41   —4.93     10.74   10.45    8.65           0.38  0.36  0.18
        3   14.91 13.73         10.50     0.60   14.00   10.50      0.39 —0.57 —2.57            0.08 —0.06 —2.57          13.93   12.05    7.57         —10.62 —9.72 —5.84
        4    8.76 10.10         12.15   —1.01    10.54   12.15      0.90 —0.54 —3.66            0.14  0.17 —3.66           9.02    9.19    8.86           0.45  0.34 —0.05
        5   —4.53  —1.66         1.39   —6.08    —0.58    1.39      6.14  3.73 —2.21            1.21  5.19 —2.21           1.38    1.88   —0.64           2.12  1.80  0.58


Asset Value of Firms
                                                 19.82   20.40     —1.45 —1.86 —3.60           —1.81    —1.65   —3.60     16.24   16.09   14.80          0.23    0.22    0.13
sector 1    19.71  19.85        20.40    12.15
       2    18.49  19.28        21.47    13.06   19.66   21.47     —1.76    —2.88    —6.81     —2.24 —2.23      —6.81     14.77   14.48   12.62          0.37    0.35    0.20
                                         11.05   16.07   14.91      0.33    —0.39    —2.51     —0.69 0.06       —2.51     14.99   14.04   11.26         —8.28   —7.88   —6.00
       3    16.22  15.85        14.91
       4    16.55  17.38        19.23    11.82   17.81   19.23     —1.87 —3.04       —5.41     —2.69 —2.54      —5.41     12.89   12.73   12.61          0.35   0.25    —0.01
       5    —1.33  —0.55         1.05    —2.65   —0.02    1.05      2.56  1.59       —1.77      0.38 2.16       —1.77      1.07    0.97   —0.48          1.24    1.09    0.56




1A11 figures    are    percentage changes fron the base case.
                                                                                                                    Figure   5b
                                   Figure 5a




            Surprise Reduction in the Corporote Tx Rate to .34                                 Announced Reduction in the Corporte mx Rate   to .34
            Results or Sector 2. Monucturinq                                                   Results For Sector 2. MrnuFcturinq
    10.00                                                                              12.00




    -1.00                                                                              -1.00
    10.00                                                                              10.00
                                                                            K                                                                                    K



                                                                                 C

                                                                                 I—)


                                                                                 cy'


    -1.00                                                                              -1.00
L                                                                                L
    22.00                                                   -    —          v          22.00                                         —                           v




    -1.00_                                                                             -1.00                                  I
        0.00        10.00      20.00      30.00     40.00        50.00   60.00             0.00        10.00     20.00     30.00      40.00           50.00   60.00
                                Year                                                                              Yer
                                          Figure 6a                                                                   Figure     6b



           Surprise Elimirition   oF Investment Tax Credit                               Announced Elimination oF   Investment Tax Credit
           Results For Sector 2. ManuFacturing                                           Results For Sector 2. ManuFacturing
    1.00                                                                         1.00




  -13.00                                                                        -13.00
    1.00




                                                                         1<                                                                              K
--I2.00
   1.00




   -5.00                                                                 EARN   -5.00                                                                    EARN
   1.00                                                                          1.00




  -7.00                                                                         -7.00                                                                     v
          0.00     10.00      20.00        30.00      40.00   50.00   60.00         0.00         10.00      20.00        30.00        40.00   50.00
                                  Yor
                                                                                                              7T,—-
                                                                                                             Yebr
                                                                                                                                                      60.00
                                 Figure    7




         Surprise Reduction in the Corporate Tax Rate and Elimination oF ITC
         Results For Sector 2. ManuFacturinq
 1.00




-4.00

 1.00




-4.00

15.00

         I                                                                     V




-1.00
        0.00     10.00      20.00      30.00      40.00      50.00      60.00
                             Year
                                                                                                                              Figure   8b
                                           Figure 8a



             Surprise Doublinq ol the GsnIine Tx                                              Surprise Doublinq io the Gsolire
                                                                                              Path   oF V   For Each Sector
             Results For Sector 3, Enerqy
     1.00                                                                             1.01)




                                                                                      -1.00

     -g.00                                                                            1.00

     1.00
                                                                                                                                                         —          7


                                                                                      -1.00
                                                                       ---1            1.00
                                                                                a,
     -8.00                                                                      0'
                                                                                 C


a,
     1.00
              ----------                                                        -c
                                                                                c-i
                                                                                a, -
                                                                                a'
                                                                                                                                                                    3

0'
I,
                                                                                       t.00   j
0,
0
C-
OC
                                                                                cL
                                                                                                                          '
0
     -6.00
      1.00                                                                            -1.00
                                                                                       2.00 T



                                                                                                                                                             —
                                                                                      -1.00 I                                               40.00   50.0fl       60.00
                                                                                                                      70.00      30.00
         0.00         10.00     20.00          30.00   40.00   50.00    60.00             0.00
                                                                                                              -
                                                                                                            10.00

                                  Ye   r                                                                               Yenr
                                             Figure     9




               Surprise I limiriôtion of I IC Under Altornetive Adjustment Custs
               Results F'or Sector 2, tThnu!octurinq
       LOU




      -13.00
       1.00



C

f-i
0

C-                                                                                    K
-13.OO
C
       1.00

                  \



      -7.00    L
          0.00         10.00       20.00        30.00       '10.00   50.00         50.00
                                    Y   er
