NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SUBSIDY DESIGN IN PRIVATELY-PROVIDED SOCIAL INSURANCE:
LESSONS FROM MEDICARE PART D
Francesco Decarolis
Maria Polyakova
Stephen P. Ryan
Working Paper 21298
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21298

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2015

We are grateful to Mark Duggan, Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, Jon Gruber, Bart Hamilton, Ben Handel,
Kate Ho, Thomas Jeitschko, Claudio Lucarelli, Aviv Nevo, Ariel Pakes, Nancy Rose, Marc Rysman,
Bernardo Silveira, Chris Timmins, and numerous seminar participants. Decarolis is grateful to the
Sloan Foundation (grant 2011-5-23 ECON) for financial support. We also gratefully acknowledge
support from the National Science Foundation (SES-1357705) and the National Institute on Aging
(5P01AG005842-29). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Francesco Decarolis, Maria Polyakova, and Stephen P. Ryan. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Subsidy Design in Privately-Provided Social Insurance: Lessons from Medicare Part D
Francesco Decarolis, Maria Polyakova, and Stephen P. Ryan
NBER Working Paper No. 21298
June 2015, Revised September 2018
JEL No. H2,H4,I11,I18,L1,L2
ABSTRACT
The efficiency of publicly-subsidized, privately-provisioned social insurance programs depends on
the interaction between strategic insurers and the subsidy mechanism. We study this interaction in
the context of Medicare's prescription drug coverage program. We find that the observed mechanism
is successful in keeping "raise-the-subsidy" incentives relatively low, acts much like a at voucher,
and obtains a level of welfare close to the optimal voucher. Across a range of counterfactuals, we find
that more efficient subsidy mechanisms share three features: they retain the marginal elasticity of demand,
limit the exercise of market power, and preserve the link between prices and marginal costs.

Francesco Decarolis
Bocconi University
Via Sarfatti 25
Milan, 20100
Italy
and EIEF
francesco.decarolis@unibocconi.it
Maria Polyakova
Department of Health Research & Policy
Stanford University
Redwood Building T111
150 Governor's Lane
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
maria.polyakova@stanford.edu

Stephen P. Ryan
Olin Business School
Washington University in St. Louis
Campus Box 1133
One Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130
and NBER
stephen.p.ryan@wustl.edu

1

Introduction

Social insurance programs have traditionally been provided directly by the government.
The last two decades, however, have seen an accelerating effort to move these programs to
privately-provided markets with public funding and extensive regulatory oversight (McGuire
et al., 2011; Gruber, 2017). Recent examples in the United States include the use of private
managed care plans in Medicare and Medicaid, private insurers competing for consumers
under the Health Insurance Marketplaces of the Affordable Care Act, and, the subject of
this paper, the private provision of prescription drug benefits in Medicare Part D. This
trend has also extended around the world to, for example, the privatization of social security
benefits in Chile, and a discussion of privatizing social security, disability, and unemployment
insurance systems in many OECD countries. The broad objectives of all such programs is
to leverage the benefits of competition to provide high-quality services at low cost to both
consumers and the government.
One critical issue that arises in such settings is how governments should determine the
level and the distribution of public funding that flows into these programs. The funding
is typically channeled through subsidies that are paid directly to private firms, making the
question of how to tailor the subsidy mechanisms central. While answering this question in
general is beyond the scope of any single paper, we contribute to the emerging academic and
policy discussion of the subsidy mechanism by providing novel evidence from the Medicare
Part D Prescription Drug Plan (PDP) program. Part D is an elective prescription drug
insurance program available to Medicare beneficiaries that was launched in 2006 and since
then has become one of the role models for privately-provided publicly-financed social insurance programs in the United States. The PDP market has several features which make it
well-suited for studying subsidy mechanism design: the program has clear, well-articulated
rules that allow us to cleanly model the incentives facing strategic firms; excellent data exists
on potential consumers and the set of choices available to them; and a complex mechanism
links equilibrium market outcomes to consumer-facing plan prices and public subsidies.
Using this rich environment, we analyze equilibrium allocations, prices, and the incidence
of subsidy dollars under the existing subsidization mechanism, as well as under an array of
counterfactual subsidy mechanisms that resemble a variety of policy proposals in this and
related markets. To facilitate this analysis, we proceed in two steps. We posit and estimate
a structural model of consumer demand and strategic insurers, respecting the many institutional details present in the market. On the demand side, we allow for risk-based selection by
allowing preferences and costs to vary across six different consumer types. Allowing for risk1

based selection enables us to directly model the key difference between insurance markets and
regular product markets: the marginal cost curve is an endogenous function of equilibrium
prices. On the supply side, we build a profit function for insurers, accounting for a host of
details such as the subsidy mechanism, risk-specific payments, reinsurance, multiple demand
types, and the endogenous marginal cost function. We leverage this structural model to first
estimate demand and cost primitives before turning to counterfactual simulations where we
adjust the subsidy mechanism.
We find that equilibrium outcomes, and, by extension, welfare, are driven by four empirical facts. First, we estimate that consumers have relatively low intrinsic willingness-to-pay
for independent prescription drug plans. This is primarily driven by the existence of a
highly-subsidized close substitute - prescription drug coverage bundled with medical insurance under private Medicare managed care plans known as Medicare Advantage (MA-PD).
The second, related, result is that the primary driver of welfare is the opportunity cost
of government spending. We find that the sign and magnitude of our welfare estimates are
dominated by the ability of the government to set subsidies to achieve optimal sorting of consumers, and risks, across different types of prescription drug coverage. Third, the observed
subsidy-setting mechanism appears to be successful in keeping plans’ margins relatively low,
as insurers price near marginal cost. Fourth, we find that, once one distills all of the administrative details of how the Part D market works, that the current mechanism acts much
like a flat voucher and obtains a level of welfare close to the optimal voucher. However, we
estimate that a social planner could do substantially better, by adjusting prices to correct
our finding that consumers are purchasing too few and too socially-expensive plans relative
to the social optimum.
While our estimates are specific to the context of Part D, our results suggest several
key economic forces that are likely to be important in any setting with publicly-subsidized
privately-provisioned goods and services. First, it is important to preserve the marginal
relationship between the prices that firms set and the prices that consumers pay. This
keeps the elasticity of demand relatively high, which results in more intense competition
and lower prices in equilibrium. Second, consumer-facing prices should be positively related
to the social cost of providing those services. Third, the relationship between subsidies
and equilibrium outcomes needs to be carefully tempered to prevent strategic pricing by
imperfectly competitive firms.
Our paper is related to several distinct literatures in social insurance, design of government transfers, and regulation of private markets. A large theoretical literature has

2

examined the role and motivation for in-kind subsidies in different sectors of the economy,
while a substantial theoretical and empirical literature has studied the supply-side effects of
government regulation. Laffont and Tirole (1993) gives a classic reference on the multitude
of theoretical issues. Surprisingly, the has been little empirical analysis at the intersection of
these literatures, even though there is a growing number of settings where in-kind subsidies
affect the decisions of private strategic firms rather than individual consumers. Our paper
contributes to the nascent literature at this intersection including: the early work by Gruber
and Washington (2005) and Cutler and Reber (1998) on tax and employer subsidizes on
employer-sponsored insurance plans; conceptually-related work on government procurement
in health care studied in Duggan (2004) and Duggan and Scott Morton (2006); as well as
the more recent concurrent work on Medicare Advantage and the Affordable Care Act in
Enthoven (2011), Frakt (2011), Decarolis (2015), Curto et al. (2015), Jaffe and Shepard
(2018), Tebaldi (2017), and Polyakova and Ryan (2018). We contribute to this literature
by analyzing the context of Medicare Part D, which in itself is a large market, as well as
by moving the literature forward by exploring ways of incorporating non-constant marginal
costs into equilibrium pricing analysis with subsidized prices.
Our paper contributes to the growing literature that analyzes the Part D program as a
prominent example of introducing consumer choice in health insurance. On the demand side,
a number of papers have explored the rationality of individual choices, consumer myopia,
and inertia.1 A handful of existing studies on the supply side have considered the quantity
and quality of the plan menu offered by Part D insurers and price responses to consumer
inertia (Lucarelli et al., 2012; Ho et al., 2015; Wu, 2016; Miller and Yeo, 2015; Chorniy et al.,
2014; Einav et al., 2016; Fleitas, 2017; Starc and Town, 2015). While studying a different
question—the difference in cost-sharing design between independent and integrated drug
plans—Starc and Town (2015) is the closest to our work in terms of the modelling approach,
including the structural estimation of demand for Part D plans by consumer risk type.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the institutional
setting and data. Section 3 lays out the empirical model of supply and demand, while
Section 4 presents model estimates. Section 5 discusses the economics forces in counterfactual
subsidy mechanisms. Section 6 concludes.
1

Including Heiss et al. (2010, 2013); Abaluck and Gruber (2011, 2016); Ketcham et al. (2012); Kesternich
et al. (2013); Kling et al. (2012); Vetter et al. (2013); Winter et al. (2006); Bundorf et al. (2013); Ketcham
and Simon (2008); Ketcham et al. (2015); Ericson (2014); Miller and Yeo (2014); Abaluck and Gruber (2016);
Ho et al. (2015); Polyakova (2016); Heiss et al. (2016); Bundorf et al. (2018); Einav et al. (2015); Abaluck
et al. (2015); Gowrisankaran et al. (2015).

3

2
2.1

Economic Environment and Data
Medicare Part D Primer

Medicare is a public health insurance program covering elderly and the disabled in the
United States. Over 50 million individuals benefit from Medicare, which accounts for roughly
$500 billion in annual budgetary outlays. The program is administered by the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). Most beneficiaries become eligible for the program
when they turn 65 and are automatically enrolled into insurance for inpatient (Part A)
and outpatient (Part B) services under the so-called “traditional” fee-for-service Medicare.
At this point consumers can make two choices. First, consumers can decide to purchase
coverage for their pharmaceutical expenditures that is not included in Parts A or B. Such
coverage is provided by private Prescription Drug Plans (PDP) under what is known as the
Medicare Part D program. Consumers have a choice of more than a dozen PDP plans in
each of the program’s 34 geographic markets. Alternatively, consumers may decide to opt
out of traditional Medicare altogether and switch to a private Medicare Advantage plan for
bundled inpatient, outpatient, and pharmaceutical coverage (MA-PD). MA-PD plans provide
a privately administered, but publicly financed alternative to government-run Medicare.
Pharmaceutical coverage for Medicare beneficiaries is the empirical context of our analysis. This drug program (launched in 2006) is a large and rapidly growing market that
accounts for about a fifth of overall federal spending in Medicare, i.e. about $100 billion.
Beyond its sheer economic size, this market further plays an important role in policy making, as it has become the role model for private provision of publicly funded social insurance.
Consumers in Part D bear only a fraction of the program’s cost (in total circa 15 percent)
due to extensive premium subsidies and risk-equalization programs. The efficiency of the
mechanism by which the government sets the premium subsidy is at the heart of our research
question, so we describe it in some detail.
To determine subsidies for pharmaceutical coverage, CMS starts by collecting “bids”
from insurers that should reflect the full price that an insurer would charge for an average
risk beneficiary. The regulator then takes a weighted (by lagged enrollment shares) average
of these bids across all Part D plans across all markets. Consumer-facing premium for each
plan is set by CMS as 25 percent of the national bid average plus the difference between
the plan’s bid and the national average. In addition to consumer premiums, insurers collect
a payment from CMS that varies across consumers depending on their health risk. CMS
assigns consumer i a risk score. To a plan that enrolls this consumer, CMS then pays a
4

subsidy equal to the insurer’s bid multiplied by i’s risk score net of consumer premium.2
For consumers with income under 150 percent of the federal poverty line (known as
“LIS,” or low-income-subsidy consumers), CMS pays the full premium when consumers are
enrolled in a qualifying plan. Further, LIS consumers are randomly assigned to qualifying
plans, unless they actively enroll in a plan of their choice. Plans in market m qualify for
LIS random assignment and full subsidies if their consumer premiums fall below the average
consumer premium in market m. As discussed in detail in Decarolis (2015), LIS random
assignment generates a discontinuity in market shares that we account for in Section 3.2.
Table 1 reports key summary statistics for the Part D market. In years 2007-2010, there
were on average 1.3 million Medicare Part D eligible individuals per geographic market in
the US. Out of these, about 0.2 million did not purchase any Part D coverage, about 0.25
million chose to buy drug plans bundled with Medicare Advantage, and 0.5 million enrolled
in stand-alone prescription drug plans (PDPs).3 .
Consumers had on average a choice of 49 Part D PDP plans in their markets, offered
by 16 insurers in 2007-2010. We can clearly see the central role of subsidies in this market:
the national average bid in years 2007-2010 was $1001, $648 of that amount was covered
in subsidies. Consumers paid the remainder (plus any additional premiums that insurers
can collect for coverage enhancements) for an average consumer-facing premium of $505.
Consumer premiums varied substantially across geographic markets and time, ranging from
$375 to $643 in annual premiums.
In our empirical analysis, we differentiate consumers by their health risk type. The idea is
that consumers of different health may have different preferences for pharmaceutical coverage
and also generate different costs for insurers. We distinguish six consumer risk types. Among
consumers not eligible for low income support, we construct five risk groups that differentiate
across low risk (relatively healthy) and high risk (relatively unhealthy) consumers. We treat
consumers that are eligible for low income support as a separate (sixth) risk group. In Panel
D, we report the share of each consumer risk type among enrollees in our analytic sample.
The shares of risk type 1 (lowest risk) to 5 (highest risk) consumers in the market are on
average respectively: 5, 20, 39, 7, and 1 percent. The remainder 30 percent of potential
consumers are individuals eligible for low income subsidies.
2

In addition to premium subsidies, CMS further provides additional payments for especially high risk
consumers. We discuss more details in Appendix A.
3
Detailed Medicare Part D enrollment numbers are recorded in Table 14 of the annual Medicare and Medicaid Statistical Supplement published by CMS at www.cms.gov/
Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Research/MedicareMedicaidStatSupp/Overview.html

5

2.2

Data

We combine two primary sources of data. The first dataset contains detailed information
about plan prices and characteristics for all Part D plans in all markets in years 2007 to
2010. The data also includes information on market-level aggregate enrollment in PDP,
MA-PD as well as other types of Part D programs.4 The second dataset are administrative
individual-level pharmaceutical claim records for years 2007-2010 for a 20 percent sample of
Medicare beneficiaries.5 These data contain individual-level information on consumer demographics, including chronic conditions, as well as Part D enrollment status, including plan
choice and low-income subsidy eligibility. The enrollment data is linked to claim information that records each drug purchase for each consumer in the sample. The purchase records
include information about the total cost of prescription as well as how this cost is split between consumer, insurer, and the government. From the 20 percent sample we construct
our analytic sample by restricting the data to individuals living in 50 US states and not
having special types of pharmaceutical insurance, such as, for example, employer-provided
coverage. The restrictions (described in more detail in Appendix Section A) decrease the
sample size from 38,628,624 individual-years (for 11,266,409 unique individuals) in the raw
data to 23,957,330 individual-years (for 7,543,722 unique individuals) in our analytic sample.

3

Model

We propose an empirical model of demand and supply of insurance contracts in Medicare
Part D that will help us evaluate the efficiency and allocative properties of the subsidization mechanism in this program. We start with a model of demand for insurance contracts
that follows the approach of Berry (1994) and Berry, Levinsohn and Pakes (1995) (hereafter referred to as BLP) before turning to a model of supply that incorporates the many
institutional features of this market.

3.1

Demand

We model consumers in 34 Part D markets in years 2007 to 2010 as choosing an insurance
plan that maximizes their indirect utility as a function of both pecuniary and non-pecuniary
4

These data are publicly available from CMS. CMS tabulates the depository of the data sources at www.
cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems.html.
5
Detailed description of data and data access is available in the online supplementary materials for this
paper as well as at www.resdac.org.

6

plan characteristics. We estimate demand separately for six different risk types of consumers.
The underlying utility structure is assumed to be the same across all six consumer groups;
for the LIS market we adjust plan characteristics to reflect the differences in premiums and
cost-sharing that these consumers face.6
The utility for enrollee i of plan j in market m consists of a deterministic component and
an idiosyncratic Type I Extreme Value-distributed random shock, ijm :
uijm = −αi pjm + βi xjm + ξjm + ijm ,

(1)

where pjm is the plan’s enrollee-facing premium after subsidies. The observable characteristics, xjm , include the annual deductible, a flag for whether the plan has coverage in the
donut hole, whether the plan has additional coverage beyond the statutory minimum (i.e. it
is “enhanced”), and several generosity measures of drug formularies. We also include fixed
effects for parent organizations that capture individuals’ preferences for brand names of large
insurance companies and quality characteristics of plans, such as pharmacy networks. ξjm
is a plan-specific fixed effect that captures unobserved plan quality. We also include the
number of years the plan has been on the market as a reduced-form approach to capturing
stickiness in consumer decision-making.7 The utility of the outside option is normalized to
zero. For all five risk types of regular consumers, the outside option constitutes buying a
Medicare Advantage drug plan bundled with a medical plan or not buying any drug coverage.
For LIS consumers that are randomly assigned to plans when first entering the program, we
assume that the outside option constitutes switching to Medicare Advantage.8
We model heterogeneity in preferences along two major dimensions. First, for five risk
types of regular enrollees, unobserved consumer heterogeneity enters the model through
random coefficients on the premium, coverage in the gap, and overall inside option. The
6

One empirical challenge specific to the LIS market is that we cannot distinguish between LIS enrollees
who are in LIS-eligible plans due to random assignment or by choice. We address this challenge by aggregating
all plans eligible for LIS random assignment into one choice within the inside option. To do the aggregation
we average the characteristics of these LIS-eligible plans. The idea is to interpret the option of not opting
out of the random assignment plans as one distinct choice that LIS enrollees can make. The potential
measurement error introduced by this aggregation is alleviated by the fact that plans eligible for LIS random
assignment have many of the same key characteristics for the LIS population, such as zero premiums, zero
deductibles, no gap in coverage, and otherwise reduced or eliminated cost-sharing.
7
Additional details and a discussion of the vintage measure may be found in Section C of the Online
Appendix.
8
We do not include consumers eligible for other sources of Part D coverage into our model, assuming that
their coverage options are always superior to the publicly available Part D contracts. This primarily includes
consumers eligible for coverage through Veteran Affairs and employer sponsored plans.

7

unobserved heterogeneity may capture differences in income, as well as individuals’ differences in risk conditional on risk type, and risk aversion. We choose a log-normal distribution
for random coefficients on premiums; it is composed of a common component, α, and an
individual-level random shock, ν ∼ N (0, 1), which is scaled by σα :
ln αi = α + σα νi .

(2)

The parameters governing coverage in the gap, βgap and σgap , and the inside option, βinner
and σinner , are specified analogously without the logarithmic transformation.
Second, we allow the entire vector of preference parameters to vary based on observable
risk type (and LIS status) of the consumer. This approach allows for risk-based sorting
of consumers in the market. We place non-LIS consumers into one of five groups on the
basis of a one-dimensional risk score, which we construct from a normalized prediction of
individual-level drug expenditures. We predict drug expenditures using a linear link between
historical drug expenditures observed in the data and individual’s health status measured
with indicators for the presence of more than 50 chronic conditions. We divide individuals
into five risk groups using percentiles of the risk score distribution (5th, 25th, 50th, 75th,
and 95th percentiles).9

3.2

Supply

Modeling the supply side in Medicare Part D market presents a considerable challenge, as
the decision-making of insurers is affected by a complex set of regulatory provisions. For
brevity, we have relegated the intricate details of the construction of our profit function to
Section D in the Online Appendix. The resulting profit function for a given firm f with a
portfolio of PDP plans Jf in a given market is given by:
πf (b) =

X

!
5
X
 R R

LIS LIS
Mt sjt (b)(θtR bj − κR
sj (b)(θLIS bj − κLIS cj ) ,
t cj ) + M

j∈Jf

t=1

(3)

where b is the vector of bids set by firms, M is market size, s is a vector of plan shares, and
c is a vector of marginal costs; the subscripts j refers to each plan and t to each consumer
risk type among 5 risk types of regular enrollees. The superscripts refer to regular enrollees
(R) and LIS enrollees (LIS).
9

Section B in the Online Appendix outlines the details of the OLS prediction, risk score construction,
and division into five risk groups.

8

Several key aspects of this profit function differ from a profit function in a standard
product market. First, while firms are required to set one bid per plan, bj , both per-enrollee
revenues and costs are indexed by risk type and LIS eligibility. For a consumer of risk type
t, a firm that bid bj receives θt bj , where θt is a risk-adjustment factor based on the enrollees’
risk score. The risk adjustment system is calibrated so that an average enrollee has a risk
score of 1, which implies that firms receive more than bj for higher risk enrollees and less
than bj for lower risk enrollees. Further, the firms faces a different expected cost for each
potential consumer, depending on the consumer’s health conditions, pharmaceutical needs,
and insurance plan design. To model this aspect of the insurance market, we assume that
marginal costs vary multiplicatively by consumer risk type, so that the insurer’s marginal
LIS
R
measure differences in average
costs are given by κR
t cj , where the scaling factors κt and κ
costs across consumer types.10
This profit function thus captures the key difference of insurance markets compared
to regular product markets: an insurer’s marginal cost curve is a function of all prices in
the market due to consumers of different risk types sorting across plans. The slope of the
marginal cost curve can be negative (adverse selection) or positive (advantageous selection);
our model does not impose a restriction on the direction of selection. Since insurers cannot
directly price discriminate in this market, the pooling of risks leads to cross-subsidization
across consumer types, with lower risk types subsidizing higher risk types.
Second, consumers face subsidized premiums; the premium formula for regular enrollees
is:

pR
(4)
j = max 0, bj − b̄ + ζ b̄ ,
where b̄ is the enrollment-weighted average bid across all Part D plans in the entire US—
critically, this includes not just PDP plans but also MA-PD plans—and ζ is the share of
the average bid not covered by the baseline federal subsidy.11 The adjustment ζ is set every
year by CMS and is governed by fiscal considerations and the Part D statutes. For example,
in 2010, this number was 0.36. Notably, this premium subsidy structure distorts both the
absolute and relative prices of Part D plans.
Third, the share of LIS enrollees in plan j is complicated by that market segment’s random
assignment mechanism: only plans with a consumer premium below the average premium in
the region qualify for random assignment of LIS consumers; all other plans receive zero LIS
enrollees, unless these enrollees opt out of the random assignment and actively choose these
10
11

The construction of these scaling factors is discussed in more detail in Section D in the Online Appendix.
Given that b̄ is determined by over 1,500 plans, we assume that firms treat it as a fixed constant.

9

plans. Section D in the Online Appendix outlines how we address the resulting non-linearity
in the plan’s market share in the LIS market.
We use the profit equation above and the behavioral assumption that insurers in this
market engage in Bertrand price competition to infer plan-type-specific marginal costs and
to solve for market equilibria under counterfactual subsidy mechanisms.

3.3

Welfare Metrics

In most of our counterfactual exercises, we will focus on measuring welfare levels and changes
for regular enrollees. For these enrollees, total welfare in the Medicare Part D PDP market
is comprised of three pieces: consumer surplus (CS), insurer profits (Π), and government
subsidies (G) including the deadweight loss associated with taxation needed to fund the
subsidy payment:
W = CS + Π − λG,
(5)
where λ is the social cost of raising public revenues. All objects in Equation 5 account
for opportunity cost: consumer surplus is measured against the zero-utility outside option,
profits are computed against what the firm could have made selling to consumers in another
market, for example, MA-PD; and government expenditures reflect the opportunity cost of
subsidizing the consumer in another market, such as MA-PD or other public pharmaceutical
programs. When solving for a vector of prices that would lead to a socially optimal allocation,
we adjust the welfare function by multiplying Π by λ. This captures the idea that under
a social planner’s allocation, the government directly controls prices and will tax/subsidize
firms to achieve a zero profit condition. Detailed derivations of each component of the welfare
function can be found in Section E of the Online Appendix.

4
4.1

Model Estimates
Demand Parameters

Table 2 reports demand estimates. Columns (1)-(5) report estimates for regular enrollees
from the random coefficient logit model with a log-normally distributed price coefficient; column (6) reports demand estimates from a Berry (1994) logit model for LIS enrollees.12 All
models are estimated using instrumental variables to account for the possibility that there is
12

We do not estimate random coefficients for the LIS enrollees as the relevant product characteristics are
set to zero for this population.

10

unobserved quality aspect of plans in the error term that is correlated with premiums, but
that we fail to capture with the observed characteristics. We instrument for plan premiums
and assume that other characteristics of the contracts are exogenous in the short run. We
motivate this by observing that, while bids for a given plan vary substantially over time,
insurers offer a rather stable portfolio of contract types over time (Polyakova, 2016). We
use BLP-style instruments that measure the number of insurance contracts offered by the
same insurer in a different market, as well as Hausman-style instruments that measure prices
charged for the similar plans in other geographic markets.13 These instruments are particularly appealing in our setting due to the regulatory structure of the market, where markets
are separated by CMS. Instrumenting the price in one region with the prices of the same
contract in other regions allows us to isolate the variation in prices that is common across
these contract (e.g. due to insurer’s price negotiations with pharmaceutical producers), but
is not correlated with market-specific unobserved quality (e.g. due to local marketing) over
and above average quality captured by insurer fixed effects. The first stage is jointly statistically significant with an F-statistic of 245 for the market with regular consumers and 23
for the LIS market.
We find intuitive patterns for the price coefficients, with riskier types and LIS consumers
having generally lower price sensitivity than other consumers. We do not find evidence of
statistically-significant dispersion in the price coefficient, which is reasonable given that we
are estimating demand within groups of consumers with similar expected costs and health
risks, both likely drivers of price sensitivity. Modal aggregate elasticities of demand by
consumer risk group are -12.9, -8.9, -5.5, -5.26, and -5.9, in the order of increasing health
risk. These are economically reasonable estimates and are similar to the range of (aggregated
across risk types) elasticities reported in Lucarelli et al. (2012) (-2.0 to -6.0) and Starc and
Town (2015) (-5.0 to -6.3).
Non-premium plan characteristics are estimated to have coefficients with intuitive signs.
Consumers dislike higher plan deductibles—more so if they have lower health risk—but
enjoy measures of plan generosity: coverage in the gap, broader coverage of common drugs,
and more in-network pharmacies all give higher utility. We also note an economically- and
statistically-significant positive coefficient on the vintage of plans, suggesting that plans
that entered earlier in the program were able to capture a larger beneficiary pool. We find
some evidence of significant dispersion in preferences (among some risk types) for two other
13

Specifically, we construct the instrument by including the lagged enrollment-weighted average of prices of
plans offered in other regions in the same macro region and in the other macro-regions by the same company,
where macro-regions are defined as three large geographic areas in the US.

11

variables for which we allow random coefficients: the inner option and the dummy for gap
coverage.
To assess whether the estimated willingness to pay is reasonable consider the following
calculation. A typical plan with a non-zero deductible has a deductible that varies from
$265 to $310 dollars. At the average of $290, removing the deductible has a dollar value
of −290 ∗ (−10.6/23.5) = $130 at the median value of the premium coefficient for risk
group 1. For risk group 5, the same computation suggests that this group values removing
the deductible at −290 ∗ (−7.92/12.9) = $178. These levels of willingness to pay for zero
deductible seem reasonable. Noting that consumers still on average pay Medicare’s standard
25 percent co-insurance for the first $290 in spending, the expected monetized value of going
from $290 to zero deductible is 0.8 ∗ ($290 − 0.25 ∗ $290) = $174, which is almost exactly our
willingness to pay estimate for consumers who are likely to spend through the deductible
(i.e. those in risk group 5) and it is lower for consumers who are less like to spend the whole
amount (the deductible level lies roughly at the 20th percentile of the spending distribution
- see Einav et al., 2016).14
Column (6) reports 2SLS estimates of the Berry logit model for the LIS market. To
estimate LIS demand, we adjust premiums to reflect LIS-specific subsidies and remove costsharing rules such as a deductible that LIS consumers do not face. The estimated price
coefficient at -7.9 suggests that LIS demand is less sensitive to prices than all risk types
of regular enrollees. This is intuitive, as prices are about $400 lower per year for the LIS
enrollees when compared to regular premiums.

4.2

Marginal Cost Estimates

We address two challenges in constructing the marginal cost estimates. First, plans that
are eligible and compete for random assignment of low-income subsidy beneficiaries have
a non-linear share function preventing us from using a standard approach of inverting the
14

A similar calculation for coverage in the gap gives a valuation of $1000 ∗ 4.62/12.9 = $358 for risk group
5 and $1000 ∗ 3.83/23.5 = $163. Again, this is reasonable given that consumers are not very likely to enter
the gap. Further, even if offered, gap coverage will not cover 100 percent of expenditures, making the actual
difference between having and not having coverage for the $3000 gap roughly 75 percent of the gap’s amount.
That is, if individuals spent through the whole gap, they would value the coverage at $2,250. Assuming
that consumers that enter the gap have uniform expenses across the gap, the mean gain in coverage is
$1,125. However, most consumers do not face these costs in the gap; Einav et al. (2016) document about 25
percent of consumers enter the gap. Assuming those consumers entering the gap have uniformly distributed
expenditures in the gap, the upper bound on the valuation of coverage is $281. We estimate a value that
is substantially above this amount for the riskiest consumers and substantially below for the lowest risk
consumers.

12

first order condition for these “distorted” plans. Second, marginal costs are assumed to not
be constant within a plan across enrollees—we allow for marginal costs to vary across five
regular consumer risk types and LIS consumers.
We start with the estimation of marginal costs for plans that we identify as systematically
not competing for random assignment of LIS consumers.15 This set of plans includes 756
out of 1,540 plans available in 2010, which is the year that our counterfactual analysis will
focus on. For these plans, we assume that the pricing incentives are captured by the first
order condition of the profit function in Equation 3 with respect to bid b. The first order
condition for prices can be inverted to recover the baseline marginal cost cj for each plan j
(Nevo, 2001). Normalizing the marginal cost multipliers κR
t (which we estimate from claims
data as described in Appendix D) so that the multiplier for risk group 1 of regular enrollees,
κR
1 , is equal to one, the inversion recovers the marginal cost for the least expensive risk group
1 enrollees. We then apply κR
t multipliers for risk groups 2-5 as well as the LIS consumers
to compute marginal costs for all enrollees.16
We next proceed to estimating the marginal costs for plans that we hypothesize distort
their bids to compete for LIS random assignment, since we observe these plans’ insurermarket pair qualifying for random assignment at least once in our data. We use a hedonic
regression of marginal costs on plan characteristics of “non-distorted” plans and then apply
this projection to the distroted plans to get a prediction of marginal costs. The hedonic
regression for 756 non-manipulating plans takes the following form (we estimate a separate
regression for each consumer risk type t):
mcjt = Xjt βt + τf t + δmt + jt ,

(6)

where Xjt includes the same non-premium characteristics of plans that we had included in
the utility function. We add the unobserved quality estimate for each plan as an additional
explanatory variable in X. We condition the regression on firm (τf t ) and market (δmt ) fixed
effects to account for inherent differences in marginal costs across insurers and geographic
15

We construct a group of such plans by selecting all contracts of those insurers that within a given
market (year-region) were not eligible to enroll randomly assigned LIS individuals into any of their plans.
See Decarolis (2015) for a discussion of factors that are likely to drive plans to compete for low income
beneficiaries.
16
As the multipliers do not vary by plan, we assume that on average consumer-type spending does not
change across plans, i.e. assume no moral hazard. While the literature has documented the presence of some
moral hazard in this market (Einav et al., 2015), the (relatively small) estimated magnitudes are concentrated
in the coverage in the gap benefit phase, which only few enrollees reach - hence, we would not expect them
to affect the average across a large number of enrollees within enrollee types.

13

regions. Panel B of Table 2 reports the coefficients for the hedonic regression. Intuitively,
the most important determinants of marginal costs are estimated to be deductibles (a higher
deductible is associated with a lower marginal cost) and coverage in the gap (plans that
offer coverage in the gap have higher marginal costs). We use the estimates of how plan
characteristics translate into marginal costs to predict marginal costs for all plans that we
assume are “distorted” by LIS random assignment. This exercise hinges on the assumption
that all plans have a similar “production function.” In other words, we assume that the
plans that manipulate the LIS threshold manipulate theirs bids, but do not have different
marginal costs conditional on a set of non-price characteristics. This appears reasonable, as
the main source of costs in the insurance market is determined by individual health risk;
therefore, it is conceivable to assume that plans with the same financial characteristics and
formulary generosity will have similar marginal costs conditional on the same risk pool.
The resulting vector of marginal costs is centered at $663 for the lowest risk enrollees and
ranges from $337 to $1,193 across plans. The scaling for highest risk regular enrollees of type
5 implies an average marginal cost for this risk group of $1,800 with a range across plans
from $809 to $3,220. These estimates of economic marginal costs from the inversion of the
first order conditions appear plausible given our estimates of plans’ accounting costs from
the claims data. Our computations suggest that the average PDP plan liability was $588 for
regular consumers of risk type 1; $1,067 for average risk category 3; $1,977 for risk category
5, and $1,363 for LIS beneficiaries.17 Our estimates of economic marginal costs imply profit
margins of 7 percent on average (standard deviation of 9 percent) for regular enrollees. These
are fairly low margins, suggesting that the regular enrollee market is reasonably competitive,
which is consistent with the policy analysis of this market (Congressional Budget Office,
2014).

4.3

Measuring Government Spending

In the remainder of the paper, we repeatedly calculate welfare that requires several assumptions about the computation of government spending. There are two types of government
expenditures that we compute. First, we compute premium subsidies. The baseline premium subsidy is set at circa 70 percent (with some minor annual variation) of the average
(weighted) bid for basic coverage across all plans offered in the US in a given year. The
17

We define plan liability from the claims data as follows: for each individual we take the difference between
the total cost paid for drugs at the point of sale, subtract patient cost-sharing payments, LIS cost-sharing
subsidies, and 85 percent of spending in the catastrophic part of the benefit, as the plan carries only 15
percent liability in the latter benefit phase.

14

consumer premium is computed as the difference between plan’s bid together with plan’s
add-on prices for any coverage enhancements and the baseline subsidy. The baseline subsidy
is not actually paid out to the plans. Instead plans receive a payment that is the difference
between their baseline bid multiplied by the enrollee’s risk score, and consumer premium.
As the risk score can be smaller than 1 for relatively healthy enrollees, plans receive subsidy
payments that are much lower than 70 percent of the average (weighted) bid for less risky
enrollees, while receiving much higher subsidies for higher risk enrollees. As detailed above
and in the Appendix Section B, we construct proxies for risk scores from the information
about chronic conditions and use the average risk score per consumer type to scale subsidies
received by plans.
The second type of government payment to Part D plans is reinsurance. This payment
covers 80 percent of prescription costs for very high spending beneficiaries. In 2010, beneficiaries had to spend more than $6,440 in total on drugs for the re-insurance program to
start paying out to plans. We compute average differences in reinsurance payments per risk
type (most of the payments are concentrated in risk group 5) from observed claims data.
We assume that this payment multiplier is fixed and does not change across counterfactuals. We apply these multipliers to plan-level reinsurance statistics reported by CMS.18 We
further compute average premium and reinsurance subsidies in the MA-PD program, as well
as additional payments for low income beneficiaries from the micro-level claims data. The
MA-PD computation allows us to estimate the opportunity cost of government expenditures
in the PDP program. In our data, most individuals that switch out of PDP plans switch
to MA-PD rather than to no coverage. Hence, in our counterfactuals, we assume that if
individuals switch from the inside option of PDP plans to the outside option, they switch
to the MA-PD program rather than leave drug insurance altogether. Thus, the government
is still likely to incur subsidy spending for these individuals through the MA-PD program.
The details of these calculations are outlined in Appendix Section E.

4.4

Efficiency of the Observed Subsidy Mechanism

Using demand and marginal cost estimates, we next compute consumer surplus, producer
profits, government transfers, and total surplus for the observed market allocation and the
observed subsidy mechanism. For expositional clarity, we report results for a single year
(2010). The calculations are reported in the first and second columns of Table 3 for regular
and LIS enrollees, respectively.
18

Reported in www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-Advantage/Plan-Payment/Plan-Payment-Data.html.

15

We estimate that total annual consumer surplus generated by Part D PDP for regular
enrollees was $2.4 billion (row 1), or about $300 for each of 7.8 million enrollees (36 percent
of potential market size). The majority of enrollees, 59 percent, were of about average
risk, in risk group 3. 6 percent were in the healthiest category and only about 1 percent
of enrollees fell into risk type 5. All enrollees paid on average $510 in premiums, while
firms collected $1,129 in per capita revenue prior to risk adjustment. Accounting for risk
adjustments, but not counting any ex post risk corridor payments, we compute that insurer
profits amount to $536 million (row 2). The $3 billion of consumer and producer surplus came
at a steep price—government expenditures on PDP subsidies (including premium subsidy,
risk adjustment payments, and reinsurance) totaled nearly $5.5 billion (row 7). Taken at
face value, the program thus generated negative surplus with a return of -46 cents on a dollar
spent in subsidies (row 13).
To interpret this computation, however, it is important to take into account the opportunity cost of government funds. The outside option in our model includes either purchasing
an MA-PD plan or not purchasing any creditable Part D coverage. If all consumers that were
to leave PDP plans enrolled in MA-PD plans, the government would incur a very similar
level of expenditures on these consumers. In rows (8)-(10) we compute that the government
would have spent $5.9 billion if PDP consumers enrolled in MA-PD.19 The difference between row (7) and (10) that amounts to $450 million, is the extra government spending on
pharmaceutical coverage generated by the PDP program. This extra spending along with
our assumption that the deadweight loss of government taxation is 30 cents on the dollar,
gives us the social cost of government spending on PDP plans of $585 million.20
Putting it all together, we estimate the total surplus generated by the regular Part D
PDP market when accounting for the opportunity cost of government funds was about $3.5
billion. In other words, the government generates extra 65 cents of surplus for each dollar
it spends in the PDP program. This positive return on a dollar is one of our primary
findings, along with the corollary that the vast majority of this surplus comes from foregone
government expenditures. The latter generalizes to many publicly funding settings, where
19

This estimate of alternative government spending only includes the subsidies for pharmaceutical coverage
in MA-PD. The literature on Medicare Advantage has further estimated that there are differences in per
capita public spending on medical insurance between enrollees in traditional fee-for-service Medicare versus
Medicare Advantage. We do not take into account this difference, as we do not have the data to compute
risk-type specific differences between traditional Medicare and Medicare Advantage. Since the literature
estimates that Medicare Advantage leads to higher government spending (Curto et al., 2015, estimate that
the difference was about 3% in 2010 and 11% on average in years 2006 to 2010), our computation is a lower
bound of surplus in the PDP program.
20
We examine the sensitivity of our results to the value of λ in Appendix E.

16

the return on public spending in each program is hard to evaluate in vacuum, as there are
almost always substitute programs where the government still incurs expenditures on the
same individuals. Without taking into account “competing” programs and the opportunity
cost of government funds, one may significantly underestimate the surplus generated by each
publicly-funded program.
Column (2) of Table 3 reports a similar calculation for the LIS market. Consumers in
this market enjoyed $2.6 billion in surplus. We do not report the profits associated with this
part of the market, as the the static Bertrand-Nash model of competition used to recover
marginal costs in the regular market does not apply to firms engaged in dynamic competition
for LIS enrollees. Computing government subsidies and government opportunity cost for
LIS enrollees requires some additional accounting to incorporate LIS-specific payments to
insurers that cover the generous reductions in cost-sharing that LIS beneficiaries enjoy. We
add LIS premium subsidies to the row that counts government premium subsidies in PDP.
For the non-premium subsidies, we add the per-plan average payments for LIS cost-sharing
that we compute from the claims data. These generate significant quantitative changes to
subsidy levels as compared to regular beneficiaries—we compute the per capita government
spending on LIS enrollees in 2010 to be $5,287 as compared to $698 for regular enrollees.
We do similar accounting adjustments on the MA-PD side, so as to make the opportunity
cost calculation comparable to the calculation of PDP subsidies. After these adjustments
and under insurer profits set to zero, total welfare is computed at negative $6.1 billion. This
is driven by two factors. First, LIS beneficiaries face much lower prices—on average $485
lower annual premiums than regular enrollees - this difference is paid from public funds.
Second, given our computation on the level of subsidization of LIS enrollees in both PDP
and MA-PD programs, MA-PD appears modestly less expensive. Hence, the net government
spending component of the welfare function for LIS enrollees is negative. The bottom line is
that the government spends an enormous amount of money on LIS enrollees in PDP, where
willingness-to-pay is low and the opportunity cost of government spending is negative.

5

Counterfactual Subsidy Mechanisms

We are interested in understanding how insurer incentives and consumer demand interact
with the subsidy mechanism to determine market outcomes. We initially consider a set of
counterfactual subsidization mechanisms where the outside option (MA-PD plans) is held
constant while we adjust the subsidy mechanism in the PDP market. This conceptual

17

exercise allows us to cleanly illustrate and tease apart the complex economic forces at work.
We then turn to a set of counterfactuals where we adjust the outside option to reflect
equilibrium changes in the PDP market. The idea is that any changes to subsidies in the
PDP market are likely to be mirrored in the MA-PD market—the counterfactuals with
adjusted outside option allow us to simulate such parallel changes.
In both settings, we consider two distinct types of subsidy mechanisms. The observed
mechanism sets subsidies as a function of the bids submitted by insurers. With a sufficiently
competitive product market, the appeal of this approach is that subsidies are linked to the
costs of providing the good. This has the advantage of protecting consumers from the risk
of cost increases as well as giving policy makers a practical starting point for determining
subsidy levels. The downside of such approach is that strategic firms can internalize the
fact that the subsidy is more generous when bids are higher, leading to higher profits at
the expense of taxpayers. To evaluate this approach to subsidy determination, we consider
several local alterations of the existing mechanism. We start by investigating the equilibrium effects of cross-market ties—under the observed mechanism the subsidy in the PDP
market depends on insurer bids in MA-PD and LIS markets; we remove these ties in our
counterfactual simulations. We then investigate the role of market power for such bid-based
subsidy determination by simulating the allocations under the two extremes where every
plan is a firm and where all plans are owned by one firm. Lastly, we consider what happens
if bid-based proportional subsidies are tied directly to firm bids rather than to a weighted
average of such bids as in the observed mechanism.
We then proceed to consider an entirely different type of subsidy—a flat voucher that
is not linked to any contemporaneous insurer behavior. Conceptually, this type of subsidy
can generate high-powered incentives to lower prices when markets are sufficiently competitive. At the same time, it imposes a greater informational requirement on the government
to arrive at a subsidy level and places the incidence of program cost risks onto consumers.
Multiple proposals for reforms in Medicare and other publicly subsidized programs envision
flat subsidies; hence, evaluating the benefits and drawbacks of such high powered mechanisms is particularly relevant for understanding the proposed policy-making in and outside
of Medicare.
Our intent across all counterfactuals is to both understand the specific welfare consequences of different mechanisms in PDP, which is of independent interest given its popularity
and the large amount of government expenditures flowing through it, but also to draw out
more general lessons about why different mechanisms generated more or less surplus that

18

may be useful in guiding subsidy mechanism design in more general contexts.

5.1

Results with Outside Option Held Fixed

Table 3 shows the results when the outside option is held fixed. We start with two counterfactuals that remove cross-market links across PDP, MA-PD, and LIS markets in columns
(3) and (4). Removing LIS market incentives from the regular market leads to an increase
in bids and the generosity of the subsidy relative to the observed allocation. In this counterfactual, the firms have no incentive to compete to be below the average premium in order
to be eligible for randomly-assigned LIS enrollees. The resulting PDP enrollment of regular
enrollees is higher than under the observed allocation, as is the government spending on
both premium and reinsurance subsidies (by $1,743M). Total surplus that accounts for the
opportunity cost of government funds increases ($230M) despite the fact that additional
government spending exceeds the increase in consumer surplus ($380M) and producer profit
($503M); the positive difference in total surplus is driven entirely by the slower change in the
foregone government spending in the MA-PD program ($1,241M). Rows (18)-(22) highlight
the role of risk selection in the market. Higher subsidies lead to a very slight increase in the
share of enrollment from lower risk consumers; the direction of this effect is intuitive and
the small magnitude of changes are consistent with the previous literature that has found
limited risk screening on prices in this market (Polyakova, 2016). Column (4) reports the
outcomes when the average bid in the formula for determining the subsidy in the regular
market no longer includes MA-PD plans (which tend to have lower bids than PDP plans).
In this case, the baseline subsidy is set as 68 percent of the average Part D PDP bid. Given
higher PDP bids, this change leads to another increase in the subsidy relative to column
(3). As a result, consumer surplus and profits increase again; this increase, however, is offset
by the growth in opportunity-cost-adjusted government spending, which leads to a slightly
lower total surplus. The results in column (4) give us a benchmark (simulated within the
model) for the analysis of alternative subsidy mechanisms for the regular market.
These results illustrate several general economic forces at play in this market. First,
with a highly-subsidized substitute available (i.e. switching to MA-PD plans that offer both
medical and pharmaceutical coverage), consumers’ baseline willingness-to-pay for plans in
the PDP market is very low. Column (10) reports results when the premium subsidy is set
to zero; PDP enrollment drops to near zero as consumers leave the PDP market.21
21
The idea of low willingness to pay for health insurance coverage in the presence of even more distant
substitutes—such as charity care—has been documented in other settings. For example, Finkelstein et al.

19

Second, increasing the generosity of the subsidy bolsters total consumer welfare, but
does so by giving costly transfers to inframarginal consumers (and changing relative prices
within the PDP market, which can lead to further allocative distortions) while also attracting
marginal consumers with decreasing valuations for the product. This is reflected in consumer
surplus per enrollee: under the observed mechanism it is $441, without LIS enrollees this
number drops to $377, and without links to the MA-PD market it declines further to $322.
Third, the sign of welfare outcomes is largely driven by the opportunity cost of government spending. Government expenditures in PDP per enrollee increase from $698 under the
observed allocation to $738 and $760 across the two counterfactuals. Even with producer
profits included, these costs substantially exceed the benefits that they generate within the
PDP market. It is only when the opportunity cost of spending in the MA-PD market is
accounted for, does the overall welfare of the PDP market become positive.
Fourth, the government’s difficult balancing act on the consumer side of the market—
setting premium subsidies to induce the optimal level of sorting across the inside and outside
options and across plans within the inside option—is further complicated by possible strategic
behavior by insurers. To help assess the degree of market power and strategic markups in this
market, Columns (5) and (6) report results for two extreme counterfactuals on the supply
side: one where all plans are independent firms, and one where all plans are owned by a single
monopolist. In both cases we let the subsidy rule follow the same mechanism as in column
(4). There is a substantial degree of market power possible in this market: the average
enrollment-weighted bid under the monopolist is over $79 higher than with atomistic firms,
an increase of just under 7 percent. This leads to higher profits and lower consumer surplus.
Interestingly, total welfare is nominally lower under both the atomistic firms counterfactual
and under a monopolist than in the reference column (4). Atomistic plans attract slightly
too many consumers to the market, given how much it costs the government to service them,
while the monopolist has too few.
The results suggest that, without links to the LIS market and MA-PD, the current ownership configuration delivers outcomes fairly close to that of a purely competitive ownership
structure. This is an interesting result, as one of the motivating reasons for using managed
competition to deliver publicly-subsidized goods and services was to leverage competition to
reduce prices. Our conclusion on this point requires caution, however, as we cannot assess
the counterfactual of possible alternatives, such as a standard government-run program or a
regulated monopolist, as we do not know anything about the comparative costs of delivering
(2017) find low willingness to pay for health insurance among low income adults in Massachusetts.

20

similar insurance plans in such scenarios, and therefore we cannot make any claims about
additional efficiencies introduced by competition. Also, while we take the marginal costs of
firms as given here, it is possible that a single buyer would be able to exert monopsony power
in negotiating with upstream pharmaceutical companies. The combination of the two effects
is ambiguous, and we limit our conclusion to the observation that the current ownership
structure gives results similar to that if all plans were independent firms.
Fifth, subsidy design matters. We have already shown that linking the level of the
subsidy to other markets can have large effects on market outcomes, and we now show that
how insurer bids are translated to consumer premiums can have an even more dramatic effect.
We solve equilibrium outcomes under two different approaches: a proportional subsidy and a
flat subsidy (i.e. a voucher). Columns (7)-(9) show the outcomes for proportional subsidies
where consumers pay 5 percent, 32 percent, or 95 percent of the bid submitted by insurers.
This subsidy mechanism produces extreme outcomes, primarily due to the exercise of market
power by insurers. In the two cases where consumer are largely shielded from bids, insurers
increase bids dramatically. The government is left to cover the large gap between the bid
and the consumer-facing premium. In the case where consumers pay 5 percent of the bid,
enrollment is nearly universal and government expenditures are nearly a staggering $3,200
per enrollee. Of the increase of $55 billion in government expenditures, firms capture $34
billion, or 62 percent. Only when the consumers pay 95 percent of the bid does the mechanism
produce positive welfare numbers, although far below the current mechanism. Notably, the
extreme counterfactuals where consumers face almost the full cost of coverage—those in
columns (9) and (10)—are the only ones that result in positive nominal surplus without
accounting for the opportunity cost of government spending. In these counterfactuals, the
government spends far less than it generates in consumer and producer valuation, as only
consumers with the highest willingness to pay stay in the program.
Inspecting the formula for determining the consumer-facing premium subsidy in Equation
4 reveals that the existing mechanism is similar to a lump-sum voucher from a consumer’s
perspective; there is essentially a fixed payment that is applied to each plan in the marketplace. To assess this intuition empirically, we solve for outcomes with vouchers running from
$0 to $1500 in $100 increments. Columns (10)-(12) show the outcomes of vouchers with
the extremes of $0 and $1500 along with the voucher that generated the highest amount of
surplus ($800). Figure 1 illustrates our estimates of total welfare across the range of vouchers
considered.22 Total surplus under the fixed outside option (marked with solid black line) is
22

We note that our model allows for “soft” exit of plans under very low subsidies. We constrain insurers

21

positive until $1,300, peaking at $800 at a level of welfare that is slightly higher, although
comparable, to the existing mechanism. In general, vouchers perform much better than
proportional subsidies, largely because they preserve the elasticity of demand on the margin
while still allowing the policymaker to influence sorting between PDP and MA-PD. In turn,
this leads firms to keep their bids reasonably competitive, minimizing the amount of costly
transfers from taxpayers to firms. This is exemplified by the average weighted bid actually
being lower at the $800 voucher than at the extremes. We note that the most generous
proportional and voucher counterfactuals have very similar enrollments, but are achieved at
vastly different levels of social cost—proportional subsidies lead to average bids of nearly
$4,000 and create an order of magnitude higher social loss.
To put our normative findings into perspective, we perform three benchmark computations of the social optimum in this market. We start by computing the social planner’s
allocation. We assume that the social planner knows consumer demands and marginal costs
(both by type) and can directly set prices, but cannot force consumers to purchase certain
insurance plans but must incentivize their choices through plan prices. The detailed results
are reported in column (1) of Table 4, while Figure 1 shows the level of welfare achieved by
the social planner in comparison to market mechanisms. We find the social planner’s solution
by solving for a set of plan-specific prices in Equation 5. The social planner increases welfare
to $5.4 billion and sets prices that result in large losses for insurers. To illustrate, Figure 2
plots the resulting changes in premiums compared to the observed mechanism, along with
changes in market shares by the highest and lowest risk types, in the California market.
Plans are ordered from left to right by increasing marginal cost. There are two broad takeaways: first, the social planner adjusts prices to obtain a general shift in market shares to
favor less-costly plans. The majority of plans losing market share are the most expensive,
while the single biggest increase in share occurs at a low-priced plan. The second takeaway
is that there are substantial differences in where consumers of different risk types move,
with the largest difference being that the social planner puts more of the most expensive
consumers into cheaper plans. The social planner’s solution illustrates that consumers are
systematically choosing plans that are too socially expensive and are doing so differentially
by risk type which leads to inefficient sorting.
We also consider an alternative scenario that captures some of the intuition of the social
to make weakly positive profits: when subsidies are very low, as in the case of a $0 voucher, insurers may
find it profitable to set very high premiums for some of their plans to induce zero enrollment. This is akin
to plans exiting the market in an environment where fixed costs accrue primarily at the insurer rather than
at the individual plan level.

22

Figure 1: Welfare under Counterfactual Subsidy Policies
9,000
Fixed outside option
Adjusted outside option

7,000

Social Planner
surplus level

Total surplus, $M

5,000
Total surplus
under observed
allocation

3,000
Total surplus
under public option
counterfactual

1,000

(1,000)

(3,000)
$0

$200

$400

$600

$800
$1,000
Voucher subsidy level, $

$1,200

$1,400

$1,600

Figure reports estimated total welfare (including the accounting for the the opportunity cost of government
spending) in counterfactuals with flat voucher subsidies ranging from $0 to $1,500, in $100 increments. Solid
black line marks the welfare estimates in counterfactuals with fixed outside option (row 11 in columns 10-12
in Table 3. Thick grey dashed line plots welfare levels for counterfactuals with vouchers when the subsidy in
the outside option (MA-PD) is adjusted to be the same voucher (row 12 in Columns 5-7 of Table 5). We also
mark total surplus (at the average subsidy level) for the observed allocation, the public option with subsidy
counterfactual, as well as the social planner’s surplus level (column 1 row 11 of Table 3; column 2 row 12 of
Table 4; and column 1 row 2 of Table 4, respectively).

planner while retaining simplicity. In a counterfactual that simulates the idea of a very generous public option (which can be thought of as, for example, letting Medicaid administer
pharmaceutical coverage), we replace all plans in each market with the characteristics of the
plan with the lowest estimated marginal cost.23 We assign the reinsurance subsidies that
23

We keep the number of plans fixed to equalize the role of the idiosyncratic error term in the logit model

23

the government pays under the existing mechanism to the marginal cost of that plan. The
government then pays the same average premium subsidy as under the observed allocation
($676) while setting prices such that the firm makes zero profit. The results are reported in
Column (2) of Table 4. In this simulation of public option coverage, we find that overall surplus is lower than that under the social planner at $3.2 billion. Consumer surplus, however, is
almost as high as under the social planner at $3 billion, while producer profit is set to zero by
design. This counterfactual manages to achieve a close-to-optimal sorting of consumers between MA-PD and PDP; the total surplus it generates is comparable to the levels of surplus
under the optimal voucher and the observed mechanism. This counterfactual is particularly
appealing given its simplicity in theory; in practice, it of course depends on the ability of
the government to offer a public plan at the cost of the cheapest private plan observed in
this competitive environment. One way in which this kind of semi-public option could arise
would be through an auction mechanism, where only one—most efficient—private plan is
allowed to serve a geographic market for a given year. The results in column (3) emphasize
that the surplus in this environment is still generated by the opportunity cost of government
funds, as consumers do not have sufficient willingness to pay even for the least costly plans.
In column (3), we simulate a related counterfactual where the government offers a low cost
public option that is, however, not subsidized. This would be closer to traditional Medicare
(rather than Medicaid) expanding pharmaceutical coverage and charging the cost of coverage
to consumers. In this case, we see similar patterns as in competitive counterfactuals with no
subsidies—enrollment drops almost to zero and only consumers with high enough valuation
of coverage enroll in the program, generating positive nominal surplus.
We find that most of the mechanisms are very similar in the composition of risk types
for enrollees in the inside option. To the extent that risk sorting changes in more extreme
counterfactuals, it follows intuitive patterns consistent with the presence of adverse selection
in this market. Figure 3 illustrates how the share of high risk consumers (type 4 and 5)
changes in the inside option as voucher-based subsidies get more generous. As vouchers
increase, leading to lower prices, the share of high risk consumers falls as lower risk consumers
start entering the market. This gradient is relatively shallow at very high subsidy levels,
suggesting that after a certain threshold, prices are not the first-order drivers of selection.
when comparing outcomes across counterfactuals. For some lowest cost plans we do not observe positive
enrollment for all risk types, which leads to a missing estimate of the plan-risk-type-specific fixed effect ξ.
The proceed with the public option counterfactuals we had to impute the missing ξ estimates. We proceeded
by taking ξ estimates for a given plan for other risk groups and scaling is by the ratio of average differences
in ξ’s across risk types among all plans for which we were able to estimate ξ’s.

24

0.25

1000

0.2

800

0.15

600

0.1

400

0.05

200

0

0

‐200

‐0.05

‐0.1

Consumer premium set by social planner relative to observed data, $

Difference in market share between social planner and observed data

Figure 2: Social Planner’s Solution: Changes in Premiums and Market Shares

California plans ordered by highest estimated marginal cost
Risk group 1

Risk group 5

‐400

Change in premium

Figure illustrates an example of the social planner’s allocation in one Part D market - California in 2010.
The x-axis orders 47 PDP plans that were available in California in 2010 by increasing - from left to right estimated marginal cost. On the left-hand-side y-axis we then plot the change in the market share of each
plan that the social planner induces relative to the observed allocation. The changes are plotted with vertical
bars. Positive changes imply that the social planner allocates a plan a higher market share, while negative
bar values imply a lower market share for the plan, relative to the plan’s observed market share. We report
the changes in market shares separately for lowest risk regular consumers (risk group 1) and highest risk
regular consumers (risk group 5). The right-hand-side y axis and the corresponding dashed line plots the
changes in premiums for each plan between the premium set by the social planner relative to the observed
premium. A positive value of the premium difference for a plan implies that the social planner’s solution
would increase the premium for this plan.

For example, moving from $800 voucher in column (11) to $1,500 voucher in column (12)
leads to a dramatic change in prices from $444 to $78—this is associated with the share of
inside option enrollment from risk groups 1 and 2 only increasing from 25 to 30 percent, and
25

high risk consumer share decreasing from 15 to 10 percent. Notably, Figure 3 highlights that
the optimal voucher of $800 achieves the same share of high risk consumers among inside
option enrollement as under the social planner. This optimal share of high risk consumers
is about 5 percentage point lower than the observed share, suggesting that too few of low
risk consumers are purchasing PDP insurance (a common result in markets with adverse
selection).
With the usual caution that our findings are specific to our settings, there are several
general themes that can be distilled from our results that may apply to other instances
of regulated and subsidized competition. We find that the best mechanisms share three
qualities: they preserve the marginal relationship between the prices that the firm sets and
the prices that consumers face, they limit how fast the subsidy grows as a function of firm
prices, and they link the consumer-facing price to (social) marginal cost. Keeping consumerfacing prices related one-to-one to firm’s prices at the margin increases the elasticity of
demand and leads to lower prices in equilibrium. Slowing down how fast the subsidy grows
relative to the prices that firms set also helps limit firms from exerting market power to
increase prices. Finally, as illustrated by the social planner’s solution, keeping consumer
prices related to marginal cost prevents allocative inefficiency along both the extensive and
intensive margins.
The existing Part D mechanism reflects these three qualities in several dimensions. First,
linking the equilibrium subsidy with both the LIS and MA-PD markets helps keep the subsidy
low. Second, the form of the subsidy, as a percentage of enrollment-weighted average of last
year’s plans average bid, both limits strategic pricing by insurers and preserves the marginal
relationship between bids and consumer prices by acting like a voucher. Third, the size of
the subsidy is not so large that all consumer-facing premiums are zero, which in turn helps
preserve the link between marginal cost and prices.

5.2

Results with Adjusted Outside Option

We next examine how the results of the main counterfactual simulations change when the
outside option (i.e. MA-PD) is adjusted to reflect changes in the generosity of subsidies in
Part D PDP. For each counterfactual, we adjust the subsidy in the outside option by the
average value of the change in PDP subsidy. Importantly, this remains a partial equilibrium
analysis, as we do not consider possible general equilibrium changes in MA-PD prices, in

26

Figure 3: Risk Sorting under Counterfactual Subsidy Policies
40
Share High Risk; Fixed Outside Option
Share High Risk; Adjusted Outside Option

Share of consumers purchasing any Part D PDP plan

35

30

25

20

15

Social Planner
high risk share

Share high
risk under
observed
allocation

10

5

$0

$200

$400

$600

$800
$1,000
Voucher subsidy level, $

$1,200

$1,400

$1,600

Figure reports the share of high risk consumers (rik type 4 and 5) among regular consumers that are buying
the inside option - a PDP plan - in counterfactuals with flat voucher subsidies ranging from $0 to $1,500, in
$100 increments. Solid grey line marks the share of high risk consumers in counterfactuals where the outside
option is held fixed. Short-dashed grey line marks the share of high risk consumers in counterfactuals that
adjust the outside option to have the same level of voucher subsidy as the inside option. Longer-dashed grey
line demarcates the share of high risk consumers in the PDP market as simulated under the social planner’s
allocation. The plotted quantities are also reported in rows 21 plus 22, columns 10-12 of Table 3 (for fixed
outside option); rows 22 plus 23 of columns 5-7 in Table 5 (for adjusted outside option) and rows 22 plus 23
of column 1 in Table 4 (for social planner).

prices of other pharmaceutical insurance options, or drug prices.24 We intend for this adjustment to capture the idea that when a government reforms one publicly-subsidized program,
24
In practice, this is implemented by adjusting the utility of choosing the inside option. We discuss the
details of the adjustment calculation in Appendix F.

27

it is likely to implement similar reforms in related programs. In the case of Medicare Part D,
PDP and MA-PD are obviously closely-related substitutes, but this general idea holds more
broadly—few publicly-subsidized program exist in isolation. The results are given in Table
5. There are two additional rows (6 and 26) included in the table in comparison to Table
3, listing the additional payments that the government makes to the MA-PD in each counterfactual relative to the observed subsidy levels in MA-PD (row 6), and the dollar amount
of the adjustment we make to the outside option (row 26). A positive number in row (26)
implies that the outside option becomes more attractive. There are two ways in which MAPD related computations change in these results. Row 6 accounts for how much more or less
the government needs to pay to consumers that purchase the MA-PD (i.e. outside) option.
Rows 8 and 9 that measure the opportunity cost of government funds are also adjusted to
reflect a similar change in what the government would have paid for PDP enrollees if they
switched to MA-PD.
A common thread across all counterfactuals with adjusted outside option is that sorting
between the inside and outside options (and across risk types within the inside option) is
very similar to the observed allocation. This is intuitive, as by adjusting the outside option,
we are essentially restoring the observed differences between the two enrollment options.
In counterfactuals in which we remove the linkages across LIS, MA-PD and PDP markets,
or alter the degree of market power, PDP insurer bids and consumer premiums decrease
slightly in face of a more attractive and hence more competitive outside option (columns
1-4). Consumer surplus increases while government payments net of the opportunity cost
decrease, given that we are subsidizing PDP and MA-PD in similar ways. As a result, total
surplus accounting for the opportunity cost of government funds in these counterfactuals is
roughly $500M higher relative to that computed for the same countefactuals in Table 3.
We observe similarly intuitive changes in the counterfactuals that consider flat subsidies.
As Figure 1 shows, for voucher levels that are close to the observed subsidy level (up until
around $1,000) the surplus of counterfactuals with adjusted outside option is reasonably
close—only somewhat higher—to that of both the observed allocation and the counterfactuals without the outside option adjustments. The optimal voucher with adjusted outside
option is substantially higher, at $1,200 versus $800 in the non-adjusted case. This is again
driven by the more attractive outside option creating competition for PDP plans leading to
lower bids, premiums, and relative subsidies. Figure 3 highlights the stabilization of the market movement when we adjust the outside option—the share of high risk consumers remains
stable at the observed levels until the voucher increases above $900; at the highest voucher

28

levels, the equilibrium level of high risk consumers converges to the same level as that under
the counterfactuals without outside option adjustments, remaining somewhat closer to the
optimal social planner level. Moreover, as we observe in Figure 1, with high vouchers applied
to both the inside and outside options, the market achieves the level of surplus that is equal
to the social planner. This effect is generated entirely by significant changes in the opportunity cost of government funds that results when we adjust the outside options that is driven
by fixed MA-PD prices that do not respond to more generous subsidies. This highlights the
general principle that to the extent that the government can control the level of prices in the
market (in this case this happens mechanically as we do not allow MA-PD prices to adjust),
higher subsidies can generate substantial consumer surplus. This surplus is still generated
at very high nominal government spending. Without accounting for the opportunity cost
of government funds, the voucher of $1,200 (column 6) generates negative $13B in surplus,
loosing 39 cents on each dollar spent.
The general takeaway is twofold. First, the evaluation of subsidized programs is challenging in the presence of possibly subsidized substitutes, which is commonplace in many
settings. Whether there is a positive return on a dollar spent in one program depends crucially on how this dollar would have been spent in related programs on the same beneficiaries.
This phenomenon is very transparent in markets with close substitutes such as PDP and
MA-PD, but is likely to still be important, but less obvious, in other programs (for example,
health insurance coverage and charity care as examined in Finkelstein et al., 2017). Second,
if substitute and related programs are likely to be subject to the same policies as the program
of interest, estimating the general equilibrium effects may be necessary to understand the
full economic impact of changes in both programs. Without general equilibrium estimates,
it is useful to focus on partial equilibrium analysis that holds substitutes fixed to understand
the economic forces of, for example, the subsidy design mechanisms as we do in Table 3.

6

Conclusion

In this paper we have analyzed the welfare effects of the mechanism for determining subsidies
for Prescription Drug Plans in Medicare Part D, focusing in particular on the supply side
of the market. We draw several conclusions for our specific empirical setting. First, we find
that the current PDP program is efficient only if we account for the fact that the government
would likely subsidize the same consumers outside of the PDP program as well. Without
taking the latter into account, we could conclude that the program only generates a fraction

29

of dollar value that is spent on it from the federal budget. This is due to two related factors.
First, demand for PDP plans is generated almost exclusively by high subsidies—consumers
have very low willingness-to-pay for unsubsidized plans, driven by the availability of close
substitutes. Second, this market is imperfectly competitive and firms are able to capture
some of the rents of the subsidy mechanism.
On the supply-side we find, perhaps surprisingly, that the current structure of the program mutes insurers’ ability to raise subsidies, and hence positively affects total welfare.
This is due to the complex way in which prices for distinct parts of the program, such as
Medicare Advantage Prescription Drug coverage, Low Income Subsidies, and market premiums for regular beneficiaries in PDP plans, are all tied together into one mechanism. We
find that the current mechanism that incorporates multiple parts of the program into an
average that is used to calculate subsidies, is similar in its incentives to a pre-determined
optimal voucher mechanism. We find that providing flat vouchers that are optimally set
ex ante could increase the total surplus in levels and relative to federal dollars spent, but
not by a large amount (although a flat voucher mechanism could dramatically reduce the
cost of administering the program, an effect that we do not include in our calculations). We
further find that removing the averaging and setting proportional subsidies would lead to a
rapid upward price spiral, as the competitive pressure on the market is not strong enough
to mitigate the “raising-the-subsidy” incentives.
Further, our analysis reveals a close connection between Part D PDP and Medicare
Advantage that, although not emphasized in prior literature, proved to be crucial for our
findings. We believe that our approach to the quantification of welfare that gradually removes
interlinked parts of the environment—specifically, LIS bidding incentives and MA-PD part
of the bid average—can be useful for the analysis of many other public programs that do
not exist in isolation, but, instead, are linked to each other through the choices of consumers
and producers or through government transfers.
Beyond the Part D context, our setting that is characterized by the presence of two
publicly subsidized programs that are close substitutes, sheds light on the challenges inherent
in the analysis of economic returns to any dollar spent on social insurance programs. In many
such programs, and especially healthcare, the government faces a version of the Samaritan’s
dilemma. If public funds are ultimately used to pay for individuals’ healthcare needs through
some channel, then the question the policy-maker faces is not whether to subsidize healthcare
use, but finding the most efficient way of doing it. This idea lies at the heart of our results—
funding the public benefit that we analyze makes economic sense only insofar as there would

30

be some expenditures on the activities related to this benefit in all counterfactual policies
that are plausibly available to the government. This insight has broad implications for the
empirical analysis of economic returns to many other public policies that is frequently done
in isolation of potentially less obvious substitutes.
While our empirical analysis focused on the subsidy mechanism in the Medicare Part D
program, our findings have broader implications for market design of privately-provisioned
and publicly-subsidized social insurance programs. As in any setting with the equityefficiency trade-off, subsidy policies will have efficiency costs for the market. One source
of such inefficiencies is market power. Subsidies create incentives for imperfectly competitive insurers to raise markups and pass them through to the price inelastic government. In
the paper we illustrate that the details of the subsidy mechanism matter dramatically for
how these incentives play out. Further, depending on whether the policy is guided by the
considerations of consumer surplus, total welfare, or government spending, we demonstrate
that different subsidy mechanisms deliver drastically different results across these three measures of surplus. Overall, we argue that, the less-studied supply-side behavior in the presence
of regulatory intervention and subsidization plays a key role in determining the efficiency
outcomes of privately-provided social insurance programs. Answering the general question
about the optimal mechanism design in these increasingly economically relevant settings
presents an important avenue for future empirical and theoretical research.

References
Abaluck, J., J. Gruber, and A. Swanson, “Prescription Drug Use under Medicare Part
D: A Linear Model of Nonlinear Budget Sets,” NBER Working Paper No. 20976, 2015.
Abaluck, Jason and Jonathan Gruber, “Choice Inconsistencies among the Elderly:
Evidence from Plan Choice in the Medicare Part D Program,” American Economic Review,
2011, 101(4), 1180–1210.
and , “Evolving Choice Inconsistencies in Choice of Prescription Drug Insurance,”
American Economic Review, 2016, 106(8), 2145–2184.
Berry, Steve, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes, “Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium,” Econometrica, 1995, 63(4), 841–889.
Berry, Steven T, “Estimating discrete-choice models of product differentiation,” RAND
Journal of Economics, 1994, 25(2), 242–262.
Bundorf, K., M. Polyakova, and M. Tai-Seale, “Delegating Decision-Making to the

31

Machine: Experimental Evidence from Health Insurance,” Unpublished mimeo, Stanford
University, 2018.
Bundorf, M. K., R. Mata, M. Schoenbaum, and J. Bhattacharya, “Are Prescription
Drug Insurance Choices Consistent With Expected Utility Theory?,” Health Psychology,
2013, 32 (9), 986–994.
Chorniy, A., D.P. Miller, and T. Tang, “Mergers in Medicare Part D: Decomposing
Market Power, Cost Efficiencies, and Bargaining Power,” Princeton University Unpublished Mimeo, 2014.
Congressional Budget Office, “Competition and the Cost of Medicare’s Prescription
Drug Program,” July 2014.
Curto, V., L. Einav, J. Levin, and J Bhattacharya, “Can Health Insurance Competition Work? Evidence from Medicare Advantage,” NBER Working Paper No. 20818,
2015.
Cutler, David M. and Sarah J. Reber, “Paying For Health Insurance: The Trade-Off
Between Competition And Adverse Selection,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1998,
113(2), 433–466.
Decarolis, Francesco, “Medicare Part D: Are Insurers Gaming the Low Income Subsidy
Design?,” American Economic Review, 2015, 105(4), 1547–1580.
Dubé, Jean-Pierre, Günter J Hitsch, and Peter E Rossi, “Do switching costs make
markets less competitive?,” Journal of Marketing Research, 2009, 46(4), 435–445.
Duggan, M., “Does Contracting Out Increase the Efficiency of Government Programs?
Evidence from Medicaid HMOs.,” Journal of Public Economics, 2004, 88(12), 2549–2572.
and F. Scott Morton, “The Distortionary Effects of Government Procurement: Evidence from Medicaid Prescription Drug Purchasing,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
2006, 121(1), 1–30.
Einav, L., A. Finkelstein, and P. Schrimpf, “The Response of Drug Expenditure to
Non-Linear Contract Design: Evidence from Medicare Part D,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 2015, 130(2), 841–899.
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Maria Polyakova, “Private provision of social
insurance: drug-specific price elasticities and cost sharing in Medicare Part D,” NBER
Working Paper No. 22277, 2016.
Enthoven, Alain C., “Reforming Medicare by Reforming Incentives,” New England Journal of Medicine, 2011, 364(21).
Ericson, Keith, “Consumer Inertia and Firm Pricing in the Medicare Part D Prescription

32

Drug Insurance Exchange,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2014, 6(1),
38–64.
Finkelstein, Amy, Nathaniel Hendren, and Mark Shepard, “Subsidizing Health Insurance for Low-Income Adults: Evidence from Massachusetts,” Working Paper 23668,
National Bureau of Economic Research August 2017.
Fleitas, S., “Dynamic Competition and Price Regulation When Consumers Have Inertia:
Evidence from Medicare Part D,” Unpublished mimeo, University of Arizona, 2017.
Frakt, Austin, “The key difference between exchanges and the Ryan-Rivlin plan,” www.
theincidentaleconomist.com March 2011.
Gowrisankaran, G., C. Marsh, and R. Town, “Myopia and Complex Dynamic Incentives: Evidence from Medicare Part D,” NBER Working Paper No. 21104, 2015.
Gruber, J., “Delivering Public Health Insurance Through Private Plan Choice in the United
States,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2017, 31 (4), 3–22.
and E. Washington, “Subsidies to Employee Health Insurance Premiums and the Health
Insurance Market,” Journal of Health Economics, 2005, 24, 253–276.
Hausman, Jerry A. and James M. Poterba, “Household Behavior and the Tax Reform
Act of 1986,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1987, 1(1), 101–119.
Heiss, Florian, Adam Leive, Daniel McFadden, and Joachim Winter, “Plan Selection in Medicare Part D: Evidence from Administrative Data,” Journal of Health Economics, 2013, 32, 1325–1344.
and Viktor Winschel, “Likelihood approximation by numerical integration on sparse
grids,” Journal of Econometrics, 2008, 144(1), 62–80.
, Daniel Mcfadden, and Joachim Winter, “Mind the Gap ! Consumer Perceptions
and Choices of Medicare Part D Prescription,” in David Wise, ed., Research Findings in
the Economics of Aging, The University of Chicago Press, 2010, pp. 413–481.
, Daniel McFadden, Joachim Winter, Amelie Wuppermann, and Bo Zhou,
“Inattention and Switching Costs as Sources of Inertia in Medicare Part D,” NBER Working Paper No. 22765, 2016.
Ho, Kate, Joseph Hogan, and F. Scott Morton, “The Impact of Consumer Inattention
on Insurer Pricing in the Medicare Part D Program,” NBER Working Paper No. 21028,
2015.
Hortacsu, Ali, Seyed Ali Madanizadeh, and Steven L. Puller, “Power to Choose?
An Analysis of Consumer Inertia in the Residential Electricity Market,” NBER Working
Paper No. 20988, June 2015.

33

Jaffe, S. and M. Shepard, “Price-Linked Subsidies and Imperfect Competition in Health
Insurance,” NBER Working Paper No. 23104, 2018.
Kesternich, Iris, Florian Heiss, Daniel McFadden, and Joachim Winter, “Suit the
action to the word, the word to the action: Hypothetical choices and real decisions in
Medicare Part D,” Journal of Health Economics, 2013, 32(6), 1313–1324.
Ketcham, J. and K. Simon, “Medicare Part D’s Effects on Elderly Drug Costs and
Utilization,” American Journal of Managed Care, 2008, 14(11), 14–22.
, C. Lucarelli, and C. Powers, “Paying Attention or Paying Too Much in Medicare
Part D,” American Economic Review, 2015, 105(1), 204–233.
Ketcham, Jonathan D, Claudio Lucarelli, Eugenio J Miravete, and M Christopher Roebuck, “Sinking, Swimming, or Learning to Swim in Medicare Part D,” American Economic Review, 2012, 102(6), 2639–2673.
Klemperer, Paul, “Competition when consumers have switching costs: An overview with
applications to industrial organization, macroeconomics, and international trade,” Review
of Economic Studies, 1995, 62(4), 515–539.
Kling, J. R., S. Mullainathan, E. Shafir, L. C. Vermeulen, and M. V. Wrobel,
“Comparison Friction: Experimental Evidence from Medicare Drug Plans,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 2012, 127(1), 199–235.
Laffont, J.-J. and J. Tirole, A Theory of Incentives in Procurement and Regulation, The
MIT Press, 1993.
Lucarelli, Claudio, Jeffrey Prince, and Kosali Simon, “The Welfare Impact of Reducing Choice in Medicare Part D: A Comparison of Two Regulation Strategies,” International
Economic Review, 2012, 53(4), 1155–1177.
McGuire, T. G., J. P. Newhouse, and A. D. Sinaiko, “An economic history of Medicare Part C,” The Milbank Quarterly, 2011, 89 (2), 289–332.
Miller, Daniel P and Jungwon Yeo, “A Dynamic Discrete Choice Model of Switching
Costs in Medicare Part D,” Clemson University and Singapore Management University
Unpublished Mimeo, 2014.
Miller, D.P. and J. Yeo, “The Consequences of a Public Health Insurance Option: Evidence From Medicare Part D,” Clemson University and Singapore Management University
Unpublished Mimeo, 2015.
Miller, Keaton, “Do Private Medicare Firms Have Lower Costs?,” University of Oregon
Unpublished Mimeo, 2014.
Nevo, A., “Measuring Market Power in the Ready-to-Eat Cereal Industry,” Econometrica,

34

2001, 69, 307–342.
Oliver, Thomas R., Philip R. Lee, and Helene L. Lipton, “A Political History of
Medicare and Prescription Drug Coverage,” Milbank Quarterly, 2004, 82(2), 283–354.
Polyakova, M., “Regulation of insurance with adverse selection and switching costs: Evidence from Medicare Part D,” American Economic Journal: Applied, 2016, 8(3), 165–95.
and S. Ryan, “In-kind Transfers, Tagging, and Market Power: Evidence from the ACA,”
Unpublished mimeo, Stanford University and Washington University in St Louis, 2018.
Small, Kenneth A. and Harvey S. Rosen, “Applied Welfare Economics with Discrete
Choice Models,” Econometrica, 1981, 49(1), 105–130.
Starc, Amanda and Robert J. Town, “Internalizing Behavioral Externalities: Benefit
Integration in Health Insurance,” NBER Working Paper No. 21783, 2015.
Tebaldi, P., “Estimating Equilibrium in Health Insurance Exchanges: Price Competition
and Subsidy Design under the ACA,” Unpublished mimeo, University of Chicago, 2017.
Vetter, S., F. Heiss, D. McFadden, and J. Winter, “Risk attitudes and Medicare Part
D enrollment decisions.,” Economics Letters, 2013, 119(2), 128–132.
Williams, H.C.W.L, “On the formation of travel demand models and economic evaluation
measure of user benefit,” Environment and Planning, 1977, 9(3), 285–344.
Winter, J., R. Balza, F. Caro, F. Heiss, B. Jun, R. Matzkin, and D. McFadden,
“Medicare prescription drug coverage: Consumer information and preferences,” PNAS,
2006, 103(20), 7929–7934.
Wu, Yufei, “Supply Response to Consumer Inertia: Strategic Pricing in Medicare Part D,”
MIT Unpublished Mimeo, 2016.

35

Table 1: Summary Statistics

(1)

Standard
deviation
(2)

49
16
$505

5.00
0.60
$59

35
14
$375

64
17
$643

$1,001
$353
$648
$354

$45
$26
$20
$24

$965
$328
$631
$333

$1,060
$383
$677
$388

1.32
0.26
0.24
0.21
0.05
0.20
0.17
0.19

1.00
0.18
0.20
0.25
0.06
0.16
0.11
0.13

0.06
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.01

4.76
0.70
1.02
1.38
0.25
0.48
0.48
0.58

2%
5%
5%
2%
0%
6%

3%
11%
19%
2%
0%
9%

15%
40%
52%
12%
1%
45%

Meani

A.

Max

(3)

(4)

Contracts

(1) Number of PDP plans per market
(2) Number of insurers per market
(3) Unweighted average PDP premium
B.

Subsidies

(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)

CMS average national bid
CMS base consumer premium
CMS subsidy for average risk beneficiary
Low income benchmark threshold

C.

Enrollment, millionsii

(8) All Part D eligible
(9) PDP enrollment, regular
^
(10) PDP enrollment, low income
(11) MA‐PD enrollment, regular
^
(12) MA‐PD enrollment, low income
(13) Employer sponsored coverage
(14) Other coverage sources
(15) No creditable coverage

i

Min

D.

Distribution of risk types among enrollees, %iii

(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)
(21)

Risk type 1, regular consumers
Risk type 2, regular consumers
Risk type 3, regular consumers
Risk type 4, regular consumers
Risk type 5, regular consumers
Consumers eligible for low‐income subsidie

5%
20%
39%
7%
1%
30%

Across 136 region‐years (34 geographic markets in years 2007‐2010)

ii

Enrollment statistics based on CMS data on the whole market, not the analytic sample
Counts of regular versus low income enrollment approximated using plan‐level LIS counts enrollment
iii
Based on the analytic sample as described in Section 4

^

Panel A based on CMS Part D Landscape files for years 2007 to 2010. A market is one of 34 Part D "regions" that cover
50 US States and the District of Columbia. "Insurers" are defined as Part D contracting organizations, which can have
common ownership. Panel B is based on data from the annual releases by the Center for Medicare titled "Annual
Release of Part D National Average Bid Amount and Other Part C & D Bid Information." Panels C and D report
enrollment statistics across different types of Part D coverage (including not purchasing any coverage) as well as
across consumer risk types within the primary types of Part D coverage considered in the paper ‐ PDP and MA‐PD.

36

Table 2: Results: Demand and Marginal Cost
Beneficiaries not eligible for low‐income subsidies
Risk type 1 Risk type 2 Risk type 3 Risk type 4 Risk type 5
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
Panel A: Parameters of the utility function
Premium, $000
Mean
Standard deviation
Standard deviation, inner option
Annual deductible, $000
Indicator for having any coverage in the gap
Mean
Standard deviation
Number of most common drugs covered
Measure of pharmacy network breadth
Number of years the plan is on the market

F‐statistic first stage across all risk types
Panel B: Marginal cost projection for non‐LIS market
Annual deductible, $000
Number of most common drugs covered
Indicator for having any coverage in the gap
Measure of pharmacy network breadth
Number of years the plan is on the market
Mean dependent variable (inverted MC, $000)
Standard deviation dependent variable
R‐squared
N

LIS
(6)

3.16
(0.35)
0.24
(0.50)
0.67
(0.55)
‐10.61
(2.29)

3.25
(0.61)
0.50
(0.39)
6.92
(0.73)
‐11.36
(1.61)

2.46
(0.33)
0.11
(0.62)
‐0.20
(0.35)
‐8.00
(1.27)

2.56
(0.38)
0.33
(0.67)
0.37
(0.48)
‐7.97
(1.56)

2.56
(0.39)
‐0.07
(0.72)
0.83
(0.33)
‐7.92
(1.48)

‐7.93
(0.56)
‐
‐
‐
‐
‐
‐

3.83
(2.08)
2.05
(0.85)
47.87
(17.57)
0.36
(0.02)
1.09
(0.19)

3.75
(1.32)
‐0.33
(0.98)
34.03
(11.11)
0.35
(0.03)
1.24
(0.12)

1.82
(1.12)
1.97
(0.53)
40.85
(14.11)
0.24
(0.01)
1.07
(0.10)

3.38
(0.86)
‐0.19
(0.65)
43.92
(10.85)
0.31
(0.10)
1.05
(0.13)

4.62
(1.14)
0.87
(0.72)
60.00
(8.68)
0.28
(0.04)
0.92
(0.12)

‐
‐
‐
‐
1.05
(7.39)
0.10
(0.07)
0.48
(0.04)

245

23

‐0.19
(0.04)
‐0.78
(2.21)
0.30
(0.01)
‐0.098
(0.04)
0.03
(0.00)

‐0.23
(0.05)
‐0.30
(2.69)
0.36
(0.01)
‐0.14
(0.05)
0.04
(0.00)

‐0.29
(0.06)
‐0.11
(3.42)
0.46
(0.01)
‐0.18
(0.07)
0.04
(0.00)

‐0.42
(0.09)
‐2.11
(4.95)
0.68
(0.02)
‐0.28
(0.10)
0.06
(0.01)

‐0.52
(0.11)
‐2.83
(6.17)
0.83
(0.03)
‐0.34
(0.12)
0.08
(0.01)

0.67
0.16
0.77
756

0.80
0.20
0.76
756

1.00
0.25
0.76
756

1.46
0.36
0.76
756

1.81
0.44
0.76
756

The table reports parameter estimates for demand models as described in Section 3.1 (Panel A). The pa‐rameters are reported
separately for risk types 1 to 5 of regular consumers (columns 1‐5) and consumerseligible for low income subsidies (column 6).
We report standard errors in parentheses. All models include,but do not report: a constant, fixed effects for parent
organizations, year fixed effects, geographic marketfixed effects,a dummy for an enhanced plan, the number of drugs on the
plan’s formulary, and the number ofdrugs placed in Tiers 1‐2 of the formulary. F‐statistics are reported for the first stage
regressions of regular (column 1) and LIS (column 6) premiums on price instruments as described in Section 4. Panel B
reportsthe results of a hedonic regression of marginal costs ‐ for plans not distorted by LIS random
assignmentincentives ‐ estimated via the inversion of the first order conditions on plan characteristics in 2010.
Theregression includes the same plan characteristics as the demand model for regular consumers.

37

38

Subsidy spending in PDP, $M
Reinsurance spending in PDP , $M
Total government spending, $M

Counterfactual subsidy spending if enrolled in MA‐PD, $M
Counterfactual reinsurance spending if enrolled in MA‐PD , $M
Total opportunity cost of government spending, $M

Total surplus; not accounting for opportunity cost of gov. spending, $M
Total surplus; accounting for opportunity cost of gov. spending, $M
Return on nominal dollar of gov. spending, $, no DWL of tax
Return on nominal dollar of gov. spending, $, with DWL of tax
Opportunity cost adjusted return on dollar of gov. spending, $

(4)
(5)
(6)

(7)
(8)
(9)

(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)

510
1,129

6
17
59
16
1
25
1,051

‐
‐
‐
‐
‐

7,700
79

(50,283)
(6,129)
(0.94)
(0.95)
(0.15)

(4,222)
3,441
(0.48)
(0.60)
0.63

7,798
36

16,469
17,496
33,965

14,210
26,502
40,712

2,642
‐
2,642

4,686
1,209
5,894

4,181
1,264
5,445

2,298
559
2,857

474
1,170

6
18
60
14
1

9,745
45

(5,605)
3,671
(0.48)
(0.60)
0.51

5,680
1,455
7,135

5,686
1,502
7,188

2,678
1,062
3,739

438
1,174

7
18
61
13
1

11,284
52

(6,912)
3,638
(0.51)
(0.62)
0.42

6,466
1,649
8,115

6,881
1,692
8,573

3,028
1,205
4,233

441
1,175

7
17
61
13
1

11,425
53

(7,112)
3,570
(0.51)
(0.63)
0.41

6,548
1,669
8,217

6,964
1,764
8,728

3,080
1,154
4,235

450
1,254

7
19
58
15
1

8,955
42

(4,983)
3,510
(0.39)
(0.53)
0.49

5,194
1,339
6,533

5,885
1,307
7,192

2,443
1,923
4,367

Monopoly
Ownership
(6)

Change market power

201
4,011

7
21
62
10
1

19,879
92

(36,605)
(19,426)
(0.27)
(0.44)
(0.30)

10,578
2,636
13,214

59,216
4,551
63,768

11,032
35,260
46,293

p=5% of
bid
(7)

603
1,885

6
15
64
13
1

11,856
55

(11,439)
(229)
(0.49)
(0.61)
(0.02)

6,880
1,744
8,623

11,966
2,552
14,518

3,613
3,821
7,434

p=32% of
bid
(8)

1,448
1,524

0
67
2
31
0

248
1

992
1,230
59.13
45.26
72.93

144
39
183

(35)
52
17

974
40
1,014

p=95%
of bid
(9)

Subsidies proportional to bids

1,531
1,531

0
72
1
27
0

182
1

1,005
1,165
(46.29)
(35.84)
(54.00)

97
26
123

(56)
34
(22)

950
27
977

(10)

$0

444
1,244

7
18
61
14
1

10,985
51

(6,632)
3,674
(0.49)
(0.61)
0.44

6,316
1,612
7,927

6,676
1,707
8,383

2,955
1,311
4,266

Optimal
voucher:
$800
(11)

78
1,473

7
23
60
9
1

20,450
95

(19,305)
(1,868)
(0.47)
(0.59)
(0.07)

10,739
2,674
13,413

22,094
3,023
25,117

10,742
2,605
13,347

(12)

$1,500

Flat voucher subsidies

Table reports the levels of consumer surplus, producer surplus, government spending, and total welfare under the observed allocation (columns 1 and 2) and under counterfactual allocations with a fixed outside option
(columns 3 to 12). We compute these objects using estimates of demand and marginal costs (for columns 1 and 2), as well as simulations of counterfactual equilibria (columns 3 to 12). All quantities are computed as
discussed in Section 3 and Appendix Section E. These baseline results assume that the cost of public funds (λ) is equal to 1.3. Negative quantities reported in parentheses.

(23) Average weighted premium, $
(24) Average weighted bid, $

(18) Share of inside option enrollment by Risk Group 1 consumers, percent
(19)
Risk Group 2
(20)
Risk Group 3
(21)
Risk Group 4
(22)
Risk Group 5

(16) Inside option enrollment, '000
(17) Inside option enrollment, percent of total market

(15) Characteristics of the allocation

Consumer surplus, $M
Insurer profit, $M
Consumer and producer surplus, $M

(1)
(2)
(3)

Remove cross‐ market
links

Regular
LIS
No LIS, no Independent
enrollees enrollees No LIS link MA‐PD link
Plans
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

Observed Allocation

Table 3: Results: Counterfactual Subsidy Mechanisms with Fixed Outside Option

Table 4: Results: Allocations and Welfare under Non-Market Mechanisms

Planner
Social
Planner
(1)

Public Option
with
subsidy
(2)

without
subsidy
(3)

(1)
(2)
(3)

Consumer surplus, $M
Insurer profit, $M
Consumer and producer surplus, $M

3,258
(7,088)
(3,830)

3,005
‐
3,005

970
‐
970

(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)

Subsidy spending in PDP, $M
Reinsurance spending in PDP , $M
Additional subsidy spending in MA‐PD, $M
Total government spending, $M

‐
‐
‐
‐

6,860
‐
‐
6,860

‐
‐
‐
‐

6,943
1,770
8,713

5,599
1,433
7,032

154
41
195

(3,830)
5,371
‐
‐
‐

(5,912)
3,229
(0.56)
(0.66)
0.47

12,374
57

10,237
47

322
1

7
18
61
13
1

9
19
59
12
1

1
71
10
19
0

374
374

87
758

728
728

(8) Counterfactual subsidy spending if enrolled in MA‐PD, $M
(9) Counterfactual reinsurance spending if enrolled in MA‐PD , $M
(10)
Total opportunity cost of government spending, $M
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)

Total surplus; not accounting for opportunity cost of gov. spendin
Total surplus; accounting for opportunity cost of gov. spending, $M
Return on nominal dollar of gov. spending, $, no DWL of tax
Return on nominal dollar of gov. spending, $, with DWL of tax
Opportunity cost adjusted return on dollar of gov. spending, $

970
1,223
‐
‐
‐

(16) Characteristics of the allocation
(17) Inside option enrollment, '000
(18) Inside option enrollment, percent of total market
(19) Share of inside option enrollment by Risk Group 1 consumers, per
(20)
Risk Group 2
(21)
Risk Group 3
(22)
Risk Group 4
(23)
Risk Group 5
(24) Average weighted premium, $
(25) Average weighted bid, $

Table reports the level of consumer surplus, producer surplus, government spending, and total welfare under counterfactual
allocations without market mechanisms. The non‐market mechanisms are defined in Section 5.1. To compute these objects, we use
estimates of demand, marginal costs, and the derivation of the social planner's problem in Appendix Section E. All quantities are
computed as discussed in Section 3 and Appendix Section E. These baseline results assume that the cost of public funds (λ) is equal
to 1.3. Negative quantities are reported in parentheses.

39

Table 5: Results: Counterfactual Subsidy Mechanisms with Adjusted Outside Option
Remove cross‐
market links
No LIS
link
(1)

Change market power

No LIS, no Independent Monopoly
MA‐PD link
Plans
Ownership
(2)
(3)
(4)

Flat voucher subsidies

$0
(5)

Optimal
voucher:
$1,200
(6)

$1,500
(7)

(1)
(2)
(3)

Consumer surplus, $M
Insurer profit, $M
Consumer and producer surplus, $M

3,504
873
4,378

4,189
914
5,103

4,227
881
5,108

4,410
1,220
5,630

(12,460) 9,577
832
1,992
(11,628) 11,569

11,327
2,173
13,500

(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)

Subsidy spending in PDP, $M
Reinsurance spending in PDP , $M
Additional subsidy spending in MA‐PD, $M
Total government spending, $M

4,725
1,252
442
6,419

5,269
1,306
802
7,377

5,366
1,368
789
7,522

4,266
957
1,415
6,638

(920) 15,596
1,152
2,335
(10,344)
943
(10,112) 18,874

19,707
2,831
674
23,212

5,075
1,203
6,278

5,545
1,257
6,802

5,649
1,280
6,929

4,363
962
5,325

(448) 12,297
1,075
2,274
627 14,571

13,493
2,456
15,949

(3,967)
4,194
(0.32)
(0.48)
0.65

(4,487)
4,356
(0.31)
(0.47)
0.59

(4,671)
4,337
(0.32)
(0.48)
0.58

(3,000)
3,922
(0.15)
(0.35)
0.59

1,517 (12,967)
2,332
5,975
0.15
(0.39)
(0.12)
(0.53)
(0.23)
0.32

(16,675)
4,058
(0.42)
(0.55)
0.17

7,769
36

8,195
38

8,355
39

6,016
28

6,785
31

16,231
75

17,774
82

6
17
59
16
1

6
17
60
16
1

6
17
60
16
1

6
18
56
19
1

6
17
58
18
1

7
16
64
11
1

7
16
65
11
1

466
1,162
56

427
1,164
84

429
1,164
84

414
1,219
113

94
1,286
203

86
1,461
218

(8) Counterfactual subsidy spending if enrolled in MA‐PD, $M
(9) Counterfactual reinsurance spending if enrolled in MA‐PD , $M
(10)
Total opportunity cost of government spending, $M
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)

Total surplus; not accounting for opportunity cost of gov. spending, $M
Total surplus; accounting for opportunity cost of gov. spending, $M
Return on nominal dollar of gov. spending, $, no DWL of tax
Return on nominal dollar of gov. spending, $, with DWL of tax
Opportunity cost adjusted return on dollar of gov. spending, $

(16) Characteristics of the allocation
(17) Inside option enrollment, '000
(18) Inside option enrollment, percent of total market
(19) Share of inside option enrollment by Risk Group 1 consumers, percent
(20)
Risk Group 2
(21)
Risk Group 3
(22)
Risk Group 4
(23)
Risk Group 5
(24) Average weighted premium, $
(25) Average weighted bid, $
(26) Outside option adjustment, $

1,224
1,224
(677)

Table reports the level of consumer surplus, producer surplus, government spending, and total welfare under counterfactual allocations with an endogenously
adjusted outside option. To compute these objects, we use estimates of demand, marginal costs, and simulations of counterfactual equilibria. All quantities
are computed as discussed in Section 3 and Appendix Sections E and F. These baseline results assume that the cost of public funds (λ) is equal to 1.3. Negative
quantities reported in parentheses.

40

APPENDIX
A

Institutional Context and Data

Institutional Context Congress expanded Medicare to include prescription drug coverage via Medicare Part D in 2006. In 2016, approximately 41 million individuals benefited
from the Medicare Part D program and the Congressional Budget Office estimates that the
government currently spends over $94 billion on Part D annually.
The supply-side of the Part D program has a unique, and controversial, design. Oliver,
Lee and Lipton (2004) discuss the political origins of Part D and its mixed reception in the
first years of the program, particularly among consumers. Unlike the rest of Medicare, the
drug insurance benefit is administered exclusively by private insurance companies. At the
same time, the setting differs from more conventional private insurance markets in two key
ways. First, firms are highly regulated and product selection is restricted; CMS sets an annual
Standard Defined Benefit (SBD), which defines the minimum actuarial level of insurance that
the private plans are required to provide. The SDB has a non-linear structure illustrated
in Figure A1; it includes a deductible, a 25 percent co-insurance rate and the infamous
“donut hole,” which is a gap in coverage at higher spending levels. As long as an actuarial
minimum is satisfied, insurers are allowed to adjust and/or top up the SDB contract design,
which generates variation in contracts’ financial characteristics. In addition, contracts may
be differentiated by the quality of insurer’s pharmacy networks, which drugs are covered,
and other non-pecuniary quality measures.
The second way in which Part D environment differs from more conventional insurance
markets is that consumers bear only a fraction of the cost in the program. As much as 90 percent of insurer revenues come from the government’s per capita subsidies.25 For individuals,
who are eligible for low-income-subsidies, these subsidies can go up to 100 percent.
Subsidies are determined through a complex system that depends on firm behavior. First,
the government administers an annual “simultaneous bidding” mechanism. According to
this mechanism, the insurers that want to participate in the program submit bids for each
insurance plan in each region they want to offer. By statute, the bids are supposed to reflect
how much revenue the insurer “needs,” including a profit margin and fixed cost allowances,
to be able to offer the plan to an average risk beneficiary. There are several nuances buried
in the set-up of the bidding procedure that are important for insurers’ incentives and will
25

See Table IV.B11 of 2012 Trustees of Medicare Annual Report.

41

Figure A1: Standard Defined Benefit in Medicare Part D
5,000

4,500

2007:
2008:
2009:
2010:

D $265;
D $275;
D $295;
D $310;

ICL $2,400
ICL $2,510
ICL $2,700
ICL $2,830

Catastrophic Coverage

Out of pocket spending ,USD

4,000

3,500

3,000

2,500
Coverage Gap

2,000
Initial Coverage Limit

1,500

2007

1,000

2008

Deductible

2009

500

2010

0
200
400
600
800
1,000
1,200
1,400
1,600
1,800
2,000
2,200
2,400
2,600
2,800
3,000
3,200
3,400
3,600
3,800
4,000
4,200
4,400
4,600
4,800
5,000
5,200
5,400
5,600
5,800
6,000
6,200
6,400
6,600
6,800
7,000

0

Total annual drug spending, USD

Insurers in the Medicare Part D program are required to provide coverage that gives at least the same
actuarial value as the Standard Defined Benefit (SDB) that is illustrated in this Figure for years 2007-2010.
The SDB design features a deductible, a co-insurance rate of 25 percent up to the initial coverage limit
(ICL) and the subsequent “donut hole” that has a 100 percent co-insurance until the individual reaches the
catastrophic coverage arm of the contract. The graph illustrates these features of the SDB by mapping the
total annual drug spending (on the x-axis) into the out-of-pocket expenditure (on the y-axis). The legend in
the top left corner specifies the key parameter values of the contract and their evolution over time: deductible
level (“D”) and the start of the coverage gap phase (“ICL”).

42

enter the insurers’ profit function in our empirical model. First, Medicare sets a minimum
required actuarial benefit level that plans have to offer. Plans are allowed to offer more
coverage (“enhance” the coverage), but that enhanced portion is not subsidized. Thus,
when submitting their bids plans are supposed to only include the costs they expect to incur
for the baseline actuarial portion of their benefit. The incremental premium for enhanced
coverage has to be directly passed on to consumers. CMS takes the bids submitted by
insurers for each of their plans and channels them through a function that outputs which
part of the bid is paid by consumers in way of premiums, and which part is paid by CMS
through subsidies. This function takes the bids of all Part D PDP plans nationwide, adds in
the bids submitted by MA-PD plans, weights them by lagged enrollment shares of the plans,
and takes the average. 25 percent of the national bid average together with the difference
between the plan’s bid and the national average is set as the consumer’s premium.
The second feature of the subsidy mechanism concerns the role of low income beneficiaries. CMS utilizes the same insurer bids to determine which insurance plans qualify to
enroll randomly assigned LIS beneficiaries. For each geographic market, CMS calculates
the enrollment-weighted average consumer premium. This average constitutes the subsidy
amount that low-income beneficiaries receive, known as LIS benchmark or LIPSA. Plans
that have premiums below the LIS benchmark qualify for random assignment of LIS enrollees (Decarolis, 2015).
Last but not least, subsidies vary depending on the health of individual enrollees. Insurers
receive higher subsidies for sicker beneficiaries through the process known as risk adjustment.
Each beneficiary is assigned a continuous risk score that is calculated such that the individual
of average health within the Medicare program has a risk score of one. Sicker beneficiaries
get assigned higher risk scores. CMS payments to insurers are scaled by this risk score
to reflect higher expected expenditures that insurers would incur for sicker enrollees. For
a consumer with risk score ri , CMS pays the insurer the bid times the risk score, minus
consumer premium. While the premiums do not vary across consumers, CMS payment is
higher for less healthy enrollees. For beneficiaries of especially poor health, insurers also
receive a so-called “re-insurance” payment, by which the government pays about 80 percent
of individual’s spending after this individual has incurred relatively high pharmaceutical
costs. This effectively further increases subsidies for sicker beneficiaries.
These mechanisms of risk adjustment and re-insurance are parts of a three-pillar risk
equalization system within Medicare Part D. The third part of this system—risk corridors—
directly decreases insurers’ exposure to bottom line risk in profits by capping certain levels

43

of losses (and symmetrically taxing unexpected gains). These three mechanisms play two
roles in the market. First, they effectively result in higher subsidies for individuals of worse
health. Second, they serve to mute insurers’ incentives to cream-skim healthier enrollees by
trying to equalize the marginal cost of each enrollee from the insurers’ perspective.
MA-PD plans participate in the bidding mechanisms and conceptually are paid the same
subsidy. In practice, MA-PD plans can use the subsidy payments from the medical part of
MA to reduce consumer premiums for MA-PD plans, so that consumer-facing premiums are
often zero for the pharmaceutical part of the MA program (Curto et al., 2015; Starc and
Town, 2015).
Data and Sample Our primary data source for analysis are Research Identifiable Files
containing a 20 percent random sample of all pharmaceutical claims for Medicare beneficiaries from years 2007-2010. The dataset (Master Beneficiary Summery File) contains
information about age, sex, place of residence, health conditions, and Part D enrollment for
each beneficiary in the 20 percent sample. For those individuals that have purchased some
type of Part D coverage, we observe detailed information about pharmaceutical claims (Part
D Drug Event File). For each claim, we observe the date of purchase, the pharmacy, the
prescribing physician, the total cost of transaction at the pharmacy, how much of the claim
was paid by the consumer, by the plan, and by CMS. We can further observe if the consumer
was eligible for low income subsidies. These data are described in detail by CMS Research
Data Assistance Center (ResDAC): www.resdac.org.
We restrict the 20 percent sample as follows. We keep individuals that reside in 50 US
states. We further keep individuals that either purchased a stand-alone Medicare Part D
PDP plan, or a Medicare Advantage MA-PD plan, or no Part D coverage. This restriction
excludes individuals who were eligible for other types of pharmaceutical coverage - primarily
through employer-sponsored Part D plans. This set of individuals constitutes our analytic
sample.
We enrich these data with publicly available information on the Part D plan options that
were available to each consumer based on their geographic market. For each plan option
we observe a vector of detailed characteristics, including deductibles, coverage in the gap,
and insurer brands, as well as consumer-facing premiums. These CMS Medicare Part D
Landscape files for years 2007-2010 are provided directly by CMS at www.cms.gov.
Last, we use public information on total and plan-level Part D enrollment as reported on
www.cms.gov to validate the estimates based on our 20 percent sample. The same source

44

of information provides data on average national bids, consumer premiums, and low income
benchmark thresholds. We use these pieces of information to infer bids for each Part D plan,
as well as which plans were eligible for LIS random assignment.
For details on data sources, file names and processing programs, please see the package
with replication programs that accompanies the paper.

B

Consumer Risk Types

Our supply side model allows for a plan’s marginal cost to change as a function of the
plan’s risk pool; in other words, the supply-side model allows for adverse or advantageous
selection. To facilitate differential risk sorting across plans, our demand model allows for
consumer preferences to vary with their health risk. To operationalize endogenous marginal
costs as an equilibrium outcome, we start by constructing a continuous one-dimensional
measure of each consumer’s risk. The risk measure that we construct is similar in spirit to
the risk score that CMS uses for risk-adjustment. We then discretize the risk space to enable
computational feasibility.
We start by generating a continuous measure of predictable risk for each Medicare beneficiary in the data. For all consumers on the market that are included in our 20 percent
sample, we observe information about their health status, measured by the indicators for
the presence of 66 chronic conditions. To map the indicators for chronic conditions and
basic demographic information into a one-dimensional pharmaceutical spending risk score,
we estimate a linear relationship between total pharmaceutical spending and information
about individual’s chronic conditions, age, sex, race, and eligibility for low income subsidies.
The model is estimated using observations on individuals who had Part D coverage and
hence their pharmaceutical claims were recorded in the data. We then use the estimated
regression coefficients to predict total pharmaceutical spending among all potential Part D
consumers. For each individual, we construct a risk score measure that is equal to the ratio
of the individual’s predicted spending to the average predicted spending in the sample. By
construction, the average consumer receives a risk score of 1.
In the next step we discretize the constructed risk scores. We divide all potential Part
D enrollees into six discrete risk groups. As the distribution of risk scores has thin tails
and is concentrated around the mean, we define the first and fifth risk score groups to be
the bottom 5th percentile and top 5th percentile of risk scores among beneficiaries that are
not eligible for low income subsidies. The second risk group are individuals with risk scores

45

between 5th and 25th percentile; third risk group - 25th to 75th percentile, and fourth risk
group - 75th to 95th percentile. We let all LIS-eligible beneficiaries be in a separate, sixth,
risk group. We cannot observe individual’s LIS eligiblility if the individual is not enrolled in
a Part D plan. Hence, we assume that all consumers that are not observed having a Part D
plan are not eligible for LIS subsidies. This appears to be a reasonable assumption, as LIS
eligiblity for many individuals is determined automatically and those who are not actively
choosing a Part D plan get randomly assigned to one.
For each of the six (including LIS) risk groups, we define two objects of interest. First,
we compute the average risk score in each group. The resulting averages are: 0.17 risk score
for the first risk group, 0.47 for the second, 0.81 for the third, 1.63 for the fourth, 2.49 for
the fifth, and 1.78 for the LIS. In the process of risk-adjustment, CMS constructs similar risk
scores for each individual. These “real” risk scores are then used to multiply insurers’ bids
before CMS determines its payments to the insurer. CMS premium subsidy is equal to the
difference between the insurer bid multiplied by a risk score net of the beneficiary premium.
To replicate this idea and to allow insurers to collect higher revenue when enrolling higher
cost individuals, we use the average risk scores per risk type as reported above to multiply
insurer bids and compute insurer revenue.
In the next step, we define how expected costs vary across five risk groups. Since we
observe only one equilibrium price per plan, we have to make parametric assumptions on
how costs across six risk group types relate to each other, as there is only one unknown
cost parameter that is identified in the marginal cost inversion system. We assume that
risk-type specific costs are related multiplicatively to each other. We normalize the marginal
cost for risk group one as the baseline marginal cost c. We then assume that the marginal
cost for risk groups two to six (the LIS) are equal to κ2 c to κ6 c. We estimate κ’s from the
claims data. For each risk type, we compute the average plan payment, including payments
by PDP and MA-PD type plans. The insurance plan payment per person is the residual
of the total annual individual spending on drugs net of patient out of pocket payments for
cost-sharing, net of reinsurance payments for especially high risks by the government, and
net of government cost-sharing subsidies for the LIS-eligible beneficiaries. We normalize the
resulting average payment in all risk types by the payment in risk type 1. The resulting
estimates of κ are: 1 for risk type 1, 1.19 for risk type 2, 1.50 for risk type 3, 2.18 for risk
type 4, 2.70 for risk type 5, 1.93 for the LIS-eligible beneficiaries. Applying these estimated
multipliers allows us to reduce the marginal cost inversion problem to a one equation in
one unknown, while at the same time endogenizing the marginal costs of Part D plans to

46

equilibrium allocation of risks across plans.

C

Consumer Inertia

The literature has documented consumer inertia in the choice of Medicare Part D plans
(Ericson, 2014; Ho et al., 2015; Polyakova, 2016; Wu, 2016; Heiss et al., 2016). Consumers
tend to choose their plan when entering the Part D program for the first time, and then
only infrequently make changes to their plans. To account for inertia in demand, we take a
reduced form approach and include the vintage of a plan in the utility function as a proxy for
inattention and switching costs. The idea is that the longer the plan has been around, the
larger the proportion of its enrollees are incumbent consumers from previous years. As we
illustrate in what follows, our reduced-form specification corresponds to an explicit structural
model of inattention and choice.
We start by borrowing from Hortacsu et al. (2015), who posit a two-stage model of
choice with inattention. In the first stage consumers make an active choice with probability
α. In the second stage, attentive consumers face a standard discrete choice problem, while
inattentive consumers stay in the same plan that they had in the last period. This implies
that the observed share of plan j depends on its own share from the previous period as
follows:
ŝj,t (p, sj,t−1 ) = αM P rj,t (p) + (1 − α)sj,t−1 ,
(7)
where ŝ is the observed share, p is the vector of plan premiums, M is market size, and
P rj,t (p) is the usual logit probability. In the first year of the program, this model reduces
to the usual logit model, or equivalently, our discrete choice model with vintage set to zero.
In year two, the observed share is a convolution of the current choice share and the set of
inattentive consumers who did not make a choice. Irrespective of whether p = 0, where no
one pays attention, or p = 1, where everyone is perfectly attentive, the plan accumulates
consumers as time goes on and the relative share of the plan remains fixed as the rest of the
world stays constant. The distinguishing feature of this model, however, is that it predicts
that the firm can start raising premiums after the first year without losing as much market
share as it would have in a perfectly attentive world. To see this, the derivative of Equation
7 with respect to its premium only has the current set of active choosers in it:
∂P rj,t (p)
∂ŝj,t (p, sj,t−1 )
= αM
,
∂pj,t
∂pj,t

47

(8)

while profits are a function of the total share, of which fraction (1 − α) are unresponsive to
price changes. The key point is that as α declines, the firm can increasingly raise premiums
and retain the same market share.
The mapping from this model to our model with a vintage variable is direct: as the
market evolves, the share of active choosers effectively shrinks as an increasing percentage of
consumers have been in the market for longer than one period. In the simplest case, assuming
that no one exits the market and all pre-existing consumers are completely inattentive,
α(T ) = 1/(T − 1), where T is the number of periods the market has been active. Our
vintage variable proxies directly for this effect, as one can rewrite Equation 8 as:
∂P rj,t (p)
∂P rj,t (p, β(T ))
∂ŝj,t (p, sj,t−1 )
= α(T )M
=M
,
∂pj,t
∂pj,t
∂pj,t

(9)

where β(T ) = F (α(T )) is a positive, monotonic transformation of α(T ). This mapping can
be generalized to allow for where α > 0 for pre-existing consumers or where α is a function of
the premium change (a la Heiss et al., 2016 and Ho et al., 2015). As such, one can view our
reduced form model of demand with a vintage variable as arising from a structural two-stage
model of inattention and choice.
A complete characterization of the influence of inattention and switching costs on demand
and pricing would require an equilibrium model as in Klemperer (1995) or Dubé et al. (2009).
We note that this literature has conflicting predictions about the sign of pricing effects in
response to switching costs: Klemperer (1995) concludes that prices are likely to be higher
in equilibrium, while Dubé et al. (2009) demonstrate that prices can be lower in equilibrium.
Indeed, in the analysis of these issues within the Medicare Part D setting, Ho et al. (2015)
and Wu (2016) come to opposite conclusions about which pricing strategies have dominated
the market in response to consumer inertia. In either environment, the fact that we are
not modelling a dynamic equilibrium may lead to a bias in marginal cost estimates. In the
setting of Medicare Advantage plans, Miller (2014) argues that in insurance markets that are
characterized by inertial demand, the marginal cost estimates from a static Bertrand model
may be around 20 percent higher or lower than the “true” dynamic values. Recognizing this
concern in our setting, we have re-estimated our key counterfactual results for a 20 percent
radius around our marginal cost estimates. Our qualitative conclusions are not sensitive to
this specification check.

48

D

Profit Function

This section provides a detailed description of how we arrive at the profit function in Equation
3 of the paper. We start with a description of the flow of payments in Part D and set up
a general profit function that can incorporate a variety of regulatory interventions in this
market. We then discuss our strategy of arriving at an empirically tractable version of the
supply-side model.
Firms receive revenues across a variety of channels. For each individual that plan j
enrolls, the insurer collects an enrollee premium, pj . The premium does not vary across
consumers and is determined as follows. CMS takes a (lagged) enrollment-weighted average
of all bids submitted by all PDP and MA-PD plans across the country. It then declares a
pre-specified share of this average for the given year (for example, 36 percent in year 2010)
as the base consumer premium. The actual premium is then equal to the base premium plus
the difference between the plan’s bid and the average national bid.
The consumer premium is augmented with an individual-plan-specific subsidy, zij , from
the government. This subsidy is equal to the bid multiplied by a measure of the enrollee’s
ex-ante health risk - ri ) - net of consumer premium. For an average-risk beneficiary with
ri = 1, the sum of the premium and government subsidy is equal to the bid that the firm
submitted for that plan. For an individual with a risk score above or below the average, the
insurer collects ri ∗ bj - out of this amount, pj is paid by the consumer, and zij = ri ∗ bj − pj
is paid as the government subsidy. Since consumer premium depends on the average bid
among all PDP and MA-PD plans, b, we can write the subsidy as a function of the bid,
the average bid, and individual-specific health risk: zij (bj , b, ri ). The individual-level risk
adjustment in the subsidy is intended to make all consumers look equally profitable to firms
in order to reduce incentives for risk-based selection.
On the cost side, the ex post costs of a plan differ for each enrollee and depend on
individual drug expenditures. Some of these costs are mitigated by the government through
catastrophic reinsurance provisions, according to which the government directly pays about
80 percent of individual’s drug spending for particularly high spenders. Throughout the
empirical results we will refer to these reinsurance provisions as reinsurance subsidies. For
an individual with a given total annual drug expenditure amount, the costs of the plan will
also depend on the cost-sharing characteristics of the plan, denoted by φj . These include
characteristics such as the deductible level, co-pays and co-insurance, as well as coverage in
the donut hole if any. We let individual-level ex post costs be the function of these costsharing characteristics of a plan as well as the individual’s measure of health risk, ri ; that
49

is, we let the cost be cij (ri , φj ).
The final piece of a plan’s ex post profit are risk corridor transfers between insurers and the
federal government. These transfers happen at the end of the year, and restrict the downside
(but also upside) risk of enrolling extremely costly individuals for the insurers. Medicare
Part D Manual provides more details. As CMS describes in Chapter 9 of Prescription Drug
Benefit Manual, risk corridors are: “Specified risk percentages above and below the target
amount. For each year, CMS establishes a risk corridor for each Part D plan. Risk corridors
will serve to decrease the exposure of plans where allowed costs exceed plan payments for
the basic Part D benefit.” (See 42 C.F.R, 423.336(a)(2).) We denote the function which
adjusts a plan’s ex post profit with Γ.
The ex post profit for plan j as a function of its bid bj is then:
πj (bj ; b−j ) = Γ

"
X

#

pj (b, bj ) + zij (bj , b, ri ) − cij (ri , φj ) ,

(10)

i∈j

where the summation is taken over all individuals enrolling in the plan.
As the sum of the premium and the subsidy is by construction equal to the risk-adjusted
bid submitted by insurer to Medicare, pj (b, bj ) + zij (bj , b, ri ) = ri ∗ bj , we can re-write the ex
ante expected profit of plan j for all consumers with risk level r as:
πjr (bj ; b−j ) = Mr srj (b)(rbj − crj ),

(11)

where srj (b) is the market share of plan j among consumers of risk r and M is the market
size. We emphasize that srj encapsulates all of the regulatory details involved in turning bids,
b, into plan-specific market shares. To operationalize the analysis, we discretize the risk type
space into five risk types among regular enrollees and LIS enrollees as a separate risk type.
Let t index risk types of regular enrollees. Let θt denote the average risk score among type
t enrollees. We can then re-write the risk-type level profit function as:
πjt (bj ; b−j ) = Mt sjt (b)(θt bj − cjt ),

(12)

We now expand this expression to allow for multi-plan insurance organizations that offer
plans to all risk types on the market, including the LIS consumers. The structure of profit
from LIS enrollment is specified as entirely symmetric to the regular enrollees. We denote
quantities related to regular enrollees of risk type t with superscript R, and quantities related

50

to the LIS part of the market with superscript LIS. The profit function for insurer f offering
a portfolio of j ∈ Jf plans across all consumer types becomes:
πf (b) =

X

5
X


j∈Jf

t=1

!

LIS LIS
R
R
)
sj (b)(θLIS bj − cLIS
MtR sR
j
jt (b)(θt bj − cjt ) + M

(13)

Firms maximize profits by choosing bid b for each insurance plan j they offer.
Equation 13 is more complex than a standard profit function in a differentiated products
market due to how the share equation sjt (b) is constructed. For regular enrollees, the share
depends on the plan’s premium, pR
j , which is not set directly by insurers, but rather depends
on the bids of other insurers in a non-linear fashion:

pR
j = max 0, bj − b̄ + ζ b̄ ,

(14)

where b̄ is the enrollment-weighted average bid of all plans in the entire US and ζ is the
share of the average bid allocated to baseline consumer premiums. The adjustment ζ is
set every year by CMS and is governed by fiscal considerations and the Part D statutes; in
2010, this number was 0.36. The share equation for the low-income segment of the market
is substantially more complex. It can be thought about as a piece-wise function with two
components: random assignment of low-income enrollees by CMS for those plans that are
eligible for random assignment, and enrollment choices by LIS consumer that make active
choices of plans (“LIS choosers”). While LIS choosers are easily modeled in the standard
discrete choice demand system, the eligibility requirement for random assignment introduces
a discontinuity into the share function. Only plans below the average premium are eligible
for random assignment, so for some choices of bj , the share function for that portion of the
market discontinuously jumps to zero.26
We make two assumptions to arrive at a tractable first order condition. First, we assume
that the firm ignores the effect of its bidding behavior on the average bid, b̄; this seems
reasonable in light of the over 1,500 PDP plans that, along with the MA-PD plans, determine
the average bid. Second, we assume that only insurers that are not competing for the
randomly assigned LIS beneficiaries can be characterized as playing a Nash-Bertrand game.
For these plans, the first-order condition is:
26
Decarolis (2015) discusses the piece-wise structure of the share function and the incentives generated by
the LIS random assignment mechanism in much greater detail.

51

∂πf
=
∂bj

5
X
t=1




R
R
X
∂s
(b)
jt
R
R
R ∂skt (b) 
θt MtR sR
+
(bk − cR
jt (b) + (θt bj − cjt )Mt
kt )Mt
∂bj
∂bj
k6=j∈J
f

+θLIS M LIS sLIS
(b) + (θLIS bj − cLIS
)M LIS
j
j

LIS
X
∂sLIS
(b)
j
LIS ∂sk (b)
+
(θLIS bk − cLIS
)M
.
k
∂bj
∂bj
k6=j∈J
f

This expression differs from the more familiar first-order condition in the differentiated
product literature in that the market size now plays an important role for the firm’s decisionmaking. The market size affects the relative effects on profit from enrolling beneficiaries of
different risk types. The incentives are further complicated by the fact that we allow for
adverse or advantageous selection and endogenous marginal costs. The profitability for
isnruers varies across risk types, since we do not impose that additional revenues from CMS
for higher risk enrollees through the risk adjustment program offset the cost differences. To
close the model, we assume that the expected marginal costs for risk types 2 to 5 and LIS are
a first order polynomial with an intercept equal to zero relative to risk type 1. We denote the
slope parameters with κt and κLIS . Collecting terms in vector notation, we can re-write the
first order condition for an insurer offering plans not distorted by LIS incentives as follows:
T
X



R
LIS
θt MtR sR
M LIS sLIS − ΩLIS (θLIS b − κLIS c) = 0.
t − Ωt (θt b − κt c) + θ

(15)

t=1

where
ΩR
kjt =
and
ΩLIS
kj =


−M R ∂sRtj (b)
t

∂bk

0

if {j, k} ∈ Jf ,

(16)

else,


(b)
j
−M LIS ∂sLIS
∂bk

0

if {j, k} ∈ Jf ,

(17)

else.

We use these first-order conditions to compute (by inversion for non-distorted plans and
using a hedonic projection for distorted plans) for marginal costs for each plan j. These cost
estimates are in turn used as inputs for computing the counterfactual equilibria.

52

E

Welfare Function

For regular enrollees, total welfare in the Medicare Part D PDP market is comprised of three
pieces: consumer surplus (CS), insurer profits (Π), and government spending (G):
W = CS + Π − λG,

(18)

where λ is the social cost of raising revenues to cover government expenditures, G. All three
pieces of the welfare function are calculated relative to the outside option. For consumer
surplus the normalization to the outside option (buying an MA-PD plan or not purchasing
Part D insurance) follows directly from the utility model. For producer surplus, the insurer
pricing decision implicitly takes into account the opportunity cost of serving the outside
option. In other words, the marginal cost as recovered from the inversion of the first-order
conditions incorporates the opportunity costs of potentially serving each consumer in the
MA-PD market or outside of the Part D program. Consequently, the profit function is
defined relative to profits that could have been made in the MA-PD program or elsewhere.
Finally, since the government subsidizes both the PDP and MA-PD parts of the market,
we consider government spending on PDP net of what it would have spent on the same
individual elsewhere. We conservatively assume that the outside option for the government
is subsidizing the same consumers in the MA-PD market. This assumption excludes the
possibility that some individuals could leave subsidized insurance altogether.
Following Williams (1977) and Small and Rosen (1981), surplus for consumer i with
marginal utilities ωi from plan characteristics, including the premium, takes the following
form:
"
"
##
J
X
1
γ + ln 1 +
exp(vij (ωi )) ,
(19)
CS(ωi ) =
αi
j=1
where γ is Euler’s constant, and vij is the deterministic component of utility for person i
from plan j (utility net of the idiosyncratic shock).27 We integrate out over the unobserved
taste heterogeneity to obtain consumer surplus for each consumer risk group t:
Z
CSt =

CS(ωt )dF (ωt ).

(20)

The second piece of the welfare calculation is producer surplus that we compute using
27

Euler’s constant is the mean value of the Type I Extreme Value idiosyncratic shock under the standard
normalizations in the logit model, and is approximately equal to 0.577.

53

Equation 3.
The last piece of the welfare calculation is government spending. In our welfare calculations, we weigh the government spending with the shadow cost of public funds, commonly
estimated at λ = 1.3.28 We compute both the nominal government spending in the PDP
program, as well as how much extra spending the PDP part of the Part D program (GP DP )
generates relative to the outside option of subsidizing the beneficiaries in Medicare Advantage
prescription drug plans (GM AP D ). We allow government spending to vary by consumer risk
type, which reflects differential risk adjustment and re-insurance payments across consumers
of different health.
Adding the three parts of the welfare function back together, we have the following
measure of total surplus for regular consumers (an analogous expression applies to LIS consumers):
Consumer Surplus (CS)

W =

z
t=5
X
t=1

Z
Mt

1
αt

}|
{
#!
J
X
γ + ln 1 +
exp(vjt (ωt ))
dF (ωt ) +
"

j=1
Producer Profit (Π)

z
5
X X
j∈J

}|

!{

[Mt sjt (b)(θt bj − κt cj )] −

t=1
Social Cost of Government Spending (G)

z
λ

" J
t=5 X
X
t=1

}|
AP D
(GPjtDP − GM
)sjt (p)Mt
t

#!{
. (21)

j=1

This welfare function describes the surplus for the private market, where firms administer
insurance contracts. To arrive at the social planner’s objective function, we include “profits”
in the government spending computation, as under a social planner, prices are set by fiat
and there are no private profits. Social planner’s problem is then to maximize the following
welfare function:
28

See, for example, Hausman and Poterba (1987).

54

Consumer Surplus (CS)

W SP (p) =

z
t=5
X
t=1

Z
Mt

1
αt

}|
{
#!
J
X
γ + ln 1 +
exp(vjt (ωt ))
dF (ωt ) +
"

j=1



Social Cost of Government Spending (G)
Producer Profit (Π)
}|
z
}|
#!{
!{ z t=5 " J

5
X
X
X
X


 R R

AP D
λ
(GPjtDP − GM
)sjt (p)Mt 
Mt sjt (p)(θtR pj − κR
−
t
t cj )

 (22)
 j∈J t=1

t=1 j=1
The vector of prices that maximizes this version of the welfare function is the social planner’s solution. Note that we use prices in the social planner’s case, as the distinction between
insurer bids and consumer premiums is not meaningful in this case. The optimal price vector
is defined by the set of first-order conditions obtained by differentiating W SP (p) with respect
to prices. The derivative of consumer surplus with respect to pj has a conveniently simple
form:
#
#
"
"
t=5
t=5 Z
X
∂CS(p) X
1
−αt exp(vjt (ωt ))
Mt sjt (p)
(23)
dF (ωt ) = −
Mt
=
P
∂pj
αt 1 + Jk=1 exp(vkt (ωt ))
t=1
t=1
The derivative of product market profit with respect to pj is:
"
#
t=5
X
∂Π(p) X
∂skt (p)
(θt pk − κt ck )
λMt sjt (p)θt + λMt
=
∂pj
∂pj
t=1
k

(24)

The derivative of government spending with respect to pj is:
"
#!
t=5
X
∂GS(p) X
∂s
(p)
kt
AP D
=
−λ
(GPktDP − GM
)
Mt
=
t
∂pj
∂pj
t=1
k
"
#!
t=5
X
X
∂skt (p)
−λ
∆Gkt
Mt
∂p
j
t=1
k

(25)

(26)

Summing these terms, we obtain:
t=5

∂W SP (p) X
=
Mt
∂pj
t=1

X
∂skt (p)
(λθt − 1)sjt (p) + λ
(θt pk − κt ck − ∆Gkt )
∂pj
k

55

!
(27)

A decrease in consumer surplus in response to an increased price (−sjt (p)) is offset, up to the
cost of transferring public funds, by an increase in profit in the product market (λθt sjt (p)).
The degree of offset varies by consumer risk type.
The first-order conditions can be simplified using vector notation:
t=5
X

Mt [(λθt − 1)st (p) + λΩt (p)(θt p − κt c − ∆Gt )] = 0

(28)

t=1

where Ωt (p) is a matrix of partial derivatives such that the element in the i-th row and j-th
column is:
∂sj t(p)
.
(29)
Ωijt (p) =
∂pi
It follows that optimal prices for the social planner’s case are given by the following:
pSocialP lanner =

t=5
X
t=1

!−1
λMt Ωt (p)θt

t=5
X

!
Mt [(1 − λθt )st (p) + λΩt (p)(κt c + ∆Gt )]

(30)

t=1

Price is set to balance the inside and outside option enrollment for each consumer risk type.
In particular, the size of each risk type market as well as the difference in risk adjustment
(θt ) versus cost factors across risk types (κt ) play a central role in determining the social
planner’s allocation.
Cost of public funds A key parameter in our calculations in the social cost of government
funds, which is set to 1.3 in our baseline analysis. In Table E1, we report the estimates of total
surplus (accounting for the opportunity cost of government funds) for each counterfactual
for λ ∈ {1, 1.7, 2}. Increasing the cost of public funds has the general effect of decreasing
overall welfare in most cases. The optimal voucher shifts up by $100 to $900 at λ = 1 in
the fixed outside option case, and remains the same at $1,200 in the adjusted outside option
case. At λ = 2, the optimal voucher shifts down by $100 to $700 in the fixed outside option
case. In the case of adjusted outside option, making government payments more socially
costly leads to a knife-edge case, where the optimal strategy is not to subsidize the market
at all, since there is not enough willingness to pay for the PDP program, so that any subsidy
is costlier than the utility loss from not subsidizing. The latter remains the case as long as
the public cost of government funds is above 1.5 per 1 dollar of government spending.

56

Table E1: Sensitivity to the Cost of Public Funds Parameter
Counterfactuals

λ=1

λ=1.3

λ=1.7

λ=2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

3,306
3,687
3,775
3,724
3,708
1,121
3,891
900
1,643

3,441
3,671
3,638
3,570
3,510
1,165
3,674
800
‐1,868

3,620
3,650
3,455
3,366
3,247
1,222
3,680
700
‐6,549

3,755
3,634
3,317
3,212
3,049
1,266
3,771
700
‐10,060

4,237
4,529
4,515
4,316
‐889
7,266
1,200
6,237

4,194
4,356
4,337
3,922
2,332
5,975
1,200
4,058

4,138
4,127
4,100
3,396
6,628
6,628
0
1,153

4,096
3,954
3,922
3,002
9,850
9,850
0
‐1,025

Public option with subsidy, $M
3,178
Public option without subsidy, $M 1,165

3,229
1,223

3,298
1,301

3,350
1,360

Panel A Fixed outside option
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

Observed allocation, $M
No LIS link, $M
No LIS , no MA‐PD link, $M
Independent plans, $M
Monopoly ownership, $M
$0 voucher, $M
Optimal voucher, $M
Optimal voucher level, $
$ 1,500 voucher, $M

Panel B Adjusted outside option
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)

No LIS link, $M
No LIS , no MA‐PD link, $M
Independent plans, $M
Monopoly ownership, $M
$0 voucher, $M
Optimal voucher, $M
Optimal voucher level, $
$ 1,500 voucher, $M

Panel C Non‐market mechanisms
(16)
(17)

Table reports the level of welfare (accounting for the opportunity cost of government funds) under counterfactual
allocations with a fixed outside option, endogenously adjusted outside option, and non‐market mechansims for
different levels of the cost of public fund parameter (λ). Welfare is computed exactly as in baseline
counterfactuals, only varying the cost of public funds parameter. The baseline results assume that the cost of
public funds (λ) is equal to 1.3 ‐ these results are replicated in column (2).

57

F

Outside Option Adjustment

We proceed in several steps to calculate the adjustments in the value of MA-PD coverage for
consumers that allow for changes in the outside option in counterfactual equilibria. There
are slight differences across different counterfactuals, so we describe them separately.
We start with counterfactuals that compute PDP subsidies via bid-averaging, similar
to how the subsidies are calculated under the observed allocation. To compute MA-PD
adjustments for these counterfactuals, we first compute the counterfactual premium subsidy
for PDP plans. This subsidy represents the difference between PDP bids and premiums.
Next, we turn to the MA-PD market. In the data, we observe MA-PD premiums, but we do
not observe bids. We impute MA-PD bids using subsidization formulas that link bids and
premiums. One complication is that MA-PD plans can apply additional subsidies to their
bids, by pulling in resources from the medical part of the Medicare Advantage program. MA
plans can use their MA subsidy to “buy down” MA-PD premiums. The data on the degree
of “buy down” by plan is not publicly available. To circumvent this data gap, we turn to the
MA literature, specifically Kluender and Mast (2016), who report that the average MA-PD
buy down is $3.90 a month. We apply this adjustment to all MA-PD premiums, so that our
imputed monthly MA-PD bid is equal to basic MA-PD premium observed in the data plus
$3.90 adjustment plus $88.33 (which is the national average bid that was released by CMS
in 2010) and minus $31.94 (which was the base beneficiary premium released by CMS in
2010). With these imputed MA-PD bids in hand, we apply the counterfactual PDP subsidy
to each bid. In addition, we assume that MA-PD plans would apply the same “buy-down”
on top of any counterfactual Part D subsidy. Subtracting the counterfactual subsidy as well
as the $3.90 “buy-down” from each MA-PD bid gives us counterfactual MA-PD premiums
for each MA-PD plan. In many cases the counterfactual PDP subsidy together with the
“buy-down” are higher than the MA-PD bid. In these cases we impose a zero lower bound
on MA-PD premiums — this is in line with the observed allocation in which many MA-PD
plans have zero premiums.
In the next step, for each MA-PD plan we compute the difference between the observed
and counterfactual premium. We take the average of these differences across all plans, which
gives us one number that summarizes the average change in MA-PD premiums under the
application of the counterfactual PDP subsidy. We proceed analogously in counterfactuals
where subsidies are set as flat vouchers. The key difference is in how we compute the
counterfactual Part D subsidy. In the case of vouchers, this is simple, since we just apply the
same voucher level to imputed MA-PD bids. We then compute the resulting difference in
58

average MA-PD premiums for consumers, which is the outside option adjustment recorded
in row (26) of Table 5. We use this adjustment as our measure of the change in the value of
the outside option. In practice, the increase (decrease) in the attractiveness of the outside
option is computationally implemented as a symmetric decrease (increase) in the value of
the inside option (the constant for the inside option choice is adjusted).

G

Subsidy Design in LIS Market

Our baseline set of counterfactuals removes the LIS enrollees from the market. As discussed
in the paper, this was done for both pedagogical and technical reasons. Naturally, however,
determining optimal ways to provide subsidies to both markets is an important question to
consider. One must confront two questions when thinking about joint subsidy setting for LIS
and regular beneficiaries. First, what is the role of the LIS random assignment mechanism
in determining market outcomes? Second, in the range of counterfactual mechanisms, which
one would maximize total surplus across both the regular and LIS markets?
On the first dimension, LIS eligibility threshold plays an important role in disciplining
prices in this market. If one does not want LIS enrollees to face premiums or cost-sharing,
as is the current situation, then some kind of additional brake on premiums is needed when
combining the LIS and regular markets. Without any additional brake, the LIS market by
itself effectively functions as a market with 100 percent proportional subsidy, which would
lead to unbounded increases in premiums. In the current system, requiring that insurers
submit only one bid for both markets, combined with the LIS eligibility threshold, serves
as a brake on premiums. It introduces an elasticity of demand through the discontinuity
of not being assigned LIS enrollees if the plan’s premium is too high, even though the LIS
enrollees themselves have zero elasticity of demand for plans that are eligible for LIS random
assignment. Earlier work in Decarolis (2015) explores these issues in detail.
To shed light on the counterfactual mechanisms that could maximize joint surplus of LIS
and regular markets, we reintroduce LIS enrollees into the regular market in a supplementary
set of counterfactuals. We focus on what we consider the most policy-relevant environment:
fixed vouchers that can differ across the two market segments. We keep the bid-tying aspect,
imposing that insurers set one bid for both markets, but we allow the government to set
different voucher subsidies for LIS and regular consumers. We ran the analysis on a matrix
of LIS and regular vouchers that range from $0 to $1000 in $100 increments. We find that
under the double voucher counterfactuals, the optimal voucher for regular consumers is $800,

59

which is the same as the optimal voucher when just considering the regular market; for the
LIS consumers, lower vouchers result in general lead to higher surplus due to the very high
government cost of subsidizing this market. The differences across total surplus along the
LIS voucher dimension are relatively small as long as the LIS voucher is lower than $800. It
follows that setting the LIS voucher to be equal to the optimal voucher for regulars does not
lead to a significant decrease in total surplus.

H

Algorithm for Solving Counterfactual Equilibria

Several of our counterfactuals involve resolving equilibrium bids when the subsidy is an
endogenous function of the average bid. We solve these types of equilibria in a nested fixed
point algorithm. In the outer step, we first pose an average bid. We model the firms as
taking this average bid as fixed. This is not an unreasonable assumption, as the marginal
effect of any one firm’s bids on the average bid is going to be very small, as the bid is a
function of 1500 plans. Taking this average bid, b̄, as fixed, we then solve for the vector of
first-order conditions. After finding this vector of bids across all markets, we then compute
the enrollment-weighted average bid. We grid search over a range of average bids until we
find an average bid that correctly reflects the equilibrium average bid.
We use the sparse grids method described in Heiss and Winschel (2008) for the evaluation
of all integrals. Sparse grids are efficient and accurate multidimensional quadrature methods
with excellent performance. Estimation of the BLP specifications for each risk type of
regular enrollees was standard with the exception of imposing the lognormality of the price
coefficient. All programs and instructions on obtaining data are publicly available in the
technical supplement.

60

