NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ULTIMATE SOURCES OF
AGGREGATE VARIABILITY

Robert J. Shiller

Working Paper No. 2129

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 1987

I thank Ray Fair for very helpful collaboration. This research
was supported by the National Science Foundation under grant number
SES—8520075. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2129
January 1987

Ultimate Sources of Aggregate Variability

ABSTRACT

What, ultimately, is different from quarter to quarter or year to year
that accounts for the fact that macroeconomic variables change over these
intervals? That is, which are the biggest ultimate sources, in terms we may
say of tastes, technology, endowments, government policy, industrial
organization, labor-management relations, speculative behavior, or the like,
that change to cause this variability?
There are a bewildering variety of claims in the literature for such
ultimate sources. Far fewer efforts have been made to give a breakdown of
the variance of macroeconomic aggregates by source. The two notable such
breakdowns to date are by Pigou (1929) and Fair (1987).

The nature of the evidence for such breakdowns is discussed here, and
the possibility that a partial breakdown may be well-determined is put
forward. An unsuccessful attempt is made to detect a component of
macroeconomic fluctuations that is due to the weather.

Robert J. Shiller
Cowles Foundation
Yale University
Box 2125 Yale Station

New Haven, CT 06520

Any empirical model of the macroeconomy tells a story about the
exogenous shocks that are ultimately responsible for changes from year to

year in macroeconomic variables. The characterization of these sources of
aggregate variability is of fundamental importance. Economic theory cannot
be applied to data unless we know which economic relations are

them-

selves shocked, or at least unless we know something about the shocks.1
Recent models have differed widely in their characterizations of these

ultimate sources of aggregate variability. Finn Kydland and Edward Prescott
(1982) and others proposed models of the business cycle in which the only
shocks to the macroeconomy are certain kinds of shocks to technology. Robert
Barro (1977) proposed a model in which 78% of the variance of a (trans-

formed) U. S. unemployment rate 1946-73 is due to unexpected changes in the
money stock, and military employment and minimum wage variables. David
Lilien (1982) argued that most of the unemployment fluctuations in the U. S.
in the l970's were due to "unusual structural shifts," such as changes in
the demand for produced goods relative to services. James Hamilton (1983)
argued that dramatic oil price shocks preceded all but one of the recessions
in the U. S. since World War II, and that these oil price shocks were in
turn caused by events such as the nationalization of Iranian assets
the Suez crisis, and strikes by oil and coal workers.
Others have offered analyses that, while not necessarily claiming to
isolate the major source of aggregate fluctuations, do suggest that
qualitatively very different exogenous shocks may be quite important:
changes in desired consumption (Robert Hall, 1986), breakdowns in the
process of borrowing and lending (Ben Bernanke, 1981), breakdowns or estab-

1

lishments of cartels (Julio Rotemberg and Garth Saloner, 1986), or variations in attitudes toward union membership (Olivier Blanchard and Lawrence

Summers, 1986). Moreover, any of these shocks might occur in a foreign
country, and be transmitted by trade relations to the domestic economy. Some
analyses have even emphasized that something that ought to be, by any
fundamental logic, truly irrelevant to the inacroeconomy, may well impor-

tantly influence it if people think it does, e. g., Michael Woodford (1987).

The potential importance of such variables may be even more important than

suggested in some papers in the theory literature if we allow for nearrational expectations' as well as the strictly rational expectations.
Recent evidence (John Campbell and N. Gregory Mankiw (1987)) suggests

that innovations in real gross national product (GNP) show little tendency
to be reversed subsequently, and that the apparent tendency of GNP to be
trend-reverting may be due to spurious trend estimation.2 To the extent that
this is right, then variations in the same sources that explain long-run
growth (and explain why the U. S. is wealthier than India or China) would
also play a role in explaining short-run movements. If cultural or institutional factors influencing the dissemination and application of learning are

the reason, then changes in these factors may play a role. If economies of
scale are a factor deterniining intercountry differences, then the discovery

of new industries or regions of production functions where such economies

obtain might also play a role. Other possible factors are changes in
government expenditure on "infrastructure" formation, government policies
and other factors encouraging or discouraging initiative, or just population
growth and natural resource discoveries and depletion.

There seem to be a bewildering array of possibilities for ultimate

2

sources. It is important to understand that it is in principle possible that
they might all contribute substantially. It is technically possible that ten
different independent shocks each might make a contribution whose standard

deviation is 32% (

J0.l)

of the standard deviation of the aggregate. Thus,

for each of the ten factors there may be evidence that it is often very

important and occasionally dominates aggregate fluctuations. Or, it is
possible that 100 independent factors each may make a contribution whose
standard deviation is 10% of the aggregate standard deviation.
One is naturally led to wonder if there isn't any systematic way to
determine what is the relative importance of different sources of macroeconomic variability.

I. Pigou's Analysis of Ultimate Sources

A. C. Pigou's remarkable book Industrial Fluctuations (1929) appears
to be the most recent effort until now to provide such a systematic breakdown of sources. He grouped these sources into three broad categories. "Real

Causes" are "changes that have occurred, or are about to occur, in actual
industrial conditions and expectations based on these are true or valid
expectations." The principal real causes he cites are: (1) harvest variations, (2) inventions, (3) industrial disputes, (4) changes in fashion, (5)

wars, and (6) foreign demand and foreign openings for investment. "Psychological causes" are "changes that occur in men's attitude of mind, so that,
on a constant basis of fact, they do not form a constant judgment." "Autonomous monetary causes" are events affecting money, such as gold discoveries,

or changes in monetary or banking policies.3 He thought that removal of the
either the autonomous monetary or the psychological causes might reduce the

3

amplitude of industrial fluctuations by about a half. Removal of harvest
variations might reduce amplitude by about a quarter. He thought that other
real causes, such as inventions or work stoppages, had much less effect.4
Of the above sources, only one, the psychological, appears largely
absent from contemporary macroeconomics, though it might be interpreted as
present in some macroeconometric models in the form of error terms. Pigou
here describes swings in optimism or pessimism affecting investment that
arise "spontaneously," though perhaps ultimately as a "psychological reflex"
from some of the same factors that he calls "real" causes.5 He emphasized
that the swings occur simultaneously over a large number of people, because
of "psychological interdependence", "sympathetic or epidemic excitement", or
"mutual suggestion".6 He denied what we now call "rational expectations"

because there is "instability in the facts being assumed," though he
admitted that "if everything were absolutely stable, recurring every year
with exact similarity or in a perfectly regular progression, people could
not fail to be aware of the relevant facts and to form correct judgments."7
What sort of evidence might Pigou have that his list comprises the
important sources? Although he made some use of statistics, his method
involves judgment that appears to be based on anecdotal and narrative

historical evidence. Such a method may in fact be of some use for this
purpose. A rough sense of proportion about some economic mechanisms may
suggest that if certain factors would change exogenously, there would be
important macroeconomic consequences. If these factors did indeed change

historically, then the only question that remains is whether such a change
could be purely endogenous, i. e. , caused ultimately by other economic

variables. We may then have some idea whether these factors are likely to be

4

determined reliably by such other economic variables.
Consider for example the case of the autonomous monetary causes. In the
contemporary context, we know that the Fed can and does move interest rates,

which have a major impact on the economy. Of course, the announced goal of
the Fed currently is to stabilize the economy, and their efforts may indeed
attenuate the effects of other shocks. But since their methods are judgmental and imprecise, it is to be expected that they must also serve to
shocks themselves. By analogy, if we analyzed the movements of an airplane
in rough weather, we would expect to find that a component of the airplane's
movements is ultimately due to the pilot.

Methods like Pigou's are suggestive, but one might hope for something
more objective and quantitative.

II. Evidence from Large-Scale Macroeconometric Models
The large-scale macroeconometric models in the Keynesian tradition

appear to be the only models detailed enough to allow a decomposition of
output variability into a variety of constituent shocks as broad as that
proposed by Pigou. In these models, all macroeconomic fluctuations can be
traced ultimately to equation residuals or exogenous variables.

Ray Fair (1987) has undertaken stochastic simulations of Fair Model of
the U. S. economy to show what are the important shocks to the model. The

Fair model is similar to most large-scale macroeconometric models in that it
includes consumption and investment functions, and a national income
identity to yield an IS curve, and demand for money equations that gives
rise to an LM curve. Monetary policy is modelled by a Fed reaction function,
but fiscal policy is taken to be exogenous.

5

To take account of shocks to exogenous variables, he added simple autoregressive forecasting equations for 23 exogenous variables to the 30 structural equations in his model, producing a 53 equation model with basically
no exogenous variables. Taking as given data through 1981 second quarter, a
stochastic simulation, the base simulation, was run using a 53 x 53 (block
diagonal, with a 30 x 30 and 23 x 23 block) variance covariance matrix
residuals, and the variance of actual real GNP for one to eight quarters

ahead (that is, 1981 third quarter through 1983 second quarter). He then set
residuals for the eight quarters to zero in each of the 53 equations, one at
a time and then in groups, and ran new stochastic simulations. The variance

in real GNP in any one of these simulations as a percent of the variance in
the base simulation is a measure of the importance of the residual that is
analogous to the square of the relative amplitudes described by Pigou.

What is striking about the results is that the conclusions differ
substantially between one-quarter-ahead simulations and eight-quarter-ahead
simulations. For example, if we drop the error term to the inventory
investment equation real GNP variance falls by 29% relative to the base
simulation in the one-quarter-ahead simulations, but by only 4% in the

eight-quarter-ahead simulations. If we drop the error term in all investment
equations (consumer durables, housing, inventories and business fixed
investment) the corresponding figures are 50.6% and 13.4% . Thus, failure to

predict investment accounts for most of the model's difficulty in forecasting one quarter ahead, but relatively little of the difficulty in making
longer-run forecasts. Other sources of variability grow faster with time
horizon, so that uncertainty about investment is swamped out.

The story told by the Fair model is a complicated one, with no single

6

source of variability dominating. Consider the percentage variance declines
in the eight-quarter-ahead simulations for real GNP. Dropping all exogenous

variables' shocks reduced variance by 44%, the remainder being accounted for
by equation residuals. The principal grouping of exogenous variables was
government expenditure and transfers (federal, state, and local), for 21%,
and after that, exports, for 19%. Among endogenous variables, dropping

residuals on consumption on services and nondurables reduced variance by
10%, on the wage and price sector by 11%, and on import demand by 7%.
Dropping Federal Reserve policy shocks reduced variance by only 3%.

What sort of evidence is behind the Fair Model that gave rise to these
variance decompositions? The modelling effort relied on the assumption that

a large list of variables is exogenous. Many of these are not plainly exogenous to the model, though one might suppose that their relation to econo-

mic activity is in some cases tenuous, complicated, and involving long lags.
The modelling effort also relied on a set of restrictions on coefficients
that vastly overidentified the model. Because of these overidentifying

restrictions, the estimate of the reduced form was not at all the same as if
it had been estimated by merely regressing endogenous variables on exogenous

and predetermined variables. The restrictions sometimes have the effect, for
example, of inferring an effect of an exogenous variable on GNP from an
observed effect on a component of GNP.
These overidentifying restrictions were usually not explicitly dis-

cussed in the description of the model. Their specification appears to have
largely intuitive origins, just as was the case with the theory of Pigou.

One would wish that there were a method that was more capable of producing a
consensus in the profession as to ultimate sources.

7

III. Partial Specifications of Exogenous Sources
Many doubt the assumptions of the large-scale macroeconometric models.

But, certainly some of their assumptions must be uncontroversial. Certainly
some variables (e. g., the weather) would be judged genuinely exogenous by
just about everyone. It would be progress if we could all agree that such a

variable explains x% of macroeconomic variability, even if x is very small.
Might not a Cranger or Sims causality test for causality from such a
variable to real GNP produce such an agreement?
But it's hard to think of any single measurable clearly exogenous

variable that seems likely to have much impact on the aggregate economy. We
have a wealth of data at a finely disaggregated level, for example, information on individual patents each of which represents a component of technolo-

gical progress. But how to aggregate this information into a data series
that might be found to cause GNP? We cannot regress GNP on hundreds of
exogenous variables each of which explains a component of it, since we would
have more independent variables than available observations.

Weather variables are probably the most obvious candidates for a truly
exogenous variable that might really cause macroeconomic aggregates.
Regression models explaining individual crop yields (e. g., Wolfgang Baier,
1977) show that weather variables explain a substantial portion of year-to-

year crop variability. Often the R2 is over 0.5. But to achieve such R2 for
individual crops the researcher uses finely focussed weather variables that
differ across crops, such variables as "estimated June potential evapotran-

spiration," or "mean soil moisture reserves (mm) at heading stage in 0-100
cm. depth of soil." To explain aggregates well, these weather variables

8

should be measured at all the appropriate times and sites for the specific

crops to which they pertain. To explain weather effects on nonagricultural
productive activities would require yet very different weather variables. To
explain housing starts, we may use number of days in the year where temperature is below freezing, to explain restaurant meals the number of evenings
of inclement weather and highway conditions in urban areas, to explain
electricity demand an average of a nonlinear function of summer temperatures

above 75 degrees, to explain heating fuel demand an average of a nonlinear
function of winter temperatures below 60 degrees.8 It is not easy to find a
good aggregator of these shocks other than GNP (or its analogues) itself.
I have attempted (see Appendix) to find an effect on net national
product of a couple of weather indices that I constructed: a summer precipi-

tation variable and a summer temperature variable. The aggregation of
national weather data for these indices took the form of summing summer
precipitation data and summer temperature data over four different weather
stations across the United States. These are crude indices, only four sites

are used, and there is no accounting for the geographical distribution of
important crops. No significant effect could be found for net national

product 1895-85, or in an earlier sample period 1895-1929. That the weather
variables are not completely off the mark is indicated by the fact that the
precipitation index is highly significant in explaining gross farm product.

IV. Models as Aggregators

Finding an aggregator of very many exogenous shocks means building a

highly disaggregated model that explains many components of GNP and shows
how they interact to produce the total. If models are to be judged as

9

aggregators, then models may be deemed successful even if they have known
structural defects that would cause them to be rejected by conventional
criteria. An aggregator model might be only a naive or crude model. For
example, we might build a large Leontief input-output model. Data on the
implementation of technological innovations, weather, or other known
exogenous shocks could be used to adjust using engineering or statistical
data the elements of the input-output matrix and the matrix of factor input
requirements. We might find that an index of structural change in the model
aggregates successfully (e. g., Granger-causes GNP) even though we know that
the assumption of fixed proportions is highly restrictive.
Large macroeconometric model projects that deal laboriously with
details may thus yield insight into sources of variability. Existing large-

scale macroeconometric models may be viewed, even by those who accept some
of the well-known criticism of their theory, as having shown some such
success already (see Ray Fair and myself, 1987). It is natural to expect
that further progress can be made along these lines, taking account of
developments in economic theory and data, if people are willing to do more
work at a detailed level, and for many different countries.

V. Interpretation

There is as yet no consensus in the profession as to the quantitative

importance of

of the various ultimate sources. In my judgment, however,

the existing literature does suggest that a great multiplicity of sources is
at work: shocks to tastes as well as technology, shocks in government
policy, demographic shocks, shocks to organizations in labor or industry,
and "psychological" shocks of the kind described by Pigou and others.

10

Currently popular methodology results in models that attempt to make do
with very few shocks. These models are valuable as special cases but should
be interpreted as exploratory exercises. We should not consider it an
objective of research to simplify or reduce the array of exogenous shocks.

Simplicity is of course a virtue, but simple models cannot be construed as
an objective if the world is not simple.

11

APPENDIX

Weather Variables as Sources of Aggregate Variability
The idea that weather or other shocks to acriculture is an important
cause of macroeconomic fluctuations has a long history. W. Stanley Jevons
(1884) and A. Piatt Andrew (1906) thought that harvest data were substantially correlated with the business cycle. Henry Moore (1914) noted a correla-

tion

Q

i871-i9O8 between pig iron production and yield per acre of crops.

However, the statistical significance of these result is questionable, and
harvest or yield per acre variables may not be exogenous.

It is perhaps of some interest that Jevons (1884) proposed his theory
that sunspots affect real output on the notion that sunspots affect argi-

culture. Anyone who tries to study weather affects on aggregates must first
find an aggregate weather variable. If the solar cycle influences weather,

some measure of the solar cycle might be potentially attractive as such a
variable. There is an enormous literature, continuing today, claiming
evidence that the solar cycle does indeed have substantial effects on
weather and agriculture. However, one survey of the literature concludes

that "There is at present little or no convincing evidence of statistically
significant or practically useful correlations between sunspot cycles and
weather or climate at intermediate time scales. This conclusion seems
justified despite massive literature on the subject."1° Sunspots have no
discernable effect on real GNP (Sheehan and Grieves (1982)11
One might expect that weather variables might be demonstrated to have a
measurable impact on aggregates in less-developed countries, where agricul-

12

ture remains a very important component of total output. However, I have not

been able to find evidence that someone has documented such an impact.12 A
computer search revealed no evidence of any concern in the macroeconomic or

meteorological literature of the last 15 years with finding an effect of
weather on economic aggregates.
In my own explorations with U. S. data, a measure of aggregate economic

activity was regressed on six own lagged values and on a current and two
lagged values of weather variables in the regression. These are not,
strictly speaking, Cranger causality tests since the current values of the

weather variables are included among regressors. The assumption is that the
regressors are known to be exogenous, and we are as interested in effects of
current values of the variables as in the effects on lagged values.
Two weather variables were constructed, which were focused roughly on
agricultural production. One was a summer precipitation variable, the other

a temperature variable. Both variables were based on measurements taken at
four sites across the U. S..
In these regressions, no significant impact of either the temperature

or the precipitation variable could be found on aggregate net national
product. This remains true even in an early sample period, 1895-1929. Of
course, reducing the sample size reduces degrees of freedom; we may just not
have enough data to detect the impact of weather in this earlier sample
period.

The precipitation variable was highly significant in explaining gross
farm product. This suggests that weather ought to be considered an input to

aggregate variability, but that the effect is too small to be revealed in
regressions of NNP on weather variables.

13

Better-focussed weather variables might yield more substantial results.

However, it is perhaps unlikely that we can obtain long historical time
series on some finely focussed weather variables.

14

Table 1.

F Tests for Significance of Weather in Causing
Real National Aggregates

Sample

Dependent Variable

Weather Variables

18951985

log(NNP/NNP(-l))

P, P(-l), P(-2)

F(3,81)

= 0.925

18951985

log(NNP/NNP(-l))

T, T(-l), T(-2)

F(3,81)

= 0.169

18951985

log(NNP/NNP(-l))

P(-l), P(-2)

F(6,78)

0.653

18951929

log(NNP/NNP(-l))

F, P(-l), P(-2)
T, T(-1), T(-2)

F(6,22) = 0.792

18961985

log(GFP/GFP(-1))

P, P(-l), P(-2)

F(3,81)

4.263**

18961985

log(CFP/GFP(-1))

T, T(-l), T(-2)

F(3,8l)

2.182

18961985

log(GFP/GFP(-l))

P, P(-l), P(-2)
T, T(-l),

F(6,78)

2.814*

F,

F Statistic

T, T(-l), T(-2)

*Significant at the 5% level. **Significant at the 1% level.
Notes: In all regressions, six lags of the dependent variable as well as a
constant term and the weather variables indicated were included as independent variables. P is a precipitation index. T is a temperature index.

15

Sources of Data

P -

Precipitation

index, 1893-1985. This is the sum of precipitation indexes

for four weather stations: Blue Hill Observatory, Massachusetts, Dickenson
Experiment Farm, North Dakota, Fayetteville Experiment Station, Arkansas,
and Davis Agricultural College, California (the last starting 1911 only).
Each of the constituent indexes is +1 if summer (June, July, August)
precipitation is in the top quartile, -l if in bottom quartile, 0 otherwise.
Source: From "description of the year," series J166, J184, J202, and J226,
in Historical Statistics of the United States. Colonial Times to 1970,
updated using U. S. Weather Service Cliniatological Data Annual Summary,
tas S

liii.

T -

Temperature index, 1893-1985. This is the sum of temperature indexes for

four weather stations: Blue Hill Observatory, Massachusetts, Dickenson
Experiment Farm, North Dakota, Fayetteville Experiment Station, Arkansas,
and Davis Agricultural College, California (the last starting 1911 only).

Each of the constituent indexes is +1 if summer temperature is in the top
quartile, -l if in bottom quartile, 0 otherwise. Source: From "description
of the year," series J166, J184, J202, and J226, in Historical Statistics of
the United States. Colonial Times to 1970, updated using U. S. Weather
Service Climatological Data Annual Summary, passim.

NNP -

Real Net National Product in 1929 dollars, 1869 to 1985. For 1869 to

1975, this is from Milton Friedman and Anna J. Schwartz, Monetary Trends in
16

the United States and the United Kingdom, NBER and U. Chicago Press, 1982.
The series was updated using CITIBASE series GNNP82, net national product in
1982 dollars. Linkage of series is by ratio in 1975.

GFP -

Real Gross Farm Product in 1982 dollars, 1889-1985. Data 1889-1946 is

Kendrick (NEER) Series A21 from U. S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, Long-Term

Economic Growth. 1860-1965. Data starting 1947 is CITIBASE series GPBF82
(Gross Farm Product, Farm Sector) converted to annual series by annual
averaging. Linkage of series is by ratio in 1946.

17

REFERENCES

Andrew, A. Piatt, "The Influence of the Crops upon Business in American,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1906, 20, 323-53.
Baier, Wolfgang, Crop-Weather Models and their Use in Yield Assessments,
World Meteorological Organization, Technical Note No. 151, 1977.

Barro, Robert J., "Unanticipated Money Crowth and Unemployment in the United
States," American Economic Review, March 1977, 67, 101-15.

Bernanke, Ben S., "Bankruptcy, Liquidity, and Recession," American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings, May 1981, 71, 155-9.
Bessler, D. A. and J. L. Kling, "A Note on Tests of Cranger Causality,"

Applied Economics, i, No. 3, pp. 335-42, June 1984.
Blanchard, Olivier, and Lawrence Sununers, "Hysteresis and the European

Unemployment Problem," reproduced, M. I. T., February 1986.

Campbell, John Y., and N. Gregory Mankiw, "Permanent and Transitory
Components in Macroeconomic Fluctuations," American Economic Review
Papers and Proceedings, May 1987, fl.

Clark,

Peter K., "The Cyclical Component of U. S. Economic Activity,"

Research Paper No. 875, Graduate School of Business, March 1986.
Cochrane, John H., "How Big is the Random Walk Component of CNP?", mimeographed, University of Chicago, April 1986.

Deere, Donald R., and Jeffrey A. Miron, "The Cross Sectional Impact of
Unemployment Insurance on Layoff, Employment and Wages," reproduced,
Texas A. & M University, 1986.
Fair, Ray C., Sources of Output and Price Variability in a Macroecononietric

18

Model," Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper No. 815, Yale University,
1987.

Fair, Ray C., and Robert J. Shiller, "Econometric Modelling as Information
Aggregation,'t reproduced, Yale University, 1987.

Garber, Peter M., and Robert C. King, "Deep Structural Excavation? A
Critique of Euler Equation Methods," NBER Technical Working Paper No.
31, November, 1983.

Hall, Robert E., The Role of Consumption in Economic Fluctuations," in
Robert J. Gordon, Ed., The American Business Cycle: Continuity and
Change, Chicago: N. B. E. R. and University of Chicago Press, 1986.

Hamilton, James D., "Oil and the Macroeconomy since World War II," Journal
of Political Economy, April 1983,

228-48..

Jevons, W. Stanley, Investigations in Currency and Finance, 1884.

Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott, "Time to Build and Aggregate

Fluctuations," Econometrica 1982, .Q, 1345-70.
Lilien, David M., "Sectoral Shifts and Cyclical Unemployment," Journal of
Political Economy, August 1982, 2Qt 777-93.
Moore, Henry L., Economic Cycles: Their Law and Cause, Macmillan, New York,
1914.

Pani, P. K., "A Macro Model of Indian Economy with Special Reference to

Output, Demand and Prices 169-70 to 1981-2," Reserve Bank of India
Occasional Papers, 1984.
Pigou, Arthur. C., Industrial Fluctuations, 2nd. ed., London: Macmillan,
1929.

Pittock, A. Barrie, and Ralph Shapiro, "Assessment of Evidence of the Effect
of Solar Variations on Weather and Climate," in Solar Variability.

19

Weather and Climate, Geophysics Study Committee, Geophysics Research
Board, Commission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics and Resources,
National Research Council, National Academy Press, Washingon, D. C.
1982.

Rotemberg, Julio J., and Garth Saloner, "A Supergame-Theoretic Model of

Price Wars during Booms," American Economic Review, June 1986, j, 390407.

Sheehan, Richard G., and Robin Grieves, "Sunspots and Cycles: A Test of
Causation," Southern Economic Journal, pp. 775-7, January 1982.
Watson, Mark, "Univariate Detrending Methods with Stochastic Trends,"
mimeographed, March 1986.

Woodford, Michael, "Self-Fulfilling Expectations and Business Cycles,"
American Economic Review. Papers and Proceedings, May 1987.

20

Notes

l.Garber and King pointed out that contemporary Euler equation estimation
methods always assume that the shocks come in somewhere else in the model,
but that this assumption will not do for every equation in the model (1983).
2.Their conclusion has been criticised by Clark (1986), Cochrane (1986),
Watson (1986) and others, and so must be regarded as tentative.

3.Pigou, Industrial Fluctuations, pp. 35.

4.ibid., p. 219-25. Note that Pigou's breakdown denies independence of
factors: he thought eliminating one may reduce the impact of another.

5.ibid., p. 73.

6.Ibid. p. 86. On this point, compare Woodford (this issue).

7.ibid. p. 74.

8.Deere and Miron (1986) regressed U. S. layoff rates by state and industry
on state-specific (but not finely focussed) weather variables and other

variables. The weather variables were significant at the 90% level in about
25% of the regressions, and were very significant overall.

9.H. L. Moore (1914), p. 110.

10. Pittock and Shapiro (1982), p. 72.

21

11. Oddly, Sheehan, and Grieves (1982) concluded that GNP Granger-causes

sunspots. They thought this was an absurd result, and inferred that Granger
causality tests are unreliable. Bessler and Kling (1984) argued that the
Cranger causality tests are less vulnerable to such spurious conclusions if
certain precautions are taken.

l2.For example, P. K. Pani (1984) attempts to use weather variables to

explain aggregates in India, but does not find them significant. His weather
variables are not finely focussed.

22

