                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  SENTIMENTS, FINANCIAL MARKETS, AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

                                             Jess Benhabib
                                              Xuewen Liu
                                             Pengfei Wang

                                         Working Paper 21294
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21294


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2015




We thank Russell Cooper, Bernard Dumas (discussant), Guido Menzio, Yong Wang and seminar participants
at Peking University, Shandong University, Shanghai Jiaotong University, HKU, HKUST, 2014 Shanghai
Macroeconomics Workshop, and 2015 â€œInvestment and Production Based Asset Pricingâ€ Workshop
in CAPR at BI Norwegian Business School for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

Â© 2015 by Jess Benhabib, Xuewen Liu, and Pengfei Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including Â© notice, is given to the source.
Sentiments, Financial Markets, and Macroeconomic Fluctuations
Jess Benhabib, Xuewen Liu, and Pengfei Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 21294
June 2015
JEL No. E02,E44,G01,G20

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper studies how financial information frictions can generate sentiment-driven fluctuations in
asset prices and self-fulfilling business cycles. In our model economy, exuberant financial market
sentiments of high output and high demand for capital increase the price of capital, which signals strong
fundamentals of the economy to the real side and consequently leads to an actual boom in real output
and employment. The model further derives implications for asymmetric non-linear asset prices and
for economic contagion and co-movement across countries. In the extension to the dynamic OLG setting,
our model demonstrates that sentiment shocks can generate persistent output, employment and business
cycle fluctuations, and offers some new implications for asset prices over business cycles.


Jess Benhabib                                       Pengfei Wang
Department of Economics                             Department of Economics
New York University                                 Business School
19 West 4th Street, 6th Floor                       Hong Kong University of Science
New York, NY 10012                                   and Technology
and NBER                                            pfwang@ust.hk
jess.benhabib@nyu.edu

Xuewen Liu
Deaprtment of Finance,
Hong Kong University of Science
 and Technology
Clear Water Bay, Kowloon
Hong Kong
xuewenliu@ust.hk
1        Introduction

The nancial sector plays a central role in the modern economy, as is evident from the wide and
deep macroeconomic impact of the recent global nancial crisis in 2007-2009. There are at least
two channels through which the              nancial sector can inÂ‡uence the aggregate real economy (see,
e.g., Levine (2005)): 1) the nancing of capital; 2) the production of information about investment
opportunities. An exploding             nancial accelerator literature has shown, both theoretically and
empirically, that the nancial sector can inÂ‡uence business cycles through the nancing channel.1
In this paper we explore the feedback eÂ¤ect from the nancial market to the real economy due
to the informational role of nancial prices. Unlike the conventional view that prices can help to
eÂ¢ciently allocate economic resources in a free market by signaling relevant information to economic
actors (Hayek (1945) and Grossman and Stiglitz (1980)), we argue that the informational role of
 nancial markets in allocating resources can be impaired by investorsÂ’ sentiments or sunspots.
The sentiment-driven asset prices in turn may inÂ‡uence real activities and shape macroeconomic
Â‡uctuations.
        We are motivated by a large empirical nance literature that has documented that investor
sentiment in nancial markets can aÂ¤ect asset prices (see, e.g., the surveys by Hirshleifer (2001)
and Baker and Wurgler (2007)). The aggregate (macro)-level asset prices are in particular sensitive
to investor sentiment, which in turn impacts corporate                  nancing and investment (Lamont and
Stein (2006)). The recent empirical work of Angeletos, Collard and Dellas (2014) also nds that
business cycle Â‡uctuations can be attributed to sentiments. Levchenko and Pandalai-Nayar (2015)
identify the sentiment shock as being more important than other factors in explaining business
cycle comovement between the US and Canada.
        We formalize our idea in a simple baseline three-period rational expectations model consisting
of a continuum of investors and workers. The investors live from period 0 to period 1. They
are the initial capital owners. The workers live from period 1 to period 2. The only fundamental
uncertainty in the economy is the aggregate total factor productivity (TFP) shock in the last period
(period 2). We assume, in the baseline case, that only the investors have information about the TFP
shock. The TFP shock in period 2 directly aÂ¤ects the workersÂ’ return on capital holdings in period
2 (which are their labor income savings from period 1) and hence their incentive to supply labor in
period 1. As capital and labor are complements in production, the workersÂ’ labor supply in period
1 in turn aÂ¤ects the investorsÂ’ return on capital held from period 0 to period 1. In such an economic
environment, the investors in period 0 will need to forecast the level of aggregate economic activity,
that is, employment and output in period 1. On the other side, forming expectations about the
behavior of the investors, the workers can obtain information from the price of capital in period
    1
        See, e.g., the seminal work of Bernanke and Gertler (1989) and Kiyotaki and Moore (1997).


                                                           1
0 about the return on their capital savings for period 2. This two-way interaction between the
 nancial market and the real economy is at the heart of our mechanism of sentiments.
      Suppose that somehow exuberant sentiments lead the investors to believe there will be a boom
in output in period 1. Then they conjecture that the demand for capital and therefore return on
capital will be high. Competition in the nancial market will push up the capital price in period 0.
However, the workers cannot tell whether the high capital price is due to the investorsÂ’ sentiments
or their signal of a high TFP in period 2. After solving a signal extraction problem, they will
attribute the high price partially to a high TFP in period 2. Their actual labor supply will indeed
increase, resulting in an actual boom in output in period 1. So the investorsÂ’ initial belief will be
con rmed. We show that there exist sentiment-driven equilibria, in which the capital price reÂ‡ects
both sentiment and TFP shocks. Under these rational expectations equilibria, Bayesian optimal
signal extraction will result in an actual labor supply of workers that is always equal to investorsÂ’
conjectured labor supply.
      The sentiment-driven Â‡uctuation studied in the baseline model links the Keynesian notions of
Â“beauty contestsÂ” and Â“animal spiritsÂ”. What matters to an individual investor is not his own
assessment of the fundamentals, but his conjecture about the actions of other investors, as in a
standard beauty contest game. Under the feedback eÂ¤ect, the asset price can inÂ‡uence real decisions
and generate complementarities between the actions of investors. Thus, the sentiment shocks in
 nancial markets endogenously drive the fundamentals and generate aggregate output Â‡uctuations.
      We also derive implications for asymmetric non-linear asset prices and for economic contagion
and co-movement across countries. First, asset price informativeness is typically asymmetric with
respect to fundamentals. Asset price collapses occur sometimes with a small change in economic
fundamentals (see, e.g., the evidence documented by Culter, Poterba, and Summers (1989)). Our
sentiment-driven equilibria can generate such asymmetric responses in asset prices. We show that
our sentiment-driven equilibria can be non-linear: When the fundamental value is higher, the asset
price only reÂ‡ects fundamentals; when the fundamental value is lower, the asset price is driven
by both fundamentals and sentiments. In such non-linear equilibria, the price informativeness is
asymmetric in fundamentals and a large discontinuity can exist in the asset price. Second, empirical
evidence suggests that asset price contagion cannot be explained by fundamentals.2 A prominent
feature of the recent Great Recession is that it was global. Perri and Quadrini (2013) document
that all major industrialized countries experienced extraordinarily large and unprecedentedly syn-
chronized contractions in output and asset prices during the Great Recession. Our model is able to
characterize such synchronization in the sentiment-driven equilibria. Due to the informational feed-
back between the nancial market and the real economy, investorsÂ’ perception of synchronization
  2
      See, e.g., the ndings of Karolyi and Stultz (1996) and King and Wadhwani (2000).




                                                        2
across countries can lead to actual synchronization.
       Finally, we extend our baseline model to a dynamic setting of an overlapping generations (OLG)
model. In the dynamic setting, the current savings of workers become the capital stock in the
subsequent period. The capital stock therefore is dynamically linked across periods through savings.
In the sentiment-driven equilibria, capital accumulation, as well as output and employment, is
driven not only by the private future productivity signals received by investors, but also by their
sentiments. Hence, i.i.d. sentiment shocks can generate persistent Â‡uctuations in output and
unemployment. As persistence is a de ning feature of all business cycles, this extension illustrates
that sentiments also hold the promise of explaining the persistence in real data. While building a
full DSGE model and confronting it with data is beyond the scope of this paper, the mechanisms
developed herein can lay the ground for such work.
       The OLG model also generates a number of predictions about asset prices over the business
cycle. First, we show, with a closed-form solution, that the risk premium is increasing in sentiment
volatility. When the sentiment volatility increases, the asset price contains noisier information
about future fundamental shocks and hence the investors demand a higher premium on the risky
investment. This implies that an economy with higher investor sentiment volatility in nancial
markets will have a higher risk premium in asset returns. Emerging markets, for example, are
more likely to experience higher sentiment volatility because of lower transparency in information
disclosure. This may partially explain why these countries typically have larger risk premia than
the developed economies (see Salomons and Grootveld (2003) for the empirical evidence). The same
argument also implies that as information transparency improves in the same country over time, the
risk premium will decline. This is consistent with the evidence showing that the equity premium
has declined (Lettau, Ludvigson and Wachter (2008), Fama and French (2002)) after the enactment
of new disclosure requirements in 1980 (Fox et al. (2003)). Second, sentiment-driven equilibria are
often asymmetrical, and occur during economic downturns. Our theory therefore suggests that the
risk premium is countercyclical, consistent with a large recent empirical literature.3 Third, our
model shows that time-varying sentiment volatility yields a time-varying risk premium. Several
empirical studies have documented that investorsÂ’ sentiment may be aÂ¤ected by the change of
seasons.4 The seasonal change in the sentiment volatility thus can generate seasonal self-ful lling
equilibrium Â‡uctuations in the risk premium. Our model hence provides a rational framework
to explain the nancial market seasonality, which is in general regarded as a market anomaly in
the context of the eÂ¢cient market hypothesis.5 Interestingly, the seasonality in asset returns is
   3
     See Campbell and Shiller (1988) and Fama and Frech (1989) for classic examples.
   4
     Saunders (1993) nds that the number of hours of sunshine aÂ¤ects peopleÂ’s mood and hence market returns.
Hirshleifer and Shumway (2003) provide some international evidence on the sunshine eÂ¤ect. Kamstra, Kramer and
Levi (2003) provide further compelling evidence of a link between the seasonal depression due to the seasonal aÂ¤ective
disorder (SAD, also known as winter blues or winter depression) and seasonal variations in stock returns.
   5
     See De Bondt and Thaler (1987) for an excellent survey of the empirical evidence.


                                                          3
primarily a small- rm phenomenon, consistent with our theoretical prediction. Baker and Wurgler
(2006) document that smaller rms are more likely to be aÂ¤ected by investor sentiments.
    Related literature.         Our paper relates to several strands of literature. First, our paper adds
to the growing recent literature that studies the feedback eÂ¤ect from nancial markets to the real
side of the economy due to informational frictions. A number of contributions to this literature use a
partial equilibrium model to study one rm or a de-facto-one- rm aggregate economy. For example,
a rm manager obtains information about the return on his own rmÂ’s investment (typically ex-
ogenously given) from nancial markets. Bond, Edmans and Goldstein (2012) provide an extensive
survey of this literature.6 Luo (2005), Chen et al. (2007), Bakke and Whited (2010), Foucault and
Fresard (2014), among others, provide empirical evidence for the feedback eÂ¤ect. Our work brings
this growing micro literature on informational feedback eÂ¤ects to a macroeconomic model. In our
model with a general equilibrium framework, agents form expectations and undertake investments
based on information from nancial markets about the aggregate state of the economy. A key fea-
ture of our model therefore is that the noisy information and prices are correlated through general
sentiments about the aggregate economy, and can generate non-fundamental rational expectations
equilibria.7 We believe that our study of the feedback eÂ¤ect operating through the macroeconomy
is important. In fact, when rms decide how much to produce, the market demand for their goods
would be heavily inÂ‡uenced by the level of aggregate demand and the state of the economy. On the
other hand, the nancial price indexes, which reÂ‡ect forward-looking views of most sophisticated
investors, are widely seen as a barometer of the aggregate economy.
    Our paper is closely related to Angeletos, Lorenzoni and Pavan (2010) and Goldstein, Ozde-
noren and Yuan (2013). These papers also study the interaction between the real sector and the
 nancial market. In Angeletos, Lorenzoni and Pavan (2010), information spillover Â‡ow from the
real sector to the nancial sector, which can generate a strategic complementarity in investment,
amplify non-fundamental shocks, and create multiple market equilibria under certain conditions.
The non-fundamental shocks in their model come from the correlated errors in information about
the fundamentals. In contrast, the non-fundamental shocks in our model come from investorsÂ’ sen-
timents. We establish the existence of a continuum of sentiment-driven equilibria and also study
nonlinear asymmetric sentiment-driven equilibria. In fact, a long tradition in macroeconomics has
resorted to models that feature multiple equilibria to explain Â“non-fundamentalÂ” Â‡uctuations in
   6
     For the theoretical work, see, e.g., Fishman and Hagerty (1992), Leland (1992), Dow and Gorton (1997), Sub-
rahmanyam and Titman (1999, 2013), Hirshleifer et al. (2006), Foucault and Gehrig (2008), Goldstein and Guembel
(2008), Ozdenoren and Yuan (2008), Bond et al. (2010), Kurlat and Veldkamp (2012), Sockin and Xiong (2012),
Goldstein and Yang (2013), and Huang and Zeng (2014).
   7
     The multiplicity of equilibria in our model may be understood in terms of the correlated equilibria induced by
market sentiments. See Aumann (1987), Maskin and Tirole (1987), Aumann, Peck and Shell (1988), Peck and Shell
(1991), Bergemann and Morris (2011), and Benhabib, Wang and Wen (2015). Correlated signals can coordinate
actions of rms and of workers to produce additional rational expectations equilibria.



                                                        4
terms of Â“animal spiritsÂ”. Equally importantly, we apply our mechanism to the international syn-
chronization of business cycles across countries as well as dynamic OLG economies, which provides
a novel channel to explain how nancial markets can aÂ¤ect business cycle Â‡uctuations.8 Goldstein,
Ozdenoren and Yuan (2013) study information spillovers from the nancial market to the real sec-
tor,9 as in our paper. Â“Trading frenziesÂ” can arise in their model as the capital provider in the
real sector optimally extracts information about investment returns from the nancial price driven
by the speculatorsÂ’ correlated signals. The key mechanism of their model is that the informational
feedback between the nancial market and the real sector can generate complementarities in trad-
ing of speculators, namely, speculators all wish to trade like others. The authors introduce noise
traders and focus on parameters that give a unique equilibrium, diÂ¤erent from ours.10
       Second, our work is related to a set of papers that emphasize informational frictions in explain-
ing asset price puzzles. Yuan (2005) and Barlevy and Veronesi (2003) explain the asymmetric and
nonlinear response in asset prices in a framework of informational frictions in an exchange economy.
We show that our sentiment-driven equilibria can also generate such asymmetric responses in asset
prices in a production economy. Gaballo (2013) shows that the introduction of an arbitrarily small
degree of price dispersion can generate large departures from the perfect-information benchmark.
Like ours, his model is fully microfounded. His mechanism crucially depends on dispersed informa-
tion. Equilibrium multiplicity in our model exists even without dispersed information and instead
stems from the two-way feedback between the nancial market and the real economy. Benhabib
and Wang (2013) construct a sequential trading model without noise traders, in which short-
term traders condition their trades both on private signals from fundamentals and on sunspots.
Investors purchase the assets in centralized markets using market prices to form Bayesian expecta-
tions about nal period returns. Benhabib and Wang (2013) show the existence of a continuum of
non-fundamental sunspot equilibria. Our paper diÂ¤ers from theirs in that the connection between
sentiments and the real economy is absent in their paper and they do not address feedback eÂ¤ects
from the nancial market to the real economy arising from informational frictions.
       Third, our paper is related to some other recent work on self-ful lling business cycles, which has
generated renewed interest after the recent nancial crisis.11 Perri and Quadrini (2013) use self-
   8
     Allen, Morris and Shin (2006) also study market structures with sequential trading by diÂ¤erentially informed
short-horizon traders who receive noisy public signals. They show that the public signals can indeed be over-weighted
by short-term traders interested in predicting average expectations relative to the private information of nal payoÂ¤s,
giving rise to a Keynesian beauty contest in market prices. See also Morris and Shin (2002).
   9
     See also Goldstein, Ozdenoren and Yuan (2011) and Goldstein and Yang (2013).
  10
     See also Albagli, Hellwig and Tsyvinski (2013) where informed and uninformed traders face limits on their asset
positions. Demand Â‡uctuations from realizations of fundamentals, or from noise traders, alter the identity of the
marginal investor. This can drive a wedge between prices and expected returns from the perspective of an outsider,
and generate excess price volatility relative to fundamentals. Albagli, Hellwig and Tsyvinski (2014) endogenize
security cash Â‡ows as the outcome of rm decisions.
  11
     Using a diÂ¤erent approach with bilateral trades and Bayesian updating of information, Angeletos and LaÂ’O (2012)
also derive sentiment-driven business cycles without using sunspots or multiple equilibria.


                                                          5
ful lling expectations to explain a global recession in a two-country model with nancial integration.
Similarly, Bacchetta and Wincoop (2013) construct a two-period two-country model with both
a   nancial linkage and a trade linkage. The self-ful lling beliefs in their model rely on a real
complementarity between future and current output. These papers do not, however, study the two-
way interaction between the nancial market and the real economy emphasized in our paper. In a
closed-economy setting, Benhabib, Wang and Wen (2015, 2013) study self-ful lling business cycles
in a modi ed Dixit-Stiglitiz monopolistic competition model. In their model, rms receive quantity
signals on their idiosyncratic demand and aggregate output. Firms, in optimally choosing their
output, observe their signal and partially attribute it to aggregate demand, which then becomes
self-ful lling. Financial markets play no role in their model. In contrast, our paper emphasizes the
two-way feedback between the nancial market and the real economy and shows that the nancial
markets can be a source of endogenous signals generating self-ful lling Â‡uctuations.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out the baseline model and Section 3 presents
the equilibria. Section 4 generalizes the baseline model by allowing more general information
structures. Section 5 studies further implications of the model on non-linear asset prices and
economic contagion and co-movement. Section 6 extends the model to a dynamic economy setting.
Section 7 concludes.


2    The Baseline Model

We start with a three-period baseline model with a nancial sector and a real sector. The nancial
sector consists of a continuum of investors with unit mass. The real sector has a representative
competitive rm and a continuum of workers with unit mass. The investors live from period 0 to
period 1 but only consume in period 1. Each investor is endowed with K0 = 1 unit of capital in
period 0. Investors trade their capital in the nancial market with price P0 in period 0. Each unit
of capital will allow its owner to receive R1 units of dividend ( nal goods) in period 1, where R1
will be endogenized. The workers live from period 1 to period 2 but only consume in period 2. The
workers supply labor in periods 1 and 2 to the competitive rm. The workers use their wage income
in period 1 to purchase nal goods to save, thereby becoming the owners of capital in period 2.
The competitive rm combines capital and labor to produce nal goods that can be used both for
consumption and as new capital according to the production function

                                         Yt = At Kt Nt1   ;                                      (1)

where At is productivity (TFP), Kt is the rmÂ’s capital input and Nt is the rmÂ’s labor input in
period t = 1; 2. Capital fully depreciates after production in each period.



                                                 6
       The Firm The rm solves a trivial problem. Let Wt and Rt be the real wage and the rental
price (dividend) of capital, respectively. The pro t maximization yields

                                             Wt = (1             )At Kt Nt ;
                                                                   1
                                             Rt =         A t Kt       Nt1     :


       Financial Market and Information Structure The nancial market opens in period 0 and
the investors trade their capital among themselves, based on their private information. Trading
capital is equivalent to trading shares of rms in the nancial market. That is, equivalently, the
representative rm has K0 = 1 unit of shares, each of the continuum of investors holds K0 = 1
unit of shares in period 0, and each share receives R1 units of dividend ( nal goods) in period 1;
hence, the capital price can be interpreted as the equity (share) price of the representative rm.
The only fundamental uncertainty in the economy is A2 . Speci cally, A1 = 1 and log A2  a2 
     1 2
                 
               2 . We assume that a is realized in period 2. But the investors, as the initial capital
N    2  a ;  a                   2

holders, receive advance information (news) about a2 in period 0.12 The workers do not have
information about a2 , but they can extract some information about it from the price of capital. We
start oÂ¤ with this simple information structure in the baseline model to highlight the key mechanism
of our model. Later we will generalize the information structure.
       The investors The continuum of investors receive a perfect signal about a2 in period 0. We
index investors by j for notational convenience. Investor j sells 1                        Kj1 capital in period 0 and
holds Kj1 to period 1. His consumption in period 1 is hence given by

                                            Cj1 = P0 (1      Kj1 ) + R1 Kj1 :

The investorÂ’s optimal capital holdings, Kj1 , are given by

                                                    max E[Cj1 j        j0 ],
                                                    Kj1


that is,
                                             max E[ (R1       P0 ) Kj1 j       j0 ];                               (2)
                                              Kj1

where      j0   = fa2 ; P0 g =   0   is the information set of investor j in period 0.
       The workers We index workers by i. A worker consumes in period 2 and supplies labor to
the rm in both periods 1 and 2. The workersÂ’ utility function is given by

                                                             1+                2    1+
                                        Ui = Ci2            Ni1                    Ni2 ,
                                                    1+                    1+
  12
    A large literature in macroeconomics has documented the importance of news shocks in explaining stock prices
and business cycles (see, e.g., Beaudry and Portier (2006)).


                                                             7
for    > 0. Worker iÂ’s budget constraints are

                                                    Ki2 = W1 Ni1 ;                                       (3)

                                                Ci2 = R2 Ki2 + W2 Ni2 :                                  (4)

For simplicity, we assume that the workers supply their labor inelastically in period 2, i.e., Ni2 = 1.
This is automatically true if we assume               2   = 0. Allowing an elastic labor supply in period 2
complicates the algebra but does not change the model results qualitatively. Later when we study
the OLG model, overlapping generations are systemic and this assumption becomes unnecessary.
Denote by      i1   = fR1 ; W1 ; P0 g =    1   the information set of worker i in period 1. Using the budget
constraints of (3) and (4), the workerÂ’s labor decision in period 1 is given by
                                                                                      
                                                                        1+
                                    max E R2 W1 Ni1                    Ni1    j   i1       :             (5)
                                     Ni1                        1+

      Figure 1 summarizes the timeline of the model setup, where sentiment shock z will be explained
shortly.




                                                 Figure 1: Timeline

      The rst-order condition of the investorsÂ’ problem in (2) is

                                                  0 = E[R1      P0 j   0]                                (6)

and the rst-order condition of the workersÂ’ problem in (5) is

                                                  Ni1 = W1 E[R2 j      1 ]:                              (7)




                                                            8
We also have
                                                                                   1
                           W1 = (1       )A1 K1 N1 , R1 = A1 K1                        N11                 (8)

and
                                                                                   1
                                W2 = (1         )A2 K2 , R2 = A2 K2                    :                   (9)

With the above rst-order conditions, we are ready to de ne an equilibrium formally.


3     Equilibrium

De nition 1 An equilibrium is a set of price functions P0 = P0 (a2 ); W1 = W1 (a2 ); R1 = R1 (a2 ); W2 =
W2 (a2 ); R2 = R2 (a2 ), and the optimal capital holdings Kj1 = K1 (a2 ; P0 ) for the investors, and the
labor choices Ni1 = N1 (R1 ; W1 ; P0 ) for the workers and their capital holdings Ki2 = K2 (R1 ; W1 ; P0 )
in period 2 such that: 1) Equations (6) to (9) are satis ed; 2) all markets clear
                                           Z
                                                Kj1 dj = 1
                                           Z
                                                Ni1 di = N1
                                           Z
                                                Ki2 di = K2 :


    We are now ready to characterize the equilibrium. Noticing that the workers are homogeneous
and have the same information set, i.e.,       i1   =   1,      we focus on the symmetric equilibrium in which
Ni1 = N1 . Finding the equilibrium involves solving for the key endogenous variable N1 from
equation (7). So we rst solve W1 and R2 and express them in terms of N1 . The following steps
solve the equilibrium.


    1. Given K1 = 1 and N1 , we have

                                                        1
                                  R1 =          K1          N11    = N11       ;
                                  W1 = (1               )K1 N1        = (1         )N1 .


    2. The capital in period 2 is given by the labor income in period 1. Hence we have

                                        K2 = W1 N1 = (1                 )N11       .


    3. We then express R2 in terms of N1 :

                                                    1
                                                                                             1
                                 R2 = A 2 K2            = A2 (1           )N11                     .


                                                            9
  4. In a symmetric equilibrium where Ni1 = N1 , equation (7) becomes

                                        +1 (1   )            1
                                   N1               =                (1      ) E [A2 j   1] .


                          1                                                  1
  5. We normalize             (1   ) = 1 and denote  =                   +1 (1   )   and thus obtain

                                                                 
                                      N1 = fE [A2 j      1 ]g        = fE [A2 jP0 ]g .                 (10)

     Notice that     1   is equivalent to fP0 g as R1 and W1 are both functions of N1 .

  6. Finally, the price P0 should be consistent with the investorsÂ’ rational expectations (equation
     (6)), namely,
                                                                                       
                                   P0 = E N11       j   j0       = E N11          ja2 ; P0 .            (11)

   Equations (10) and (11) are the two key equations characterizing the equilibrium. Equation (10)
says that the workersÂ’ labor supply depends on their expectation of the real aggregate TFP shock,
A2 . The nancial market aÂ¤ects the real economy through the information channel as the workers
try to learn A2 from the nancial price. Equation (11) states that the price of capital depends
on the marginal product of capital, which in turn depends on the real economic activities Â– the
aggregate labor supply N1 . The price of capital in the nancial market is higher if the investors
expect an increase in the real activities. Such two-way feedback can generate rich complementarities
between the nancial sector and the real sector and may result in multiple equilibria. Since solving
for other variables such as W1 , K2 and Y2 is straightforward via steps 1-4, we will mainly focus on
solving N1 and P0 in what follows. We will show three types of equilibria of the model.
   Figure 2 illustrates the two-way feedback between the nancial market and the real economy.




        Figure 2: Two-way feedback between the nancial market and the real economy

                                                        10
3.1   Fully-revealing Equilibrium

We rst study an equilibrium where the nancial price, P0 , fully reveals the fundamental uncertainty
a2 . We call this equilibrium the fully-revealing rational expectations equilibrium. We have the
following proposition.

Proposition 1 There exists a fully-revealing equilibrium in which

                                        log P0 = log    + (1      )a2 ,                                 (12)

and
                                               log N1 = a2 .                                            (13)

Proof. The proof is straightforward. It is easy to see that equations (10) and (11) both hold.

   Equation (12) implies that the capital price in period 0 fully reveals a2 . This is a self-ful lling
equilibrium. If all investors believe that the dividend R1 in the next period depends on a2 , compe-
tition in period 0 will result in that in equilibrium the price must fully reveal a2 . Since the nancial
price fully reveals a2 , the workers face no uncertainty in deciding their labor supply in period 1.
As a result, their labor choice is N1 = exp(a2 ). Since R1 = N11                , the capital dividend indeed
depends on a2 and it veri es the investorsÂ’ initial beliefs. Hence, (12) and (13) constitute a rational
expectations equilibrium. In this equilibrium, the nancial market is informationally eÂ¢cient, as
the uninformed workers can learn valuable information from the informed investors through the
asset price.
   For the fully-revealing equilibrium, the outputs in periods 1 and 2 are

                                log Y1 = (1       ) log N1 = (1          ) a2

and
                 log Y2 = log fA2 [(1       ) Y1 ] g = a2 +     [log(1      ) + (1     ) a2 ] ,

respectively.


3.2   Non-revealing Equilibrium

However, there also exists a non-revealing equilibrium where the capital price does not reveal
information about a2 at all. We characterize such an equilibrium in the following proposition.

Proposition 2 There exists a non-revealing equilibrium in which

                                               log P0 = log

                                                       11
and
                                                     log N1 = 0.

Proof. The proof is straightforward and hence omitted.


   If investors in period 0 think that the workersÂ’ labor supply is N1 = 1 and hence the dividend per
unit capital R1 = N11            is independent of a2 , then their advance information about a2 becomes
irrelevant. The competition in the nancial market then drives P0 = R1 =                         N11     =   . Under
such a price the workers can learn nothing about a2 from the capital price, and thus by equation
(10) their labor supply is determined by the unconditional mean of A2 , which by our assumption
is one. Hence, N1 = 1 or log N1 = 0. Again, the investorsÂ’ initial belief that N1 = 1 is veri ed.
   For the non-revealing equilibrium, the outputs in periods 1 and 2 are

                                          log Y1 = (1         ) log N1 = 0

and


                              log Y2 = log fA2 [(1      ) Y1 ] g = a2 +      log(1   ),

respectively.


3.3   Sentiment-driven Fluctuations

We now show that there are other types of equilibria in our model. We call them sentiment-driven
equilibria. Suppose that the investors in the             nancial market also observe a non-fundamental
shock, z    N (0;  2z ),   which is aÂ¤ected by their sentiment or psychology. We assume that z and
a2 are independent. That is, the information set in period 0 becomes                      j0   = fP0 ; a2 ; zg =     0.

We are interested in the equilibrium in which the aggregate labor supply in period 1 takes the
form log N1 = n
               + a2 + z, where n
                                  and  are coeÂ¢cients to be determined. That is, in such an
equilibrium sentiments matter. We have the following proposition.

                                                                                                2 2
Proposition 3 There exists a continuum of equilibria indexed by 0   2z                       4 a,   in which the
price P0 is given by
                                    log P0 = p + log    + (1       ) (a2 + z)                                    (14)

and
                                             log N1 = n
                                                       + a2 + z;                                                 (15)




                                                         12
where                                                 q
                                                      2 2     4 2z
                                        =                                                                  (16)
                                          2                 2
and p = n
          = 0.
Proof. See Appendix.


   When investors perceive that log N1 = a2 + z, they believe that the dividend per unit capital,
R1 , is aÂ¤ected not only by the fundamental shock a2 but also by the sentiment z. Competition in
the nancial market in period 0 will then drive the price to P0 = R1 = N11                       . With this price,
investors are happy to trade. However, for the workers, the price P0 now only partially reveals the
fundamental shock a2 . The workers face a signal extraction problem Â– using the price to forecast a2 .
The actual labor supply will then be a function of P0 . The size of the fundamental shock relative to
the sentiment shock has to satisfy some restrictions so that the actual labor supply of the workers
is exactly the same as investors think it would be. This explains condition (16). When condition
(16) holds, the initial belief of the investors that log N1 = a2 + z is veri ed. To see this, by (10),
                                                                
the actual labor supply of the workers is given by log N1 =  E [a2 ja2 + z] + 12 var(a2 ja2 + z) ,
                                         2a                                 2a
which can be calculated as log N1 =    2 2
                                        a + 2z
                                                    (a2 + z). Note that     2 2
                                                                              a + 2z
                                                                                          = 1 by rearranging (16).
Therefore, P0 and N1 as de ned in equations (14) and (15) indeed constitute a rational expectations
equilibrium.
   For the sentiment-driven equilibria, the outputs in periods 1 and 2 are, respectively,

                              log Y1 = (1      ) log N1 = (1          ) (a2 + z)

and
               log Y2 = log fA2 [(1   ) Y1 ] g = a2 +        [log(1      ) + (1       ) (a2 + z)] .

   The sentiment-driven Â‡uctuation studied in this subsection links the Keynesian notions of
Â“beauty contestsÂ” and Â“animal spiritsÂ”. What matters to an individual investor is not his own
assessment of the fundamental a2 and thereby its impact on dividend R1 , but his conjecture about
the actions of other investors, as in a standard beauty contest game. This comes about because
of the feedback from the rst stage (period 0) to the second stage (period 1), which generates en-
dogenous complementarities between actions of investors. At the same time, the sentiment shocks
in the nancial market aÂ¤ect the real economy through the asset price and generate Â‡uctuations in
aggregate output as if they were driven by Â“animal spiritsÂ”. A long tradition in macroeconomics has
resorted to models that feature multiple equilibria to explain the observed Â“animal spiritsÂ”-styled
Â‡uctuations. In our model, sentiment-based asset prices with informational feedback drive multiple




                                                       13
equilibria.13,14
    Three remarks on the sentiment-driven equilibria are in order. First, in our model, the capital
price P0 is always equal to the dividend R1 in period 1 (no arbitrage). Nevertheless, sentiment-
driven equilibria exist because sentiments can endogenously drive the dividend R1 in period 1.15
Figure 3 illustrates the continuum of sentiment-driven equilibria. The fully-revealing equilibrium
and the non-revealing equilibrium analyzed in the previous two subsections are two special cases of
the sentiment-driven equilibria. Note that sentiment-driven equilibria exist for  z 2 (0; 2  a ], which
means that sentiment-driven equilibria are more likely when  a is higher.




                   Figure 3: A continuum of self-ful lling sentiment-driven equilibria

                                                                   1
    Second, as in the nance literature, we can use            V ar(a2 jP0 ) ,   the reciprocal of the variance of a2
conditional on the price, to measure the price informativeness about a2 . It is easy to calculate

                                                  1            1
                                                           =          ,
                                         V ar(a2 ja2 + z)      2a
   13
      In our model setup with asymmetric periods of consumption (of investors and workers), there are two frictions:
the limited participation friction as in a typical OLG model and the informational friction. If we focus on the second
friction only, we are able to prove that the second-best constrained eÂ¢ciency corresponds to the fully-revealing
equilibrium and the sentiment-driven equilibria are welfare reducing, which gives the welfare implication of the
sentiment-driven Â‡uctuations.
   14
      In our model with a competitive nancial market, the investors are price-takers and the collusion among them is
precluded. Empirically, in a large nancial market, collusion may be diÂ¢cult. Nonetheless, for theoretical models of
collusion in nancial markets on individual stocks, see Allen and Gale (1992) and also Peck (2014). For recent work
related to ours that also excludes collusion see, for example, Hellwig and Veldkamp (2009), Angeletos, Lorenzoni and
Pavan (2010) and Goldstein, Ozdenoren and Yuan (2013).
   15
      Sentiment-driven equilibria would not be possible if the labor supply is assumed to be constant or exogenously
given. To see this, let us assume that N1 = 1 without loss of generality. Equation (11) then immediately implies a
unique price P0 = . This diÂ¤ers from Benhabib and Wang (2013), where the sentiment can drive the asset price to
diverge from its underlying dividend.




                                                         14
which is monotonically increasing in . Hence, if the continuum of equilibria in Proposition 3
(Figure 3) are indexed by  2 [0; ], we can rank them in terms of price informativeness.
         Third, it is worth noting that trading based on sentiments in our model is diÂ¤erent from noise
trading in at least two aspects. i) Noise traders are irrational and unaware of their mistakes. In
contrast, the investors in our model are fully rational. Although they are aware that a sentiment
shock is non-fundamental, it is optimal for them to trade on the shock if their peers choose to do
so. ii) Noise trading volatility is exogenous and can be arbitrary. By contrast, sentiment volatility
                                                                    2 2
in our model has an endogenous upper limit, i.e.,  2z             4 a   as shown in Proposition 3.
         Role of the assumptions         Here we discuss two assumptions in our model. First, informed
investors are short-lived and they have long-lived information. This assumption is made mainly for
the purpose of introducing the OLG model later in a consistent setup.16 Allen, Morris and Shin
(2006) provide detailed explanations and motivation for this assumption. In the context of our
model, the reason for making this assumption is even stronger. The investors are the initial capital
holders; naturally they may have some advance information about a2 . More importantly, nancial
markets can aggregate the dispersed information of investors (Grossman and Stiglitz (1980)). We
will show in the next section that the investors in our model do not need to have perfect information
or an information advantage over the workers. Second, we assume a Cobb-Douglas production
function under which capital and labor are complementary in production in period 1. Our model
mechanism is robust to the setting with a general CES production function.17


4         Generalized Information Structures

In the baseline model, we assumed a simple information structure to highlight the core mechanism
of our model. In this section, we generalize our information structure along several dimensions and
show that our result is robust.
    16
     For our baseline model, we can instead assume that investors are long-lived and their consumption occurs in
period 2. This would not change the result of our model under the reasonable assumption that limited commitment
frictions prevent trades between the investors and the workers before workers make their labor decision and obtain
labor income in period 1. Note that investorsÂ’ capital in period 0 fully depreciates in period 1 and is not carried over
to period 2. Formally, if investors consume in period 2, an investorÂ’s optimal capital trading decisionin period
                                                                                                                 10 is
given by maxE[Cj2 j j0 ], where Cj2 = R2 Cj1 , Cj1 = P0 (1 Kj1 ) + R1 Kj1 and R2 = A2 K2 1 = A2 N11                   by
             Kj1

noting K2 = Y1 = N11 ; we Â“misuseÂ” notation and use Cj1 to denote savings carried over to period 2 for expositional
simplicity. It is easy to show that the above optimization problem is equivalent to maxE[Cj1 j j0 ].
                                                                                      Kj1
    17
     Under a general CES production function, our result of the existence of multiple equilibria does not change.
It is easy to see that the fully-revealing equilibrium and the non-revealing equilibrium will always exist. For the
sentiment-driven equilibria, only the Â“directionÂ” might be diÂ¤erent, i.e., the relationship between the asset price and
the labor supply can be negative if labor and capital are substitutes.




                                                          15
4.1      Dispersed Information and the Implementation of Equilibria

So far, we have assumed that investors have perfect information about fundamental shock a2 and
sentiment shock z. We now allow for dispersed information. Speci cally, the information set of
investor j is assumed to be      j0   = fP0 ; a2 +"j ; z+ j g, where a2 +"j is his private signal about a2 and
z +  j is his private signal about sentiment z. It is also assumed that "j  N (0;  2" ),  j  N (0;  2 ),
cov("j ;  j ) = 0, and that "j as well as  j is independent across investors.
       Under this setup, we can immediately conclude that Propositions 1 and 3 still hold based on the
concept of rational expectations equilibrium (REE).18 In fact, under the Â“eÂ¢cientÂ” market price
given in (14) that already fully reÂ‡ects a2 + z, any noise (i.e., "j and  j ) on top of a2 and z have
no value in inferring R1 = N11            when N1 is given by (15). That is, when investors trade capital
in the nancial market, they do not need to condition their decisions on their private information
as the market price is informative enough compared with their private signal.
       The question, however, is where the Â“eÂ¢cientÂ” price comes from in the rst place. Such REEs
raise a natural question about equilibrium implementability (see, e.g., Vives (2014) for more dis-
cussions). Traders do not condition their demand and supply on their private information, yet
the market price somehow magically aggregates their private information and becomes eÂ¢cient.
In what follows, we study the implementation of the sentiment-driven equilibrium as well as the
fully-revealing equilibrium under dispersed information of investors.
       We adopt the approach proposed by Vives (2014) (also used in Benhabib and Wang (2013)).
Unlike in a classic REE trading game where a trader submits his demand conditional on both the
market price and his private signal, in VivesÂ’ trading game, a trader submits his demand function
(schedule) conditional on his private signal only, and then the market auctioneer collects the demand
schedules from all traders and sets a price that can clear the market.
       To tailor to the setting of private valuations in Vives (2014), we make an additional but weak
assumption. Beside the dividend R1 , a scrap value or private bene t in proportion to R1 is derived
when investors hold capital to period 1, in the spirit of Holmstrom and Tirole (1997). Speci cally,
the gain per unit of capital that investor j obtains by holding that capital to period 1 is R1 euj ,
                 1 2       2
                             
where uj  N     2  u ;  u measures the heterogeneity across investors in private bene t of holding
capital. Investor j receives private signals sj0 = a2 + uj + "j and lj0 = z +  j in period 0; that is,
 j0    = fa2 + uj + "j ; z +  j g. In his eyes, the fundamental value of the capital includes not only a2
but also uj , so it is natural to assume that his private signal sj0 concerns a2 + uj and not a2 .
       For simplicity, we also assume that the net demand for capital for an investor is limited up to
  18
    The non-revealing equilibrium in Proposition 2 naturally holds. We are interested in the fully-revealing equilib-
rium and the sentiment-driven equilibrium where the capital price eÂ¢ciently aggregates the dispersed information of
investors.



                                                         16
d > 0 and short sales are not allowed. Denote the demand schedule by dj (p0 ; sj0 ; lj0 ), meaning
that investor j 0 s submitted demand function is dj (p0 ) conditional on his private signals being sj0
and lj0 , where p0  log P0 . We have the following proposition.

                                                                                                               2 2
Proposition 4 There exists a continuum of self-ful lling equilibria indexed by 0   2z                       4 a,   in
which the demand schedule of investors is
                                      8                                                      1 2
                                      <                      p0 (u +log )         2u +        + 2"
                                                                                            2 
                                        d   if sj0 + lj0        1           +              2u
                                                                                                          u
               dj (p0 ; sj0 ; lj0 ) =                                                                             (17)
                                      :   1                                             otherwise

and the equilibrium price is given by

                                   p0 = u + log     + (1         ) (a2 + z)

and
                                             log N1 = a2 + z

                              log R1 = p0    u = log      + (1       ) (a2 + z);

where                              q                                          
                                                                           
                                   2 2    4 2z                  1 1+d d  2u
                        =                          and      u = r                  .
                             2         2                              2     2    2
                                                                      u +  " + 2

Proof. See Appendix.


   The equilibrium outcome in Proposition 4 is essentially the same as that in Proposition 3. The
diÂ¤erence is that now there is an explicit mechanism for aggregating the dispersed information of
investors into the asset price, which in turn inÂ‡uences the decision of workers. The equilibria are
still self-ful lling. Depending on investorsÂ’ expectation of p0 (i.e., the extent to which the market
price will reÂ‡ect fundamentals versus sentiments), they will choose diÂ¤erent demand schedules,
which will in turn result in diÂ¤erent market clearing prices. Sentiments endogenously drive the
dividend R1 in period 1. Note that when  2z = 0,  2 = 0 and lj0 = 0, the equilibrium corresponds
to the fully-revealing equilibrium about a2 . In other words, the fully-revealing equilibrium is a
special case of the sentiment-driven equilibrium.
   Since we have analyzed the REE implementation under dispersed information, in the follow-
ing sections we will apply the concept of REEs directly if investors or workers have dispersed
information.




                                                     17
4.2     Private Information of Workers

In this subsection, we assume that not only investors but also workers receive private information
about the TFP shock and the sentiment shock. We show that our result of sentiment-driven equi-
libria is robust to the alternative information structures under REEs. For expositional convenience,
we repeat the equilibrium conditions of (10) and (11) here:

                                                                           
                                          N1 = fE [A2 j               i1 ]g                                                         (18)

                                                                               
                                        P0 = E N11                    j    j0       :                                               (19)

   First, we assume that not only investors but also workers receive signals about A2 . Speci cally,
we assume that the information set for investors in period 0 is                             j0   = fP0 ; aI2 + "j ; z +  j g and the
information set for workers in period 1 is        i1   = fR1 ; W1 ; P0 ; aH                      I
                                                                          2 + vi g, where sj0 = a2 + "j is the
private signal about a2 received by investor j in period 0 and si1 = aH
                                                                      2 + vi is the private signal
about a2 received by worker i in period 1. We assume that cov(a2 ; aI2 ) > 0, cov(a2 ; aH
                                                                                        2 ) > 0 and
cov(aI2 ; aH                             I
           2 ) = 0. For instance, a2 = !a2 + (1        !) aH                           I H
                                                           2 , with 0 < ! < 1 and cov(a2 ; a2 ) = 0, satis es
the assumptions. Without loss of generality, we assume that a2 = aI2 + aH
                                                                        2 . In addition, we assume
                                                           1 2     2                                  1 2       2
the unconditional distributions to be aI2  N (            2 I ; I )     and aH
                                                                                2  N(                2  H ;  H ).

   Under the above alternative information structure, we have the following proposition.

                                                                                                                       2 2
Proposition 5 There exists a continuum of sunspot equilibria indexed by 0   2z                                      4 I ,   in which
the price P0 is given by
                                  log P0 = log         + (1               ) (aI2 + z);                                             (20)

and
                                                                                   
                             log W1 = log(1            )              aI2 + z + aH
                                                                                   2 ;                                              (21)
                                                       
                                      log N1 = aI2 + z + aH
                                                            2 ;                                                                     (22)

where                                                  q
                                                           2  2I        4 2z
                                        =                                             :                                           (23)
                                              2                 2 I
Proof. See Appendix.

   The intuition behind Proposition 5 is similar to that behind Proposition 3. When workers decide
on their labor supply, they need to forecast a2 = aI2 + aH
                                                         2 . They can infer a2 from three pieces of
information:   nancial price P0 , wage W1 and their own signal si1 = aH
                                                                      2 + vi . Wage W1 eÂ¢ciently
aggregates all private signals, si1 , to clear the labor market. This can be understood by noting that
                                            1
the total labor demand is N1d = 1W1              , which only depends on the wage. The worker labor

                                                           18
supply is characterized by some function N1s such that Ni1  s = N s (W ; aH + v ; P ). The market
                                                                  1   1 2      i   0
                                 R s
clearing condition requires N1 = N1 (W1 ; a2 + vi ; P0 )di, which means W1 = W (P0 ; aH
                             d              H
                                                                                        2 ) for any
function N1s . Since workers know P0 , they can infer aH
                                                       2 perfectly from W1 .

         We can further generalize the information structure by allowing investorsÂ’ and workersÂ’ signals
about A2 to be correlated. In addition, we can allow workers to also receive some information
about sunspots and their signals on sunspots to be correlated with those of investors. Speci -
cally we assume that a2 = aI2 + d + aH
                                     2 , where d is a random variable independent of a2 and
                1 2       2
d  N(          2  d ;  d );   aI2 and aH
                                          2 have the unconditional distributions as previously speci ed with
                                                              z
cov(aI2 ; aH
           2 ) = 0. Similarly, we assume that                z   = z I +  + z H , where z I ,  and z H all have the stan-
dard normal unconditional distribution, and cov(z; ) = 0 and cov(z I ; z H ) = 0. The information
set for investors is assumed to be             j0   = fP0 ; aI2 +d+"j ; z I ++ j ; d; g and the information set for
workers is              = fR1 ; W1 ; P0 ; aH          H                                    2
                   i1                      2 +d+vi ; z ++& i ; d; g, where & i  N (0;  & ). In other words, the
signals about both a2 and z are correlated across investors and workers, where d and  represent
common information for investors and workers. Under this alternative information structure, we
                                                                                                      2 2
show that there exists a continuum of sunspot equilibria indexed by 0   2z                         4 I ,   with

                                        log P0 = log     + (1           ) (aI2 +  z z I + d),

                                                                                               
                                   log W1 = log(1        )             aI2 +  z z I + d + aH
                                                                                               2 ,
                                                                        
                                            log N1 = aI2 +  z z I + d + aH
                                                                             2 ,

where  is given by                                               q
                                                                  2  2I      4 2z
                                                    =                                 .
                                                         2               2 I
The proof is very similar to that of Proposition 5 and hence is omitted. A conclusion we can
draw is that as long as there is informational segmentation between investors and workers, but not
necessarily asymmetry (i.e., the investors need not have an information advantage over the workers),
there exist sunspot equilibria.19 So without loss of generality, in the following sections, we assume
that only the investors have information about the fundamental shock A2 and the sunspot z.


5         More implications

5.1         Non-linear Asymmetric Equilibria

So far we have focused on symmetric equilibrium for the sake of tractability. We now consider the
possibility of asymmetric equilibria, which can be appealing for example if prices are generally more
    19
         We owe this summary to the referee.



                                                                   19
informative when fundamentals are strong. Also, asset price collapses can sometimes occur with
a small change in economic fundamentals (see, e.g., the evidence documented by Culter, Poterba,
and Summers (1989)). Several studies (e.g., Yuan (2005) and Barlevy and Veronesi (2003)) have
attempted to explain this asymmetric and nonlinear response in asset prices in a framework of
informational frictions in an exchange economy. We now show that our sentiment-driven equilibria
can also generate such asymmetric responses in asset prices in a production economy.
   To illustrate the intuition, we rst consider a simple case. We conjecture that the equilibrium
price takes the following form:
                                  8
                                  <         log    + (1       )a                 if a2  0
                       log P0 =                               h 2             i                 ;                            (24)
                                                               ( 12  a )
                                  : log     + (1     ) log                       if a2 < 0
                                                                ( 12  a )


                                                                                              ( 21  a )
where  () denotes the c.d.f. of the standard normal distribution. As                         ( 21  a )
                                                                                                             < 1, it follows
that log P0 < log     iÂ¤ a2 < 0. So, from the price log P0 given by (24), the workers can infer
perfectly whether a2 < 0 or not. We now verify that the price given by (24) indeed forms a
rational expectation equilibrium. After observing the price log P0  log , the workers can infer
that a2 = (log P0   log )= ((1        )). In this case, the workers face no uncertainty and hence their
labor supply is log N1 = a2 according to equation (10). By (11), the asset price is hence given by
(24). On the other hand, if the workers see that the nancial price is below log , they know for
                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                 (       a )
sure that a2 < 0. Their rational expectation of A2 is thus E[A2 jP0 ] = E[A2 jA2 < 1] = ( 12 ) by
                                                                                               2 a
                                                                      h            i
                                                                        ( 21  a ) 
the property of lognormal distribution. So their labor supply is N1 = ( 1  )        according to (10).
                                                                                          2    a
By (11), the asset price is hence veri ed to be (24). To summarize, when a2  0 the equilibrium is
fully revealing; when a2 < 0 the equilibrium is non-revealing.
   Despite its simplicity, the above example provides two general insights. First, by construction
the price is more informative when the fundamentals are strong. Second, the price is discontinuous
in the fundamental value measured by a2 . There is a discrete jump around a2 = 0. That is, a large
fall in the asset price occurs with a small decrease in a2 around a2 = 0 if (1                         ) or  a is big.
   Now we consider non-linear asymmetric sentiment-driven equilibria. Again, we are interested
in an equilibrium with                  (
                                            log    + (1       )a2 if a2  0
                             log P0 =                                                 ;                                      (25)
                                             log    + p(a2 ; z)        if a2 < 0

where z is the sentiment and p(a2 ; z) is some nonlinear function. The diÂ¢culty of constructing
such an equilibrium lies in that both the distribution function of z and the price function p() have
to be consistent with rational expectations. Denote by f (z) the density function of z. Conditions




                                                     20
(10) and (11) imply that a rational expectation equilibrium must satisfy

                            p(a2 ; z) = (1             ) log E[ exp(a2 )jp(a2 ; z)] < 0;                                                 (26)

for all a2 < 0 and all possible z. Since the distribution of z can in principle be arbitrary, it
is impossible to give a complete characterization of all nonlinear asymmetric equilibria. And in
general, the equilibrium price function will not permit a closed-form solution. Hence, we focus on
a special case of the equilibrium which yields closed-form solutions for tractability. Suppose that z
is distributed with the following density function
                                     8
                                     <                          0                          if z  0
                           f (z) =                                          (z+ 2
                                                                                 a =2)
                                                                                       2
                                                                                                      ;                                   (27)
                                     :       1                  1              2 2
                                         ( 12  a )
                                                          a
                                                                p
                                                                    2
                                                                       e          a        if z < 0

                                                                                               1 2    2
                                                                                                           
that is, z follows the truncated normal distribution of z  N                                  2 a; a        with z < 0. In other
words, a2 and z are independently and identically distributed conditional on a2 < 0. We have the
following sentiment-driven equilibrium.


Proposition 6 Suppose that z has density function given by (27). There exists an asymmetric
sentiment-driven equilibrium in which the price takes the form given by (25) with
                                                                                            
                                                                           exp(a2 ) + exp(z)
                             p(a2 ; z) = (1                ) log                              :                                          (28)
                                                                                    2

Proof. See Appendix.
                                                                                                                   h              i
                                                                                                                       1+exp(z)
   Since exp(z) < 1 with probability 1, we have p(a2 = 0 ; z) = (1                                        ) log          2           < 0 with
probability 1. This means that when fundamental a2 declines from positive to negative, there is a
downward jump in the asset price with probability 1. More importantly, in the limit, the decline
is purely driven by the sentiment shock if the realized a2 happens to be 0 . An arbitrarily small
deterioration in economic fundamentals can generate a large crisis in the asset price and real output
under a very pessimistic sentiment shock z.
   It is easy to show that there are an in nite number of non-linear asymmetric sentiment-driven
equilibria. In fact, we can assume that z = (z1 ; z2 ; :::z ) and z is i.i.d. with density function (27),
where  = 1; 2;...    . So there are an in nite number of asymmetric sentiment-driven equilibria




                                                                    21
indexed by , where
                                                            2                         3
                                                                         X
                                                             6 exp(a2 ) +     exp(z ) 7
                                                             6                         7
                                                             6            =1          7
                                 p(a2 ; z) = (1       ) log 6                         7:                      (29)
                                                             6            +1           7
                                                             4                         5


Cleary, when    = 0, the equilibrium corresponds to the fully-revealing equilibrium in Proposition
1; when    = +1, the equilibrium corresponds to the non-revealing equilibrium for a2 < 0, as in
(24).


5.2     Contagion and Comovement

A large empirical literature has documented contagion in asset price movements (see Yuan (2005)
for a discussion of the ndings in the literature). In particular, empirical evidence suggests that con-
tagion cannot be explained by fundamentals and is asymmetrical in market downturns and upturns
(see, e.g., Karolyi and Stultz (1996), King and Wadhwani (2000), Ang and Chen (2002), Connolly
and Wang (2003)). In attempting to explain the international synchronization of business cycles
during nancial crises, while the theory of the credit channel proposed by Perri and Quadrini (2013)
is useful in explaining such synchronization among industrial countries, it alone cannot explain why
many emerging countries with heavy capital controls can also fall into a deep recession (Chudik
and Fratzscher (2012)). In this subsection, we use our sentiment-driven equilibrium (informational
channel) to illustrate economic contagion and comovement.
   We now extend the model economy to a continuum of countries/markets indexed by `. For
simplicity, we assume that these countries are in autarky and there are no trade or nancial linkages.
The productivity shock in country ` in period 2 is given by

                                                  log A2` = g + a2`  a
                                                                      ~2` ,

                 1 2     2
                                                                                              1 2    2
                                                                                                          
where g  N      2 g ; g       is a global shock that aÂ¤ects all country and a2`  N         2 a; a       is the
i.i.d. country-speci c technology shock. This setup with the assumption of an exogenous global
shock can be regarded as a reduced-form model of the two-country model with endogenous explicit
trade linkage in Benhabib, Liu and Wang (2014).
   We assume that country 0 (for example, the U.S.) is special in that its                  nancial price may
inÂ‡uence actions of the investors in other countries. This is to capture the initial trigger of the
economic contagion. For simplicity, again we assume that the investors in country ` know g and




                                                             22
a2` perfectly in period 0. So the equilibrium in each country can be characterized by

                                                 N1` = fE [A2` jP0` ; P00 ]g

and
                                                                                 
                                              P0` = E N11      jg; a2` ; P0` ; P00 .

   It follows immediately that the fully-revealing equilibrium in which log P0` = log                              + (1
 )(g + a2` ) and log N1` = (a2` + g) constitute a rational expectation equilibrium in the open
economy. In this equilibrium, contagion is purely driven by the global shock g. We now show that
an informational contagion can occur, where contagion means that a pure idiosyncratic shock in
country 0 can generate a synchronization of asset prices and real outputs across countries.
   We have the following equilibrium that exhibits contagion through idiosyncratic technology
shocks. For ` = 0,

                                           log P00 = log      + (1       )(g + a20 ),
                                           log N10 = (g + a20 ),

and for ` > 0,
                                                  (                  "                                        #)
                                                                       2g                    1  2a  2g
           log P0`       = log + (1       ) (a2` + z` ) +  2                (g  +  a 20 ) +
                                                                    a +  2g                 2  2a +  2g
                                           "                                         #
                                                 2g                   1  2a  2g
          log N1`        = (a2` + z` ) +  2           (g + a20 ) +                   ;                             (30)
                                              a +  2g                2  2a +  2g
                   p                                         
                      2 2   4 2z
with  =   2            2            , where z`  N 0;  2z is the sentiment shock in country ` > 0. In the
above equilibrium, the workers in country ` > 0 infer the global shock g from price P00 and the
local shock a2` from price P0` (together with P00 ). In other words, local price P0` does not provide
any additional information regarding g beyond what P00 provides; price P0` only provides noisy
signals (with sentiment noise) about a2` .
                                                                              h 2                       2 2 i
                                                                                 g                1 a g
   In the extreme case of  z = 0 and  = 0, we have log P0` = log +(1 ) 2 +     2 (g + a20 ) + 2  2 + 2
                                                                                a   g                  a    g
                h 2                     2 2 i
                   g               1 a g
and log N1` =  2 +2 (g + a20 ) + 2 2 +2 for ` > 0, that is, local price P0` becomes completely
                         a     g                  a   g
uninformative and country 0 and country ` are perfectly synchronized. Country 0Â’s idiosyncratic
technology shock, a20 , aÂ¤ects other countries. The intuition behind the above equilibrium is the
following. In the open economy, the asset price in country 0 essentially becomes another sunspot
for investors in country `, in addition to their country-speci c sentiment shock. In the above equi-
librium, investors in country ` > 0 Â“overreactÂ” to the asset price in country 0. Investors in all other



                                                             23
countries believe that workers in their country think recessions in the U.S. will have a global impact.
With this belief, investors in country j will ignore local shock a2` and try to short capital when
they see a fall in the asset price in the U.S. caused by idiosyncratic shock a20 . They will therefore
push down the capital price in country j, as these investors are afraid that workers in their country
will reduce their labor supply and thus lower the return on capital. When the workers see a fall in
capital prices P0` and P00 , they will partially attribute the fall in the asset prices to a global shocks
g, leading them to reduce the actual labor supply. So investorsÂ’ perception of synchronization leads
to actual synchronization.
    In Appendix B, we also provide an asymmetric sentiment-driven equilibrium that exhibits con-
tagion.


6    The OLG Model

In this section, we extend our baseline model to the OLG framework. We show that our sentiment-
driven equilibria are robust to a dynamic setting, and we derive additional economic insights.
First, the OLG model provides a dynamic equilibrium setting to study the process of saving and
capital accumulation. As in the baseline model, we study the sentiment-driven rational expectations
equilibria. The diÂ¤erence lies in the dynamic setting where the current savings of workers become
the capital stock in the subsequent period. The capital stock therefore is dynamically linked
across periods through savings. Its accumulation, as well as output and employment, is therefore
driven not only by the private future productivity signals received by investors, but also by their
sentiments. Second, the OLG model delivers novel implications for asset prices over the business
cycles.
    Timeline In each period t, there are ve stages:


Stage 1: (Information) The old generation of workers become investors (capitalists) and a new gen-
                                                                                                           1
      eration of workers are born. Both capitalists and workers know the history At         1   = fA gt =0
      and the current-period At . Only capitalists receive private signals about At+1 to be realized
      in the next period.

Stage 2: (Capital trading among capitalists) Capitalists trade capital among themselves in a -
      nancial market before production based on the historical information At , their private signals
      about At+1 , their private signals about sentiment shock zt , and the capital price Pt . The
      sentiment shock has prior distribution zt  N (0;  2z ) and is i.i.d. across time.

Stage 3: (Production) Based on their capital stock, wage Wt and productivity At , capitalists hire
      workers and produce. By inferring information about At+1 from prices Pt and Wt , workers


                                                   24
      decide on their labor supply.

Stage 4: (Consumption) Capitalists obtain their production revenue net of labor cost, clear the
      balance (if any) of capital trade in the current period and the balance (if any) of bond trade
      in the previous period, consume and then die. Workers obtain their labor income.

Stage 5: (Savings of workers) Workers can save their labor income in bonds or invest in capital. A
      bond that has claims on consumption units in stage 4 in the next period is traded. Workers
      use their labor income to purchase the bond or short the bond. The balance of their income
      is invested in capital for the next period. The net supply of the bond is 0. The economy
      repeats stages 1 to 5 in the next period.


   In this section, we assume that agents have a risk-averse utility function (speci cally, Epstein-
Zin preferences). An agentÂ’s lifelong utility function is

                                                      Nt1+      
                                                                   1
                                U (Nt ; Ct+1 ) =           + ECt+1   .
                                                      1+

where Nt is his labor supply as a (young) worker in period t, Ct+1 is his consumption as an (old)
capitalist in period t + 1, and parameter  < 1 measures risk aversion.
   Compared with the baseline model where K0 = 1 is exogenous, we may think that in this section
K0 is endogenized and also a bond market is introduced.
   Investors (Capitalists)         In this section, for simplicity, we assume that there are no rms.
Instead, a capitalist (investor) directly hires workers to produce. This is equivalent to the case
where each capitalist owns one rm which hires workers to produce. The value of the rm is the
capital income of the rmÂ’s owner Â– the output (revenue) of the rm minus its labor cost. Trading
capital is equivalent to trading the value (shares) of a rm in the nancial market.
   Let us rst consider the problem of capitalist j who receives private signals at+1 +"jt and zt + jt
(where log At+1  at+1 ); that is, his information set in stage 2 is          jt   = fKt ; Pt ; At ; at+1 +"jt ; zt + jt g.
He solves
                                                              h              i 1
                                                                                  
                                 Vt ("jt ;  jt ; Kjt ) = max E Cjt j    jt                                           (31)
                                                      Mjt

where
                                          h                                              i
                                                                    1
                        Cjt = Pt Mjt + max At (Kjt           Mjt ) Njt             Wt Njt :                           (32)
                                          Njt

We explain (32). In stage 2, the capitalist can sell Mjt  Kt to other capitalists and keep Kt                         Mjt
for production. In stage 3, the capitalist hires labor, Njt , and produces according to production
function
                                                                  1
                                      Yjt = At (Kjt        Mjt ) Njt     .


                                                      25
So the rst term of Cjt in (32) is the income from selling capital in stage 2 and the second term
is the capitalistÂ’s production revenue net of labor cost (or his net capital income of production) in
stage 3.20 It is easy to verify later that a capitalist faces no uncertainty about his consumption
level Cjt given his information set           jt ,   so (31) can be written as

                                         Vt ("jt ;  jt ; Kjt ) = max E [Cjt j           jt ] :                       (33)
                                                                       Mjt


      We work by backward induction from stage 3 to stage 2. In stage 3, given Kjt ; Mjt , Wt and At ,
capitalist jÂ’s rst-order condition with respect to Njt in (32) is

                                                                      1
                                               At (1              )
                                         Njt =                              (Kjt       Mjt ):                         (34)
                                                   Wt

From (34), we see that given Wt , a capitalistÂ’s labor hiring is in proportion (linear) to his capital
stock, Kjt       Mjt . By substituting (34) into (32), Cjt becomes

                                                     Cjt = Pt Mjt + Yjt ;                                             (35)

where
                                                                      1
                                                         At (1     )
                                      Yjt = At                                  (Kjt     Mjt ).                       (36)
                                                             Wt
The second term of Cjt in (35) is capitalist jÂ’s production revenue net of labor cost or                        proportion
of his production revenue Yjt . The production revenue (output) is given by (36), a linear function
of his capital holdings, Kjt          Mjt . The linearity of (36) will determine that the production across
capitalists can be aggregated and an aggregate production function exists. We then move to stage
                 h         i1
2. Let Rt  At At (1 Wt
                         )
                              . The optimization problem in stage 2, (33), is transformed to

                             Vt ("jt ;  jt ; Kjt ) = max E [Pt Mjt + Rt (Kjt                 Mjt )j   jt ] :         (37)
                                                         Mjt


The rst-order condition with respect to Mjt implies

                                                         Pt = E [Rt j        jt ] :                                   (38)

It will be shown that the aggregate labor supply Nt and thereby Rt are a function of Pt and thus
Pt = Rt . So the solution to (37) becomes

                                               Vt ("jt ;  jt ; Kjt ) = Rt Kjt :                                      (39)
 20
      Although the selling of capital takes place in stage 2, the receipt of income from this sale will be in stage 4.




                                                                  26
       Workers Workers are assumed to be homogeneous and have common information set                                             it   =
fWt ; Pt ; At ; Kt g in stage 3. We analyze the decisions of a representative worker by backward
induction from stage 5 to stage 3. In stage 5, after obtaining his labor income, the worker can
purchase the bond or invest his income in capital for the next period. Let Bt be the unit of bonds
                                                                                                                        1
held and Kt+1 be the capital savings (after trading the bond). Denote the bond price by                                Rf t ,   where
Rf t is the bond yield.21
       The workerÂ’s consumption in period t + 1 from his bond claim is Bt . The worker will become
a capitalist in the next period with private information at+2 + "0 and zt+1 +  0 . His expected
consumption from capital savings perceived at the beginning of the next period is thus given by
Vt+1 ("0 ;  0 ; Kt+1 ) = Rt+1 Kt+1 based on (39). Therefore, the workerÂ’s total consumption in period
t + 1 is
                                            Ct+1 = Bt + Rt+1 Kt+1 ,

with budget constraint
                                                  1
                                            Bt        + Kt+1  Wt Nt .
                                                 Rf t
                                                     Kt+1
Denote the ratio of capital savings by st           Wt Nt .   The representative workerÂ’s problem thus can be
written as                                       2               "                           !            #! 1 3
                              Nt1+
                                                                                                              
                                                                     (1         st ) Rf t
                    max               + Nt Wt 4max E                                              j   it          5,             (40)
                     Nt       1+                     st               +st Rt+1

where the second max is about the bond trade decision in stage 5 and the rst max is about the
labor supply decision in stage 3. Finally, the zero net supply of the bond means that in equilibrium

                                                          st = 1.                                                                (41)


       The rst-order condition with respect to st in (40), together with (41), gives
                                                                         
                                                      E Rt+1 j        it
                                             Rf t    = h                   i.
                                                          1
                                                      E Rt+1 j        it


Then, the rst-order condition with respect to Nt in (40) implies

                                                            1
                                     Nt     = Wt E Rt+1 j it 
                                                                    1
                                            = Wt E Rt+1 jPt ; At ; Kt  :                                                        (42)

In (42), since Wt is a function of Nt and Kt , the information set                      it   = fWt ; Pt ; At ; Kt g is eÂ¤ectively
  21
    The bond traded in period t has price R1f t (units of consumption goods) and is endowed with the claim of 1 unit
of consumption goods in the next period t + 1.



                                                            27
equivalent to fPt ; At ; Kt g.
     Now we derive the aggregate production function. In equilibrium, we have
                                                              Z
                                                                  Mjt dj = 0:

As all the capitalists start with the same level of capital, Kjt = Wt                                    1 Nt 1    = Kt . By (34), the labor
market equilibrium condition thus can be written as
                                                     Z                                     1
                                                                  At (1                 )
                                           Nt =          Njt dj =                                 Kt :                                 (43)
                                                                      Wt

From (36), the aggregate production can be written as

                                                 Z                                 1
                                                              At (1             )
                                         Yt =        Yjt dj =                                    At K t :                              (44)
                                                                  Wt

Equations (43) and (44) together imply

                                                             Yt = At Kt Nt1         .

So
                                                                                                         1
                              Wt = (1            )At Kt Nt            and Rt = At Kt                         Nt1   :                   (45)

Capital evolves as
                                         Kt+1 = (1              )Yt = (1        )At Kt Nt1                   :                         (46)

     Applying (45), equation (42) becomes

                                            (1           )                 n h                         io 1
                  ( +1) (1       )                                                  1                       
                Nt                   =                        [At Kt ]      E At+1 Nt+1    jPt ; At ; Kt      :                        (47)

                     1                                                            1
By normalizing           (1          ) = 1 and denoting  =                    +1 (1         )      as in (10), we obtain a key set of
equations in equilibrium (we denote xt = log Xt ):

                                     2      
             nt =        at +           kt +log E [exp (at+1 +  (1                             ) nt+1 ) jpt ; at ; kt ]            (48)
                                            
          kt+1 = log(1               ) + at + kt + (1       ) nt                                                                       (49)
             pt = log E [exp (log                + at + (1            ) (nt     kt )) jpt ; at ; kt ; at+1 + "jt ; zt +  jt ] ;       (50)

where (48) is from (47), (49) is from (46), and (50) is from (38). Here we have used the fact that
the relevant economic history up to the beginning of period t can be summarized by at and kt .
     In fact, conditions (48) and (50) parallel conditions (10) and (11) in the baseline model, respec-



                                                                      28
tively. The only diÂ¤erence in the dynamic model is the additional condition, (49), which gives the
law of motion for capital. We conjecture that equilibrium labor takes the form

                                        nt = nc + 'at + kt + (at+1 + zt ) ;

where nc , ';  and  are coeÂ¢cients to be determined. Proposition 7 summarizes the equilibria.

                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                            ^
                                                                                                                            
Proposition 7 There exists a continuum of equilibria indexed by 0   2z                                                       2
                                                                                                                             4 a,   in which the
price pt is given by

 pt = log Rt = [log    + (1            ) nc ] + [1 + (1                ) '] at + (1               ) (        1) kt + (1       ) (at+1 + zt ) ,

and
                                           nt = nc + 'at + kt + (at+1 + zt )

                                   kt+1 = log(1                   ) + at + kt + (1                       ) nt

                                                  yt = at + kt + (1                      ) nt ;

where                                                             rh
                              h                          i                                        i2                 2
                                       1                                      1
                                  (1       )2      1                   (1        )2    1                4       1
                       =
                                                                             2
                                                                      + (1          )
                                                        '=
                                                               1        (1          )2 
                                                  q
                                        ^        ^2       4 2z
                                                              2a                [1 + (1                   )']
                              =                                      with ^ 
                                                    2                           1 (1                      )2 
and
                                  (1          ) log(1    ) + 12  2a  + 12 (1 )2  2z
                          nc =
                                                  1 (1       ) [1 + (1        )]
                                                                                                                           
with    [(1     )]2    [(1             )] + 1 ^       [1 + (1       )']2 [1 + (1                                    )'] .
                                                              
Proof. See Appendix.


   The intuition behind Proposition 7 is similar to that in our baseline model. While at+1 directly
aÂ¤ects the workersÂ’ return on savings, its eÂ¤ect on existing capitalists (the old generation) is only
through an indirect general equilibrium channel. If high sentiments lead capitalists to speculate
that the output and hence the demand for capital will be high in period t, competition will drive
up the capital price Pt . After observing a high price Pt , the workers in period t will need to solve a
signal extraction problem, leading them to attribute the high price Pt partially to high productivity
in the next period. High productivity in the next period increases their incentive to supply labor


                                                                       29
in the current period. So output and the demand for capital will indeed be high in period t. The
initial conjecture of the existing capitalists is thus veri ed.22
    Three remarks on the OLG equilibrium are in order. First, if we set  z = 0, then  has two
solutions, 0 and ^. It is easy to verify that the fully-revealing equilibrium (corresponding to  z = 0
and  = ^) and the non-revealing equilibrium (corresponding to  z = 0 and  = 0) are two special
cases of the sentiment-driven equilibria in Proposition 7. Sentiment-driven equilibria are more
likely when  2a is higher. Second, the aggregate capital stock, kt , in our model has a stationary
distribution. In fact, based on Proposition 7, we have

  kt+1 = [log(1          ) + (1     ) nc ] + [1 + (1        ) '] at + [ + (1        ) ] kt + (1                  ) (at+1 + zt ) .

We prove that  < 1 and therefore 0 <              +(1       )  < 1 (see the appendix). Third, the assumption
of the utility function with risk neutrality versus risk aversion (i.e.,  = 1 versus  < 1) aÂ¤ects the
equilibrium by altering the constant coeÂ¢cient nc only but not the other coeÂ¢cients (',  and ).
In fact,  appears only in the constant term nc in Proposition 7. The most important reason for
introducing the risk-averse utility is to derive the asset pricing implications, to be analyzed below.
       Now we proceed to discuss implications of the OLG model.


Implication 1: Persistence in business cycles Proposition 7 shows that i.i.d. sentiment
shocks can generate persistent Â‡uctuations in output and unemployment. Concretely, a sentiment
shock zt in period t inÂ‡uences the labor supply in period t (that is nt ), which in turn aÂ¤ects
the capital level in period t + 1 (that is kt+1 ). Because the OLG economy is dynamically linked
across periods by capital accumulation, zt can have a persistent eÂ¤ect on asset prices, output and
unemployment.


Implication 2: Asset prices over business cycles (cross section) We derive the risk pre-
mium in our model, which is de ned as rt  log E [Rt+1 j                  it ]   log Rf t . We have the closed-form
solution of it.



Corollary 1 The risk premium is given by
                                        (                                                )
                                            V ar ([1 + (1     ) '] at+1 jat+1 + zt )
                  rt = (1         )
                                           +V ar [(1           ) (at+2 + zt+1 )]
                                                                                                                 
                                                                2a  2z                                      
                         = (1      ) [1 + (1    )']2                      + (1     )2
                                                                                         2  2a   +    2z           ,         (51)
                                                            2  2a +  2z
  22
       The equilibrium can be implemented following the approach analyzed in Section 4.1.



                                                            30
which is increasing in  2z when  is decreasing in  2z .
Proof. See Appendix.
                                                                                           r
                                                                                      ^     ^ 2   4 2
                                                                                                     z
                                                                                      +    
                                                                                                  2
    Corollary 1 implies that if  as a function of         2z   takes the form  =          2
                                                                                                    a
                                                                                                         (corresponding
to the upper branch of the curve as in Figure 3), the risk premium is increasing in sentiment
volatility. Our model hence gives a novel implication of sentiment volatility-driven risk premia, one
that depends crucially on the mechanism of the feedback between nancial markets and the real
economy. Namely, the sentiments in nancial markets aÂ¤ect the real economy and thus inÂ‡uence
aggregate consumption and asset returns, which in turn impact the risk premium. Corollary 1 gives
cross-sectional predictions. The model predicts that an economy with higher investor sentiment
volatility in nancial markets (i.e., higher  z ) will have a higher risk premium in asset returns. The
intuition behind Corollary 1 is as follows. Return Rt+1 in the next period t + 1 depends on at+1
and nt+1 . In period t, workers can infer information about at+1 from pt , at , kt and eÂ¤ectively from
at+1 + zt but has no information about nt+1 which is a function of at+2 + zt+1 . So the conditional
variance of Rt+1 depends on conditional variance V ar ([1 + (1                ) '] at+1 jat+1 + zt ) and variance
V ar [(1     ) (at+2 + zt+1 )]. Higher sentiment volatility results in lower informativeness about at+1
and hence higher conditional variance of Rt+1 , which leads to a bigger gap between the mean of
Rt+1 and its certainty-equivalent value or a higher risk premium.


Implication 3: Asset prices over business cycles (time series) In the OLG model so far
(Proposition 7), the sentiment volatility ( z ) and the risk aversion () are invariant across time.
So the risk premium is constant across time for a given equilibrium path. A direct time-series
implication (based on Corollary 1) is, therefore, that if there is an unexpected shock to sentiment
volatility in the nancial market (i.e., an increase in  z , for example in a nancial crisis), the risk
premium increases.
    Now we extend the OLG model to allow for regime changes and formally model time-varying risk
premia. To highlight the mechanism and for tractability, we consider three cases. First, we consider
a deterministic process of time-varying sentiment volatility. Speci cally, we assume that sentiment
                                                                                                                    
volatility,  z , has four realized values with a seasonal cycle of  z(1) ;  z(2) ;  z(3) ;  z(4) ;  z(1) ; ::: ,
where  z(1) >  z(2) =  z(3) =  z(4) ; that is, the sentiment volatility in the rst season is higher than
those in other three seasons. A possible reason for the seasonal variation in sentiment volatility
is seasonal aÂ¤ective disorder (SAD, also known as winter blues or winter depression), which is
linked closely with hours of daylight; experimental research in psychology has documented SAD
can generate depression. Kamstra, Kramer and Levi (2003) show clear evidence that the seasonal
SAD causes stock market seasonality. Under the above setup, we are able to derive closed-form
risk premia.

                                                         31
Corollary 2 Suppose sentiment volatility has a seasonal cycle of ( z;t ;  z;t+1 ;  z;t+2 ;  z;t+3 ;  z;t+4 ; :::) =
                                                 
  z(1) ;  z(2) ;  z(3) ;  z(4) ;  z(1) ; ::: . The equilibrium of the OLG model exists. The risk premium has a
                                                                                                                  
seasonal cycle, which is (rt ; rt+1 ; rt+2 ; rt+3 ; rt+4 ; :::) = r(1) ; r(2) ; r(3) ; r(4) ; r(1) ; ::: ,
where r(1) > r(2) = r(3) > r(4) .
Proof. See Appendix.


      In a rational expectations framework, Corollary 2 provides a novel perspective to explain sea-
sonal tendencies/calendar eÂ¤ects in nancial markets and has implications for return predictability.
Because of the feedback between the nancial market and the real economy, the season with higher
sentiment volatility also has a higher risk premium. From (51), we can see that the risk premium
in the current period depends on not only the equilibrium in the current period but also the equi-
librium in the next period. Solving the risk premia under a seasonal cycle of sentiment volatility is
not trivial. Figure 4 illustrates an example of time-series risk premia, where the parameter values
are     = 0:3,   = 1,  =     3,  a = 0:1,  z(1) = 0:02,  z(2) =  z(3) =  z(4) = 0:01.23




Figure 4: Time-series risk premia (annualized) under a seasonal cycle of sentiment volatility  z

      Second, consider the case where there is a stochastic switch between the fully-revealing equilib-
rium and the non-revealing equilibrium across time. Speci cally, we assume a Markov process of
regime changes with stochastic matrix
                                                                     !
                                                  qF;F    1   qF;F
                                                                                                                 (52)
                                                  qN;F   1    qN;F

where qF;N is the transition probability from the fully-revealing equilibrium to the full-revealing
  23
     Parameter choice  a = 0:1 is to capture the large Â‡uctuation in output in the seasonal frequency (see, e.g., Wen
(2002)).


                                                         32
equilibrium and qN;F is the transition probability from the non-revealing equilibrium to the fully-
revealing equilibrium. We have the following corollary.

Corollary 3 Suppose the fully-revealing equilibrium and the non-revealing equilibrium follow the
Markov process of (52). The equilibrium of the OLG model exists. The risk premium, rt , follows
the Markov process, in which rt is higher in the state of the non-revealing equilibrium and lower
in the state of the fully-revealing equilibrium (under a suÂ¢cient condition that jqF;N   qN;F j is not
too high).
Proof. See Appendix.

   In the dynamic rational-expectations equilibrium, the equilibrium in period t needs to incor-
porate the expectation of regime changes in the future. So the equilibrium is unlike the case with
an unexpected shock to regime changes. Solving the equilibrium is not trivial and the details are
provided in the appendix. Corollary 3 formalizes stochastic time-varying risk premia. Again, our
explanation of time-varying risk premia is built into a rational-expectation framework and crucially
depends on the mechanism of the feedback between the nancial market and the real economy.
   Third, we consider regime changes of time-varying risk aversion (and constant sentiment volatil-
ity). Speci cally, we assume that the risk aversion  has two states (L ; H ), where L < H , and
follows a Markov process with stochastic matrix
                                                                 !
                                             H;H   1     H;H
                                                                                                 (53)
                                             L;H   1     L;H

where  H;H is the transition probability from risk aversion H to risk aversion H and  L;H is the
transition probability from risk aversion L to risk aversion H . Workers when born know their
own risk aversion but when making their labor decisions need to form expectations about the risk
aversion of the next generation of workers. We have the following corollary.

Corollary 4 Suppose the risk aversion  follows the Markov process of (53). The equilibrium of
the OLG model exists. The risk premium, rt , follows the Markov process, in which rt is higher
in the regime of  = L and is lower in the regime of  = H (under a suÂ¢cient condition that
 H;H     L;H is not too high). In particular, the variation in the risk premium across the two
regimes is increasing in sentiment volatility ( z ).
Proof. See Appendix.

   In Corollary 4, it may not be surprising that the risk premium is higher when risk aversion is
higher. What we want to emphasize, however, is the ampli cation eÂ¤ect of sentiment volatility.
Only in the presence of sentiment and the feedback eÂ¤ect, does the time-varying risk aversion

                                                    33
play a large role in generating time-varying risk premia. In fact, we prove that given L and H
the variation (diÂ¤erence) in the risk premium between the two regimes is increasing in sentiment
volatility  z .


7     Conclusion

In this paper, we study how the nancial sector can aÂ¤ect the aggregate real economy through
the information channel. In the rational expectations framework, we show that investorsÂ’ senti-
ments aÂ¤ect nancial market prices which in turn inÂ‡uence real activities. Because of the two-way
feedback between the nancial sector and the real sector, a small sentiment shock in the nancial
market can be ampli ed and can have a large impact on the real economy. The sentiment-driven
equilibria also have implications for non-linear asset prices, discontinuity in asset prices, and cross-
country comovements in asset prices and real output. Under informational frictions, investorsÂ’
perception of synchronization across economies can lead to actual synchronization. In a dynamic
economy, sentiment-driven Â‡uctuations can also generate persistence in business cycles and have
cross-sectional and time-series implications for asset prices over business cycles. The main pur-
pose of our paper is to illustrate the possibility of sentiment-driven Â‡uctuations in asset prices and
real output. Embedding our mechanism in a full-Â‡edged DSGE model and quantifying the role of
sentiments is left for future research.




                                                  34
Appendix

A       Proofs

Proof of Proposition 3:         We prove that P0 and N1 de ned in equations (14) and (15) constitute
a rational expectations equilibrium. Under (14), the rst condition, (10), becomes

                           log N1 =  log fE [A2 ja2 + z]g
                                                                       
                                                          1
                                  =  E [a2 ja2 + z] + var(a2 ja2 + z) ;
                                                          2

where                                                                                                
                                            1 2       2                           1
                       E [a2 ja2 + z] =      a + 2 2 a 2                 a2 + z +  2a
                                            2      a + z                         2
and
                                                                     2  4a
                                   var(a2 ja2 + z) =  2a                       :
                                                                  2  2a +  2z
Comparing terms with the conjecture log N1 = n
                                              + a2 + z yields

                                                      2a
                                     a2 + z =                (a2 + z)
                                                 2  2a
                                                       +  2z

or
                                                        2a
                                              1=                   ;                                                  (A.1)
                                                    2  2a +  2z
and                                                                                              
                                1 2        2   1     1                       1 2  4a
                     n
                     =           a + 2 2 a 2  2a +  2a                                          = 0:
                                2       a + z 2     2                       2 2  2a +  2z
Solving (A.1) with respect to  gives
                                                    q
                                                    2 2         4 2z
                                         =                               ;
                                              2             2

                   2 2
where 0   2z    4 a.

     Under (15), equation (11) becomes

                      log P0 = log   + (1      ) log N1 = log          + (1            ) (a2 + z);

that is, p = 0.


Proof of Proposition 4:         First, we conjecture p0 = u + log                  + (1          ) (a2 + z), where u is a
constant to be determined. After observing this price in period 1, workersÂ’ information extraction

                                                       35
problem is the same as that in Proposition 3, so their labor supply is still log N1 = a2 + z. Given
                                                                                                                                                              
this labor supply, the dividend is still log R1 = log +(1                                            ) (a2 +z). Hence, we have P0 = eu R1 .
     Second, conditional on a realization of P0 , it is optimal for investor j to buy capital if and only
if
                                                     E (R1 euj jp0 ; sj0 ; lj0 )  P0
                             
or E (euj jp0 ; sj0 ; lj0 )  eu . We express uj in terms of p0 , sj0 and lj0 . It is easy to obtain

                                                p0 (u +log )                                                  
                                                    1                    lj0                          1
                                  sj0                                  +     = uj +                      j + "j ,
                                                                                                    

                                                p0   (u +log )
                                                      1                         lj0
that is, the combination, sj0                                        +           ,   provides a signal about uj . Thus, condition
                                                                                                                                            1 2
                                                                                                    p0 (u +log )                 2u +      + 2"
                                                                                                                                           2 
E (euj jp0 ; sj0 ; lj0 )  eu can be transformed to sj + lj0                                           1                  +               2
                                                                                                                                            u
                                                                                                                                                       u . This is
(17).
     Third, given the demand schedule (17), market clearing implies
                                                                                                     1 2
                                                                                                                        
                                                              p0 (u +log )                  2u +      + 2"
                                                                                                     2 
                         pr sj0 + lj0 <                          1                    +              2
                                                                                                      u
                                                                                                                   u
                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                         = d:
                                                                                                      1 2
                                                              p0 (u +log )                  2u +        + 2"
                                                                                                     2 
                         pr sj0 + lj0                           1                    +              2u
                                                                                                                   u

                                                                           
                  lj0                                                 2
Note that sj0 +       N a2 + z ;  2u             +     2"   +   2
                                                                                . Because the market clearing equation is true for
                              
                              d
                          1 1+ d
                                    2u
any p0 , we obtain    
                     u =r               .
                                                2
                                  2u + 2" +    
                                                2



Proof of Proposition 5: We show that the combination of (20), (23) and (22) satis es conditions
(18) and (19). Note that W1 is a function of N1 , so given (22) we must have (21). First, because W1
is in the form of (21), a worker can infer aH
                                            2 perfectly by comparing W1 with P0 . The eÂ¤ective infor-
mation set of the workers becomes the same across workers, namely                                                        i1   =    1   = fR1 ; W1 ; P0 ; aH
                                                                                                                                                          2 g.
So workers can make an identical decision in period 1; that is, symmetric equilibrium among work-
ers, condition (18), still applies.


     Condition (18) becomes

                                               
               log N1 =  log E A2 jaI2 + z; aH
                                               2
                                                                            
                              I    H     I       H
                                                     1    I  H     I     H
                      =  E a2 + a2 ja2 + z; a2 + var(a2 + a2 ja2 + z; a2 )
                                                       2
                                                           
                              I          1
                      =  E a2 ja2 + z + var(a2 ja2 + z) + aH
                                  I                  I   I
                                                                2 :                                                                                          (A.2)
                                             2


                                                                                36
We have                                                                                             
                                                  1 2       2                           1
                           E aI2 jaI2 + z =          I + 2 2 I 2              aI2   + z +  2I
                                                    2      I + z                         2
and                                                                                 2
                                                                             2I
                                       var(aI2 jaI2   + z) =     2I                     :
                                                                         2  2I +  2z
Under condition (23), it is easy to verify that (A.2) becomes (22).
     Next, we turn to the equilibrium condition of (19), which by substituting (22) becomes

                                                                                                        
                    log P0 = log             + log E exp [(1            ) log N1 ] jaI2 + z; aI2 + "j
                               = log         + (1      ) (aI2 + z).

This is (20), so condition (19) is veri ed.


Proof of Proposition 6:               By (27), p(a; z) < 0. Hence the workers can perfectly infer a2 if
log P0  log . When the price falls below log , the workers know that a2 < 0 and learn about
a2 from price p(a2 ; z) and eÂ¤ectively from exp(a2 ) + exp(z). Conditional on a2 < 0, a2 and z are
independent and identically distributed. So, by symmetry we have E [exp(a2 )j exp(a2 ) + exp(z)] =
E [exp(z)j exp(a2 ) + exp(z)]. Since E [exp(a2 ) + exp(z)j exp(a2 ) + exp(z)] = exp(a2 ) + exp(z), it
                                                              exp(a2 )+exp(z)
then follows that E [exp(a2 )j exp(a2 ) + exp(z)] =                   2       .        Equation (28) is then obtained by
(26).


Proof of Proposition 7: Given the price pt , the workersÂ’ eÂ¤ective information set is fat ; kt ; at+1 +
zt g. Equation (48) becomes

                               2           
             nt = at +            kt +     log E [exp (at+1 +  (1            ) nt+1 ) jkt ; at ; at+1 + zt ] .
                                           

Substituting nt+1 = nc + 'at+1 + kt+1 + (at+2 + zt+1 ) and using kt+1 = log(1                                ) + at + kt +
(1      ) nt , we obtain
                   8                                                                                       9
                   >
                   > (1      ) [nc +  log(1       )]                                                     >
                                                                                                           >
                   >
                   >                               2                                                2
                                                                                                           >
                                                                                                           >
                   >                                                                                 ) nt >
                   < + [  + (1
                   >                    )] at +        + (1     ) kt + (1                             >
                                                                                                           =
              nt =   +  log E [exp [(1      ) (at+2 + zt+1 )] jat+1 + zt ]                                       (A.3)
                   >
                   >                                                                                         >
                                                                                                             >
                   >
                   >    
                     +  E [ [1 + (1     )'] at+1 jat+1 + zt ]                                             >
                                                                                                             >
                   >
                   >                                                                                         >
                                                                                                             >
                   : 1                                                                                      ;
                     + 2  var [ [1 + (1      )'] at+1 jat+1 + zt ]




                                                            37
     Comparing terms of (A.3) with nt = nc + 'at + kt + (at+1 + zt ) yields

                                                                                    2   + (1                   ) 
                                                                      =
                                                                                    1     (1                   )2 

or  =         2    + (1           ) [ + (1                    )]. We assume that the economy is stable, which requires
                                                                                             1                                                                1
(1     )  [ + (1                  )] < 1. Because  =                                 +1       (1        ),    it is true that  <                      1         or  (1       ) < 1.
When  < 1, we have                      + (1                 ) < 1. Hence, (1                             )  [ + (1                   )] < 1. We focus on the case
of  < 1. We solve the quadratic equation with respect to :

                                                                  2
                                          G()                      + (1               ) [ + (1                       )]         = 0.                                         (A.4)

Notice that G( = 0) =                      2    > 0 and G( = 1) =                                 2   + (1             )        1 < 0; the latter is true because
            1                                1                            1                                                                          1
=     +1       (1    )    and      +1           (1       )   <   1        +    2   under                > 0 and thus  <                        1    +       2   . Therefore, by the
intermediate value theorem, there is a unique solution of  that satis es 0 <  < 1, which is

                                             h                                 i        rh                                 i2                       2
                                                      1                                              1
                                                 (1       )2         1                      (1          )2      1                  4       1
                                   =                                                                                                                     .
                                                                                                  2

And ' is given by
                                                                                      + (1                     )
                                                                          '=                                          :
                                                                                    1 (1                   )2 
As for , we have
                                                                          [1 + (1                 )']      2a
                                                              1=                                       2            :                                                              (A.5)
                                                                          1 (1                   )2    2a +  2z
                                     )']
We de ne ^ =             [1+(1
                          1 (1     )2 
                                         .   Thus,
                                                                                              2a
                                                                               1 = ^                   ,
                                                                                         2  2a +  2z
                          r
                     ^     ^ 2   4 2
                                    z
                         
                                 2
that is,  =                2
                                   a
                                        . Once we have , we can solve for the constant coeÂ¢cient nc :
                                                                      2                                                          !                   3
                                                                                                    [(1              )]2
                                                                      6                                                                     7
                                                              1
                                                                      6                                   [(1             )]               7
            (1             ) log(1                  )+           26                                                                     ! 7 + 1 (1                        )2  2z
                                                              2  a 6                                                                2   7 2
                                                                      4                                    [1 + (1                 )']    5
                                                                              + 1            ^
                                                                                                                [1 + (1              )']
     nc =                                                                                                                                                                               .
                                                                          1        (1           ) [1 + (1                     )]




                                                                                             38
                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                        E[Rt+1 jkt ;at ;at+1 +zt ]
Proof of Corollary 1: We                       rst calculate Rf t , which is given by Rf t =                                                1                        .
                                                                                                                                        E[Rt+1 jkt ;at ;at+1 +zt ]
Using the expression of Rt in Proposition 7, we obtain

            rf t = log Rf t
                   8                                                                                                                                    9
                   >
                   >  [log + (1                 ) nc ] + (1               ) (         1) kt+1                                                          >
                                                                                                                                                        >
                   >
                   >                                        [1+(1    )'] 2a                                                                          >
                                                                                                                                                        >
                   >     1
                                                )']  2a +                                         1    2                                               >
                   < 2 [1
                   >
                           
                             + (1                                2 2
                                                                 a + z2       at+1
                                                                                    
                                                                                       +  z z t + 2  a                                               >
                                                                                                                                                        =
                 =                                     2 2     ([1+(1 )']2a ) 2                                                                           :
                   >
                   >  + 12 [1 + (1                  )']  a        2  2a + 2z
                                                                                      (2 1)                                                         >
                                                                                                                                                     >
                   >
                   >         h                                                                   i                                                   >
                                                                                                                                                     >
                   >
                   >                                                                                                                                 >
                                                                                                                                                     >
                   : + 1 2     [(1                 )] + (2             1) [(1             )]2 + 12 (2                     1) (1            ) z ;
                                                                                                                                                 2 2
                               2 a


Next, we can work out the expectation of Rt+1 in log, which is

                        log E (Rt+1 jkt ; at ; at+1 +  z zt )
                        8                                                                                                                       9
                        >
                        >  [log + (1           ) nc ] + (1        ) ( 1) kt+1                                                                  >
                                                                                                                                                >
                        >
                        >                                   [1+(1    )'] 2a                                                                  >
                                                                                                                                                >
                        >     1
                                               )']  2a + 2 2 +                at+1 +  z zt + 12  2a                                     >
                        < 2 [1
                        >
                                
                                  + (1
                                                                   a
                                                                          2
                                                                          z              
                                                                                                                                                >
                                                                                                                                                =
                      =                                                                2                                                            :
                              1                      2 2       ([1+(1       )'] 2a )
                        >
                        >  +  2  [1 + (1         )']    a          2  2a + 2z
                                                                                                                                                >
                                                                                                                                                >
                        >
                        >                                                                                                                     >
                                                                                                                                                >
                        >
                        >                                                                                                                       >
                                                                                                                                                >
                        : + 1 2      [(1         )]  +  [(1       )]   2
                                                                              + 12 (1      )2  2z                                              ;
                              2 a


Therefore, the risk premium is
                                                                                         (                                                                       )
                                                                                             V ar ([1 + (1                      ) '] at+1 jat+1 + zt )
           log E [Rt+1 jkt ; at ; at+1 + zt ]          log Rf t = (1               )
                                                                                            +V ar [(1                        ) (at+2 + zt+1 )]
                      ("                                                                     #                                              )
                                                         [1 + (1               )']  a   2 2                                              
    = (1         )        [1 + (1     )']2  2a                                                     + (1                    2   2 2
                                                                                                                            )  a + z  2
                                                                                                                                                                (A.6)
                                                                    2  2a   +  2z
                                                                                                               
                                         2 2 2                                 2
                                                                                                            
    = (1         ) [1 + (1          )'] 2 2a z 2 + (1                          )      2  2a   +    2z           .
                                          a + z

Finally, we prove that the term in (A.6) is decreasing in .                                                    Considering that 2  2a +  2z =
 1[1+(1
     (1
             )']
             )2 
                   2a   by (A.5), we have

                                                                    2
                                     [1 + (1          )']  2a                                                         
                                                                         + (1            )2 2  2a +  2z
                                          2  2a   +    2z
                                                                                                                                       
                                                                         (1  )2                       1           (1          )2 
                            = [1 + (1           )']      2a                                                                               :                   (A.7)
                                                                        1 (1    )2                                   




                                                                          39
We prove the last term in (A.7) is negative. Note that

                                                (1 )2                            1  (1            )2 
                                                                                                            <0
                                             1 (1    )2                               
                                                                                  2
                                                                                     
                                           ,  (1  ) + (1                         )  <1
                                                                   + 2
                                           , <                           2
                                                                              ;
                                                           1       2 +

                                                                                         1                                                      + 2
where the last step is obtained by substituting  =                                   +1 (1     )   . The relation that  <                   1 2 +   2   is
                                         + 2
true if and only if G( =              1 2 +       2   ) < 0 is true, where function G() is de ned in (A.4). We verify
                 + 2
that G( =     1 2 +    2   ) < 0 is true. Concretely,
                                                                                                               
                        2                       + 2                                             + 2                         + 2
                           + (1          )              + (1                         )                                                 <0
                                             1 2 + 2                                    1       2 +         2           1   2 +      2
                                   2
                                                                                                               
                                                    + 2                                +
              ,                                +                                                            1 <0
                        + 1 (1              )    (1   )2    +1                         (1       )
              ,          < 0;

                                                                                          1
where the second line is obtained by substituting  =                                  +1 (1        )   .


Proof of Corollary 2: First, we solve the OLG equilibrium. We conjecture that the labor
decision rule in season  is nt; = nc;k + ' at +   kt + ( at+1 + zt ), where  = 1, 2, 3 and 4, and
V ar (zt ) =  2z;t =  2z() . Based on (48), we have
         8                                                                                                                                                             9
              at + 8  2 k + (1     ) nc;(k % 4)+1
         >
         >                 t 2                                                                                                      3                          9       >
                                                                                                                                                                       >
         >
         >                                                                                                                                                             >
                                                                                                                                                                       >
         <             >
                       >        at+1 + (1       )                                                                                                            >
                                                                                                                                                               >       =
nt; =                 <     6                                                                                                 ! 7                           =           :
         >
         >
         >   +  log E exp 64     ' (k % 4)+1 at+1 +   (k % 4)+1 at+2 + z t+1
                                                                                                                                   7 j at+1 + zt ; at
                                                                                                                                   5                                   >
                                                                                                                                                                       >
                                                                                                                                                                       >
         >
         :             >
                       >                                                                                                                                >
                                                                                                                                                        >              >
                                                                                                                                                                       ;
                       :            +            [log(1     ) + a + k + (1                                             ) nt; ]                        ;
                                                       (k % 4)+1                            t       t


Comparing terms with nt; = nc; + ' at +   kt + ( at+1 + zt ), we obtain   =  and ' = ',
                                                                                     2
where  and ' are as in Proposition 7. The coeÂ¢cient  solves 1 = ^ 2  a2 ; we focus                                     2a + z()
on the upper branch solution of  as shown in Figure 3, so  is decreasing in  z() . Since
 z(1) >  z(2) =  z(3) =  z(4) , we have that 1 < 2 = 3 = 4 .
    Next, we calculate the risk premium. It is easy to nd the risk premium in season  is
                             (                                                                          )
                                   V ar ([1h + (1            ) '] at+1 j at+1 + zt )i
      r() = (1        )
                                   +V ar (1                 ) (k % 4)+1 at+2 + zt+1
                (                                                                   2                                                                         )
                                                          [1 + (1       )']   2a                                                                       
  = (1        ) [1 + (1               )']2  2a                                       + (1                 )2 2(k % 4)+1  2a +  2z((k % 4)+1)                  .
                                                              2  2a +  2z()
                                                                                                                                                          (A.8)


                                                                         40
Now we prove that r(1) > r(2) = r(3) > r(4) . Considering that 2  2a + 2z() =  1[1+(1
                                                                                            (1
                                                                                                                                  )']
                                                                                                                                       2 ,
                                                                                                                                  )2   a
similar to (A.7), we can transform the last two terms in (A.8) to
                                                   2                                                        
                  [1 + (1            )']   2a
                                                        + (1            )2 2(k % 4)+1  2a +  2z((k % 4)+1)
                          2  2a +  2z()
             (                                                    )                                            
                     h [1 + (1          )']   2a            i                      2  [1 + (1          )'] 2                  
        =               (1  )2           1 (1         )2             + (1         )                           (k % 4)+1    ;
                     1 (1   )2              
                                                                                         1 (1            )2  a

                                                                 (1  )2             1 (1     )2 
where we have proved that the term                             1 (1   )2                           is negative in (A.7). Therefore, by
1 < 2 = 3 = 4 , we have r(1) > r(                            2)    = r(3) > r(4) .


Proof of Corollary 3: First, we solve the OLG equilibrium under regime changes. We conjecture
that the labor decision rule is nt;F = nc;F + 'at + kt + at+1 in the state of the perfect-revealing
equilibrium and is nt;N = nc;N + 'at + kt in the state of the non-revealing equilibrium. Let
nt;F  log Nt;F and nt;N  log Nt;N .
     Suppose the current state in period t is the fully-revealing equilibrium. Based on (47), we have
                                                        8       h                              i                9
                                 (1        )            < qF;F E At+1 N 1        jP t ; A t ; K t
                                                                                                                   =
       ( +1) (1       )                                                 t+1;F
     Nt;F                  =                   [At Kt ]                h                                      i   .              (A.9)
                                                        : + (1 qF;F ) E At+1 N 1               jP  t ; A t ; K t
                                                                                                                   ;
                                                                                  t+1;N

                            1                                                            1
By normalizing                  (1      ) = 1 and denoting  =                        +1 (1     )     as in (10), (A.9) can be transformed
to
         2                                              3 8              8      "    "                     #            #            9   9
          [  + (1     )] at                            >
                                                          >
                                                          >              >
                                                                         < q E exp        (1    ) nc;F                              >
                                                                                                                                     =   >
                                                                                                                                         >
                                                                                                                                         >
        6  2                                          7 >                 F;F                              jat+1 ; at                  >
        6 +      + (1     )     kt                   7 <        
                                                                    log >              +(1     )at+2                                  =
nt;F   =6
        6 + [1 + (1
                                                        7+
                                                        7 >              :                                                       ; >.
                                                                                                                                     >
        4                ) '] at+1                      5 >
                                                          >                + (1 qF;F ) E exp  (1       ) nc;N jat+1 ; at              >
                                                                                                                                       >
                     2
                                                          >
                                                          :                                                                            >
                                                                                                                                       ;
          +(1      ) nt;H                                        +(1             ) log(1          )

By comparing terms with nt;F = nc;F + 'at + kt + at+1 , we obtain  and ' as in Proposition 7
and  = ^.


     Similarly, suppose the current state in period t is the non-revealing equilibrium. We obtain
         8                            2                                                           9
         >   [    + (1     )] a  +      + (1    )    k  + (1      )2 n                       >
         >
         >                        t                         t                  t;N                   >
         >
         <
                     (                         c;F
                                                                                                 ) >
                                                                                                     >
                                                                                                     =
                       qN;F E exp  (1       ) n +  [1 + (1      ) '] at+1 + (1       )at+2 jat
nt;N   =   +  log                                                                                 :
         >
         >
         >              + (1 qN;F ) E exp  (1       ) nc;N +  [1 + (1       ) '] at+1 jat          >
                                                                                                     >
                                                                                                     >
         >
         : +(1                                                                                      >
                                                                                                     ;
                       ) log(1     )

Comparing terms with nt;N = nc;N + 'at + kt yields  and ' as in Proposition 7.


                                                                               41
   Next, we calculate the risk premium. Denote the rental price of capital by Rt;F in the state of
the fully-revealing equilibrium and by Rt;N in the state of the non-revealing equilibrium. Suppose
the current state in period t is the fully-revealing equilibrium. The bond yield is given by
                                h                       i                  h                          i
                                                                             
                         qF;F E Rt+1;F  jkt ; at ; at+1 + (1 qF;F ) E Rt+1;N         jkt ; at ; at+1
     log Rf t;F    = log        h                       i                  h                          i
                                   1                                          1
                         qF;F E Rt+1;F  jkt ; at ; at+1 + (1 qF;F ) E Rt+1;N         jkt ; at ; at+1
                     8                                                                                              9
                     >
                     >   flog + [1  + (1        ) '] at+1 + (1       ) ( 1) kt+1 g                                 >
                                                                                                                    >
                     >
                     >            8                                                               9            >
                                                                                                                    >
                     >
                     >            >                                c;F                                  >           >
                                                                                                                    >
                     >
                     <
                                  < q F;F E    exp     (1     ) n     +  a t+2    jk t ; at ; at+1    =           >
                                                                                                                    =
                                                                                                
                   =              >
                                  : + (1       qF;F ) E exp  (1         ) nc;N jkt ; at ; at+1         >
                                                                                                        ;               :
                     >
                     >
                     >   + log 8                                                                        9       >
                                                                                                                    >
                                                                                                                    >
                     >
                     >
                               >
                               < qF;F E exp (           1) (1   ) nc;F + at+2 jkt ; at ; at+1             >
                                                                                                            =       >
                                                                                                                    >
                     >
                     >                                                                                            >
                                                                                                                    >
                     :         >
                               : + (1    q ) exp ( 1) (1               ) nc;N                              >
                                                                                                            ;       ;
                                                  F;F


The expected capital return is given by

                  log E (Rt+1 jkt ; at ; at+1 )
           = log fqF;F E [exp (rt+1;F ) jkt ; at ; at+1 ] + (1 qF;F ) E [exp (rt+1;N ) jkt ; at ; at+1 ]g
             8                                                                          9
             < log +
             >         ( [1 + (1     ) ']  a  t+1  +  (1      ) ( 1)
                                                                   
                                                                      kt+1
                                                                                  ) =
                                                                                        >
           =              qF;F E exp (1                c;F
                                                   ) n + at+2 jkt ; at ; at+1              :
             : + log
             >                                                                        >
                                                                                        ;
                          + (1 qF;F ) exp (1              ) nc;N

Hence, the risk premium in the state of the fully-revealing equilibrium is

              log E (Rt+1 jkt ; at ; at+1 ) log Rf t;F
              8      (                                                                  )                9
              >         q     E    exp   (1       ) n c;F + a          jk   ; a  ; a                       >
              > log       F;F                                    t+2       t    t    t+1                    >
              >
              >                                                                                           >
                                                                                                            >
              >
              >         + (1      qF;F ) exp (1         ) nc;N                                              >
                                                                                                            >
              >
              >             8                                                             9            >
                                                                                                            >
              >
              <                                                                                             >
                                                                                                            =
                            >
                            < qF;F E exp  (1             ) nc;F + at+2 jkt ; at ; at+1 >     =
            =               >
                                                                    c;N
                                                                                              >                :   (A.10)
              >             : + (1        qF;F ) exp  (1         )n                           ;            >
              >
              >                                                                                             >
                                                                                                            >
              >
              >     log 8                                                                        9      >
                                                                                                            >
              >
              >
              >
                        >
                        <  qF;F E exp ( 1) (1               ) nc;F + at+2 jkt ; at ; at+1          >
                                                                                                     =      >
                                                                                                            >
                                                                                                            >
              >
              :                                                                                           >
                                                                                                            ;
                        >
                        :  + (1 qF;F ) exp ( 1) (1                 ) nc;N                           >
                                                                                                     ;




                                                          42
Similarly, we can work out the risk premium in the state of the non-revealing equilibrium:

                   log E (Rt+1 jkt ; at ) log Rf t;N
                   8                                                                                  9
                   >
                   >
                   >  (1 )  ([1 + (1       ) ']2  2a                                                >
                                                                                                      >
                                                                                                      >
                   >
                   >                                         c;F + a
                                                                                       )           >
                                                                                                      >
                   >
                   >            q N;F E   exp  (1       )   n           t+2    jkt ; at               >
                                                                                                      >
                   >
                   >  + log                                                                         >
                                                                                                      >
                   >
                   >            +  (1 qN;F ) exp (1             ) nc;N                                >
                                                                                                      >
                   >
                   <             8                                                                    >
                                                                                                      =
                                                                                         9
                 =               >
                                 < qN;F E exp  (1             ) nc;F + at+2 jkt ; at >      =           :       (A.11)
                   >
                   >             >
                                                                        c;N
                                                                                             >
                                                                                                      >
                                                                                                      >
                   >
                   >             : + (1      qN;F ) exp  (1          )n                      ;       >
                                                                                                      >
                   >
                   >     log 8                                                                9   >
                                                                                                      >
                   >
                   >                                                                                  >
                                                                                                      >
                   >
                   >
                   >
                             >
                             <  qN;F E exp ( 1) (1                ) nc;F + at+2 jkt ; at        >
                                                                                                  =   >
                                                                                                      >
                                                                                                      >
                   >
                   :                                                                                >
                                                                                                      ;
                             >
                             : + (1      qN;F ) exp ( 1) (1             ) nc;N                   >
                                                                                                  ;


If jqF;F      qN;F j is small enough, (A.11) is higher than (A.10). In fact, if qF;F = qN;F , the other
terms are the same while the additional term (1               ) [1 + (1     ) ']2  2a in (A.11) is positive.


Proof of Corollary 4: We rst solve the equilibrium of the OLG model with the Markov process
of risk aversion. We conjecture that the labor decision rule is nt;H = nc;H + 'at + kt + (at+1 + zt )
when workers in period t have risk aversion H (regarding their consumption in period t + 1) and
it is nt;L = nc;L + 'at + kt + (at+1 + zt ) when workers in period t have risk aversion L . Let
nt;L  log Nt;L and nt;H  log Nt;H .
     Suppose workers in current period t have risk aversion H (regarding their consumption in
period t + 1). Their labor decision in period t is
                                             8        h            H                i           9 1
                            (1    )          <               1
                                                H;H E At+1 Nt+1;H       jPt ; At ; Kt             = H
      ( +1) (1     )
     Nt;H              =            [At Kt ]               h          1
                                                                                H              i      .
                                             : + 1            At+1 Nt+1;L          jPt ; At ; Kt ;
                                                       H;H E


Hence,
                8                                                                                           9
                >
                > [  + (1      )] at + 2  + (1       ) kt + (1      )2 nt;H                           >
                                                                                                              >
                >
                >                                                                                       >
                                                                                                              >
                >
                > +  log  H;H exp (1        ) H nc;H + 1  H;H  exp (1             ) H nc;L              >
                                                                                                              >
                >
                < H                                                                                          >
                                                                                                              =
       nt;H   =   +(1
                     h     ) log(1     )                                           i                           :
                >
                >         1                1              2   2  1                  2
                                                                                                              >
                                                                                                              >
                >
                > +                                                                                          >
                >
                >         2 [(1     )] + 2 H [(1     )]  a + 2 H [(1     ) z ]                          >
                                                                                                              >
                                                                                                              >
                >
                : +  log E [exp ( [1 + (1                                                                   >
                                                                                                              ;
                       H              H           )'] a ) jat+1 + z ;a ]
                                                                      t+1     t   t


Comparing terms with nt;H = nc;H + 'at + kt + (at+1 + zt ) yields ',  and  as in Proposition
7.
     Next, we work out the risk premium. Denote the rental price of capital by Rt+1;H in period
t + 1 when workers in period t + 1 have risk aversion H and by Rt+1;L when workers in period




                                                         43
t + 1 have risk aversion L . The bond yield in the state of  = H is

      log Rf t;H
                                                                         
                    H;H E [exp (H rt+1;H ) jat+1 + zt ] + 1     H;H E [exp (H rt+1;L ) jat+1 + zt ]
  = log                                                                  
         H;H E [exp ((H 1) rt+1;H ) jat+1 + zt ] + 1  H;H E [exp ((H 1) rt+1;L ) jat+1 + zt ]
    8 (                                                                    )                           9
    >
    >        log     +  [1 + (1    ) '] a t+1 +  (1      ) (   1) k t+1                               >
                                                                                                       >
    >
    >   E                                                                                              >
                                                                                                       >
    >
    <        + (1        ) (at+2 + zt+1 ) jat+1 + zt ; at                                            >
                                                                                                       =
  =       1
        + 2 (2H 1)  V ar f[1 + (1           ) '] at+1 + (1      ) (at+2 + zt+1 ) jat+1 + zt ; at g > :
    >
    >                                                                                                  >
    >
    >               H;H exp[H (1 )nc;H ]+(1  H;H ) exp[H (1  )nc;L ]
                                                                                                       >
                                                                                                       >
    >
    : + log                                                                                            >
                                                                                                       ;
               H;H exp[(H 1)(1   )nc;H ]+(1  H;H ) exp[(H 1)(1       c;L
                                                                      )n ]


The expected capital return is given by

              log E [exp (rt+1 ) jkt ; at ; at+1 +  z zt ]
              8 (                                                                   )                  9
              >
              >        log   +  [1  +   (1      ) '] at+1 +  (1     ) (    1) kt+1                    >
                                                                                                       >
              >                                                                                        >
              < E + (1
              >
                                  ) (at+2 + zt+1 ) jat+1 +  z zt ; at
                                                                                                       >
                                                                                                       =
            =       1
                                                                                                            :
              >
              >  + 2 V ar f[1 + (1          ) '] at+1 + (1      ) (at+2 + zt+1 ) jat+1 + zt ; at g   >
                                                                                                       >
              >                                                                                        >
              : + log 
              >
                               exp (1
                                      
                                                )n c;H
                                                       
                                                         + 1 
                                                                            
                                                                         exp (1     ) nc;L
                                                                                                      >
                                                                                                       ;
                              H;H                                  H;H


Hence, the risk premium in the state of  = H is

           log E (Rt+1 jat+1 +  z zt ; at ;  = H ) log Rf t;H
          8                                                                                                 9
          >
          >  (1 H ) V ar f[1 + (1           ) '] at+1 + (1      ) (at+2 + zt+1 ) jat+1 + zt ; at g       >
                                                                                                            >
          >
          <                                                                                           >
                                                                                                            =
             + log  H;H exp (1         )n  c;H    + 1  H;H exp (1               ) nc;L
        =                                                                                                       :
          >
          >                   exp[H (1   )nc;H ]+(1  H;H ) exp[H (1    )nc;L ]                          >
                                                                                                            >
          >
          : log  H;H                                                                                       >
                                                                                                            ;
                      H;H  exp[( H 1)(1    )n       ( H;H )
                                               c;H ]+ 1      exp[( H  1)(1    )nc;L ]

                                                                                                                 (A.12)

Similarly, the risk premium in the state of  = L is (A.12) with H being replaced by L and  H;H
being replaced by  L;H .
   Therefore, the diÂ¤erence (variation) in the risk-premium between state  = L and  = H is

    [log E (Rt+1 jat+1 +  z zt ;  = L ) log Rf t;L ] [log E (Rt+1 jat+1 +  z zt ;  = H )                log Rf t;H ]
    8                                                                                                 9
    >
    >   ( H   L ) V ar f[1 + (1      ) '] a t+1  + (1  ) (a  t+2  + z t+1 ) ja  t+1  + z t ; at g >
                                                                                                      >
    >
    >                                                                               !           >
                                                                                                      >
    <         log  L;H exp (1         )n  c;H   + 1  L;H exp (1           )n   c;L                  =
  =     +                                                                                         ;
    >
    >
    >          log  H;H exp (1          ) nc;H + 1  H;H exp (1               ) nc;L                 >
                                                                                                      >
                                                                                                      >
    : + f  ; 
    >                    
                             f L ;  L;H
                                                                                                    >
                                                                                                      ;
               H H;H
                                                                                                                     (A.13)




                                                        44
where                                                                                                                       
                                      exp  (1                                ) nc;H + (1               ) exp  (1    ) nc;L
                 f (; ) = log                                                                                                         .
                                 exp [( 1) (1                                ) nc;H ] + (1             ) exp [( 1) (1      ) nc;L ]
In (A.13), we prove that the sum of the second term and the third term is positive when  L;H                                                               H;H
is small enough. To see this, if  L;H =  H;H = , the second term becomes 0 and the third term
becomes f (H ; )                f (L ; ) > 0 by
                                  
                     @f (; )                                                                                                            
        sgn                            = sgn           exp (1              ) nc;H              exp (1           ) nc;L       nc;H       nc;L        = 1.
                        @

The rst term in (A.13) is positive and increasing in H                                                 L and  2z . Note that in Corollary 1, we
have proved that the rst term is increasing in  2z when  is decreasing in  2z . Overall, (A.13) is
positive and increasing in  2z given H and L .


B     Asymmetric Sentiment-driven Equilibrium in Section 5.2

Here we construct an asymmetric sentiment-driven equilibrium that exhibits contagion. For ` = 0,
                                                 (
                                                               log         + (1           )(g
                                                                                           h + a20 )        i if g  0
                                  log P00 =                                                 exp(g)+exp(z0 )
                                                       log      + (1                ) log        2           if g < 0

and                                                          (
                                             log N10 =                         h(g + a2` )             i if g  0 ;
                                                                                exp(g)+exp(z0 )
                                                                        log          2                   if g < 0

where z0 is the sentiment shock in country 0 with p.d.f. as
                                                       8
                                                       >
                                                       <                                0                       if z  0
                                           f (z0 ) =                                           (z0 + 2
                                                                                                      g =2)
                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                             ;
                                                       >
                                                       :           1
                                                                                   1
                                                                                    p      e        2 2
                                                                                                       g        if z < 0
                                                             ( 12  g )       g       2


for ` > 0,
                                    (
                                                                    log h+ (1      )(g i+ a2` )                                          if g  0
        p0` = log P0` =                                                   exp(g)+exp(z0 )
                                           log   + (1              ) log       2         + (1                       )(a2` + z` ) if g < 0

and                                              (
                                                               h               (g + ai2` )                          if g  0
                                  log N1` =                        exp(g)+exp(z0 )                                                  ;
                                                        log             2                     + (a2` + z` ) if g < 0
                      p                                          
                         2 2    4 2z
with  =     2             2             , where z`  N 0;  2z is the sentiment shock in country ` > 0.
    The workers in each country can infer whether g  0 or g < 0 by looking at the dispersion


                                                                                        45
of asset prices across countries q
                                 ` > 0. Notice that dispersion of p0` is SD(p0` ) = (1      ) a if
                                                                     2
g  0 and SD(p0` ) = (1         ) 2  2a +  2z if g < 0. Since 2 2 +
                                                                        a
                                                                          2 = 1 and   , we have
        q                                                            a    z
           2 2     2
(1     )   a +  z  (1    ) a .
       In the extreme case of  z = 0 and  = 0, the above equilibrium becomes
                                    (
                                              log    + (1         )(g
                                                                   h + a2` )        i if g  0
                        log P0` =                                   exp(g)+exp(z0 )
                                        log   + (1          ) log        2           if g < 0

and                                           (
                                log N0` =                 h(g + a2` )       i if g  0 :                     (B.1)
                                                           exp(g)+exp(z0 )
                                                   log          2             if g < 0

for `  0.
       In such an equilibrium, when g  0, the equilibrium is fully-revealing; when g < 0, the nancial
prices across countries ` > 0 are perfectly synchronized.24 When workers in each country observe
perfectly synchronized asset prices, they infer that g < 0 with probability 1; their information
extraction leads to their labor supply as in (B.1). The intuition behind the above equilibrium is the
following. Investors in the nancial market in country 0 as well as in country ` > 0 Â“overweightÂ”
the impact of the global shock g when g < 0. The extreme case helps highlight the intuition more
sharply. In an economic downturn, investors perceive that the global economy is fully synchronized
and local shocks do not matter. Under the information frictions and the feedback eÂ¤ect, investorsÂ’
perception of synchronization leads to actual synchronization. The nancial prices and the real
output in period 1 across countries become fully synchronized. In this sense, sentiments in nancial
markets can amplify the cross-country comovement because country-speci c shocks are Â“ignoredÂ”
by the investors.


References
 [1] Albagli, Elias, Christian Hellwig and Aleh Tsyvinski (2013) Â“A Theory of Asset Pricing Based
     on Heterogeneous InformationÂ”, mimeo.

 [2] Albagli, Elias, Christian Hellwig and Aleh Tsyvinski (2014) Â“Risk-Taking, Rent-Seeking, and
     Investment When Financial Markets Are NoisyÂ”, mimeo.

 [3] Allen, Franklin and Douglas Gale (1992) Â“Stock-price ManipulationÂ”, Review of Financial
     Studies, 5, 503-529.

 [4] Allen, Franklin, Stephen Morris and Hyun Song Shin (2006) Â“Beauty Contests and Iterated
     Expectations in Asset MarketsÂ”, Review of Financial Studies, 19, 719-752.
  24
    It is easy to extend the information structure to allow imperfect comovement in period 1 for the sentiment-driven
equilibrium (see Benhabib, Liu and Wang (2014)).



                                                              46
 [5] Ang, Andrew and Joseph Chen (2002) Â“Asymmetric correlations of equity portfoliosÂ”, Journal
     of Financial Economics, 63, 443-494.

 [6] Angeletos, George-Marios, Guido Lorenzoni and Alessandro Pavan (2010) Â“Beauty Contests
     and Irrational Exuberance: A Neoclassical ApproachÂ”, NBER working paper 15883.

 [7] Angeletos, George-Marios, Fabrice Collard and Harris Dellas (2014) Â“Quantifying Con denceÂ”,
     mimeo.

 [8] Angeletos, George-Marios and Jennifer LaÂ’O (2012) Â“SentimentsÂ”, Econometrica, 81(2), 739-
     779.

 [9] Aumann, Robert (1987) Â“Correlated Equilibrium as an Expression of Bayesian RationalityÂ”,
     Econometrica, 55, 1-18.

[10] Aumann, Robert, James Peck and Karl Shell (1988) Â“Asymmetric Information and Sunspot
     Equilibria: A Family of Simple ExamplesÂ”, CAE Working Paper #88-34.

[11] Bacchetta, Philippe and Eric van Wincoop (2013) Â“The Great Recession: A Self-Ful lling
     Global PanicÂ”, mimeo.

[12] Baker, Malcolm, Jeremy Stein and JeÂ¤rey Wurgler (2003) Â“When Does The Market Mat-
     ter? Stock Prices And The Investment Of Equity-Dependent FirmsÂ”, Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, 969-1006.

[13] Baker, Malcolm and JeÂ¤rey Wurgler (2006) Â“Investor Sentiment and the Cross-Section of Stock
     ReturnsÂ”, Journal of Finance, 61 (4), 1645-1680.

[14] Baker, Malcolm and JeÂ¤rey Wurgler (2007) Â“Investor Sentiment in the Stock MarketÂ”, Journal
     of Economic Perspectives, 21(2), 129-152.

[15] Bakke, Tor-Erik and Toni Whited (2010) Â“Which Firms Follow the Market? An Analysis of
     Corporate Investment DecisionsÂ”, Review of Financial Studies, 23, 1941-1980.

[16] Barlevy, Gadi and Pietro Veronesi (2003) Â“Rational panics and stock market crashesÂ”, Journal
     of Economic Theory, 110, 234-263.

[17] Beaudry, Paul and Franck Portier (2006) Â“Stock Prices, News, and Economic FluctuationsÂ”,
     American Economic Review, 96(4): 1293-1307.

[18] Benhabib, Jess, Xuewen Liu and Pengfei Wang (2014) Â“Sentiments, Financial Markets, and
     Macroeconomic FluctuationsÂ”, Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2562067.

[19] Benhabib, Jess and Pengfei Wang (2013) Â“Private Information and Sunspots in Sequential
     Asset MarketsÂ”, Journal of Economic Theory, forthcoming.

[20] Benhabib, Jess, Pengfei Wang and Yi Wen (2013) Â“Uncertainty and Sentiment-Driven Equi-
     libriaÂ”, NBER Working Paper No. 18878.

[21] Benhabib, Jess, Pengfei Wang and Yi Wen (2015) Â“Sentiments and Aggregate Demand Fluc-
     tuationsÂ”, Econometrica, 83, 549-585.

[22] Bergemann, Dirk and Stephen Morris (2011) Â“Correlated Equilibrium in Games with Incom-
     plete InformationÂ”, mimeo.



                                               47
[23] Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler (1989) Â“Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctua-
     tionsÂ”, American Economic Review, 79(1), 14-31.
[24] Bond, Phillip, Alex Edmans and Itay Goldstein (2012) Â“The Real EÂ¤ects of Financial MarketsÂ”,
     Annual Review of Financial Economics, 4, 339-360.
[25] Bond, Philip, Itay Goldstein and Edward Simpson Prescott (2010) Â“Market-Based Corrective
     ActionsÂ”, Review of Financial Studies, 23, 781-820.
[26] Campbell, John and Robert Shiller (1988) Â“Stock Prices, Earnings, and Expected DividendsÂ”,
     Journal of Finance, 43 (3), 661-676.
[27] Chen, Qi, Itay Goldstein and Wei Jiang (2007) Â“Price Informativeness and Investment Sensi-
     tivity to Stock PriceÂ”, Review of Financial Studies, 20, 619-650.
[28] Chudik, Alexander and Marcel Fratzscher (2012) Â“Liquidity, Risk and the Global Transmission
     of the 2007-08 Financial Crisis and the 2010-11 Sovereign Debt CrisisÂ”, mimeo.
[29] Connolly, Robert and Albet Wang (2003) Â“International equity market comovements: Eco-
     nomic fundamentals or contagion?Â” Paci c-Basin Finance Journal, 11, 23-43.
[30] Culter, David, James Poterba and Lawrence Summers (1989) Â“What moves stock pricesÂ”,
     Journal of Portfolio Management, 15, 4-12.
[31] De Bondt, Werner and Richard Thaler (1987) Â“Further Evidence on Investor Overreaction and
     Stock Market SeasonalityÂ”, Journal of Finance, 42 (3), 557-581.
[32] Dow, James and Gary Gorton (1997) Â“Stock Market EÂ¢ciency and Economic EÂ¢ciency: Is
     There a Connection?Â”, Journal of Finance, 52, 1087-1129.
[33] Fama, Eugene and Kenneth French (1989) Â“Business conditions and expected returns on stocks
     and bondsÂ”, Journal of Financial Economics, 25 (1), 23-49.
[34] Fama, Eugene and Kenneth French (2002) Â“The Equity PremiumÂ”, Journal of Finance, 57
     (2), 637-659.
[35] Farmer, Roger (1999) The Macroeconomics of Self-Ful lling Prophecies, 2nd ed., MIT Press,
     Cambridge.
[36] Fishman, Michael and Kathleen Hagerty (1992) Â“Insider Trading and the EÂ¢ciency of Stock
     PricesÂ”, RAND Journal of Economics, 23, 106-122.
[37] Foucault, Thierry and Thomas Gehrig (2008) Â“Stock Price Informativeness, Cross-Listings and
     Investment DecisionsÂ”, Journal of Financial Economics, 88, 146-168.
[38] Foucault, Thierry and Laurent Fresard (2014) Â“Learning From PeersÂ’ Stock Prices and Cor-
     porate InvestmentÂ”, Journal of Financial Economics, 111, 554-577.
[39] Fox, Merritt, Randall Morck, Bernard Yeung and Artyom Durnev (2003) Â“Law, Share Price
     Accuracy, and Economic Performance: The New EvidenceÂ”, Michigan Law Review, 102 (3),
     331-386.
[40] Gaballo, Gaetano (2013) Â“Price Dispersion and Private UncertaintyÂ”, mimeo.
[41] Goldstein, Itay and Alexander Guembel (2008) Â“Manipulation and the Allocational Role of
     PricesÂ”, Review of Economic Studies, 75, 133-164.

                                               48
[42] Goldstein, Itay, Emre Ozdenoren and Kathy Yuan (2011) Â“Learning and Complementarities
     in Speculative AttacksÂ”, Review of Economic Studies, 78(1), 263-292.

[43] Goldstein, Itay, Emre Ozdenoren and Kathy Yuan (2013) Â“Trading Frenzies and Their Impact
     on Real InvestmentÂ”, Journal of Financial Economics, 109, 566-582.

[44] Goldstein, Itay and Liyan Yang (2013) Â“Good Disclosure, Bad DisclosureÂ”, mimeo.

[45] Grossman, Sanford and Joseph Stiglitz (1980) Â“On the Impossibility of Informationally EÂ¢-
     cient MarketsÂ”, American Economic Review, 70, 393-408.

[46] Hayek, Friedrich (1945) Â“The Use of Knowledge in SocietyÂ”, American Economic Review, 35,
     519-530.

[47] Hellwig, Christian and Laura Veldkamp (2009) Â“Knowing What Others Know: Coordination
     Motives in Information AcquisitionÂ”, Review of Economic Studies, 76, 223-251.

[48] Hirshleifer, David (2001) Â“Investor Psychology and Asset PricingÂ”, Journal of Finance, 56,
     1533-1597.

[49] Hirshleifer, David and Tyler Shumway (2003) Â“Good Day Sunshine: Stock Returns and the
     WeatherÂ”, Journal of Finance, 58 (3), 1009-1032.

[50] Hirshleifer, David, Avanidhar Subrahmanyam and Sheridan Titman (2006) Â“Feedback and the
     Success of Irrational InvestorsÂ”, Journal of Financial Economics, 81, 311-338.

[51] Holmstrom, Bengt and Jean Tirole (1997) Â“Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds, and
     the Real SectorÂ”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 663-691.

[52] Huang, Shiyang and Yao Zeng (2014) Â“Investment Waves under Cross LearningÂ”, mimeo.

[53] Kamstra, Mark, Lisa Kramer and Maurice Levi (2003) Â“Winter Blues: A SAD Stock Market
     CycleÂ”, American Economic Review, 93(1): 324-343.

[54] Karolyi, Andrew and Rene Stulz (1996) Â“Why do markets move together? An investigation of
     U.S.- Japan stock return co-movementsÂ”, Journal of Finance, 51, 951-986.

[55] King, Mervyn and Sushil Wadhwani (2000) Â“Transmission of volatility between stock marketsÂ”,
     Review of Financial Studies, 3, 5-33.

[56] Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro and John Moore (1997) Â“Credit CyclesÂ”, Journal of Political Economy 105
     (2): 211Â–248.

[57] Kurlat, Pablo and Laura Veldkamp (2012) Â“Shall We Regulate Financial Information?Â”,
     mimeo.

[58] Lamont, Owen and Jeremy Stein (2006) Â“Investor Sentiment and Corporate Finance: Micro
     and MacroÂ”, American Economic Review, 96(2): 147-151.

[59] Leland, Hayne (1992) Â“Insider Trading: Should it be Prohibited?Â”, Journal of Political Econ-
     omy, 100, 859-887.

[60] Lettau, Martin, Sydney Ludvigson and Jessica Wachter (2008) Â“The Declining Equity Pre-
     mium: What Role Does Macroeconomic Risk Play?Â” Review of Financial Studies, 21 (4):
     1653-1687.


                                               49
[61] Levchenko, Andrei and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar (2015), Â“TFP, News, and Â“Sentiments:Â” The
     International Transmission of Business CyclesÂ”, mimeo.

[62] Levine, Ross (2005) Â“Finance and Growth: Theory and EvidenceÂ”, in Handbook of Economic
     Growth, Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf (eds.)

[63] Luo, Yuanzhi (2005) Â“Do Insiders Learn from Outsiders? Evidence from Mergers and Acqui-
     sitionsÂ”, Journal of Finance, 60, 1951-1982.

[64] Morris, Stephen and Hyun Song Shin (2002) Â“Social Value of Public InformationÂ”, American
     Economic Review, 92(5): 1521-1534.

[65] Ozdenoren, Emre and Kathy Yuan (2008) Â“Feedback EÂ¤ects and Asset PricesÂ”, Journal of
     Finance, 63(4), 1939-1975.

[66] Peck, James (2014) Â“A Battle of Informed Traders and the Market Game Foundations for
     Rational Expectations EquilibriumÂ”, Games and Economic Behavior, 88, 153-173.

[67] Peck, James and Karl Shell (1991) Â“Market Uncertainty: Correlated and Sunspot Equilibria
     in Imperfectly Competitive EconomiesÂ”, Review of Economic Studies, 58, 1011-29.

[68] Perri, Fabrizio and Vincenzo Quadrini (2013) Â“International RecessionsÂ”, mimeo.

[69] Salomons, Roelof and Henk Grootveld (2003) Â“The equity risk premium: emerging vs. devel-
     oped marketsÂ”, Emerging Markets Review, 4 (2), 121-144.

[70] Stock Prices and Wall Street Weather

[71] Saunders, Edward (1993) Â“Stock Prices and Wall Street WeatherÂ”, American Economic Re-
     view, 83 (5), 1337-1345.

[72] Sockin, Michael and Wei Xiong (2012) Â“Informational Frictions and Commodity MarketsÂ”,
     Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

[73] Subrahmanyam, Avanidhar and Sheridan Titman (1999) Â“The Going-Public Decision and the
     Development of Financial MarketsÂ”, Journal of Finance, 54, 1045-1082.

[74] Subrahmanyam, Avanidhar and Sheridan Titman (2013) Â“Financial Market Shocks and the
     MacroeconomyÂ”, Review of Financial Studies, 26, 11, 2687-2717.

[75] Vives, Xavier (2014) Â“On The Possibility Of Informationally EÂ¢cient MarketsÂ”, Journal of
     the European Economic Association, 12, 1200-1239.

[76] Yi Wen (2002) Â“The business Cycle EÂ¤ects of ChristmasÂ”, Journal of Monetary Economics,
     49, 6, 1289-1314.

[77] Yuan, Kathy (2005) Â“Asymmetric Price Movements and Borrowing Constraints: A REE Model
     of Crisis, Contagion, and ConfusionÂ”, Journal of Finance, 60 (1): 379-411.




                                              50
