                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          ENVIRONMENTAL BENEFITS FROM DRIVING ELECTRIC VEHICLES?

                                          Stephen P. Holland
                                            Erin T. Mansur
                                          Nicholas Z. Muller
                                           Andrew J. Yates

                                         Working Paper 21291
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21291


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2015




We thank Gregory Grissom for his research assistance. We thank Joseph Aldy, Matthew Kahn, Joseph
Shapiro, and seminar participants at POWER, NBER, and ASSA conferences for helpful comments
and suggestions. Special thanks to Gloria Helfand and David Brzezinski for data. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Stephen P. Holland, Erin T. Mansur, Nicholas Z. Muller, and Andrew J. Yates. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Environmental Benefits from Driving Electric Vehicles?
Stephen P. Holland, Erin T. Mansur, Nicholas Z. Muller, and Andrew J. Yates
NBER Working Paper No. 21291
June 2015
JEL No. D62,H23,Q53,Q54

                                             ABSTRACT

Electric vehicles offer the promise of reduced environmental externalities relative to their gasoline
counterparts. We combine a theoretical discrete-choice model of new vehicle purchases, an econometric
analysis of the marginal emissions from electricity, and the AP2 air pollution model to estimate the
environmental benefit of electric vehicles. First, we find considerable variation in the environmental
benefit, implying a range of second-best electric vehicle purchase subsidies from $3025 in California
to -$4773 in North Dakota, with a mean of -$742. Second, over ninety percent of local environmental
externalities from driving an electric vehicle in one state are exported to others, implying that electric
vehicles may be subsidized locally, even though they may lead to negative environmental benefits
overall. Third, geographically differentiated subsidies can reduce deadweight loss, but only modestly.
Fourth, the current federal purchase subsidy of $7500 has greater deadweight loss than a no-subsidy
policy.


Stephen P. Holland                                  Nicholas Z. Muller
Bryan School of Business and Economics              Department of Economics
University of North Carolina, Greensboro            Warner Hall, 305D
P.O. Box 26165                                      Middlebury College
Greensboro, NC 27402-6165                           303 College Street
and NBER                                            Middlebury, VT 05753
sphollan@uncg.edu                                   and NBER
                                                    nicholas.muller74@gmail.com
Erin T. Mansur
Dartmouth College                                   Andrew J. Yates
100 Tuck Hall                                       Department of Economics
Hanover, NH 03755                                   and Curriculum for the
and NBER                                            Environment and Ecology
erin.mansur@dartmouth.edu                           University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
                                                    CB 3305
                                                    Chapel Hill, NC 27599
                                                    ajyates@email.unc.edu




A supplemental appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w21291
1         Introduction
Due to a combination of factors, including technological advances, environmental concerns,
and entrepreneurial audacity, the market for pure electric vehicles, which was moribund
for more than a century, is poised for a dramatic revival.1 Several models are already
selling in considerable volumes. The portfolio of electric vehicles is beginning to span the
consumer vehicle choice set. Almost all major manufacturers are bringing new models to
the market. The Federal Government is encouraging these developments by providing a
significant subsidy for the purchase of an electric vehicle, and some states augment the
federal subsidy with their own additional subsidy.
        The subsidies reflect beliefs that electric vehicles generate a range of benefits includ-
ing: decreased reliance on imported oil, insulation from oil price shocks, and a reduction
in environmental impacts.2 This paper explores the latter with a particular focus on the
air pollution emissions generated by driving a vehicle, including both greenhouse gasses
(GHGs) and local pollutants. Rather than simply accepting the assertion of environmental
benefits from electric vehicle use, we conduct a rigorous comparison of the environmental
consequences of gasoline and electric vehicles by extending and integrating existing modeling
tools.
        There are two factors that motivate our exploration of the ex ante claims of environmental
benefits from electric vehicles. First, and most obvious, despite being treated by regulators
as “zero emission vehicles”, electric vehicles are not necessarily emissions free. In 2014, the
U.S. Department of Energy reported that nearly 70 percent of electricity generated in the
U.S. is produced by burning coal and natural gas. In many locations in the country, the
comparison between a gasoline vehicle and an electric one is really a comparison between
burning gasoline or a mix of coal and natural gas to move the vehicle. It is well-known that
coal has higher emissions than oil which has higher emissions than natural gas. Thus, the
relative emissions intensity per vehicle mile traveled is not immediately clear, despite strong
beliefs otherwise.
    1
    http://energy.gov/articles/history-electric-car.
    2
    http://energy.gov/eere/vehicles/ev-everywhere-grand-challenge-does-10-year-vision-plug-electric-
vehicles.



                                                    1
      Second, there are significant physical differences between emissions from gasoline and
electric vehicles. This is due to the distributed nature of the electricity grid as well as the
height at which emissions occur. Charging an electric vehicle increases electricity demand
which is met by (potentially) several power plants that may be quite distant from where
the vehicle is driven. In contrast, emissions from a gasoline vehicle occur where the vehicle
is driven. Even if the two vehicle types are driven in the same location, their emission
patterns will be spatially distinct. Because air pollution damages depend on the location of
emissions (Muller and Mendelsohn, 2009), the damages associated with driving the vehicles
in one place may differ greatly from the damages associated with driving the vehicles in
another place. As for emissions height, gasoline vehicles emit pollutants at or near the
ground while power plant discharges occur hundreds of feet above the ground, leading to
additional heterogeneity in the damages produced by the two vehicle types (Muller, Tong,
and Mendelsohn, 2009). Evaluating these sources of heterogeneity requires careful attention
to the complex interactions among the underlying economic and physical systems.
      These factors generate critical questions as to the merits of the federal subsidy. The first
factor questions the policy in terms of its sign: is it better to subsidize or tax electric vehicle
purchases? The second factor raises concerns regarding the one-size-fits-all design of the
subsidy. With heterogeneity in the environmental benefits of electric vehicles, what are the
welfare benefits of differentiated policy (i.e., allowing policy to vary by location)?
      Our analysis addresses these questions. We determine the environmental benefit of elec-
tric vehicles relative to comparable gasoline vehicles accounting for heterogeneity in the
externalities from both types of vehicles. We analyze the welfare associated with policies
that target these externalities, such as subsidies on the purchase of an electric vehicle and
taxes on electric and/or gasoline miles, and we consider the welfare benefits of differentiated
policy.
      To accomplish these tasks, we extend and integrate three component models. The first
component uses a theoretical discrete choice transportation model to analyze consumer choice
between electric and gasoline vehicles and welfare issues.3 The second component builds on
  3
   Examples of theoretical discrete choice transportation models include De Borger (2001), De Borger
and Mayeres (2007), and Parry and Small (2005). Differentiated policy is analyzed by Weitzman (1974),
Mendelsohn (1986), Stavins (1996), Banzhaf and Chupp (2012), Muller and Mendelsohn (2009), and Fowlie


                                                 2
the econometric analysis of the relationship between electricity generation and air pollution
emissions to analyze the effects of changes in electricity load due to charging electric vehicles
on emissions from individual electric power plants.4 The third component builds on air
pollution integrated assessment models to describe the relationship between emissions from
a given smokestack or tailpipe and damages at a given location.5 Combining the components
together yields a powerful and unprecedented modeling framework for analyzing electric
vehicle policy.6
    Our first set of results documents the considerable heterogeneity in the environmental
benefit of an electric vehicle relative to a gasoline vehicle. This benefit can be large and
positive, large and negative, or negligible, depending on the location. For example, California
has relatively large damages from gasoline vehicles and a relatively clean electric grid, which
implies a large positive environmental benefit of an electric vehicle. These conditions are
reversed in North Dakota. In New York City and rural Nevada, the environmental benefit
is negligible. Using the environmental benefit, we calculate the welfare maximizing (second-
best) subsidies on electric vehicle purchases. Even in locations like California, subsidy values
are significantly less than the current federal subsidy. And in North Dakota the subsidy is
negative, implying a tax on the purchase an electric vehicle. The national average subsidy
for the purchase of an electric vehicle is estimated to be -$742. Thus, on average in the U.S.
for our study period, the second-best purchase policy is a tax, not a subsidy.7
    Our second set of results shows the remarkable degree to which electric vehicles driven
in one location lead to environmental externalities in other locations. For example, at the
and Muller (2013).
   4
     See Graff Zivin et al (2014) and Holland and Mansur (2008).
   5
     Previous works includes Mendelsohn (1980), Burtraw et al. (1998), Mauzerall et al. (2005), Tong et al.
(2006), Fann et al. (2009), Levy et al. (2009), Muller and Mendelsohn (2009), Henry et al. (2011), and
Mauzerall et al. (2005). In our application of integrated assessment, we model both ground-level emissions
and power plant emissions throughout the contiguous U.S. In contrast to prior work, we report damages
within the county of emission, within the state of emission, and in total (across all receptors).
   6
     Babaee et al (2014), Graff Zivin et al (2014), Michalek et al (2011), and Tessum et al (2014) analyze the
benefits of electric vehicles at the aggregate level. Li et al. (2015) consider variation in damages from electric
vehicles but assume uniform damages from gasoline vehicles. Grissom (2013) considers variation in damages
from gasoline vehicles but does not account for local pollution from electric vehicle charging. Our study is
the first to consider the geographic variation in damages from both local and global pollutants emitted by
both gasoline and electric vehicles and to tie this variation to a consumer choice model to evaluate welfare.
   7
     Our electricity grid data are from the period 2010-2012 and the emissions inventory used by AP2 is from
2011. These are the latest years for which data are available.



                                                        3
state level, ninety-one percent of local pollution damages from driving an electric vehicle
are exported to states other than the state in which the vehicle is driven. In contrast, only
eighteen percent of local pollution damages from driving a gasoline vehicle are exported to
other states. This discrepancy has interesting political economy implications. Suppose that
a given state is considering whether or not to implement a subsidy on the purchase of an
electric vehicle. It is not obvious whether the state will consider full damages (damages
across all states), or only native damages (those damages which actually occur in the given
state) when setting policy. Moreover, state regulators face incentives in current air pollution
policy that emphasize within-state consequences of emissions. Central aspects of federal air
pollution policy, namely the National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) established
by Title I of the Clean Air Act, emphasize compliance with ambient pollution limits within
states. Although there are constraints on the extent of exported pollution, especially from
power plants, the NAAQS clearly encourage local compliance. All else equal this would
lead state regulators to focus on in-state damage. The difference between using full and
native damages in determining the second-best subsidy may be considerable. Accounting
for full damages the second-best subsidy is positive in 12 states. Accounting for only native
damages, the second-best subsidy is positive in 34 states.
   The final set of results assesses the deadweight loss of various second-best policies as well
as the welfare gains from differentiated policy. The theoretical analysis of our discrete choice
model reveals that the welfare gains from differentiated subsidies depend on the higher order
moments of the distribution of environmental benefits. Calibrating this model gives us an
estimate of the magnitude of these gains. For electric vehicle subsidies, we find large dead-
weight loss and small welfare gains from differentiation. For taxes on miles, we find small
(or zero) deadweight loss and larger welfare gains from differentiation. We also evaluate the
current federal policy of a $7500 subsidy on the purchase of an electric vehicle relative to
a default policy in which there is no subsidy at all. Because electric vehicles, on average,
generate greater environmental externalities than gasoline vehicles, the current federal pol-
icy has greater deadweight loss than the no-subsidy policy. Moreover, the welfare difference
between these two policies increases substantially as the electric vehicle adoption rate in-
creases, rising from $200 million at recent adoption rates to $3.7 billion at adoption rates


                                               4
that are foreseeable in the near future (i.e., five percent of sales).
        Public policy evaluation is especially difficult and important in contexts characterized
by: (i) strong prior beliefs as to the merits of the policy and/or its targeted outcome, (ii)
complex interactions among economic and physical systems, and (iii) large, or economically
significant outcomes. The federal policy which encourages the purchase of electric vehicles
exhibits each of these traits. As such, the present study is warranted and should be of broad
interest to economists, policymakers, consumers, and the environmental community.
        In Section 2 we develop a simple general equilibrium model that includes discrete choice
over vehicle type as well as environmental externalities from driving. We derive several
theoretical results about second-best policy choices and the welfare benefits from differenti-
ated policies. In Section 3 we describe the methods by which we determine emissions and
damages from electric and gasoline vehicles. Section 4 presents the results. In Section 5 we
consider how the interaction with the Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards
may effect the second-best subsidies on electric vehicles and we discuss several important
caveats to our analysis. Section 6 concludes.



2         Theoretical model
Consider a theoretical discrete choice transportation model in which consumers in the market
for a new vehicle choose between a gasoline vehicle and an electric vehicle.8 Consumers obtain
utility from a composite consumption good x (with price normalized to one) and from miles
driven over the life of the selected vehicle, either gasoline miles g or electric miles e. We
allow for several policy variables. The government may provide a subsidy s for the purchase
of an electric vehicle, place a tax tg on gasoline miles, a tax te on electric miles, or some
combination of these policies. We hold fuel and vehicle prices fixed.9
    8
     Examples of general discrete choice models are Anderson et al. (1992) and Small and Rosen (1981).
Examples of theoretical discrete choice transportation models are de Borger (2001) and de Borger and
Mayeres (2007). In Supplementary Appendix A, we extend the model to include several vehicles of each
type.
   9
     This is consistent with a model in which vehicles and miles are produced by price-taking firms using
constant returns to scale technology.




                                                   5
       The indirect utility of purchasing a gasoline vehicle is


                        Vg = max x + f (g) such that x + (pg + tg )g = I − pΨ ,
                                 x,g



where pΨ is the price of the gasoline vehicle, pg is the price of a gasoline mile, I is income,
and f is a concave function. Likewise, the indirect utility of purchasing an electric vehicle is


                      Ve = max x + h(e) such that x + (pe + te )e = I − (pW − s),
                           x,e



where pW is the price of the electric vehicle, pe is the price of an electric mile, and h is a
concave function. Because the objective function in these optimization problems is quasi-
linear, there are no income effects.10
       Following the discrete choice literature, we assume that the choice of vehicle is influenced
by i.i.d. random variables g and e drawn from a common extreme value distribution.11
Accordingly, we define the conditional utility, given that a consumer elects the gasoline
vehicle, as
                                              Ug = Vg + g ,

and the conditional utility, given that a consumer selects the electric vehicle, as


                                              Ue = Ve + e .


A consumer selects the gasoline vehicle if Ug > Ue . This occurs with probability

                                                             exp(Vg /µ)
                         π ≡ Probability(Ug > Ue ) =                            ,
                                                        exp(Vg /µ) + exp(Ve /µ)

where µ is proportional to the standard deviation of the extreme value random variables.
  10
     The marginal utility of income is constant, the number of miles driven does not depend on income, and
the choice of vehicle does not depend on income.
  11
     The extreme value distribution (or double exponential distribution) has two parameters, η and µ. The
expected value is µγ + η where γ is Euler’s constant (0.577). The variance is µ2 (3.14159)2 /6.




                                                    6
The expected utility of a new vehicle purchase is given by


                         E [max[Ue , Ug ]] = µ ln (exp(Ve /µ) + exp(Vg /µ)) .


       Consumers create negative environmental externalities by driving, but ignore the damages
from these externalities when making choices about the type of vehicle and number of miles.
In our empirical analysis, gasoline vehicles emit several pollutants from their tailpipes and
electric vehicles cause emissions of several pollutants from the smokestacks of electric power
plants that charge them. Because the damages from these pollutants may be global or local,
we introduce multiple locations into the model.


2.1       Uniform vs. differentiated regulation

Let m denote the number of locations and let αi denote the proportion of the total population
of new vehicle buyers that resides in location i. An important feature of our model is that
driving in one location may lead to local damages in that location, as well as local damages
in other locations. Accordingly, we define full damages due to driving in location i as the sum
across all locations of local damages plus the global damages. Assuming that both global
and local damage functions are linear allows us to characterize full damages with a single
variable for each type of vehicle.12 Let δgi denote the marginal full damages (in dollars per
mile) from driving a gasoline vehicle in location i, and δei denote the marginal full damages
(in dollars per mile) from driving an electric vehicle in location i.
       We determine welfare maximizing purchase subsidies under both uniform regulation (the
same policy applies to all locations) and differentiated regulation (policy may vary from
location to location). Because the first-best policy in our model is differentiated Pigovian
taxes on both types of miles, we refer to the welfare maximizing subsidies as second-best.13
       First we study differentiated regulation. Here there are m local governments that select
location-specific purchase subsidies. Let Ri denote the expected government revenue gen-
  12
     Prior research on the damages from local air pollutants has found strong evidence of constant marginal
damages. See Muller and Mendelsohn (2009); Fowlie and Muller (2013). Constant marginal damages is also
consistent with the EPA’s social cost of carbon calculations.
  13
     Results for uniform taxes on miles are in the Supplementary Appendix B.



                                                    7
erated by the purchase of a new vehicle in location i.14 For the moment, we assume local
government i cares about full damages due to driving in location i. It selects the purchase
subsidy si to maximize the welfare Wi associated with the purchase of a new vehicle within
the location, defined as the sum of expected utility and expected revenue less expected
pollution damage:15


                Wi = µ (ln(exp(Vei /µ) + exp(Vgi /µ))) + Ri − (δgi πi gi + δei (1 − πi )ei ).


       Optimizing the welfare function gives the the following Proposition (all proofs are in the
Appendix).

Proposition 1. The second-best differentiated subsidy on the purchase of the electric vehicle
in location i is given by s∗i where


                                            s∗i = (δgi gi − δei ei ) .


       The term δgi gi − δei ei is simply the difference between the full damages over the driving
lifetime of a gasoline vehicle and the full damages over the driving lifetime of an electric
vehicle.16 Even if the electric vehicle emits less pollution per mile than the gasoline vehicle,
the sign of the subsidy is ambiguous, because the number of miles driven may be different.
If the miles driven are indeed the same, and the electric vehicle emits less pollution per mile
than the gasoline vehicle, then the subsidy is positive. We refer to the difference δgi − δei
as the environmental benefit of an electric vehicle. This concept assumes that the number
of miles driven by the two types of vehicles is the same (an assumption we will maintain in
most of the empirical section below).
       Next we study uniform regulation. Here a central government selects a uniform subsidy
that applies to all m locations. The government’s objective is to maximize ∑ αi Wi , which
  14
     Alternatively we could have a single revenue equation and assume that a central government makes the
location-specific policy choices. But, given our subsequent distinction between full and native damages, it is
natural to consider distinct local governments.
  15
     Because there are no income effects, the consumer component of welfare is equivalent to the standard
notion of compensating variation (Small and Rosen 1981).
  16
     The simple structure for the second-best subsidy is due to the fact that we only have two vehicles in
the choice set. If there are two or more gasoline vehicles in the choice set, then the second-best subsidy will
depend on the various cross-price elasticities (see Supplementary Appendix A).

                                                        8
is the weighted average of welfare across locations. The next proposition delineates the
second-best uniform subsidy. It also describes an approximation formula for the welfare gain
in moving from uniform regulation to differentiated regulation.

Proposition 2. Assume that prices, income, and the functions h and g are the same across
locations. The second-best uniform subsidy on the purchase of an electric vehicle is given by
s̃, where
                                   s̃ = ((∑ αi δgi )g − (∑ αi δei )e) .

Furthermore, let W(S ∗ ) be the weighted average of welfare from using the second-best differ-
entiated subsidies s∗i in each location and let W(S̃) be the weighted average of welfare from
using the second-best uniform subsidy s̃ in each location. To a second-order approximation,
we have

                             1          1                   1
            W(S ∗ ) − W(S̃) ≈ π(1 − π) ( ∑ αi (s∗i − s̃)2 − 2 (1 − 2π) ∑ αi (s∗i − s̃)3 ) ,
                             2          µ                  µ

where π is evaluated at the uniform subsidy.

       Proposition 2 is most easily interpreted in the special case in which the population of
new vehicle buyers in the same in each location (αi = n1 ) and the electric vehicle and gasoline
vehicle are driven the same number of miles (g = e). Here the second-best uniform subsidy
s̃ is equal to the average environmental benefit multiplied by the number of miles driven.
And the approximate welfare gain from differentiation is a function of the second and third
moments of the distribution of the environmental benefits. This provides a point of com-
parison to previous work on differentiated regulation.17 But the practical application of the
approximation is limited because it depends on the value of µ. Recall that this parameter is
proportional to the standard deviation of the random variables in the utility function. If we
determine a value for µ, either by an econometric procedure (Dubin and McFadden 1984)
or by a calibration procedure (De Borger and Mayeres 2007), then we will generally be able
to determine the exact numerical value of the welfare gain, which eliminates the need for an
  17
    Mendelsohn (1986) finds the exact welfare improvement from differentiation to be a function of the
second moment of the distribution of the relevant environmental parameter. The reasons for this difference
are discussed in Supplementary Appendix C. See also Jacobsen et al (2015).


                                                    9
approximation.


2.2    Full vs. native damages

So far we have assumed that local government i is concerned with the full damages caused
by driving in location i. But this may not necessarily hold. For example, when an electric
vehicle in driven in Pennsylvania, regulators in Pennsylvania may be more concerned about
environmental damages which occur in Pennsylvania than they are about downwind damages
that occur in New York. To account for this possibility, it is useful to break up full damages
into native damages (i.e. those damages which occur in location i) and exported damages
(i.e. those which occur in other locations.)
   If a local government only cares about native damages, then its objective is to maximize


             Ŵi = µ (ln(exp(Vei /µ) + exp(Vgi /µ))) + Ri − (δ̂gi πi gi + δ̂ei (1 − πi )ei ),


where δ̂gi and δ̂ei are the marginal native damages in location i due to driving a vehicle in
location i. It follows from Proposition 1 that the second-best purchase subsidy based on
native damages, denoted by ŝ∗i , is given by


                                         ŝ∗i = (δ̂gi gi − δ̂ei ei ) .


We would expect considerable heterogeneity across locations in the relationship between
native and full damages due to the various chemical and physical processes that govern the
flow of local pollution. In general, however, we would expect electric vehicles to export more
pollution than gasoline vehicles, due to the distributed nature of electricity generation as well
as the fact that smokestacks release emissions much higher in the atmosphere than tailpipes.
The greater the extent to which the electric emissions are exported to other locations, the
greater the extent to which a given location may want to subsidize the purchase of an electric
vehicle.




                                                     10
3        Calculating air pollution damages
The theoretical model illustrates that the environmental benefit of an electric vehicle arises
from reduced damages relative to the gasoline vehicle it replaces. We calculate this benefit by
determining emissions per mile for electric and gasoline vehicles, and then mapping emissions
into damages, accounting for the fact that both emissions and damages may differ by location.
In these calculations, we use the county as the basic unit of location. We first give an overview
of our general procedure, and then describe the details of our two component empirical
models.
       We consider damages from five air pollutants: CO2 , SO2 , NOx , PM2.5 , and VOCs. These
pollutants account for the majority of global and local air pollution damages and have been
a major focus of public policy.18 Our set of electric vehicles includes each of the eleven
pure electric vehicles in the EPA fuel efficiency database for the 2014 model year. Our set of
gasoline vehicles is meant to capture the closest substitute in terms of non-price attributes to
each electric vehicle. Wherever possible, we use the gasoline-powered version of the identical
vehicle, e.g., the gasoline-powered Ford Focus for the electric Ford Focus.
       To determine the emissions per mile for each gasoline vehicle, we integrate data from
several sources. For CO2 and SO2 , emissions are directly proportional to gasoline usage, so
we use conversion factors in GREET scaled by the EPA’s MPG.19 We differentiate urban
and non-urban counties by using EPA’s city and highway mileage.20 For NOx emissions, we
use the Tier 2 emission standards for the vehicle “bin”. For PM2.5 and VOCs, we combine
the Tier 2 standards with GREET estimates of PM2.5 emissions from tires and brakes and
VOC emissions from evaporation. The implication of this procedure is that emissions per
mile for each gasoline vehicle only differ across urban and non-urban counties.21
       For electric vehicles, determining emissions per mile is more complicated. We begin with
the EPA estimate of MPG equivalent (i.e., the estimated kWh per mile).22 We adjust this
  18
     A more complete analysis would also include assessment of emissions from CO and toxics.
  19
     In the 2012 GREET model, developed by Argonne National Laboratory, the SO2 emissions rate is
0.00616 g/mile at 23.4 mpg. This is slightly higher than the Tier 2 allowed 30 ppm which would be 0.00485
g/mile at 23.4 mpg.
  20
     Urban counties are defined as counties which are part of a Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA).
  21
     The emissions per mile for our gasoline vehicles are reported in Table A in Supplementary Appendix D.
  22
     We use the combined city/highway EPA figure and do not differentiate electric vehicles by urban and



                                                   11
figure to account for the temperature profile of each county, because electric vehicles use
more electricity per mile in cold and hot weather.23 Next we use an econometric model
(described below) to estimate the marginal emissions factors (e.g., tons per kWh) for each of
our pollutants at each of 1486 power plants due to an increase in regional electricity load. We
combine these estimates with an assumed daily charging profile to determine the emissions
per mile at each power plant due to the charging of an electric vehicle in a given county.24
The implication of this procedure is that emissions per mile for each electric vehicle may
differ across any two counties.
    Next we map emissions into damages. For CO2 , we use the EPA social cost of carbon of
$41 per ton.25 For local pollutants, we use the AP2 model. This model calculates damages
per unit of a given local pollutant in each county (as described below). By multiplying
emissions per mile and damages per unit, and then aggregating across pollutants (and, for
electric vehicles, across power plants) we obtain the full damages per mile for each gasoline
vehicle and each electric vehicle in each county. As in the theoretical section, these full
damages account for global effects, local effects in the given county, and local effects in other
counties.
    To analyze any policy which affects multiple counties, we need a sense of the relative
importance of driving in the counties. We weight all summary statistics using Vehicle Miles
Travelled (VMT) in each county, as estimated by the EPA for their Motor Vehicle Emission
Simulator (MOVES).26
rural since regenerative braking leads to smaller differences in city and highway efficiencies.
   23
      This is due to both the decreased performance of the battery and the increased demand for climate
control (Yuksel and Michalek, forthcoming, 2015). Temperature also effects the performance of gasoline
vehicles, but the effects are much smaller, so we do not adjust gasoline MPG for temperature. We model
the electric vehicle range loss as a Gaussian distribution with no range loss at 68°F but a 33% range loss at
19.4°F. See Supplementary Appendix E. We explore how sensitive our findings are to this assumption, as
well as others, in Section 4.4.
   24
      We analyze eight charging profiles: our baseline profile using estimates from Electric Power Research
Institute (EPRI) (See Supplementary Appendix Figure 1 in Supplementary Appendix D), a flat profile, and
six profiles with non-overlapping four-hour charging blocks.
   25
      See http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/EPAactivities/economics/scc.html. We use the year 2015, 3%
discount rate estimate and convert it to 2014 dollars. Moreover, all monetary values in all model components
are also converted to 2014 dollars.
   26
      The theoretical model weights by αi (the number of new vehicle buyers). This is equivalent if vehicles
are driven the same number of miles per year in each county, and vehicles last the same number of years in
each county.




                                                     12
3.1       Econometric model: estimation of marginal emission factors
          from electricity use

To determine the emissions that result from electricity use to charge an electric vehicle, we
must determine which power plants respond (and how they respond) to increases in electricity
usage at different locations. The electricity grid in the contiguous U.S. consists of three main
“interconnections”: Eastern, Western, and Texas. Since there are substantial electricity flows
within each interconnection but quite limited flows between interconnections, we model each
interconnection separately. Within each interconnection, transmission constraints prevent
the free flow of electricity throughout the interconnection. Accordingly, we follow the North
American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC) and divide the three interconnections
into nine distinct regions.27 We use these nine NERC regions to define the spatial scale
for measuring emissions per kWh. In particular, our estimation strategy assumes that an
electric vehicle charged at any county within a given NERC region has the same marginal
emission factors as an electric vehicle charged at any other county within the same region.28
       Our data consists of hourly emissions of CO2 , SO2 , NOx , and PM2.5 at 1486 power plants
as well as hourly electricity consumption (i.e., electricity load) for each of our nine NERC
regions, for the years 2010-2012.29 We use these data to estimate the effect of electricity
load on emissions, employing methods similar to Graff Zivin et al. (2014) and Holland and
Mansur (2008). Like them, we allow for an integrated market where electricity consumed
within an interconnection may be provided by any power plant within that interconnection.
In contrast, however, we estimate the effect of changes in electricity load separately for each
power plant in the interconnection.
       The dependent variable in our analysis, yit , is power plant i’s hourly emissions (CO2 ,
  27
      See http://www.nerc.com for a description of NERC regions. We model the Eastern interconnection as
the six NERC regions (FRCC, MRO, NPCC, RFC, SERC, and SPP). We define the MRO region to include
all of the Midwest Independent Transmission System (MISO) territory (circa 2012), even those parts in other
regions. We split the Western interconnection between California and the rest of the WECC. The Texas
interconnection is simply the coterminous ERCOT.
   28
      There are some data on electricity load at NERC sub-regions. Due to a high degree of multi-collinearity,
our estimation strategy would likely not work at this level of disaggregation.
   29
      CO2 , SO2 , and NOx data are directly from the EPA CEMS. We construct hourly PM2.5 from hourly
generation and annual PM2.5 emissions rates. Power plant emissions of VOCs are negligible. More details
about this data are in Supplementary Appendix F.



                                                     13
SO2 , NOx , or PM2.5 ) at time t. For each power plant, we regress the dependent variable
on the contemporaneous electricity load in each of the regions within the power plant’s
interconnection. To account for different charging profiles, the coefficients on load vary by
hour of the day. The regression includes fixed effects for each hour of the day interacted
with the month of the sample. We regress:

          24 J(i)                                   24   12
      yit = ∑ ∑ βijh HOU Rh REGIONj LOADjt + ∑ ∑ αihm HOU Rh M ON T Hm + εit ,                (1)
          h=1 j=1                                   h=1 m=1


where J(i) equals the number of regions in the interconnection in which power plant i is
located, HOU Rh is an indicator variable for hour of the day h, REGIONj indicates elec-
tricity region j, M ON T Hm indicates month of the sample m, and LOADjt is the electricity
consumed in region j at time t. The coefficients of interest are the marginal emission factors
βijh , which represent the change in emissions at plant i from an increase in electricity usage
in region j in hour of the day h.


3.2      The AP2 model: determining damages from local air pollution

The AP2 model is an integrated assessment air pollution model.30 AP2 connects reported
emissions (USEPA, 2014) to estimates of ambient concentrations using an air quality model.
In particular, the air quality model maps emissions of ammonia, NOx , SO2 , PM2.5 , and
VOCs from each reported source of air pollution in the contiguous U.S. into ambient con-
centrations of SO2 , O3 , and PM2.5 at all receptor locations (i.e., the 3,110 counties in the
contiguous U.S.). The remaining components of AP2 then link these ambient concentrations
to exposures, physical effects, and monetary damages. Welfare endpoints covered by the
model include: human health, crop and timber yields, degradation of buildings and mate-
rial, and reduced visibility and recreation (Muller and Mendlsohn, 2007). Human exposures
are calculated using county-level population data for 2011 which are reported by the U.S.
Census. Crop and timber yields are reported by the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Dam-
ages associated with built structures, visibility, and recreation contribute a very small share
 30
    See Muller, 2011; 2012; 2014. The AP2 model is an updated version of the APEEP model (Muller
and Mendelsohn 2007; 2009; 2012; NAS NRC 2010; Muller, Mendelsohn, Nordhaus 2011; Henry, Muller,
Mendelsohn 2011). More details of our implementation of AP2 are given in Supplementary Appendix F.


                                               14
of total damage (Muller, Mendelsohn, Nordhaus, 2011)
       Exposures are translated into physical effects (e.g., premature deaths, cases of illness,
lost crop yields) using concentration-response functions reported in the related literature. In
terms of the share of total damages, the most important concentration-response functions
are those governing adult mortality. We use results from Pope et al., (2002) to specify the
effect of PM2.5 exposure on adult mortality rates and we use results from Bell et al (2004) to
specify the effect of O3 exposure on all-age mortality rates.31 Mortality risks, which comprise
the vast majority of damage from local air pollution, are then expressed in terms of monetary
terms using a $6 million value of a statistical life (VSL). Crop and timber yield effects from
pollution exposure are valued using 2011 market prices.
       Because of the focus of this paper on small changes to the vehicle fleet, calculation of
incremental damages per-unit mass emitted is necessary. The algorithm used to compute
damages per ton herein has been used in prior research (Muller and Mendelsohn, 2009;
Muller, Mendelsohn, and Nordhaus, 2011). Briefly, this entails the following steps. With all
sources in the U.S. emitting at their reported level in 2011, exposures, physical effects, and
monetary damages are computed. Then, for an emission from a particular power plant, AP2
adds one ton of SO2 , for example, to reported emissions for 2011. Exposures, physical effects,
and monetary damage are re-computed. The incremental damages per-unit mass is tabulated
as the difference in monetary damage between the baseline case and the add-one-ton case.
       Importantly, in computing per-unit emitted damages, AP2 aggregates the difference in
damages across all county receptors affected by the additional ton. As discussed above,
local governments may be more concerned about native damages rather than full damages.
We use the AP2 model in a novel way to determine both types of damages. To determine
full damages, we follow the usual procedure and aggregate damages at all receptors. To
determine native damages, we disaggregate the plume of damages resulting from emissions
at a given source in two ways. For in-state effects, native damages are limited to the change
in damages that occur within the state of emission. For in-county effects, native damages
encompass damages which occur within the county of emission.
  31
    In our sensitivity analysis, we show the effects of using a more recent concentration response functions
from Roman et al., 2008.



                                                    15
4       Results

4.1       Environmental benefit of electric vehicles

The environmental benefit of an electric vehicle depends on the difference between damages
from gasoline and electric vehicles. We begin with damages from electric vehicles. The right
panel of Figure 1 illustrates our baseline estimates of the damages (in cents per mile) for the
2014 electric Ford Focus by county. The variation is largely driven by the NERC regions,
although damages do vary within a region due to our county-specific temperature correction.
      Table 1 summarizes the data in Figure 1 and shows sensitivity with respect to charging
profiles.32 In the baseline EPRI profile, mean damages are 2.5 cents per mile (the equivalent
of 7.5 cents per kWh) but range from less than one cent per mile in California and the West
(WECC) to over four cents per mile in the Midwest (MRO). These regional differences in
emissions reflect the pollution intensity of the fuels used in each region’s generating capacity
as well as its electricity imports from other regions. There is some variation in damages
across the charging profiles. It is widely assumed, as in the EPRI charging profile, that
most electric vehicle charging will occur at night. However, damages could be reduced in the
Midwest (MRO) by over 1.5 cents per mile by charging between 1pm and 4pm, for example.
But generally, variation across charging profiles is much smaller than the variation across
NERC regions.
      The left columns in Table 2 summarize the distribution of damages across counties for
the electric Ford Focus as well as all other 2014 model year electric vehicles. For the electric
Ford Focus, the mean is 2.5 cents per mile with a range from under one cent (in the West)
to almost 5 cents (in the Midwest). The difference across vehicles is due solely to differences
in their efficiency (in kWh per mile). For example, the BYD e6 (the dirtiest electric vehicle)
uses approximately twice as many kWh per mile as the Chevy Spark (the cleanest electric
vehicle). Correspondingly, the mean, minimum, and maximum damages of the BYD e6 are
approximately double those of the Chevy Spark.
      We now turn to the damages from gasoline vehicles. The left panel of Figure 1 illustrates
the damages (in cents per mile) for the gasoline Ford Focus by county. The counties with
 32
      All results are in 2014$ and all summary statistics are weighted by VMT.


                                                     16
large damages correspond to major population centers because air pollution damages are
mostly comprised of premature mortality risks. These damages are summarized in the middle
columns of Table 2. For the gasoline Ford Focus, mean damages are two cents per mile (the
equivalent of $0.60 per gallon) but range from about a cent per mile to over four cents per
mile.33
       Notice that there is substantial overlap in the distributions of damages from gasoline and
electric vehicles. If these damages were highly correlated, then the environmental benefit
of an electric vehicle would be small in most counties. In fact, the damages are not highly
correlated (the correlation is 0.06). As a result, the environmental benefit varies substantially,
as shown in the right columns of Table 2. For example, gasoline vehicle damages are large
in Los Angeles (due to the large population and properties of the airshed) but electric
vehicle damages are small (due to the clean Western power grid). In this situation, the
environmental benefit is almost equal to gasoline damages (i.e., three to four cents per mile)
and hence electric vehicles have substantial environmental benefits. The opposite occurs in
the upper Midwest where gasoline vehicle damages are small (due to low population densities)
but electric vehicle damages are large (due to the prevalence of coal-fired generation in the
region and the temperature adjustment to electric vehicle range). Here the environmental
benefit of an electric vehicle is negative, and is almost equal to the electric vehicle damages.
Overall, the environmental benefit is negative on average for each of the electric vehicles in
Table 2.34 The electric Ford Focus is the median electric vehicle in terms of environmental
benefit, and we focus on it throughout the results section.
       Using Proposition 2, we can convert the environmental benefit into the second-best pur-
chase subsidy by assuming that both the electric vehicle and the gasoline vehicle are driven
150,000 miles.35 Figure 2 shows the second-best subsidies by county. Except for a few coun-
  33
     The mean damage per gallon of gasoline is $0.62 per gallon for each vehicle since the damages are
proportional to gasoline use and our substitute vehicles are all in the same Tier 2 “bin”.
  34
     This is due in large part to the fact that only 30% of the VMT occurs in the three regions with the
lowest marginal damages from electricity (see the last column of Table 1).
  35
     We are assuming that both types of vehicles have 10 year lifetimes, regardless of the number of miles
driven, and that both types of vehicles are driven 15,000 miles a year in the absence of any taxes on miles.
In practice, vehicle life depends on both years and miles driven. Moreover, it is not clear whether electric
vehicles will be driven more (due to lower costs per mile) or less (due to the inconvenience of charging) than
gasoline vehicles.




                                                     17
ties around New York City and Atlanta, the subsidy is negative throughout the eastern part
of the country (i.e. it is a tax on the purchase of electric vehicles). The subsidy is large and
negative in the Upper Midwest. On the other hand, it is positive in most places in the West,
and quite large in many counties in California. Overall, the second-best subsidy ranges from
about positive $5,000 to negative $5,000.
   In Table 3, we aggregate to the level of Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA). The MSAs
with the highest environmental benefit are all in California because electricity generation in
the West does not produce much air pollution. In these MSAs, the environmental benefits
are about two to three cents per mile (a second-best subsidy of up to $5000). The MSAs
with the lowest environmental benefit are all in the upper Midwest, again because of the
prevalence of coal-fired power stations. Here the environmental benefits are negative three
cents per mile (a second-best purchase tax of about $4000). Other large MSAs can have
either positive or negative environmental benefits. New York and Chicago have some of
the largest damages from gasoline vehicles, but environmental benefits from electric vehicles
are small or negative due to the large damages from electric vehicles. Electric vehicles
have substantial environmental benefits in the major Texas MSAs, due to relatively low
electric vehicle damages in Texas. However, for non-urban regions as well as for MSAs in
the Southeast, Northeast, and Midwest, the benefits from electric vehicles are negative.
   Table 4 contains a similar analysis at the state level. Compared to MSAs, the environ-
mental benefits of electric vehicles are smaller at the state level because of negative benefits
in non-urban areas. The largest environmental benefits are in California (a second-best sub-
sidy of $3,000) and other Western states. The lowest benefits are in the Upper Midwest (a
second-best tax of almost $5,000 in North Dakota.) There are only 12 states in which the
environmental benefit is positive, and Texas is the only high VMT state outside the Western
interconnection in which the environmental benefit is positive. The left panel of Figure 3
shows the second-best purchase subsidy by state. When driven in the average state, a 2014
electric Ford Focus causes $724 more environmental damages over its driving lifetime than
the equivalent gasoline Ford Focus.
   Despite these modest (or negative) environmental benefits of electric vehicles, the current
federal subsidy for electric vehicles is $7500. Many states have additional policies designed


                                              18
to encourage the adoption of electric vehicles.


4.2    Exporting pollution: full and native damages

Although both gasoline and electric vehicles export pollution, electric vehicles export pollu-
tion to a remarkable degree (the grid itself is distributed and emissions from power plants
are released from tall smokestacks intended to disperse pollutants over a wide area). To
illustrate this discrepancy, we first analyze transport of a specific pollutant from a specific
county. Panel A in Figure 4 illustrates the change in PM2.5 associated with a fleet of 10,000
gasoline-powered Ford Focus vehicles, each driven 15,000 miles in a year in Fulton County
Georgia. Most of the increase in PM2.5 is centered within a few nearby counties. Panel B
in Figure 4 shows the change in PM2.5 associated with the same number of miles driven by
electric powered Ford Focus vehicles that are charged in Fulton County, thereby increasing
the consumption of electricity in the Southeast (SERC). The spatial footprint of PM2.5 in
this case encompasses the entire eastern U.S.
   Our definition of native damages allows a more comprehensive analysis of pollution ex-
port. Table 5 shows native damages at both the state and county levels for both electric
and gasoline vehicles. For electric vehicles, full damages from local pollutants are 1.6 cents
per mile on average. Native state damages are only 0.15 cents per mile, and native county
damages are only 0.02 cents per mile. Thus on average 91% of electric vehicle damages from
local pollutants are exported from the state and 99% of are exported from the county. Local
damages from gasoline vehicles are exported to a much smaller extent. On average only 18%
of these damages are exported from a state and only 57% are exported from a county.
   Using native damages rather than full damages changes the environmental benefit calcu-
lation quite dramatically, especially at the lower tail of the distribution. In this lower tail,
gasoline full damages are small and electric full damages are large. Because most electric
vehicle damages are exported, both native gasoline damages and native electric damages are
small. This implies that the lower tail of environmental benefit moves from approximately
-3.5 cents per mile to approximately -0.06 cents per mile for county-level native damages.
In contrast, at the the upper tail of the distribution, electric vehicle damages were already
low, so accounting for native damages has a smaller impact on the environmental benefit.

                                              19
On average, the environmental benefit calculated using native damages is positive at both
the state and county level. Correspondingly, as illustrated in the right panel of Figure 3, the
state level second-best purchase subsidy, using native damages, is positive in 33 out of 48
states.
       Do state policymakers place greater emphasis on full or native damages when considering
electric vehicle subsidies? Eight states have implemented subsidies for the adoption of elec-
tric vehicles, above and beyond the federal subsidy: California ($2500), Colorado ($6000),
Georgia ($5000), Illinois ($4000), Maryland ($3000), Massachusetts ($2500), Texas ($2500)
and Utah ($1500). In addition, some states offer a variety of other incentives, including
carpool lane access, electricity discounts, and parking benefits.36 As shown in supplemen-
tary Appendix G, both actual subsidies and the number of other incentives are more highly
correlated with our calculated native damage subsidy than with our calculated full damage
subsidy. This evidence suggests that native damages may help explain state policymakers’
support for electric vehicle subsidies.


4.3       State and county differentiated policies

Our analysis shows that the environmental benefits of electric vehicles vary substantially
across locations. This raises the question of whether differentiated policies can lead to large
enough welfare gains to offset any additional implementation costs. To calculate these welfare
gains, we calibrate the discrete choice model developed in Section 2.37 In addition to electric
vehicle purchase subsidies, we also consider fuel-specific taxes on miles driven (i.e. VMT
taxes), because such taxes at the county level correspond to first-best policy in our model.
       Table 6a shows the deadweight losses for differentiated VMT tax policies. County-specific
taxes on electric miles and gasoline miles set at the Pigovian levels tei = δei and tgi = δgi have
zero deadweight loss. To calculate deadweight losses of other policies, we need to specify the
share of new vehicle purchases that would be electric under a default policy in which there
  36
     The Department of Energy maintains a database of alternative fuels policies by state:
http://www.afdc.energy.gov/laws/matrix?sort by=tech. A small number of states impose a special regis-
tration fee for electric vehicles. State policies change frequently. Our data accounts for policies in place on
January 1, 2015.
  37
     See Supplementary Appendix H for more details.



                                                      20
is no subsidy at all (or business as usual.) If the share would be 5%, we refer to this as the
5% BAU EV share case. Given a 5% BAU EV share, state-specific taxes have a deadweight
loss of $102 million per year, and uniform federal taxes has a deadweight loss of $273 million
per year.38 This implies a gain from differentiation of $171 million (moving from federal to
state) and of $273 million (moving from federal to county). The middle and right columns
of Table 6a show differentiated policies in which there is only a single tax on one of the fuels.
The second-best single tax is smaller than the Pigovian tax, because consumers can avoid
taxation by substituting into the untaxed vehicle (see Supplementary Appendix I). For single
tax policies, the gains from differentiation are on the order of $150-$200 million. However,
the deadweight losses are large ($2 billion) particularly for taxes on electric miles only. The
last three rows of Table 6a show differentiated taxes based on native damages. The gains
from differentiation are small or even negative. These policies lead to large deadweight losses
($1-$1.5 billion), because taxes based on native damages are much too low.
      Table 6b shows the deadweight losses for differentiated electric vehicle purchase subsidies.
Gains from differentiation are relatively small: on the order of $20-$40 million at 5% BAU
EV share. These gains are much smaller than the gains from differentiation of VMT taxes. In
addition to small gains from differentiation, deadweight losses from electric vehicle subsidies
are large: over $2 billion per year. Electric vehicle subsidies based on native damages have
similarly large deadweight losses and small gains from differentiation.
      Finally, Table 6b shows the deadweight loss from the current federal policy of a $7500
subsidy on the purchase on an electric vehicle and the deadweight loss from the default no-
subsidy policy. The deadweight loss from the current federal subsidy is $6 billion per year
at 5% BAU EV share. This exceeds the deadweight loss from the no-subsidy policy by $3.7
billion per year. The BAU EV shares shown in the table represent plausible shares in the
near future and are appropriate for evaluating policy looking forward. To evaluate the recent
past, we calculate deadweight losses of the two policies for a BAU EV share of 0.375% which
is consistent with the actual 2014 electric vehicle market share of approximately 0.75%.39
The deadweight loss from the current federal subsidy is $2.2 Billion and the deadweight loss
 38
      For context, annual vehicle sales are approximately 15 million in the United States.
 39
      Li et al (2015) estimate that 50% of electric vehicle sales are due to the subsidy.



                                                      21
from the no-subsidy policy is $2 Billion. Regardless of BAU EV share, the current federal
subsidy has larger deadweight loss than the no subsidy policy. And the welfare difference
between the two polices increases substantially as the BAU EV share increases.


4.4       Sensitivity analysis

Our analysis takes data from a number of different sources, uses estimated coefficients from
regressions in the electricity model and the AP2 model, and makes assumptions about critical
variables such as charging behavior and the effects of temperature on electric vehicle range.
Although there is uncertainty associated with each of these factors, we do not attempt to
assign standard errors to our results. Instead we perform a sensitivity analysis to see the
effects of various deviations from our baseline model.40
      The first parameter that we explore in Table 7 is the social cost of carbon (SCC). Our
baseline value is $41. A higher value for the SCC leads to higher damage estimates for both
electric and gasoline vehicles, but the environmental benefit is not highly sensitive to the
assumed SCC.
      Several of our assumptions affect only one type of vehicle. On the electric side, our base-
line calculation makes a temperature adjustment to account for the reduced performance of
electric vehicles in weather extremes and uses the EPRI charging profile. Table 7 shows that
our results are not sensitive to these choices. On the gasoline side, our baseline calculation
differentiates the MPG of gasoline vehicles by city and highway driving and assumes emis-
sions throughout the lifetime of the vehicle are the same as when new. Using an average
MPG instead leads to slightly lower gasoline vehicle damages. Doubling emissions rates for
local pollutants primarily affects the upper tail of the gasoline vehicle damages and hence
the upper tail of the environmental benefits.
      Another set of assumptions relate to parameters in the AP2 model. In particular, in
the baseline case, AP2 uses a VSL of approximately $6 million. A lower VSL of about $2
million leads to lower damages for both electric and gasoline vehicles and hence a narrower
distribution for the environmental benefit. Another important parameter in AP2 is the dose-
response function that links PM2.5 exposure to adult mortality. We find that a higher dose
 40
      Additional sensitivity for the welfare analysis is in Supplementary Appendix H.

                                                     22
response parameter leads to higher damages for both vehicles which widens the distribution
of environmental benefits.
       The final sensitivity calculation examines changes to the electricity grid and the gasoline
vehicle fleet. Our baseline uses observed power plant emissions in 2010-2012 to estimate the
damages from electric vehicles. New air pollution and climate regulations on power plants
will likely lead to lower emissions in the future. For a rough estimate of these effects, we
model a power grid in which all of the coal-fired power plants are replaced with new gas-
fired power plants. This procedure implies that the replacement plants would be in the same
location and would be dispatched identically to the old coal-fired plants.41 Turning to the
gasoline vehicle fleet, our baseline uses the gasoline Ford Focus as the comparison vehicle
to the electric Ford Focus. New regulations on gasoline vehicles will likely lead to lower
emissions in the future. For a rough estimate of these effects, we use the Toyota Prius as a
proxy for the vehicle of the future. The effect of these changes on the environmental benefit
of electric vehicles is given by the “Future grid & vehicle” row in Table 7. Damages from
both vehicles are lower, and damages from electric vehicles are much lower. However the
mean environmental benefit of 0.64 cents per mile implies an electric vehicle subsidy of $960,
which is still substantially less than current subsidies.



5        Extensions and caveats

5.1       Effects of CAFE standards

We have analyzed the environmental benefit of electric vehicles in isolation from other en-
vironmental regulations. In practice, other regulations may impact the electricity market
and/or the market for vehicles, and hence have an effect on the environmental benefit of
electric vehicles.
       One important regulatory interaction is with the Corporate Average Fuel Economy
  41
     Modeling different plant locations and a new load curve is beyond the scope of the present analysis. Here
we scale the plant-specific coefficients for coal plants by a ratio. The numerator is the average emissions rate
for combined cycle gas turbine plants that started operating after 2007, namely their total emissions in 2010
over their total net generation that year. The denominator is a similar emissions rate for each coal plant in
our sample that is not a co-generation plant.



                                                      23
(CAFE) standards. CAFE stipulates that the sales-weighted harmonic mean of MPG for
a given manufacturer’s fleet of vehicles must meet a certain requirement. Electric vehicles
are assigned a MPG equivalent for this calculation. These values are generally much larger
than any existing gasoline vehicle. Assuming that the CAFE requirement is initially bind-
ing, selling an electric vehicle enables manufacturers to meet a lower standard for the rest
of their fleet. Starting in 2017, this effect will be exacerbated, as the CAFE standards will
treat electric vehicles even more generously. An electric vehicle sale will receive a multiplier,
starting at two and then declining over time. When a manufacturer sells an electric vehicle,
it will get credit in the CAFE calculation as if it sold two electric vehicles. This will enable
the firm to decrease the fuel economy of the rest of its fleet even more while remaining in
compliance with CAFE.
       We give a preliminary analysis of this interaction that is consistent with our model.42
Let the CAFE-induced environmental cost of an electric vehicle be defined as the increase in
environmental damage from the rest of the fleet when an electric vehicle is sold. In Supple-
mentary Appendix J we show that the CAFE-induced environmental cost is the difference
in damages due to the substitution of a low MPG vehicle for a high MPG vehicle.43 We
also show that the second-best subsidy on the purchase of an electric vehicle is decreased
by the amount of the CAFE-induced environmental cost. Applying our baseline values for
the Ford Focus, the CAFE-induced environmental cost under current CAFE standards is
$1439 per vehicle. The magnitude of this CAFE-induced environmental cost is significant
in comparison with even the largest second-best subsidy for an electric vehicle found in our
study ($3025, in California).


5.2       Caveats

There are several important caveats that affect the calculation and interpretation of our
environmental benefit of an electric vehicle due to decreased air pollution emissions.
       First, it is important to stress that we have only considered the externalities from air
  42
     A more thorough analysis would require a complete model of both supply and demand for the entire
new vehicle market and relax our assumption of constant prices.
  43
     With respect to the 2017 CAFE standards, double counting the electric vehicle more than doubles its
CAFE-induced environmental cost.


                                                  24
pollution emissions associated with driving the vehicles. There are several other externalities
associated with electric and gasoline vehicles. For example, there are pollution emissions
associated with manufacturing and disposing of both types of vehicles. There are emissions
associated with extracting oil, refining gasoline, and transporting the gasoline to the retail
stations. There are emissions associated with mining coal and natural gas and transporting
these resources to electric power plants. In addition to these “life-cycle” externalities, there
may be a geo-political externality from oil consumption. It is unlikely, however, that these
externalities have the same degree of heterogeneity found in air pollution emissions. So the
effect of including them would likely be a shift in the distribution of second-best subsidies but
not a significant change in the variance of this distribution. Moreover, previous research on
life-cycle externalities has shown that the differences between electric vehicles and gasoline
vehicles are relatively small (Michalek et al. 2011).
       Second, electric vehicle subsidies may be justified due to innovation spillovers. If innova-
tion is a public good, then markets may provide too little innovation. Similarly, the inability
of firms to appropriate the full gains from innovation (e.g., consumers may also benefit)
may reduce innovation incentives. Our analysis cannot speak to the appropriateness of these
justifications for electric vehicle subsidies. However, it is worth noting that electric vehicle
subsidies are a “demand pull” innovation policy and hence are subject to all the limitations
of demand pull policies.
       Third, an additional argument put forth in favor of electric vehicle subsidies involves the
dynamics of network externalities. Subsidizing electric vehicles today helps boost demand,
which in turn increases incentives to provide electric vehicle charging infrastructure.44 This
results in a larger network in the future, at which point electric vehicle adoption will pre-
sumably be more desirable due to a cleaner electric grid. This argument may indeed have
merit, but any such long-term benefits may be at least partially offset by the short-term
costs associated with current electric vehicle use. Our analysis provides the foundation for
an estimate of these costs.
       Fourth, electric power plants may be subject to cap-and-trade emission permit markets.
  44
    Li et al (2015) examine the relative effectiveness of the current policy with alternative policies aimed at
building out the charging network.



                                                      25
EPA programs cap emissions of NOx and SO2 and the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative
caps emissions of CO2 in the Northeast. In our model of the electricity market, we determine
the marginal increase in emissions due to an increase in electricity consumption. We do not
model the constraint that power plant emissions are capped. During the period of our
analysis, the permit prices in these markets were low, which suggests that the constraints
due to the cap were not severe.45
       Finally, there are three important caveats to our calculation of the environmental benefit.
First, it is based on a simple snapshot of the electricity grid in the years 2010-2012. We
might expect the grid to become cleaner over time by integrating new lower-emission fuels
and technologies. Of course, gasoline vehicles may become cleaner over time as well. The
overall effect on the environmental benefit of electric vehicles will depend on the relative
rates of changes of these two factors. Table 7 makes a preliminary analysis of a future grid,
but it is important to stress that our estimates are based on the dispatch and emissions of the
electricity grid in 2010-2012. Second, we focus on the marginal emissions from an increase
in the demand for electric power due to electric vehicles charging. This is appropriate when
the electricity demand for electric vehicles is a small fraction of overall electricity use. The
effects of large scale adoption of electric vehicles would require analysis beyond the scope of
this paper. Third, our results depend critically on the AP2 model, so our analysis inherits
any of its limitations.



6        Conclusion
The Federal Government encourages the adoption of electric vehicles by providing a $7,500
subsidy for the purchase of an electric vehicle. Some states add to the federal subsidy with
their own financial inducements. These public sector interventions embody a conventional
wisdom that electric vehicles generate a range of benefits. Perhaps chief among these is a
reduction in environmental impacts relative to gasoline vehicles. Rather than simply ac-
cepting the assertion of environmental benefits from electric vehicle use, this paper conducts
  45
    A complete analysis of this issue would also require evaluating the increase in abatement costs to meet
the cap following the increase in emissions from electric vehicles.



                                                    26
a rigorous comparison of the environmental consequences of gasoline and electric powered
vehicles, specifically by quantifying the externalities (both greenhouse gases and local air
pollution) generated by driving these vehicles.
   On average, electric vehicles generate a negative environmental benefit of about -0.5 cents
per mile relative to comparable gasoline vehicles (-1.5 cents per mile for vehicles driven out-
side metropolitan areas). We find considerable variation around this central result; electric
vehicles used in Los Angeles, California produce a benefit of 3.3 cents per mile while those
used in Grand Forks, North Dakota, produce a cost of 3 cents per mile. One implication
of these findings is the dependence of policy orientation (whether a policy encourages or
discourages electric vehicle adoption) on the policymaker’s jurisdiction. Our distinction be-
tween full and native damages reveals another policy implication. In the vast majority of
states, when a consumer opts for an electric vehicle rather than a gasoline vehicle, they
reduce air pollution in their state. However, in all but twelve states, this purchase makes
society as a whole worse off because electric vehicles tend to export air pollution to other
states more than gasoline vehicles. Given this, we would not be surprised to see a prolifer-
ation of state-specific subsidies for electric vehicles. Hence there may be a need for federal
policy to account for exported damages.
   Of course, given the heterogeneity in the magnitude and the sign of the environmental
benefit of an electric vehicle, differentiated policy is in fact appropriate, provided it accounts
for full damages, not just native damages. We find that differentiated taxes on miles driven
lead to greater welfare gains than differentiated subsidies on vehicle purchases. This is not
surprising, as economists have long recognized the superiority of putting a direct price on
externalities relative to other indirect corrective policies. Unfortunately, this insight does
not seem to have had much influence on policy, as political decision makers often implement
indirect policies instead. A consequence of this predilection is that multiple indirect policies
may target the same externalities, as is the case with CAFE standards and purchase subsidies
on electric vehicles. Our preliminary analysis suggests that the interaction of these policies
may have significant unintended consequences. It seems worthwhile to devote additional
study to this issue.
   In summary, our findings generate critical questions as to the merits of the federal subsidy


                                               27
in the U.S. and may provide guidance to other governments considering interventions in the
electric vehicle market. We evaluate concerns regarding the sign, the magnitude, and the
one-size-fits-all nature of the subsidy. We find that both sign and magnitude of the federal
subsidy are significantly different from those indicated by our model. Differentiated policy
can lead to welfare improvements relative to one-size-fits all, but greater gains are realized by
using differentiated taxes on electric and gasoline miles rather than differentiated purchase
subsidies. As a general point, the paper argues that public policy evaluation is especially
important in contexts characterized by: economically significant outcomes with complicated
interactions among economic and physical systems, where stakeholders possess strong prior
beliefs among as to the merits of the policy. The federal subsidy of electric vehicles exhibits
each of these traits. Although we have focused on vehicles, there is a broader trend toward
electrification of a variety of forms of transportation. Our methodology, which combines
discrete-choice models, distributed electricity generation, and air pollution models, may
yield a useful template for further analysis of the environmental consequences of this trend.




                                               28
Appendix
Preliminary calculations. For the moment we drop the i subscript. Let G = πg and E =
(1 − π)e. For a generic policy variable ρ we have

∂W                 1              1           ∂Vg 1           ∂Ve       ∂G      ∂E ∂R
   = µ(                        ) ( exp(Vg /µ)    + exp(Ve /µ)     )−(δg    + δe    )+    ,
∂ρ      exp(Vg /µ) + exp(Ve /µ) µ             ∂ρ µ            ∂ρ        ∂ρ      ∂ρ    ∂ρ

which simplifies to
                      ∂W            ∂Ve    ∂Vg         ∂G      ∂E    ∂R
                         = ((1 − π)     +π     ) − (δg    + δe    )+    .                              (2)
                      ∂ρ            ∂ρ     ∂ρ          ∂ρ      ∂ρ    ∂ρ
From the definition of π we have

∂π (exp(Vg /µ) + exp(Ve /µ)) exp(Vg /µ) µ ∂ρ − exp(Vg /µ)(exp(Vg /µ) µ                 + exp(Ve /µ) µ1 ∂V
                                                                                                       ∂ρ )
                                        1   g  ∂V                    1           ∂Vg                      e
                                                                                  ∂ρ
   =                                                                                                          .
∂ρ                                (exp(Vg /µ) + exp(Ve /µ))2

which simplifies to
                                  ∂π π(1 − π) ∂Vg ∂Ve
                                     =       (    −    ).                                              (3)
                                  ∂ρ    µ      ∂ρ   ∂ρ
Using this result we can derive the following

                       ∂G    ∂π    ∂g    π(1 − π) ∂Vg ∂Ve      ∂g
                          =g    +π    =g         (    −    )+π                                         (4)
                       ∂ρ    ∂ρ    ∂ρ       µ      ∂ρ   ∂ρ     ∂ρ
and
               ∂E      ∂π           ∂e      π(1 − π) ∂Vg ∂Ve             ∂e
                  = −e    + (1 − π)    = −e         (    −    ) + (1 − π) .                            (5)
               ∂ρ      ∂ρ           ∂ρ         µ      ∂ρ   ∂ρ            ∂ρ
With these in hand we turn to the proof of the Propositions.
Proof of Proposition 1. Throughout the proof we can drop the subscript i. From the Envelope
Theorem, we have ∂sg = 0 and ∂V∂s = 1. The first-order condition for s comes from substituting
                   ∂V            e


these expressions into (2) with ρ = s, setting the resulting expression equal to zero, and
simplifying. This gives
                                          ∂G       ∂E    ∂R
                            (1 − π) − (δg     + δe    )+      = 0.
                                          ∂s       ∂s     ∂s
Expected tax revenue is R = −s(1 − π). So we have         ∂R
                                                          ∂s   = −(1 − π) + s ∂π
                                                                              ∂s . Substituting this into
the first-order condition and simplifying gives
                                      ∂π         ∂G      ∂E
                                 (s      ) − (δg    + δe    ) = 0.                                     (6)
                                      ∂s         ∂s      ∂s
So the optimal s is given by
                                                  ∂s + δe ∂s
                                               δg ∂G      ∂E
                                          s=         ∂π
                                                                                                       (7)
                                                     ∂s




                                                    29
From (4) and (5), we have
                                          ∂G ∂g     ∂π   ∂π
                                            =   π+g    =g ,
                                          ∂s ∂s     ∂s   ∂s
and
                                ∂E ∂e                ∂π        ∂π
                                    = (1 − π) − e          = −e ,
                                 ∂s ∂s                ∂s       ∂s
where the second equality in both equations follows from the fact that there are no income
effects, so ∂g     ∂e
            ∂s and ∂s are equal to zero. Substituting these into the first-order condition for s
and simplifying gives
                                        s = (δg g − δe e) .
∎
    Proof of Proposition 2.
    Let W(S) denote the weighted average of per capita welfare across regions as a function
of an arbitrary vector of subsidies S = (s1 , s2 , . . . , sn ). We have

      W(S) = ∑ αi Wi (si ) = ∑ αi (µ (ln(exp(Vei /µ) + exp(Vgi /µ))) + Ri − (δgi Gi + δei Ei )) .

    First consider the derivation of the second-best uniform subsidy. Here the central govern-
ment selects the same subsidy s for each location. Except for δgi , δei , and αi , the locations
are identical, and the government is selecting the same subsidy for each location. Therefore,
the values for ei , gi , Ri and πi will be same across locations. Under these conditions, the
derivative of W(S) with respect to s can be written as

                                         ∂π             ∂G       ∂E
                              ∑ αi s        − ∑ αi (δgi    + δei    ) = 0.
                                         ∂s             ∂s       ∂s
It follows that
                             ∂π    ∂G             ∂E
                              s −(     ∑ αi δgi +    ∑ αi δei ) = 0.
                             ∂s     ∂s            ∂s
Solving for s gives the second-best uniform subsidy s̃
                                         1                ∂G            ∂E
                                  s̃ =   ∂π
                                              (∑ αi δgi      + ∑ αi δei    ).                                                 (8)
                                         ∂s
                                                          ∂s            ∂s

The equation in the Proposition for s̃ now follows from the same manipulations used in the
proof of Proposition 1.
   Next we want to determine a second-order Taylor series approximation to W(S) at the
point S̃ = (s̃, s̃, . . . , s̃). First we take the derivatives at an arbitrary point. Because ∂W
                                                                                              ∂si does
not depend on sj , the cross-partial derivative terms will all be equal to zero. We have

                               ∂W          ∂πi           ∂Gi       ∂Ei
                                   = αi si     − αi (δgi     + δei     )
                               ∂si         ∂si           ∂si       ∂si

From (3), (4), and (5) we have:          ∂πi
                                         ∂si   = − πi (1−π
                                                       µ
                                                           i)
                                                              ,   ∂Gi
                                                                  ∂si   = − πi (1−π
                                                                                µ
                                                                                    i)
                                                                                       gi and   ∂Ei
                                                                                                ∂si   =   πi (1−πi )
                                                                                                              µ      ei .   Using




                                                          30
these we can write the derivative as
                               ∂W       πi (1 − πi )
                                   = αi              (−si + δgi gi − δei ei ) .
                               ∂si           µ
Now take the second derivative. We have
∂ 2W    αi                                                πi (1 − πi )    1         ∂W      πi (1 − πi )
   2
     = − 2 πi (1−πi )(1−2πi ) (−si + δgi gi − δei ei )−αi              = − (1−2πi )     −αi              .
 ∂si    µ                                                      µ          µ         ∂si          µ

   Evaluating the first and second derivatives at S̃ gives
                                 ∂W     αi
                                     ∣ = π(1 − π)(δgi g − δei e − s̃),                                (9)
                                 ∂si S̃ µ
and
                             ∂ 2W      1         ∂W     αi
                                2
                                  ∣ = − (1 − 2π)     ∣ − π(1 − π).                                   (10)
                              ∂si S̃   µ         ∂si S̃ µ
We have dropped the subscripts from g, e, and π because prices, income, and the functions
f and h are the same across locations, and, at the point S̃, the subsidy is the same across
locations. In addition, because the subsidy does not effect the number of miles driven, it
follows from Proposition 1, that s∗i = (δgi g − δei e). Thus

                                      ∂W     αi
                                          ∣ = π(1 − π)(s∗i − s̃).                                    (11)
                                      ∂si S̃ µ
   Because the cross-partial derivatives are equal to zero, the second-order Taylor series
expansion of W at the point S̃ can be written as

                                            ∂W               1  ∂ 2W
                    W(S) − W(S̃) ≈ ∑            ∣ (si − s̃) + ∑       ∣ (si − s̃)2 .
                                            ∂si S̃           2   ∂s2i S̃

We use this expansion to evaluate W(S ∗ ) − W(S̃). From (10) and (11) we have
                                                  1
                            W(S ∗ ) − W(S̃) ≈       π(1 − π) ∑ αi (s∗i − s̃)2 +
                                                  µ
               1    1                                    1
                 (− 2 π(1 − π)(1 − 2π) ∑ αi (s∗i − s̃)3 − π(1 − π) ∑ αi (s∗i − s̃)2 ) .
               2 µ                                       µ
The formula for the second-order approximation follows by combining the quadratic (s∗i − s̃)
terms. ∎




                                                     31
References
 [1] Anderson, S., A. de Palma, and J. Thisse (1992), Discrete choice theory of product
     differentiation, Cambridge: MIT Press.

 [2] Babaee, S., A. Nagpure, and J. DeCarolis (2014), “How much do electric drive vehicles
     matter to future U.S. emissions”, Environmental Science and Technology, forthcoming.

 [3] Banzhaf, H., and B. Chupp (2012), “Fiscal federalism and interjurisdictional externali-
     ties: New results and an application to US air pollution”, Journal of Public Economics,
     96: 449-464.

 [4] Bell, M.L., A. McDermott, S. L. Zeger, J. M. Samet, and F. Domenici. (2004), “Ozone
     and Short-Term Mortality in 95 US Urban Communities, 1987-2000.” J. of the Amer.
     Medical Association, 17: 2372-2378.

 [5] Burtraw, D., A. Krupnick, D. Austin, D. Farrel, and E. Mansure (1998), “Costs and
     benefits of reducing air pollutants related to acid rain,” Contemporary Economic Policy,
     16: 379-400.

 [6] De Borger, B. (2001), “Discrete choice models and optimal two-part tariffs in the pres-
     ence of externalities: optimal taxation of cars,” Regional Science and Urban Economics,
     31: 471-504.

 [7] De Borger, B. and I. Mayeres (2007), “Optimal taxation of car ownership, car use and
     public transport: Insights derived from a discrete choice numerical optimization model,”
     European Economic Review, 51: 1177-1204.

 [8] Dubin, J. and D. McFadden (1984), “An econometric analysis of residential electric
     appliance holdings and consumption,” Econometrica, 52: 345-362.

 [9] Fann, N., C. Fulcher, and B. Hubbell (2009), “The Influence of location, source, and
     emission, type in estimates of the human health benefits of reducing a ton of air pollu-
     tion,“ Air Quality, Atmosphere and Health, 2: 169-176.

[10] Fowlie, M. and N. Muller (2013), “Market-based emissions regulation when damages
     vary across sources: What are the gains from differentiation?” EI@Haas WP 237.

[11] Graff Zivin, J., M. Kotchen, and E. Mansur (2014), “Spatial and temporal heterogene-
     ity of marginal emissions: Implications for electric cars and other electricity-shifting
     policies”, Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 107(A): 248-268.

[12] Grissom, G. (2013), “Determining the optimal subsidy for plug-in electric vehicles in
     the United States by county”, Honors Thesis in Economics, The University of North
     Carolina at Chapel Hill.

[13] Henry, D., N. Muller, and R, Mendelsohn (2011), “The social cost of trading: measuring
     the increased damages from Sulfur Dioxide trading in the United States,” Journal of
     Policy Analysis and Management, 30(3): 598-612.

                                             32
[14] Holland, S., and E. Mansur (2008), “Is real-time pricing green? The environmental
     impacts of electricity demand variance”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(3):
     550-561.

[15] Jacobsen, M., C. Knittel, J. Sallee, and A. van Benthem (2015), “Correcting externali-
     ties from durable goods in the presence of herterogeneity”, working paper.

[16] Levy, J., L. Baxter, and J. Schwartz (2009),“Uncertainty and Variability in Health
     Related Damages from Coal-fired Power Plants in the United States, Risk Analysis,
     DOI: 10.1111/j.1539-6924.2009.01227.x

[17] Li, S., L. Tong, J. Xing, and Y. Zhou (2015), “The market for electric vehicles: Indirect
     network effects and policy impacts”, working paper, Cornell University.

[18] Mauzerall, D., B. Sultan, N. Kim, and D. Bradford (2005), “NOx Emissions from Large
     Point Sources: Variability in Ozone Production, Resulting Health Damages and Eco-
     nomic Costs,” Atmospheric Environment, 39: 2851-66.

[19] Mendelsohn, R. (1980), “An Economic Analysis of Air Pollution from Coal-Fired Power
     Plants,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 7(1): 30-43.

[20] Mendelsohn, R. (1986), “Regulating heterogeneous emissions,” Journal of Environmen-
     tal Economics and Management, 13: 301-312.

[21] Michalek, J., M. Chester, P. Jaramillo, C. Samaras, C. Shiau, and L. Lave (2011),
     “Valuation of plug-in vehicle life-cycle air emissions and oil displacement benefits”,
     Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108: 16554-16558.

[22] Muller, N. (2011), “Linking Policy to Statistical Uncertainty in Air Pollution Damages.”
     The B.E. Press Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy. 11(1), Contributions, Article
     32.

[23] Muller,     N.    (2012),     “The     Design     of  Optimal    Climate   Policy
     with    Air    Pollution    Co-Benefits.”    Resource  and    Energy   Economics.
     http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.reseneeco.2012.07.002

[24] Muller, N. (2014), “Boosting GDP growth by accounting for the environment: Including
     air pollution and greenhouse gas damages increases estimated U.S. growth.” Science.
     August 22nd, Vol. 345 no. 6199 pp. 873-874: DOI:10.1126/science.1253506.

[25] Muller, N. and R. Mendelsohn (2007), “Measuring the Damages of Air Pollution in the
     United States” J. of Environmental Economics and Management, 54: 1-14.

[26] Muller, N. and R. Mendelsohn (2009), “Efficient pollution regulation: getting the prices
     right,” American Economic Review, 99: 1714-1739.

[27] Muller, N. and R. Mendelsohn (2012), Using Marginal Damages in Environmental pol-
     icy: A Study of Air Pollution in the United States, The American Enterprise Institute
     Press. Washington, D.C., USA.

                                             33
[28] Muller, N., R. Mendelsohn, W. Nordhaus (2011), “Environmental Accounting for Pol-
     lution in the United States Economy.“ American Economic Review. 101: 1649-1675.

[29] Muller, N., D. Tong, R. Mendelsohn, (2009) “Regulating NOx and SO2 in Atlanta.” The
     B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy: Vol. 9 : Iss. 2 (Contributions), Article 3.

[30] National Academy of Sciences, National Research Council. (NAS NRC) 2010. Hidden
     Costs of Energy: unpriced consequences of energy production and use. National Academy
     Press, Washington, D.C., USA.

[31] Parry, I. and K. Small (2005), “Does Britain or the United States have the right gasoline
     tax?” American Economic Review, 95: 1276-1289.

[32] Pope, C. A., R. T. Burnett, M. J. Thun, E. E. Calle, D. Krewski, K. Ito, G. D. Thurston.
     (2002). “Lung Cancer, Cardiopulmonary Mortality, and Long-Term Exposure to Fine
     Particulate Air Pollution.” J. of the Amer. Medical Association, 287 (9): 1132-1141.

[33] Roman, H.A. K.D. Walker, T.L. Walsh, L. Conner, H.M. Richmond, B.J. Hubbell, P.L.
     Kinney. (2008). “Expert Judgment Assessment of the Mortality Impact of Changes in
     Ambient Fine Particulate Matter in the U.S.” Environmental Science and Technology.
     42:2268 – 2274.

[34] Small, K. and H. Rosen (1981), “Applied welfare economics with discrete choice models,”
     Econometrica, 49: 105-130.

[35] Stavins, R. (1996), “Correlated Uncertainty and Policy Instrument Choice,” Journal of
     Environmental Economics and Managemetn, 30: 218-232.

[36] Tessum, C., J. Hill, and J. Marshall (2014), “Life cycle air quality impacts of conven-
     tional and alternative light duty transportation in the United States,” Proceedings of
     the National Academy of Sciences, 111: 18490-18495.

[37] Tong, D., N. Muller, D. Mauzerall, and R. Mendelsohn (2006), “Integrated Assess-
     ment of the Spatial Variability of Ozone Impacts from Emissions of Nitrogen Oxides,”
     Environmental Science and Technology, 40(5): 1395-1400.

[38] USEPA (2014) National Emissions Inventory (NEI), 2011. Washington, DC: Office of Air
     Quality Planning and Standards, Emissions Inventory Group; Emissions, Monitoring,
     and Analysis Division.

[39] Weitzman, M. (1974), “Prices vs. Quantities,” Review of Economic Studiesm 41: 477-
     491.

[40] Yuksel, T. and J. Michalek (2015), “Effects of regional temperature on electric vehi-
     cle efficiency, range, and emissions in the United States”, forthcoming, Environmental
     Science and Technology.




                                             34
Figure	  1:	  Marginal	  Damages	  for	  Gas	  and	  Electric	  Cars	  by	  County	  




                                                35
Figure	  2:	  Second-­‐Best	  Electric	  Vehicle	  Subsidy	  by	  County	  




                                 36
Figure	  3:	  Second-­‐Best	  Electric	  Vehicle	  Subsidy	  by	  State	  (Full	  and	  NaDve	  Damages)	  




                                                      37
Figure	  4	  	  Panel	  A:	  Change	  in	  PM2.5	  Preliminary	  Fulton	  County:	  	  
                                      1000	  ICE	  Focus	  




                                                         38
Figure	  4	  	  Panel	  B:	  Change	  in	  PM2.5	  :	  1000	  EV	  Focus	  in	  SERC	  Region	  




                                              39
	  

Table	  1:	  Mean	  damages	  in	  cents	  per	  mile	  by	  NERC	  electricity	  region	  for	  a	  2014	  Ford	  Focus	  electric	  
vehicle	  for	  different	  charging	  profiles.	  

                                                                               Damages	  in	  cents	  per	  mile	  
                                                                                                                                                                               	   VMT	  
Region	                       EPRI	      Flat	              Hr	  1-­‐4	   Hr	  5-­‐8	   Hr	  9-­‐12	     Hr	  13-­‐16	     Hr	  17-­‐20	     Hr	  21-­‐24	           (pct)	  
California	                    0.69	       0.75	              0.65	          0.78	            0.78	             0.84	              0.82	              0.64	          	      12%	  
WECC	  w/o	  CA	             1.03	       0.92	              1.18	          0.98	            0.84	             0.76	              0.73	              0.99	          	     10%	  
ERCOT	                         1.28	       1.21	              1.50	          1.41	            1.10	             1.07	              1.05	              1.16	          	      8%	  
FRCC	                          2.48	       2.14	              3.21	          2.36	            2.25	             1.39	              1.53	              2.11	          	      7%	  
SERC	                          2.75	       2.68	              2.76	          2.26	            2.73	             2.97	              2.64	              2.72	          	     24%	  
SPP	                           2.24	       2.74	              2.07	          4.91	            2.30	             2.89	              2.39	              1.89	          	      4%	  
NPCC	                          3.11	       2.75	              4.19	          3.75	            1.61	             2.12	              2.49	              2.35	          	      9%	  
RFC	                           3.65	       3.56	              3.44	          3.39	            3.85	             3.07	              3.44	              4.17	          	     22%	  
MRO	                           4.39	       3.61	              5.77	          4.01	            3.11	             2.63	              2.37	              3.78	          	      5%	  
                                                                                                                                                                              	  
Total	                 	      2.50	       2.38	              2.69	          2.49	            2.30	             2.18	              2.18	              2.44	                 100%	  
	                                                                                                                                                                            	  

Notes:	  The	  regions	  are	  listed	  by	  the	  damage	  per	  mile	  under	  the	  “Flat”	  charging	  profile.	  	  The	  “EPRI”	  
charging	  profile	  is	  illustrated	  in	  Appendix	  Figure	  1.	  	  The	  flat	  charging	  profile	  assumes	  charging	  is	  equally	  
likely	  across	  hours.	  	  Other	  profiles	  assume	  charging	  occurs	  only	  in	  the	  indicated	  hours.	  	  Damages	  (in	  
cents	  per	  mile)	  are	  weighted	  across	  counties	  by	  passenger	  vehicle	  VMT.	  	  “WECC	  w/o	  CA”	  is	  the	  Western	  
US	  excluding	  California;	  “ERCOT”	  is	  Texas;	  “FRCC”	  is	  Florida;	  “SERC”	  is	  the	  Southeast;	  “SPP”	  is	  Kansas	  and	  
Oklahoma;	  “NPCC”	  is	  the	  Northeast;	  “RFC”	  is	  the	  Mid-­‐Atlantic	  and	  Midwest;	  and	  “MRO”	  is	  the	  upper	  
Midwest	  including	  all	  of	  MISO.	  	  See	  http://www.nerc.com	  for	  a	  map	  of	  the	  regions.	  

	                                                      	  




                                                                                            40
Table	  2:	  Summary	  statistics	  of	  damages	  and	  environmental	  benefit	  in	  cents	  per	  mile	  for	  2014	  electric	  
vehicles	  and	  equivalent	  2014	  gasoline	  vehicles	  across	  counties	  

	                                      Electric	  Vehicle	                	        Gasoline	  Vehicle	                 	       Environmental	  Benefit	  	  
Vehicle	                         mean	          min	         max	        	   mean	          min	        max	         	       mean	         min	        max	  
Chevy	  Spark	                   2.20	         0.59	        4.17	       	     1.81	       1.05	        4.42	          	     -­‐0.39	     -­‐3.05	     3.20	  
Honda	  Fit	                     2.22	         0.60	        4.20	       	     2.07	       1.24	        4.96	          	     -­‐0.15	     -­‐2.88	     3.73	  
Fiat	  500e	                     2.26	         0.61	        4.27	       	     1.87	       1.03	        4.75	          	     -­‐0.39	     -­‐3.17	     3.45	  
Nissan	  Leaf	                   2.30	         0.62	        4.35	       	     1.31	       0.81	        3.60	          	     -­‐1.00	     -­‐3.44	     2.29	  
Mitsubishi	  i-­‐Miev	           2.34	         0.63	        4.41	       	     1.81	       1.05	        4.42	          	     -­‐0.53	     -­‐3.30	     3.17	  
Smart	  fortwo	                  2.45	         0.66	        4.63	       	     1.78	       1.08	        4.61	          	     -­‐0.67	     -­‐3.48	     3.24	  
Ford	  Focus	                    2.50	         0.67	        4.72	       	     2.00	       1.13	        4.47	          	     -­‐0.49	     -­‐3.53	     3.31	  
Tesla	  S	  (60	  kWh)	        2.72	         0.73	        5.15	       	     2.64	       1.41	        5.68	          	     -­‐0.09	     -­‐3.65	     4.48	  
Tesla	  S	  (85	  kWh)	        2.96	         0.80	        5.59	       	     2.89	       1.63	        5.96	          	     -­‐0.07	     -­‐3.87	     4.77	  
Toyota	  Rav4	                   3.45	         0.93	        6.52	       	     2.25	       1.32	        5.18	          	     -­‐1.21	     -­‐5.11	     3.66	  
BYD	  e6	                        4.20	         1.13	        7.94	       	     2.25	       1.32	        5.18	          	     -­‐1.96	     -­‐6.52	     3.45	  
	  

Notes:	  Damages	  are	  from	  power	  plant	  emissions	  or	  tailpipe	  emissions	  of	  NOx,	  VOCs,	  PM2.5,	  SO2,	  and	  
CO2e.	  	  Electric	  vehicles	  assume	  the	  EPRI	  charging	  profile.	  	  Equivalent	  vehicles	  are	  defined	  as	  the	  
identical	  make	  where	  possible.	  	  The	  equivalent	  vehicle	  for	  the	  Nissan	  Leaf	  is	  the	  Toyota	  Prius;	  for	  the	  
Mitsubishi	  i-­‐Miev	  is	  the	  Chevy	  Spark;	  for	  the	  Tesla	  Model	  S	  is	  the	  BMW	  740	  or	  750;	  and	  for	  the	  BYD	  e6	  is	  
the	  Toyota	  Rav4.	  	  Damages	  are	  in	  cents	  per	  mile	  and	  are	  weighted	  across	  counties	  by	  VMT.	  	  	  

	                                                    	  




                                                                                      41
Table	  3:	  	  Environmental	  benefit	  in	  cents	  per	  mile	  by	  Metropolitan	  Statistical	  Areas	  for	  a	  2014	  Ford	  Focus	  
(electric	  v.	  gasoline)	  	  

                                                                 Environmental	                            Damage	   Damage	                 	  
                                                                 benefit	  per	   VMT	                   per	  mile	   per	  mile	   Purchase	  
Metropolitan	  Statistical	  Area	                            mile	             (pct)	                 (gasoline)	   (electric)	   Subsidy	  
               Highest	  Benefit	  MSAs	                                	                   	                	                	               	  
Los	  Angeles,	  CA	                                                  3.31	              2.88%	            3.99	            0.69	          $4,958	  
Oakland,	  CA	                                                         2.35	              0.80%	            3.04	            0.68	          $3,531	  
San	  Jose,	  CA	                                                     2.26	              0.57%	            2.94	            0.69	          $3,388	  
San	  Francisco,CA	                                                    2.06	              0.47%	            2.74	            0.68	          $3,086	  
Santa	  Ana,	  CA	                                                    2.01	              0.99%	            2.68	            0.67	          $3,016	  
             Other	  High	  VMT	  MSAs	                                                                                                             	  
San	  Diego,	  CA	                                                        	   	  
                                                                          1.99                  	   	  
                                                                                             1.03%                	   	  
                                                                                                                2.67                	   	  
                                                                                                                                  0.68              $2,986	  
Riverside,	  CA	                                                        1.31	             1.41%	            2.02	            0.71	            $1,972	  
Phoenix,	  AZ	                                                          0.89	             1.11%	            1.92	            1.03	            $1,328	  
Dallas,	  TX	                                                           0.76	             1.91%	            2.05	            1.29	            $1,144	  
Houston,	  TX	                                                          0.76	             1.83%	            2.16	            1.40	            $1,140	  
New	  York,	  NY	                                                      0.12	             2.08%	            3.30	            3.17	               $184	  
Tampa,	  FL	                                                          -­‐0.20	            0.96%	            2.27	            2.47	             -­‐$305	  
Atlanta,	  GA	                                                        -­‐0.21	            1.95%	            2.52	            2.73	             -­‐$314	  
Chicago,	  IL	                                                        -­‐0.60	            1.20%	            3.12	            3.72	             -­‐$900	  
Washington	  DC-­‐VA	                                                 -­‐0.72	            1.81%	            2.31	            3.03	          -­‐$1,077	  
                  U.S.	  and	  Non-­‐Urban	                               	                 	                	                	                    	  
U.S.	  Average	                                                       -­‐0.49	            100%	             2.00	            2.50	             -­‐$742	  
Non-­‐urban	                                                           -­‐1.46	             19%	             1.30	            2.77	          -­‐$2,193	  
                Lowest	  Benefit	  MSAs	                                  	                 	                	                	                    	  
St.	  Cloud,	  MN	                                                   -­‐2.73	            0.07%	            1.76	            4.49	          -­‐$4,094	  
Bismarck,	  ND	                                                       -­‐2.83	            0.04%	            1.67	            4.49	          -­‐$4,240	  
Fargo,	  ND-­‐MN	                                                     -­‐2.93	            0.07%	            1.69	            4.61	          -­‐$4,388	  
Duluth,	  MN-­‐WI	                                                    -­‐2.95	            0.09%	            1.62	            4.56	          -­‐$4,418	  
Grand	  Forks,	  ND-­‐MN	                                            -­‐3.00	            0.03%	            1.66	            4.66	          -­‐$4,495	  
	  

Notes:	  The	  environmental	  benefit	  is	  the	  difference	  in	  damages	  between	  the	  gasoline-­‐powered	  Ford	  
Focus	  and	  the	  electric	  Ford	  Focus.	  	  Environmental	  benefit	  is	  weighted	  by	  VMT	  by	  county	  within	  each	  
MSA.	  	  Non-­‐urban	  includes	  all	  counties	  that	  are	  not	  part	  of	  an	  MSA.	  The	  vehicle	  subsidy	  assumes	  vehicle	  
is	  driven	  150,000	  miles.	  

	                                                 	  




                                                                                42
Table	  4:	  	  Environmental	  benefit	  in	  cents	  per	  mile	  by	  state	  for	  a	  2014	  Ford	  Focus	  (electric	  v.	  gasoline)	  

                                Environmental	                              Damage	   Damage	   	  
                                benefit	  per	   VMT	                     per	  mile	   per	  mile	   Purchase	  
State	                         mile	             (pct)	                   (gasoline)	   (electric)	  	  	   Subsidy	  
Highest	  Benefit	  
                                            	                    	                 	                	                 	  
States	  
California	                            2.02	                 12%	             2.71	             0.69	          $3,025	  
Utah	                                  0.88	                  1%	             1.92	             1.04	          $1,320	  
Colorado	                              0.75	                  2%	             1.78	             1.03	          $1,123	  
Washington	                            0.74	                  1%	             1.76	             1.02	          $1,108	  
Arizona	                               0.73	                  2%	             1.75	             1.02	          $1,093	  
Other	  High	  VMT	  
States	                                    	                   	                	                 	                    	  
Texas	                                  0.52	                 9%	             1.90	             1.38	               $784	  
Florida	                              -­‐0.55	                7%	             1.94	             2.49	             -­‐$829	  
Georgia	                              -­‐0.64	                4%	             2.10	             2.74	             -­‐$955	  
New	  York	                          -­‐0.75	                5%	             2.35	             3.10	          -­‐$1,122	  
New	  Jersey	                        -­‐0.91	                3%	             2.70	             3.61	          -­‐$1,367	  
Virginia	                             -­‐1.02	                4%	             1.87	             2.89	          -­‐$1,532	  
Ohio	                                 -­‐1.62	                5%	             2.02	             3.65	          -­‐$2,437	  
Pennsylvania	                         -­‐1.65	                3%	             2.00	             3.64	          -­‐$2,472	  
Indiana	                              -­‐1.70	                3%	             1.96	             3.65	          -­‐$2,543	  
Michigan	                             -­‐1.81	                3%	             1.93	             3.75	          -­‐$2,720	  
Lowest	  Benefit	  
States	                                    	                  	                 	                 	                    	  
South	  Dakota	                      -­‐2.52	               0%	              1.40	             3.92	          -­‐$3,787	  
Minnesota	                            -­‐2.57	               1%	              1.57	             4.14	          -­‐$3,856	  
Nebraska	                             -­‐2.63	               2%	              1.85	             4.48	          -­‐$3,951	  
Iowa	                                 -­‐2.75	               1%	              1.49	             4.24	          -­‐$4,118	  
North	  Dakota	                      -­‐3.18	               0%	              1.39	             4.58	          -­‐$4,773	  
	                                          	                  	                 	                 	                    	  
U.S.	  Average	                      -­‐0.49	              100%	             2.00	             2.50	             -­‐$742	  
	  

Notes:	  The	  environmental	  benefit	  is	  the	  difference	  in	  damages	  between	  the	  gasoline-­‐powered	  Ford	  
Focus	  and	  the	  electric	  Ford	  Focus.	  	  Environmental	  benefit	  is	  weighted	  by	  gasoline-­‐vehicle	  VMT	  within	  
each	  state.	  The	  vehicle	  subsidy	  assumes	  the	  vehicle	  is	  driven	  150,000	  miles.	  

	                                                   	  




                                                                                 43
Table	  5:	  Native	  damages	  in	  cents	  per	  mile	  by	  state	  and	  county	  and	  export	  percentages	  

Vehicle	                    Damages	                                mean	        med	         std.	  dev.	      min	        max	  
Electric	                   All	                                    2.50	        2.74	           1.11	          0.67	        4.72	  
                             Non-­‐GHG	                              1.62	        1.86	           0.95	          0.16	        3.50	  
             	              State	                                  0.15	        0.16	           0.07	          0.04	        0.33	  
             	              	  	  	  	  Export	  %	            91%	         91%	                                          91%	  
             	              County	                                 0.02	        0.02	             	  
                                                                                                     0.01	          0.00	        0.06	  
             	              	  	  	  	  Export	  %	            99%	         99%	                                          98%	  
             	                                                                                          	  
Gasoline	   	   All	                                               2.00	        1.91	           0.60	          1.13	        4.47	  
                      Non-­‐GHG	                                     0.54	        0.37	           0.53	          0.01	        2.92	  
             	   State	                                             0.44	        0.27	           0.51	          0.00	        2.76	  
             	   	  	  	  	  Export	  %	                       18%	         27%	                                           5%	  
             	   County	                                            0.23	        0.11	             	  
                                                                                                     0.38	          0.00	        2.03	  
             	   	  	  	  	  Export	  %	                       57%	         71%	                                          30%	  
             	                                                                                          	  
Environmental	  	   All	                                           -­‐0.49	     -­‐0.81	        1.34	          -­‐3.53	     3.31	  
            Benefit	   Non-­‐GHG	                                   -­‐1.08	     -­‐1.44	        1.14	          -­‐3.43	     2.28	  
                        State	                                         0.29	        0.12	         0.51	          -­‐0.32	     2.46	  
                   	   County	                                        0.21	        0.09	         0.37	          -­‐0.06	     2.00	  
	                 	  

Note:	  Damages	  in	  cents	  per	  mile.	  “All”	  reports	  damages	  from	  all	  pollutants	  at	  all	  receptors.	  	  “Non-­‐GHG”	  
reports	  damages	  from	  local	  pollutants	  (i.e.,	  excluding	  CO2)	  at	  all	  receptors.	  	  “State”	  reports	  damages	  
from	  local	  pollutants	  from	  receptors	  within	  the	  same	  state	  as	  the	  source.	  	  “County”	  reports	  damages	  
from	  local	  pollutants	  from	  receptors	  within	  the	  same	  county	  as	  the	  source.	  	  “State	  Export	  %”	  reports	  the	  
share	  of	  non-­‐GHG	  damages	  which	  occur	  at	  receptors	  outside	  the	  state.	  	  “County	  Export	  %”	  reports	  the	  
share	  of	  non-­‐GHG	  damages	  which	  occur	  at	  receptors	  outside	  the	  county.	  	  Electric	  damages	  assume	  the	  
EPRI	  charging	  profile.	  	  Damages	  are	  weighted	  by	  VMT.	  

	                                                             	  




                                                                                            44
Table	  6a:	  Deadweight	  losses	  of	  differentiated	  VMT	  taxes	  	  

	                                Gas	  and	  	  Electric	  Tax	        	               Gas	  Tax	  Only	            	                 Electric	  Tax	  Only	  
	                                          BAU	  EV	  Share	             	               BAU	  EV	  Share	            	                   BAU	  EV	  Share	  
                                   1%	             5%	        10%	        	     1%	              5%	        10%	       	        1%	               5%	          10%	  
	  
County	  policies	                0	              0	             0	     	     192	            863	        1543	        	     1958	             1994	        2042	  
State	  policies	                90	            102	        118	        	     281	            962	        1688	        	     1960	             2005	        2064	  
Federal	  policy	               163	            273	        415	        	     336	           1004	        1830	        	     1983	             2121	        2303	  
                                                                             	        	               	             	       	        	                  	               	  
	  
County	  (Native)	               	  
                                 1158	             	  
                                                  1445	         	  
                                                               1808	        	        	               	             	       	        	                  	               	  
State	  (Native)	              1234	           1531	       1906	        	        	               	             	       	        	                  	               	  
Federal	  (Native)	             911	           1034	       1194	        	        	               	             	       	        	                  	               	  
	  

Table	  6b:	  Deadweight	  losses	  of	  differentiated	  electric	  vehicle	  purchase	  subsidies	  

                                                                                                       BAU	  EV	  Share	  
	                                                                                          1%	              5%	             10%	  
	  
County	  policies	                                                                       1996	          2182	             2411	  
State	  policies	                                                                        2000	          2205	             2458	  
Federal	  policy	  (-­‐$742	  subsidy)	                                                2024	          2324	             2703	  
	                                                                                               	              	              	  
County	  policies	  (native	  damages)	                                                2022	          2315	             2686	  
State	  policies	  (native	  damages)	                                                 2026	          2333	             2723	  
Federal	  policy	  (native	  damages,	  -­‐$1553	  subsidy)	                         2028	          2344	             2744	  
	                                                                                               	              	              	  
Current	  Federal	  Policy	  ($7500	  subsidy)	                                       2765	          6009	          10015	  
BAU	  Federal	  Policy	  (Zero	  subsidy)	                                            2027	          2343	             2742	  
	                                                                                               	              	              	  
	                                                                                               	              	              	  
	  
Notes:	  Deadweight	  loss	  in	  millions	  of	  dollars	  per	  year	  is	  based	  on	  15	  million	  annual	  vehicle	  sales	  
normalized	  to	  the	  emissions	  profile	  of	  the	  Ford	  Focus.	  The	  BAU	  EV	  Share	  is	  the	  proportion	  of	  electric	  
vehicles	  sold	  if	  there	  were	  no	  subsidy.	  	  This	  share	  is	  determined	  by	  the	  assumed	  value	  for	  𝜇 	  	  (10735.3,	  
16753.7,	  22451.1)	  which	  is	  proportional	  to	  the	  standard	  deviation	  of	  the	  unobserved	  relative	  preference	  
shock.	  In	  Table	  6a,	  federal	  taxes	  in	  the	  joint	  tax	  case	  are	  2.0	  cents	  per	  mile	  on	  gasoline	  miles	  and	  2.5	  
cents	  per	  mile	  on	  electric	  miles.	  
	                                                   	  




                                                                                     45
	  

Table	  7:	  Sensitivity	  analysis	  of	  damages	  and	  environmental	  benefit	  in	  cents	  per	  mile	  for	  2014	  electric	  
and	  gasoline	  Ford	  Focus	  

	                                        Electric	  Vehicle	            	        Gasoline	  Vehicle	         	        Environmental	  Benefit	  	  
                               mean	             min	       max	        	   mean	       min	      max	      	        mean	         min	        max	  
	  
Baseline	                      2.50	           0.67	       4.72	       	     2.00	     1.13	     4.47	       	      -­‐0.49	     -­‐3.53	     3.31	  
Carbon	  cost	                   	                	             	     	        	         	         	        	          	            	           	  
	  	  	  SCC=$51	           2.71	           0.80	       5.02	       	     2.36	     1.41	     4.84	       	      -­‐0.35	     -­‐3.55	     3.56	  
	  	  	  SCC=$31	           2.28	           0.55	       4.42	       	     1.65	     0.86	     4.09	       	      -­‐0.64	     -­‐3.50	     3.06	  
	                                 	                	             	     	        	         	         	        	          	            	           	  
No	  temperature	  
                                2.35	           0.67	       3.90	       	     2.00	     1.13	     4.47	     	        -­‐0.35	     -­‐2.74	     3.32	  
adjustment	  
Flat	  charging	  
                                2.38	           0.74	       3.88	       	     2.00	     1.13	     4.47	       	      -­‐0.38	     -­‐2.69	     3.24	  
profile	  
	                                	               	           	         	       	         	         	       	             	            	         	  
Average	  MPG	                2.50	           0.67	       4.72	       	     1.87	     1.36	     4.23	        	     -­‐0.63	     -­‐3.30	     3.02	  
Double	  gasoline	  
                                2.50	           0.67	       4.72	       	     2.54	     1.15	     7.38	     	        0.04	        -­‐3.48	     5.75	  
emissions	  rates	  
	                                 	                	             	     	        	         	         	      	            	            	           	  
$2	  Million	  VSL	          1.57	           0.71	       2.64	       	     1.68	     1.13	     2.69	       	      0.12	        -­‐1.49	     1.78	  
PM	  dose	  	  
                                3.59	           1.25	       6.89	       	     2.31	     1.14	     6.10	     	        -­‐1.28	     -­‐5.65	     4.05	  
response	  
	                                 	                	             	     	        	         	         	        	          	            	           	  
Future	  grid	  &	  
vehicle	                       0.66	           0.37	       1.39	       	     1.31	     0.81	     3.60	       	      0.64	        -­‐0.50	     2.81	  
	  

Notes:	  Damages	  are	  from	  power	  plant	  emissions	  or	  tailpipe	  emissions	  of	  NOx,	  VOCs,	  PM2.5,	  SO2,	  and	  
CO2e.	  	  Electric	  vehicles	  assume	  the	  EPRI	  charging	  profile.	  	  Damages	  are	  in	  cents	  per	  mile	  and	  are	  
weighted	  across	  counties	  by	  VMT.	  	  	  

Notes:	  	  “Carbon	  cost”	  uses	  a	  social	  cost	  of	  carbon	  of	  $51	  or	  $31.	  	  “No	  temperature	  adjustment”	  assumes	  
electric	  vehicles	  have	  no	  range	  degradation	  at	  low	  temperatures.	  	  “Flat	  charging	  profile”	  assumes	  
electric	  vehicle	  charging	  occurs	  equally	  in	  all	  hours	  instead	  of	  following	  the	  estimated	  EPRI	  charging	  
profile.	  	  “Average	  MPG”	  uses	  the	  average	  MPG	  for	  gasoline	  vehicles	  instead	  of	  using	  the	  city	  MPG	  in	  
urban	  counties	  and	  the	  highway	  MPG	  in	  non-­‐urban	  counties.	  	  “Double	  gasoline	  emissions	  rates”	  doubles	  
the	  gasoline	  vehicle	  emissions	  rates	  for	  local	  pollutants.“$2	  Million	  VSL”	  assumes	  the	  VSL	  is	  $2	  million	  
instead	  of	  the	  baseline	  $6	  million.	  	  “PM	  dose	  response”	  assumes	  the	  higher	  PM2.5	  adult-­‐mortality	  dose-­‐
response	  from	  Roman	  etal	  2008	  instead	  of	  the	  baseline	  dose	  response.	  	  “Future	  grid	  &	  vehicle”	  assumes	  
all	  coal-­‐fired	  power	  plants	  are	  replaced	  by	  clean	  natural	  gas	  plants	  which	  are	  dispatched	  identically	  and	  
the	  gasoline	  vehicle	  is	  a	  Toyota	  Prius.	  

	  



                                                                                    46
