                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           RISK AND RISK MANAGEMENT IN THE CREDIT CARD INDUSTRY

                                          Florentin Butaru
                                          QingQing Chen
                                            Brian Clark
                                            Sanmay Das
                                           Andrew W. Lo
                                          Akhtar Siddique

                                        Working Paper 21305
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21305


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2015


We thank Michael Carhill, Jayna Cummings, Misha Dobrolioubov , Dennis Glennon, Amir Khandani,
Adlar Kim, Mark Levonian, David Nebhut, Til Schuerman, Michael Sullivan and seminar participants
at the Consortium for Systemic Risk Analysis, the Consumer Finance Protection Bureau, the MIT
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (CSAIL), the Office of the Comptroller of
the Currency, and the Philadelphia Fed’s Risk Quantification Forum for useful comments and discussion.
The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors only, and do not necessarily
represent the views and opinions of any institution or agency, any of their affiliates or employees,
or any of the individuals acknowledged above. Research support from the MIT CSAIL Big Data program,
the MIT Laboratory for Financial Engineering, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency is
gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21305.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Florentin Butaru, QingQing Chen, Brian Clark, Sanmay Das, Andrew W. Lo, and Akhtar
Siddique. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Risk and Risk Management in the Credit Card Industry
Florentin Butaru, QingQing Chen, Brian Clark, Sanmay Das, Andrew W. Lo, and Akhtar
Siddique
NBER Working Paper No. 21305
June 2015
JEL No. D12,D14,D18,E21,E51,G01,G17,G21

                                               ABSTRACT

Using account level credit-card data from six major commercial banks from January 2009 to December
2013, we apply machine-learning techniques to combined consumer-tradeline, credit-bureau, and macroeconomic
variables to predict delinquency. In addition to providing accurate measures of loss probabilities and
credit risk, our models can also be used to analyze and compare risk management practices and the
drivers of delinquency across the banks. We find substantial heterogeneity in risk factors, sensitivities,
and predictability of delinquency across banks, implying that no single model applies to all six institutions.
 We measure the efficacy of a bank’s risk-management process by the percentage of delinquent accounts
that a bank manages effectively, and find that efficacy also varies widely across institutions. These
results suggest the need for a more customized approached to the supervision and regulation of financial
institutions, in which capital ratios, loss reserves, and other parameters are specified individually for
each institution according to its credit-risk model exposures and forecasts.


Florentin Butaru                                      Sanmay Das
U.S. Department of the Treasury                       Washington University
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency             SEAS
Florentin.Butaru@occ.treas.gov                        sanmay@seas.wustl.edu

QingQing Chen                                         Andrew W. Lo
U.S. Department of the Treasury                       MIT Sloan School of Management
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency             100 Main Street, E62-618
Qingqing.Chen@occ.treas.gov                           Cambridge, MA 02142
                                                      and NBER
Brian Clark                                           alo@mit.edu
U.S. Department of the Treasury
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency             Akhtar Siddique
and Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute                  U.S. Department of the Treasury
Brian.Clark@occ.treas.gov                             Office of the Comptroller of the Currency
                                                      Akhtarur.Siddique@occ.treas.gov
Table of Contents

     I.     Introduction ......................................................................................................................................... 1
     II.        Data ...................................................................................................................................................... 6

           A.       Unit of Analysis .......................................................................................................................... 6
           B.       Sample Selection........................................................................................................................ 8

     III.       Empirical Design and Models ................................................................................................ 10

           A.       Attribute Selection ................................................................................................................. 12
           B.       Dependent Variable............................................................................................................... 13
           C.       Model Timing ........................................................................................................................... 14
           D.       Measuring Performance ...................................................................................................... 15

     IV.        Classification Results ................................................................................................................ 17

           A.       Nonstationary Environments ........................................................................................... 18
           B.       Model Results........................................................................................................................... 19
           C.       Risk Management Across Institutions .......................................................................... 23
           D.       Attribute Analysis .................................................................................................................. 25

     V.         Conclusion ..................................................................................................................................... 28
     References.................................................................................................................................................. 31
I.     Introduction

       The financial crisis of 2007–2009 highlighted the importance of risk management at

financial institutions. Particular attention has been given, both in the popular press and the

academic literature, to the risk management practices and policies at the mega-sized banks

at the center of the crisis. Few dispute that risk management at these institutions—or the

lack thereof—played a central role in shaping the subsequent economic downturn. Despite

the recent focus, however, the risk management policies of individual institutions largely

remain black boxes.

       In this paper, we examine the practice of risk management and its implications of six

major U.S. financial institutions using computationally intensive “machine-learning”

techniques applied to an unprecedentedly large sample of account-level credit-card data.

The consumer-credit market is central to understanding risk management at large

institutions for two reasons. First, consumer credit in the United States has grown

explosively over the past three decades, totaling $3.3 trillion at the end of 2014. From the

early 1980s to the Great Recession, U.S. household debt as a percentage of disposable

personal income doubled, although declining interest rates have meant that the debt

service ratios have grown at a lower rate. Second, algorithmic decision-making tools,

including the use of scorecards based on "hard" information, have, have become

increasingly common in consumer lending (Thomas, 2000). Given the larger amount of

data as well as the larger number of decisions compared to commercial credit lending, this

reliance on algorithmic decision-making should not be surprising. However, the

implications of these tools for risk management, for individual financial institutions and

their investors, and for the economy as a whole, are still unclear.


14 June 2015                 Risk Management for Credit Cards                    Page 1 of 31
       Compared to other retail loans such as mortgages, lenders and investors have more

options to actively monitor and manage credit-card accounts because they are revolving

credit lines. Consequently, managing credit-card portfolios is a potential source of

significant value. Better risk management could provide financial institutions with savings

on the order of hundreds of millions of dollars annually. For example, lenders can cut or

freeze credit lines on accounts that are likely to go into default, thereby reducing their

exposure. By doing so, they can potentially avoid an increase in the balances of accounts

destined to default, known in the industry as “run-up.” However, by cutting these credit

lines to reduce run-up, banks also run the risk of cutting the credit limits of accounts that

will not default, thereby alienating customers and potentially forgoing profitable lending

opportunities. More accurate forecasts of delinquencies and defaults reduce the likelihood

of such false positives. Issuers and investors of securitized credit-card debt would also

benefit from such forecasts and tools. And given the size of this part of the industry—$861

billion of revolving credit outstanding at the end of 2014—more accurate forecasts can also

improve macroprudential policy decisions and reduce the likelihood of a systemic shock to

the financial system.

       Our data allow us to observe the actual risk management actions undertaken by

each bank on an account level, and thus determine the possible cost savings from a given

risk management strategy. For example, we can observe line decreases and realized run-

ups over time, and the cross-sectional nature of our data allows us to further compare risk-

management practices across institutions and examine how actively and effectively firms

manage the exposure of their credit-card portfolios. We find significant heterogeneity in

the credit-line management actions across our sample of six institutions.



14 June 2015                 Risk Management for Credit Cards                   Page 2 of 31
        We compare the efficacy of an institution’s risk-management process using a simple

measure: the ratio of the percentage of credit-line decreases on accounts that become

delinquent over a forecast horizon to the percentage of line decreases on all accounts over

the same period. This measures the extent to which institutions are targeting “bad”

accounts and managing their exposure prior to default. 1 We find that this ratio ranges from

less than one, implying that the bank was more likely to cut the lines of good accounts than

those that eventually went into default, to over 13, implying the bank was highly accurate

in targeting bad accounts. While these ratios vary over time, the cross-sectional ranking of

the institutions remains relatively constant, suggesting that certain firms are either better

at forecasting delinquent accounts or view line cuts as a beneficial risk-management tool.

        Because effective implementation of the above risk-management strategies requires

banks to be able to identify accounts that are likely to default, we build predictive models

to classify accounts as good or bad. The dependent variable is an indicator variable equal to

1 if an account becomes 90 days past due (delinquent) over the next two, three, or four

quarters. Independent variables include individual-account characteristics such as the

current balance, utilization rate, and purchase volume; individual-borrower characteristics

from a large credit bureau such as the number of accounts an individual has outstanding,

the number of other accounts that are delinquent, and the credit score; and macroeconomic

variables including home prices, income, and unemployment statistics. In all, we construct

87 distinct variables.




         1 Despite the unintentionally pejorative nature of this terminology, we adopt the industry convention

in referring to accounts that default or become delinquent as “bad” and those that remain current as “good”.




14 June 2015                      Risk Management for Credit Cards                             Page 3 of 31
        Using these variables, we compare three modeling techniques—logistic regression,

decision trees using the C4.5 algorithm, and random forest. The models are all tested out of

sample as if they were being implemented at that point in time, i.e., no future data were

used as inputs in these tests. All models perform reasonably well, but the decision trees

tend to perform the best in terms of classification rates. In particular, we compare the

models based on well-known measures such as precision and recall, and statistics that

combine them such as the F-Measure and kappa statistics. 2 We find that the decision trees

and random-forest models outperform logistic regression with respect to both measures.

        There is, however, a great deal of cross-sectional and temporal heterogeneity. As

expected, the performance of all models declines as the forecast horizon increases.

However, the performance of the models for each bank remains relatively stable over time

(we test the models semi-annually starting in 2010Q4 through the end of our sample

period 2013Q4). Across banks we find a great deal of heterogeneity in classification

accuracy. For example, at the two-quarter forecast horizon, the mean F-Measure ranges

from 63.8% at the worst performing bank to 81.6% at the best. 3 Kappa statistics show

similar variability.

        We also estimate the potential dollar savings from active risk management using

these machine-learning models. The basic strategy is to first classify accounts as good or

bad using the above models, and then cut the credit lines of the bad accounts. The cost

savings depend on 1) the model accuracy and 2) how aggressively banks cut credit lines.

          2 Precision is defined as the proportion of positives identified by a technique that are truly positive.

Recall is the proportion of positives that is correctly identified. The F-Measure is defined as the harmonic
mean of precision and recall, and is meant to describe the balance between precision and recall. The kappa
statistic measures performance relative to random classification. See Figure 2 for further details.
          3 These F-Measures represent the mean F-Measure for a given bank over time.




14 June 2015                       Risk Management for Credit Cards                               Page 4 of 31
The potential cost of this strategy is cutting credit lines of good accounts, thereby alienating

customers and losing future revenues. We follow Khandani, et al.’s (2010) methodology to

estimate the value added of our models and report the cost savings for various degrees of

line cuts (ranging from doing nothing to cutting the account limit to the current balance).

To include the cost of alienating customers, we conservatively assume that customers

incorrectly classified as bad will pay off their current balances and close their accounts.

Therefore, the bank will lose out on all future revenues from such customers.

       With respect to this measure, we find that our models all perform well. Assuming

that cutting the lines of bad accounts would save a run-up of 30% of the current balance,

we find that implementing our decision tree models would save about 55% relative to

taking no action for the two-quarter-horizon forecasts. When we extend the forecast

horizon, the models do not perform as well and the cost savings decline to about 25% and

22% at the three- and four-quarter horizons, respectively. These figures vary considerably

across banks. The bank with the greatest cost savings had a value-added of 76%, 46%, and

35% across the forecast horizons; the bank with the smallest cost savings would only stand

to gain 47%, 14%, and 9% by implementing our models across the three horizons. Of

course, there are many other aspects of a bank’s overall risk management program, so the

quality of risk management strategy of these banks cannot be ranked solely on the basis of

these results, but the results do suggest that there is substantial heterogeneity in the risk

management tools and effective strategies available to banks.

       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we describe our

dataset and discuss the security issues surrounding it and the sample-selection process

used. In Section III we outline the model specifications and our approach to constructing



14 June 2015                  Risk Management for Credit Cards                     Page 5 of 31
useful variables that serve as inputs to the algorithms we employ. We also describe the

machine-learning framework for creating more powerful forecast models for individual

banks, and present our empirical results. We apply these results to analyze bank risk

management and key risk drivers across banks in Section IV. We conclude in Section V.



II.    The Data

       A major U.S. financial regulator has engaged in a large-scale project to collect

detailed credit-card data from several large U.S. financial institutions. As detailed below,

the data contains internal account-level data from the banks merged with consumer data

from a large U.S. credit bureau, comprising over 500 million records over a period of six

years. It is a unique dataset that combines the detailed data available to individual banks

with the benefits of cross-sectional comparisons across banks.

       The underlying data contained in this dataset is confidential, and therefore has strict

terms and conditions surrounding the usage and dissemination of results to ensure the

privacy of the individuals and the institutions involved in the study. A third-party vendor is

contracted to act as the intermediary between the reporting financial institutions, the

credit bureau, and the regulatory agency and end users at the regulatory agency are not

able to identify any individual consumers from the data. We are also prohibited from

presenting results that would allow the identification of the banks from which the data are

collected.


       A.      Unit of Analysis

       The credit-card dataset is aggregated from two subsets we refer to as account-level

and credit-bureau data. The account-level data is collected from six large U.S. financial


14 June 2015                 Risk Management for Credit Cards                    Page 6 of 31
institutions. It contains account-level variables for each individual credit-card account on

the institutions' books, and is reported monthly starting January 2008. The credit-bureau

data is obtained from a major credit bureau, and contains information on individual

consumers reported quarterly starting the first quarter of 2009.

       This process results in a merged dataset containing 186 raw data items (106

account-level items and 80 credit-bureau items). The account-level data includes items

such as month-ending balance, credit limit, borrower income, borrower credit score,

payment amount, account activity, delinquency, etc. The credit-bureau data includes

consumer-level variables such as total credit limit, total outstanding balance on all cards,

number of delinquent accounts, etc. 4

       We then augment the credit-card data with macroeconomic variables at the county

and state level using data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) and Home Price Index

(HPI) data from the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA). The BLS data are at the

county level, taken from the State and Metro Area Employment, Earnings, and Hours (SM)

series and the Local Area Unemployment (LA) series, each of which is collected under the

Current Employment Statistics program. The HPI data are at the state level. The BLS data

are matched using ZIP codes.

       Given the confidentiality restrictions of the data, the unit of analysis in our models is

the individual account. Although the data has individual account-level and credit-bureau

information, we cannot link multiple accounts to a single consumer. That is, we cannot

determine if two individual credit-card accounts belong to the same individual. However,

the credit-bureau data does allow us to determine the total number of accounts that the

       4   The credit-bureau data for individuals is often referred to as attributes in the credit-risk literature.




14 June 2015                        Risk Management for Credit Cards                                 Page 7 of 31
owner of each of the individual accounts has outstanding. Similarly, we cannot determine

unique credit-bureau records, and thus have multiple records for some individuals. For

example, if individual A has five open credit cards from two financial institutions, we are

not able to trace those accounts back to individual A. However, for each of the five account-

level records, we would know from the credit-bureau data that the owner of each of the

accounts has a total of five open credit-card accounts.


       B.      Sample Selection

       The data collection by the financial regulator for supervisory purposes started in

January 2008. For regulatory reasons, the banks from which the data have come have

changed over time though the total number has stayed at eight or less. However, the

collection has always covered the bulk of the credit-card market. Mergers and acquisitions

have also altered the population over this period.

       Our final sample consists of six financial institutions, chosen because they have

reliable data spanning our sample period. Although data collection commenced in January

2008, our sample starts in 2009Q1 to coincide with the start of the credit-bureau data

collection. Our sample period runs through the end of 2013. 5

       We are forced to draw a randomized subsample from the entire population of data

because of the very large size of the data. For the largest banks in our dataset, we sample

2.5% of the raw data. However, as there is substantial heterogeneity in the size of the

credit-card portfolios across the institutions, we sample 10%, 20%, and 40% from the


        5 We also drew samples at December 2011, and December 2012. Our results using those samples are

quite similar. When we test the models, our out of time test sample extends to 2014Q2 for our measure of
delinquency.




14 June 2015                    Risk Management for Credit Cards                          Page 8 of 31
smallest three banks in our sample. The reason is simply to render the sample sizes

comparable across banks so that differences in the amount of data available for the

machine-learning algorithms are not driving the results.

        These subsamples are selected using a simple random sampling method. Starting

with the January 2008 data, each of the credit-card accounts is given an 18-digit unique

identifier based on the encrypted account number. The identifiers are simple sequences

starting at some constant and increasing by one for each account. The individual accounts

retain their identifiers and can therefore be tracked over time. As new accounts are added

to the sample in subsequent periods, they are assigned unique identifiers that increase by

one for each account. 6 As accounts are charged off, sold, or closed, they simply drop out of

the sample and the unique identifier is permanently retired. We therefore have a panel

dataset that tracks individual accounts through time (a necessary condition for predicting

delinquency) and also reflects changes in the financial institutions' portfolios over time.

        Once the account-level sample is established, we merge it with the credit-bureau

data. This process also requires care because the reporting frequency and historical

coverage differ between the two datasets. In particular, the account-level data is reported

monthly beginning in January 2008, while the credit-bureau data is reported quarterly

beginning in the first quarter of 2009. We merge the data using the link file provided by the

vendor at the monthly level to retain the granularity of the account-level data. Because we

merge the quarterly credit-bureau data with the monthly account-level data, each credit-



         6 For example, if a bank reported 100 credit-card accounts in January 2008, the unique identifiers

would be {C+1,C+2,…,C+100}. If the bank then added 20 more accounts in February 2008, the unique
identifiers of these new accounts would be {C+101,C+102,…,C+120}.




14 June 2015                     Risk Management for Credit Cards                           Page 9 of 31
bureau observation is repeated three times in the merged sample. However, we retain only

the quarter-ending months for our models in this paper.

       Finally, we merge the macroeconomic variables to our sample using the five-digit

ZIP code associated with each account. While we do not have a long time series in our

sample, there is a significant amount of cross-sectional heterogeneity that we use to

identify macro trends. For example, HPI is available at the state level, and several

employment and wage variables are available at the county level. Most of the macro

variables are reported quarterly, which allows us to capture short-term trends.

       The final merged dataset retains roughly 70% of the credit-card accounts. From

here, we only retain personal credit cards. The size of the sample across all banks increases

steadily over time from about 5.7 million credit-card accounts in 2009Q4 to about 6.6

million in 2013Q4.



III.   Empirical Design and Models

       We consider three basic types of credit-card delinquency models: C4.5 decision tree

models, logistic regression, and random-forest models. In addition to running a series of

“horse races” between these models, we seek a better understanding of the conditions

under which each type of model may be more useful. In particular, we are interested in

how the models compare over different time horizons, changing economic conditions, and

across banks.




14 June 2015                 Risk Management for Credit Cards                  Page 10 of 31
       We use the open-source software package Weka to run our machine-learning

models. 7 Weka offers a wide collection of open-source machine-learning algorithms for

data mining. We use Weka's J48 classifier, which implements the C4.5 algorithm developed

by Ross Quinlan (1993) (see, Frank, Hall, and Witten (2011)), because of its combination of

speed, performance, and interpretability. This algorithm is a decision tree learner. We

compare the results with those obtained using logistic regression models and random

forests, also available in Weka, and include the same variables as in the decision trees.

More specifically, we use a logistic regression model with a quadratic penalty function, i.e. a

ridge logistic regression. This is the Weka implementation of logistic regression as per

Cessie and van Houwelingen (1992). The likelihood is expressed as the following logistic

function:


                                                                                   exp(𝑋𝑖 𝛽)
            𝑙(𝛽) = ��𝑌𝑖 log 𝑝(X 𝑖 ) + (1 − 𝑌𝑖 ) log�1 − 𝑝(𝑋𝑖 )��   ,   𝑝(𝑋𝑖 ) ≝
                                                                                  1 - exp(𝑋𝑖 𝛽)
                     𝑖


The objective function is l ( β ) − λ β           where λ is the ridge parameter. The objective
                                              2




function is minimized with a quasi-Newton method.

       Our third model is the random forest. Random forests learn an ensemble of decision

trees, combine bootstrap aggregation with random feature selection (Breiman (2001);

Breiman and Cutler (2004)). They have emerged over the last decade as perhaps the

leading empirical method for many classification tasks (Caruana and Niculescu-Mezil

(2006); Criminisi et al (2012)). While random forests often learn ensembles of a hundred

or more trees, because of the size of our datasets and the computational power available,


       7   See http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/.




14 June 2015                      Risk Management for Credit Cards                        Page 11 of 31
we benchmark the performance by learning ensembles with 20 trees to provide a

reasonable tradeoff between computation time and classification accuracy.

        In all, we have 87 attributes in the models composed of account-level, credit-bureau,

and macroeconomic data. 8 We acknowledge that, in practice, banks tend to segment their

portfolios into distinct categories when using logistic regression and estimate different

models on each segment. However, for our analysis, we do not perform any such

segmentation. Our rationale is that our performance metric is solely based on classification

accuracy. While it may be true that segmentation results in models that are more tailored

to individual segments such as prime vs. subprime borrowers, thus potentially increasing

forecast accuracy, we relegate this case to future research. For our current purposes, the

number of attributes should be sufficient to approach the maximal forecast accuracy using

logistic regression. We also note that decision tree models are well suited to aid in the

segmentation process, and thus could be used in conjunction with logistic regression, but

again leave this for future research. 9


        A.      Attribute Selection

        Although there are few papers in the literature that have detailed account-level data

to benchmark our features, we believe we have selected a set that adequately represents

current industry standards, in part based on our collective experience. Glennon et al.

(2008) is one of the few papers with data similar to ours. These authors use industry

experience and institutional knowledge to select and develop account-level, credit-bureau,


        8 We refer to our “variables” as attributes as is common in the machine-learning literature.
        9 Another reason for not differentiating across segments is that the results might reveal the identity
of the banks to knowledgeable industry insiders. The same concern arises with the size of the portfolio.




14 June 2015                      Risk Management for Credit Cards                           Page 12 of 31
and macroeconomic attributes. We start by selecting all possible candidate attributes that

can be replicated from Glennon et al. (2008, Table 3). Although we cannot replicate all of

their attributes, we do have the majority of those that are shown to be significant after their

selection process.

       We also merge macroeconomic variables to our sample using the five-digit ZIP code

associated with the account. While we do not have a long time series of macro trends in our

sample, there is a significant amount of cross-sectional heterogeneity that we use to pick up

macro trends.


       B.       Dependent Variable

       Our dependent variable is delinquency status. For the purposes of this study, we

define delinquency as a credit-card account greater than or equal to 90 days past due. This

differs from the standard accounting rule by which banks typically charge off accounts that

are 180 days or more past due. However, it is rare for an account that is 90 days past due to

be recovered, and is therefore common practice within the industry to use 90 days past due

as a conservative definition of default. This definition is also consistent in the literature

(see, e.g., Glennon et al. (2008) and Khandani et al. (2010)). We forecast all of our models

over three different time horizons—two, three, and four quarters out—to classify whether

or not an account becomes delinquent within those horizons.




14 June 2015                 Risk Management for Credit Cards                   Page 13 of 31
        C.      Model Timing

        To predict delinquency, we estimate separate machine-learning model every six

months starting with the period ending 2010Q4. 10 We estimate these models at each point

in time as if we were in that time period, i.e., no future data is ever used as inputs to a

model, and require a historical training period and a future testing period. For example, a

model for 2010Q4 is trained on data up to and including 2010Q4, but no further. Table 2

defines the dates for the training and test samples of each of our models.

        The optimal length of the training window involves a tradeoff between increasing

the amount of training data available and the stationarity of the training data (hence its

relevance for predicting future performance). We use a rolling window of two years as the

length of the training window to balance these two considerations. In particular, we

combine the data from the most recent quarter with the data from 12 months prior to form

a training sample. For example, the model trained on data ending in 2010Q4 contains the

monthly credit-card accounts in 2009Q4 and 2010Q4. The average training sample thus

contains about two million individual records, depending on the institution and time

period. In fact, these rolling windows incorporate up to 24 months of information each

because of the lag structure of some of the variables (e.g., year over year change in the HPI),

and an addition 12 months over which an account could become 90 days delinquent.




        10 That is, we build models for the periods ending in 2010Q4, 2011Q2, 2011Q4, 2012Q2, 2012Q4, and

2013Q2. 2013Q2 is our last model because we need an out-of-sample test period to test our forecasts; it is
used only for the two-quarter models.




14 June 2015                     Risk Management for Credit Cards                         Page 14 of 31
       D.      Measuring Performance

       The goal of our delinquency prediction models is to classify credit-card accounts

into two categories: accounts that become 90 days or more past due within the next n

quarters (“bad” accounts), and accounts that do not (“good” accounts). Therefore, our

measure of performance should reflect the accuracy with which our model classifies the

accounts into these two categories.

       One common way to measure performance of such binary classification models is to

calculate precision and recall. In our model, precision is defined as the number of correctly

predicted delinquent accounts divided by the predicted number of delinquent accounts,

while recall is defined as the number of correctly predicted delinquent accounts divided by

the actual number of delinquent accounts. Precision is meant to gauge the number of false

positives (accounts predicted to be delinquent that stayed current) while recall gauges the

number of false negatives (accounts predicted to stay current that actually went into

default).

       We also consider two statistics that combine precision and recall, the F-measure and

the kappa statistic. The F-Measure is defined as the harmonic mean of precision and recall,

and is meant to describe the balance between precision and recall. The kappa statistic

measures performance relative to random classification. According to Khandani et al.

(2010) and Landis and Koch (1977), a kappa statistic above 0.6 represents substantial

performance. Figure 2 summarizes the definitions of these classification performance

statistics measures in a so-called “confusion matrix”.

       In the context of credit-card portfolio risk management, however, there are account-

specific costs and benefits associated with the classification decision that these



14 June 2015                 Risk Management for Credit Cards                  Page 15 of 31
performance statistics fail to capture. In the management of existing lines of credit, the

primary benefit of classifying bad accounts before they become delinquent is to save the

lender the run-up that is likely to occur between the current time period and the time at

which the borrower goes into default. On the other hand, there are costs associated with

incorrectly classifying accounts as well. For example, the bank may alienate customers and

lose out on potential future business and profits on future purchases.

       To account for these possible gains and losses, we use a cost-sensitive measure of

performance to compute the "value added" of our classifier, as in Khandani et al. (2010), by

assigning different costs to false positives and false negatives, and approximating the total

savings that our models would have brought if they had been implemented. Our value-

added approach is able to assign a dollar-per-account savings (or cost) of implementing

any classification model. From the lender’s perspective, this provides an intuitive and

practical method for choosing between models. From a supervisory perspective, we can

assign deadweight costs of incorrect classifications by aggregate risk levels to quantify

systemic risk levels.

       Following Khandani et al. (2010), our value-added function is derived from the

confusion matrix. Ideally, we would like to achieve 100% true positives and true negatives,

implying correct classification of all accounts, delinquent and current. However, any

realistic classification will have some false positives and negatives, which will be costly.

       To quantify the value-added of classification, Khandani et al. (2010) define the profit

with and without a forecast as follows:

                         Πno forecast = (𝑇𝑃 + 𝐹𝑁)𝐵𝐶 𝑃𝑀 − (𝐹𝑃 + 𝑇𝑁)𝐵𝐷                           [1]

                             Πforecast = 𝑇𝑃 𝐵𝐶 𝑃𝑀 − 𝐹𝑃𝐵𝐷 − 𝑇𝑁𝐵𝐶                                [2]



14 June 2015                  Risk Management for Credit Cards                    Page 16 of 31
                            ΔΠno forecast = 𝑇𝑁(𝐵𝐷 − 𝐵𝐶 ) − 𝐹𝑁𝐵𝐶 𝑃𝑀                         [3]




where BC is the current account balance; BD is the balance at default; PM is the profitability

margin; and TP, FN, FP, and TN are defined according to the confusion matrix. Note that Eq.

[3] is broken down into a savings from lowering balances (the first term) less a cost of

misclassification (the second term).

       To generate a value-added for each model, the authors then compare the savings

from the forecast profit (forecast) with the benefit of perfect foresight. The savings from

perfect foresight can be calculated by multiplying the total number of bad accounts (TN +

FP) by the run up (BD – BC). The ratio of the model forecast savings (Eq. [3]) to the perfect

foresight case can be written as:

                                                                     𝐵     −1
                             𝐵𝐷         𝑇𝑁 − 𝐹𝑁[1 − (1 + 𝑟)−𝑁 ] � 𝐷 − 1�
                Value-Added � , 𝑟, 𝑁� =
                                                                 𝐵𝐶                        [4]
                             𝐵𝐶                    𝑇𝑁 + 𝐹𝑃


where we substitute [1 − (1 + 𝑟)−𝑁 ] for the profitability margin, r is the discount rate, and

N is the discount period.



IV.    Classification Results

       In this section we report the results of our classification models by bank and time.

There are on average about 6.1 million accounts each month in our sample. Table 1 shows

the sample sizes over time. There is a significant amount of heterogeneity in terms of

delinquencies across institutions and time (see Figure 1). Delinquency rates necessarily

increase with the forecast horizon, since the longer horizons include the shorter ones.




14 June 2015                 Risk Management for Credit Cards                   Page 17 of 31
Annual delinquency rates range from 1.36% to 4.36%, indicating that the institutions we

are studying have very different underwriting and/or risk-management strategies.

        We run individual classification models for each bank over time; separate models

are estimated for each forecast horizon for each bank. Because our data ends in 2014Q2,

we can only test the three- and four-quarter-horizon models on the training periods ending

in 2012Q2 and 2012Q4, respectively. 11


        A.      Nonstationary Environments

        A fundamental concern for all prediction algorithms is generalization, i.e., whether

models will continue to perform well on out-of-sample data. This is particularly important

when the environment that generates the data is itself changing, and therefore the out-of-

sample data is almost guaranteed to come from a different distribution than the training

data. This concern is particularly relevant for financial forecasting given the non-

stationarity of financial data as well as the macroeconomic and regulatory environments.

And our sample period, which starts on the heels of the 2008 financial crisis and the

ensuing recession, only heightens these concerns.

        We address overfitting primarily by testing out of sample. Our decision tree models

also allow us to control the degree of in-sample fitting by controlling what is known as the

pruning parameter, which we refer to as M. This parameter acts as the stopping criterion

for the decision tree algorithm. For example, when M = 2, the algorithm will continue to

attempt to add additional nodes to the leaves of the tree until there are two instances

        11 For example, for the four-quarter forecast models with training data ending 2012Q2, the

dependent variable is defined over the period 2012Q2 through 2013Q2, making the test date 2013Q2. We
then need one year of data to test the model out-of-sample which brings us to our last month of data coverage
in 2014Q2.




14 June 2015                      Risk Management for Credit Cards                          Page 18 of 31
(accounts) or less on each leaf, and an additional node would be statistically significant. As

M increases, the in-sample performance will degrade because the algorithm stops even

though there may be potentially statistically significant splits remaining. However, our out-

of-sample performance may actually increase for a while because the nodes blocked by

increasing M are overfitting the sample. Eventually, however, even the out-of-sample

performance degrades as M becomes sufficiently high.

        To find a suitable value of M for our machine-learning models, we conduct

overfitting tests on data from a select bank by varying the M parameter from 2 to 5,000.

Within each of the 15 clusters, a value of M = 50 seems to optimize performance under a

variety of assumptions in our value-added calculation, although the results are not very

sensitive between 25 and 250. Similar experiments with data from other banks produced

similar results. In light of these results, we use a pruning parameter of M = 50 in all of our

decision tree models.


        B.      Model Results

        In this section we show the results of the comparison of our three modeling

approaches—decision trees, logistic regression, and random forests. The random-forest

models are estimated with 20 random trees. 12

        To preview the results and help visualize the effectiveness of our models in terms of

discriminating between good and bad accounts, we plot the model-derived risk ranking


        12  The C4.5 models produced unreliable results for the 4Q forecast horizon for bank 5 due to a low
delinquency rate combined with accounts that are difficult to classify (the corresponding logistic and
random-forest forecasts were the worst performing models). The random-forest models for the 4Q forecast
horizon for bank 2 failed to converge in a reasonable amount of time (run-time was stopped after 24+ hours
at full capacity) so those results are omitted as well. Throughout the paper, those results are indicated with
N/A.




14 June 2015                      Risk Management for Credit Cards                           Page 19 of 31
versus an account’s credit score at the time of the forecast in Figure 3 for Bank 2. Accounts

are rank-ordered based on a logistic regression model for a two-quarter forecast horizon.

Green points represent accounts that were current at the end of the forecast horizon; blue

points represent accounts 30 days past due; yellow points represent accounts 60 days past

due; and red points represent accounts 90 days or more past due. We plot each account’s

credit-bureau score on the horizontal axis because it is a key variable used in virtually

every consumer-default prediction model, and serves as a useful comparison to the

machine-learning forecast.

       This plot show that while credit scores discriminate between good and bad accounts

to a certain degree (the red 90+ days past due accounts do tend to cluster to the left region

of the horizontal axis with lower credit scores), the C4.5 decision tree model is very

effective in rank-ordering accounts in terms of riskiness. In particular, the red 90+ days

past due points cluster heavily at the top of the graph, implying that the machine-learning

forecasts are highly effective in identifying accounts that eventually become delinquent. 13

       Table 3 shows the precision and recall for our models. We also provide the true

positive and false positive rates. The results are given by bank, time, and forecast horizon

for each model type. The statistics are calculated for the classification threshold that

maximizes the respective model’s F-Measure to provide a reasonable balance between

good precision and recall.

       Although selecting a modeling threshold based on the test data does introduce some

look-ahead bias, we use this approach when presenting the results for two reasons. First,

banks are likely to calibrate classification models using an expected delinquency rate to

       13   Analogous plots for our logistic regression and random-forest models look very similar.




14 June 2015                       Risk Management for Credit Cards                           Page 20 of 31
select the acceptance threshold. We do not separately model delinquency rates and view

the primary purpose of our classifiers as the rank-ordering of accounts. To this end, we are

less concerned with forecasting the realized delinquency rates than rank-ordering accounts

based on risk of delinquency. Therefore, the main role of the acceptance threshold for our

purposes is for exposition and to make fair comparisons across models.

       Second, the performance statistics we report–the F-measure and the Kappa

statistic–are relatively insensitive to the choice of modeling threshold. Figures A1 through

A3 in the Appendix show the sensitivity of these performance statistics to the choice of

acceptance threshold for the C4.5, logistic regression, and random-forest models,

respectively. The three plots on the left in each figure show the F-measure versus the

acceptance threshold while the plots on the right show the Kappa statistic. The lines are

color-coded by bank and the points represent the maximum value of the line, i.e., the

acceptance thresholds used in our models.

       There are a few noteworthy points here. First, for each bank, the optimal threshold

remains relatively constant over time, which means that it should be easy for a bank to

select a threshold based on past results and get an adequate forecast. Second, in the cases

where the selected threshold varies over time, the lines are still quite flat. For example, in

our C4.5 decision tree models in Figure A1, the optimal thresholds cluster by bank and the

curves are very flat between 20% to 70% threshold values for the F-measure and the

kappa statistics. For the random-forest models in Figure A3, the lines are not as flat, but the

optimal thresholds tend to cluster tightly for each bank. In sum, it is important to

remember that the goal of a bank would not be to maximize the F-measure in any case, and

as long as the selected threshold is selected using any reasonable strategy, our sensitivity



14 June 2015                 Risk Management for Credit Cards                    Page 21 of 31
analysis demonstrates that it would, in all likelihood, only have a minimal effect on our

main results.

        Each of the models achieves a very high true positive rate which is not surprising

given the low default rates. The false positive rates are reasonable, between 11% and 38%

for the two-quarter horizon models. However, as the forecast horizon increases, the models

become less accurate and the false positive rates increase for each bank.

        Table 4 presents the F-Measure and kappa statistics by bank and time. As

mentioned above, the F-measure and kappa statistics show that the C4.5 and random-

forest models outperform the logistic regression models. The performance of the models

declines as the forecast horizon increases. Figures 4 and 5 present the F-measures and

kappa statistic graphically for the six banks. The C4.5 and random-forest models tend to

consistently out-perform the logistic regression, regardless of the forecast horizon, for each

statistic.

        Table 5 presents the value-added for each of the models, which represents the

potential gain from employing a given model versus passive risk management. Under this

metric, the C4.5 and random-forest models outperform the logistic regression models. We

plot the comparisons in Figure 6 for the two quarter forecast horizon models. 14 The results

are similar in that the C4.5 and random-forest models outperform logistic regression. All

the value-added results assume a run-up of 30% and profitability margin of about 13.5%.

        For the two quarter forecast horizon, the C4.5 models produce an average per bank

cost savings of between 45.2% and 75.5%. The random forests yield similar values,


        14 We also have produced similar figures for the three and four quarter forecast horizons but omit

them to conserve space.




14 June 2015                     Risk Management for Credit Cards                         Page 22 of 31
between 47.0% and 74.4%. The logistic regressions fare much worse based on the bank

average values because Banks 1 and 2 show two periods of negative value added—

meaning that the models did such a poor job of classifying accounts that the bank would

have been better off not managing accounts at all. Even omitting these negative instances,

the logistic models tend to underperform the others.

       There is substantial heterogeneity in value-added across banks as well. Figure 7

plots the value added for all six banks for each model type. All models are based on a two-

quarter forecast horizon. Bank 3 is always at the top of the plots meaning that our models

are performing the best. Bank 4 tends to be the lowest (although still has a positive value-

added) and the other four banks cluster in between.

       Moving to three- and four-quarter forecast horizons, the model performance

declines and as a result the value-added declines. However, the C4.5 trees and random

forests remain positive and continue to outperform logistic regression. Although the

relative performance degrades somewhat, our machine-learning models still provide

positive value at the longest forecast horizons.

       Figure 8 presents the value-added versus the assumed run-up. The value-added for

each model increases with run-up. With the exception of a 10% run-up for Bank 5, all the

C4.5 and random-forest models generate positive value-added for any run-up of at least

10%. The logistic models however, need to have a run-up of at least 20% for Bank 1 to

break even and never do so for Bank 2.


       C.      Risk Management Across Institutions

       In this section, we examine risk management practices across institutions. First, we

compare the credit-line management behavior across institutions. Second, we examine how


14 June 2015                 Risk Management for Credit Cards                 Page 23 of 31
well individual institutions target bad accounts. In credit cards, cutting lines is a very

common tool used by banks to manage their risks and one we can analyze given our

dataset.

        As of each test date, we take the accounts which were predicted to default over a

given horizon for a given bank, and analyze whether the bank cut its credit line or not. We

use the predicted values from our models to simulate the banks’ real problems and avoid

any look-ahead bias. In Table 6 and Figure 9 we compute the mean of the ratio of the

percent of lines cut for defaulted accounts to the percent of lines cut on all accounts. A ratio

greater than 1 implies that the bank is effectively targeting accounts that turn out to be bad

and cutting their credit lines at a disproportionately greater rate than they are cutting all

accounts, a sign of effective risk management practices. Similarly, a ratio less than one

implies the opposite. 15 We report the ratio for each quarter between the model prediction

and the end of the forecast horizon because cutting lines earlier is better if indeed they turn

out to become delinquent.

        The results show a significant amount of heterogeneity across banks. For example,

Figure 9 shows that three banks (2, 3, and 5) are very effective at cutting lines of accounts

predicted to become delinquent—they are between 4.8 and 13.2 times more likely to target

accounts predicted to default than the general portfolio. In contrast, Banks 4 and 6

underperform, rarely cut lines of accounts predicted to default. Bank 1 tends to cut the

same number of good and bad accounts. There is no clear pattern to banks’ targeting of bad

accounts across the forecast horizon.


         15 We plot the natural logarithm of this ratio in Figure 9 so values above zero are interpreted as

effective risk management.




14 June 2015                     Risk Management for Credit Cards                          Page 24 of 31
       Of course, these results are not conclusive because banks have other risk

management strategies in addition to cutting lines, and our efficacy measure relies on the

accuracy of our models. However, these empirical results show that, at a minimum, risk

management policies differ significantly across major credit-card issuing financial

institutions.


       D.        Attribute Analysis

       A common criticism of machine-learning algorithms is that they are essentially black

boxes, with results that are difficult to interpret. For example, given the chosen pruning

and confidence limits of our decision tree models, the estimated decision trees tend to have

about 100 leaves. The attributes selected vary across institutions and time, hence it is very

difficult to compare the trees because of their complexity. Therefore, the first goal of our

attribute analysis is to develop a method for interpreting the results of our machine-

learning algorithms. The single decision-tree models learned using C4.5 are particularly

intuitive.

       We propose a relatively straightforward approach for combining the results of the

decision tree output that captures the results by generating an index based on three main

criteria. We start by constructing the following three metrics for each attribute in each

decision tree:


             1. Log of the number of instances classified: This is meant to capture the importance of

                 the attribute. If attributes appear multiple times in a single model, we sum all the

                 instances classified. This statistic is computed for each tree.

             2. The minimum leaf number: The minimum leaf number is the highest node on the

                 tree where the attribute sits, and roughly represents the statistical significance of


14 June 2015                     Risk Management for Credit Cards                        Page 25 of 31
               the attribute. The logic of the C4.5 classifier is that, in general, the higher up on the

               tree the attribute is (i.e., the lower the leaf number), the more important is it.

               Therefore, the attributes will be sorted in reverse order; that is, the variable with

               the lowest mean minimum leaf number would be ranked first. This statistic is

               computed for each tree.

           3. Indicator variable equal to 1 if the attribute appears in the tree and 0 otherwise: We

               combine the results of multiple models over time to derive a bank-specific attribute

               ranking based on the number of times attributes are selected in a given model. For

               example, we run six separate C4.5 models for each bank using a two quarter

               forecast horizon. This ranking criterion is the number of times (between zero and

               six) that a given attribute is selected to a model. This statistic is meant to capture

               the stability of an attribute over time.



       We combine the above statistics into a single ranking measure by standardizing

each to have a mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1 and summing them by attribute.

Attributes that do not appear in a model are assigned a score equal to the minimum of the

standardized distribution. We then combine the scores for all unique bank-forecast horizon

combinations and rank the attributes. This leaves us with 18 individual scores for each

attribute used to rank them by importance. The most important attributes should have

higher scores and appear near the top of the list and be raked lower (i.e., attribute 1 is the

most important).

       In all, 78 of the 87 attributes are selected in at least one model. Table 7 shows the

mean attribute rankings across all models, by forecast horizon, and by bank. More

important attributes are ranked lower. The table is sorted based on the mean ranking for



14 June 2015                   Risk Management for Credit Cards                          Page 26 of 31
each attribute across all 18 bank-forecast horizon pairs. Columns 2-4 show the mean

ranking by forecast horizon and columns 5-10 show the mean ranking by bank.

       It is reassuring that the top ranking variables—days past due, behavioral score,

credit score, actual payment over minimum payment, one month change in utilization,

etc.—are intuitive. For example, accounts that start out delinquent (less than 90 days) are

most likely to become 90 days past due, regardless of the forecast horizon or bank.

       Looking across forecast horizons, we do not see much variation. In fact, the pairwise

Spearman rank correlations between the attribute rankings (for all 78 attributes that

appear in at least one model) are between 89.8% and 94.3%.

       However, there is a substantial amount of heterogeneity across banks, as suggested

by the pairwise rank correlations between banks which range from 46.5% to 80.3%. This

suggests that the key risk factors affecting delinquency vary across banks. For example, the

change in one-month utilization (i.e., the percentage change in the drawdown of the credit

line) has an average ranking between 2.0 and 4.0 for Banks 1, 2, and 5 but ranks between

10.3 and 15.7 for Banks 3, 4, and 6. For risk managers, this is a key attribute because

managing drawdown and preventing run-up prior to default is central to managing credit-

card risk. Large variation across banks in other attributes such as whether an account has

entered into a workout program, the total fees, and whether an account is frozen further

suggest that banks have different risk management strategies.

       Overall, the results in Table 7 support the validity of our models and variable

ranking criteria since the most widely used attributes in the industry tend to appear near

the top of our rankings. However, looking across institutions, the results suggest that banks




14 June 2015                 Risk Management for Credit Cards                  Page 27 of 31
face different exposures, likely due to differences in underwriting practices and/or risk

management strategies.

       There is also substantial heterogeneity across banks in how macroeconomic

variables affect their customers. Macroeconomic variables are more predictive for Banks 2

and 6 at a two-quarter forecast horizon, while for Bank 6, macroeconomic variables are

captured as important factors at the one-year forecast horizon. The macroeconomic

variables are only in the most important 20 attributes for Bank 2 and 6 in a two-quarter

forecast horizon and for Bank 6 at the one-year forecast horizon. Although they are not the

most important attributes, their ranking score is still relatively high and shows that the

macroenvironment has a significant impact on consumer credit risk.

       As mentioned above, we had also drawn the data three other times before. Using the

data as of 2012Q4 (i.e. with 12 quarters of data from 2009Q1 to 2012Q4), our results

showed greater macroeconomic sensitivity. The different results are consistent with

intuition since the macroeconomic environment with a vantage point of 2012Q4 was quite

different from the macroeconomic environment as of 2014Q2. These results emphasize the

dynamic nature of machine-learning models, a particularly important feature for

estimating industry relations in transition.



V.     Conclusion

       In this study, we employ a unique, very large dataset consisting of anonymized

information from six large banks collected by a financial regulator to build and test

decision-tree, regularized logistic regression, and random-forest models for predicting

credit-card delinquency. The algorithms have access to combined consumer tradeline,



14 June 2015                 Risk Management for Credit Cards                Page 28 of 31
credit bureau, and macroeconomic data from January 2009 to December 2013. We find that

decision trees and random forests outperform logistic regression in both out-of-sample and

out-of-time forecasts of credit-card delinquencies. The advantage of decision-trees and

random forests over logistic regression is most significant at short time horizons. The

success of these models implies that there may be a considerable amount of “money left on

the table” by the credit-card issuers.

       We also analyze and compare risk-management practices across the banks and

compare drivers of delinquency across institutions. We find that there is substantial

heterogeneity across banks in terms of risk factors and sensitivities to those factors.

Therefore, no single model is likely to capture the delinquency tendencies across all

institutions. The results also suggest that portfolio characteristics alone are not sufficient to

identify the drivers of delinquency, since the banks actively manage the portfolios. Even a

nominally high-risk portfolio may have fewer volatile delinquencies because of successful

active risk management by the bank.

       The heterogeneity of credit-card risk management practices across financial

institutions has systemic implications. Credit-card receivables form an important

component of modern asset-backed securities. We have found that certain banks are

significantly more active and effective at managing the exposure of their credit-card

portfolios, while credit-card delinquency rates across banks are also quite different in their

macroeconomic sensitivities. An unexpected macroeconomic shock may thus propagate

itself through the greater delinquency rate of credit cards issued by specific financial

institutions into the asset-backed securities market.




14 June 2015                  Risk Management for Credit Cards                    Page 29 of 31
       Our study provides an in-depth illustration of the potential benefits that big data

and machine-learning techniques can bring to consumers, risk managers, shareholders, and

regulators, all of whom have a stake in avoiding unexpected losses and reducing the cost of

consumer credit. Moreover, when aggregated across a number of financial institutions, the

predictive analytics of machine-learning models provide a practical means for measuring

systemic risk in one of the most important and vulnerable sectors of the economy. We plan

to explore this application in ongoing and future research.




14 June 2015                 Risk Management for Credit Cards                Page 30 of 31
References


Breiman, L. , 2001. Random Forests, Machine Learning 45 (1): 5–32.
      doi:10.1023/A:1010933404324

Breiman, L. and A. Cutler, 2004. Random Forests (Manual)
      URL:http://www.stat.berkeley.edu/users/breiman/RandomForests/cc_papers.htm

Caruana, R. and Niculescu-Mizil, A., 2006. An empirical comparison of supervised learning
      algorithms. In Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML)

Cessie, S., van Houwelingen, J.C. , 1992. Ridge Estimators in Logistic Regression. Applied
       Statistics. 41(1):191-201.

A. Criminisi, J. Shotton, and E. Konukoglu. , 2012. Decision forests: A unified framework for
       classification, regression, density estimation, manifold learning and semi-supervised
       learning. Found. Trends Comput. Graphics and Vision, 7(2–3):81–227.

Frank, E., Hall, M. A., and Witten, I. H., 2011, Data Mining: Practical Machine Learning Tools
       and Techniques, Morgan Kaufmann, Burlington, MA.

Glennon, D., Kiefer, N., Larson, E., and Choi, H. , 2008. “Development and Validation of
      Credit-Scoring Models,” Journal of Credit Risk, 4.

Khandani, A. E., Kim, A. J., Lo, A. W. , 2010. Consumer credit-risk models via machine-
     learning algorithms, Journal of Banking & Finance, 34(11), 2767–2787

Landis, J.R.; Koch, G.G., 1977. The measurement of observer agreement for categorical data.
       Biometrics 33 (1): 159–174. doi:10.2307/2529310

Quinlan, J. R. , 1993. C4.5: programs for machine learning, Morgan Kaufman, San Francisco,
      CA.

Thomas, L.C. , 2000. A survey of credit and behavioral scoring – forecasting financial risk of
     lending to consumers, International Journal of Forecasting 16(2) 163-167.




14 June 2015                 Risk Management for Credit Cards                   Page 31 of 31
       Table 1 - Sample Description
This table shows the total number of accounts over time. The six banks’ data are combined to show the
aggregate each quarter.
                              Date       Number of Accounts (1,000’s)
                             2009Q4                     5,696
                             2010Q2                     5,677
                             2010Q4                     5,787
                             2011Q2                     5,960
                             2011Q4                     5,306
                             2012Q2                     6,300
                             2012Q4                     6,580
                             2013Q2                     6,643
                             2013Q4                     6,604
       Table 2 - Model Timing
This table shows the model timing. The first two columns represent the start and end dates of the
training data. The test period columns show the quarter in which the models are tested. All models are
meant to simulate a bank’s actual forecasting problem “as if” they were at the test period start date.
                      Training Period                Test Period Start
                         Start - End       2Q Forecast 3Q Forecast 4Q Forecast
                     2009Q4 - 2010Q4         2011Q2        2011Q3        2011Q4
                     2010Q2 - 2011Q2         2011Q4        2012Q1        2012Q2
                     2010Q4 - 2011Q4         2012Q2        2012Q3        2012Q4
                     2011Q2 - 2012Q2         2012Q4        2013Q1        2013Q2
                     2011Q4 - 2012Q4         2013Q2        2013Q3          N/A
                     2012Q2 - 2013Q2         2013Q4          N/A           N/A
         Table 3 - Precision, Recall, True Positive Rate, and False Positive Rates by Bank
This table shows the precision, recall, true positive rate, and false positive rates by bank, time, and forecast horizon for each model type. The statistics are
defined in Figure 2. The acceptance threshold is defined as the threshold which maximizes the F-Measure.
                                                             Panel A: 2 Quarter Forecast Horizon
                                   C4.5 Decision Trees                          Logistic Regression                              Random Forests
                                                True       False                              True       False                             True        False
                                               Positive   Positive                          Positive    Positive                         Positive     Positive
   Bank      Test Date   Precision   Recall     Rate       Rate       Precision   Recall      Rate       Rate       Precision    Recall    Rate        Rate
     1        201106      71.3%       63.0%      99.9%     37.0%        17.9%       59.1%     99.0%      40.9%        68.8%       67.8%     99.9%      32.2%
     1        201112      62.8%       70.3%      99.8%     29.7%        26.0%       70.2%     98.8%      29.8%        65.0%       68.3%     99.8%      31.7%
     1        201206      65.5%       67.8%      99.8%     32.2%        62.7%       60.0%     99.8%      40.0%        64.2%       69.1%     99.8%      30.9%
     1        201212      68.0%       65.3%      99.8%     34.7%        62.6%       62.1%     99.8%      37.9%        66.2%       67.3%     99.8%      32.7%
     1        201306      68.2%       59.9%      99.9%     40.1%        58.6%       59.3%     99.8%      40.7%        58.3%       70.1%     99.7%      29.9%
     1        201312      67.1%       65.6%      99.8%     34.4%        60.6%       64.5%     99.8%      35.5%        64.5%       69.4%     99.8%      30.6%
              Average:    67.2%       65.3%      99.8%     34.7%        48.1%       62.5%     99.5%      37.5%        64.5%       68.7%     99.8%      31.3%


     2        201106      63.7%       73.0%      99.4%     27.0%        64.2%       71.5%     99.4%      28.5%        65.9%       71.1%     99.4%      28.9%
     2        201112      60.5%       75.9%      99.2%     24.1%        61.9%       71.3%      99.3%     28.7%        60.5%       74.2%     99.2%      25.8%
     2        201206      64.8%       63.5%      99.4%     36.5%         3.1%       91.8%      53.9%      8.2%        63.4%       71.2%     99.3%      28.8%
     2        201212      65.7%       70.7%      99.4%     29.3%        10.0%       67.7%      90.4%     32.3%        62.0%       73.9%     99.3%      26.1%
     2        201306      66.5%       66.8%      99.5%     33.2%        63.6%       68.6%      99.4%     31.4%        61.7%       72.3%     99.3%      27.7%
     2        201312      63.2%       73.0%      99.3%     27.0%        62.7%       71.2%      99.3%     28.8%        60.8%       72.6%     99.2%      27.4%
              Average:    64.1%       70.5%      99.4%     29.5%        44.3%       73.7%      90.3%     26.3%        62.4%       72.5%     99.3%      27.5%


     3        201106      79.9%       88.8%      99.9%     11.2%        75.7%       81.2%      99.8%     18.8%        80.0%       87.7%     99.9%      12.3%
     3        201112      69.2%       92.6%      99.7%      7.4%        72.5%       82.4%      99.8%     17.6%        80.5%       85.6%     99.9%      14.4%
     3        201206      81.1%       84.9%      99.9%     15.1%        73.6%       81.7%      99.9%     18.3%        83.9%       79.0%     99.9%      21.0%
     3        201212      79.5%       85.4%      99.9%     14.6%        72.4%       79.3%      99.9%     20.7%        79.0%       85.5%     99.9%      14.5%
     3        201306      71.6%       90.2%      99.9%      9.8%        70.8%       80.3%      99.9%     19.7%        70.6%       90.8%     99.9%       9.2%
     3        201312      74.8%       88.6%      99.9%     11.4%        70.7%       84.2%      99.9%     15.8%        70.8%       90.3%     99.9%       9.7%
              Average:    76.0%       88.4%      99.9%     11.6%        72.6%       81.5%      99.9%     18.5%        77.5%       86.5%     99.9%      13.5%
(Table 3 - Panel A, cont.)
                                       C4.5 Decision Trees                         Logistic Regression                           Random Forests
                                                    True       False                             True      False                           True      False
                                                   Positive   Positive                         Positive   Positive                       Positive   Positive
   Bank      Test Date       Precision   Recall     Rate       Rate      Precision   Recall      Rate      Rate      Precision   Recall    Rate      Rate
     4        201106          59.4%       64.9%     99.7%      35.1%      57.2%       62.3%     99.7%      37.7%      58.7%      67.2%    99.7%      32.8%
     4        201112          61.2%       70.0%     99.8%      30.0%      53.1%       67.1%     99.7%      32.9%      62.4%      67.3%    99.8%      32.7%
     4        201206          67.4%       59.0%     99.9%      41.0%      57.6%       59.3%     99.8%      40.7%      59.0%      64.6%    99.8%      35.4%
     4        201212          68.6%       60.5%     99.9%      39.5%      59.0%       62.1%     99.8%      37.9%      64.0%      62.1%    99.8%      37.9%
     4        201306          62.3%       65.1%     99.8%      34.9%      61.5%       61.3%     99.8%      38.7%      61.3%      66.9%    99.8%      33.1%
     4        201312          68.9%       60.7%     99.9%      39.3%      57.5%       67.1%     99.8%      32.9%      64.6%      65.6%    99.9%      34.4%
              Average:        64.6%       63.4%     99.8%      36.6%      57.7%       63.2%     99.8%      36.8%      61.7%      65.6%    99.8%      34.4%


     5        201106          69.6%       72.8%     99.8%      27.2%      64.5%       71.8%     99.8%      28.2%      67.2%      76.0%    99.8%      24.0%
     5        201112          66.1%       72.8%     99.8%      27.2%      65.7%       69.0%     99.8%      31.0%      64.1%      76.4%    99.8%      23.6%
     5        201206          70.7%       64.4%     99.9%      35.6%      66.3%       62.2%     99.8%      37.8%      65.6%      72.5%    99.8%      27.5%
     5        201212          66.2%       75.4%     99.8%      24.6%      63.5%       72.7%     99.8%      27.3%      66.1%      74.5%    99.8%      25.5%
     5        201306          68.4%       71.0%     99.8%      29.0%      68.0%       68.8%     99.8%      31.2%      66.9%      75.4%    99.8%      24.6%
     5        201312          63.3%       77.5%     99.7%      22.5%      66.6%       70.4%     99.8%      29.6%      64.3%      75.2%    99.8%      24.8%
              Average:        67.4%       72.3%     99.8%      27.7%      65.7%       69.1%     99.8%      30.9%      65.7%      75.0%    99.8%      25.0%


     6        201106          69.7%       66.5%     99.9%      33.5%      64.6%       66.4%     99.8%      33.6%      69.9%      65.9%    99.9%      34.1%
     6        201112          64.0%       71.1%     99.8%      28.9%      66.0%       66.9%     99.8%      33.1%      64.5%      70.6%    99.8%      29.4%
     6        201206          74.7%       67.6%     99.8%      32.4%      69.9%       71.2%     99.8%      28.8%      70.9%      71.4%    99.8%      28.6%
     6        201212          42.8%       90.4%     99.1%      9.6%       67.9%       70.2%     99.8%      29.8%      66.4%      72.9%    99.7%      27.1%
     6        201306          36.2%       96.2%     98.7%      3.8%       70.6%       69.5%     99.8%      30.5%      71.7%      70.2%    99.8%      29.8%
     6        201312          62.8%       72.5%     99.7%      27.5%      60.9%       72.3%     99.7%      27.7%      61.8%      71.7%    99.7%      28.3%
              Average:        58.4%       77.4%     99.5%      22.6%      66.7%       69.4%     99.8%      30.6%      67.5%      70.4%    99.8%      29.6%
                                                       Panel B: 3 Quarter Forecast Horizon
                             C4.5 Decision Trees                         Logistic Regression                           Random Forests
                                          True       False                             True      False                           True      False
                                         Positive   Positive                         Positive   Positive                       Positive   Positive
Bank   Test Date   Precision   Recall     Rate       Rate      Precision   Recall      Rate      Rate      Precision   Recall    Rate      Rate
 1     201109       60.3%       45.8%     99.7%      54.2%       55.8%       42.0%     99.7%     58.0%      56.0%      50.0%    99.7%      50.0%
 1     201203       59.0%       44.5%     99.7%      55.5%       54.5%       39.3%     99.7%     60.7%      56.3%      46.1%    99.7%      53.9%
 1     201209       53.8%       47.6%     99.6%      52.4%       52.4%       40.1%     99.6%     59.9%      53.4%      47.4%    99.6%      52.6%
 1     201303       55.6%       43.3%     99.7%      56.7%       52.0%       37.7%     99.7%     62.3%      49.5%      45.4%    99.6%      54.6%
 1     201309       36.9%       54.0%     99.1%      46.0%       54.4%       35.4%     99.7%     64.6%      55.7%      44.1%    99.6%      55.9%
        Average:    53.1%       47.0%     99.6%      53.0%       53.8%       38.9%     99.7%     61.1%      54.2%      46.6%    99.6%      53.4%


 2     201109       52.3%       51.5%     98.5%      48.5%       54.7%       45.9%     98.8%     54.1%      55.7%      48.1%    98.8%      51.9%
 2     201203       55.2%       42.5%     98.9%      57.5%       46.8%       48.8%     98.3%     51.2%      48.9%      47.6%    98.5%      52.4%
 2     201209       47.6%       56.0%     98.1%      44.0%        5.0%       80.4%     52.2%     19.6%      50.3%      52.0%    98.4%      48.0%
 2     201303       51.1%       45.2%     98.9%      54.8%        9.3%       49.6%     87.8%     50.4%       N/A        N/A       N/A       N/A
 2     201309       50.8%       50.8%     98.4%      49.2%       48.3%       50.9%     98.2%     49.1%        N/A       N/A       N/A       N/A
        Average:    51.4%       49.2%     98.6%      50.8%       32.8%       55.1%     87.0%     44.9%      51.7%      49.3%    98.6%      50.7%


 3     201109       70.1%       56.4%     99.7%      43.6%       64.7%       51.8%     99.6%     48.2%      66.8%      57.8%    99.6%      42.2%
 3     201203       70.6%       55.4%     99.8%      44.6%       65.2%       52.9%     99.7%     47.1%      71.2%      55.3%    99.8%      44.7%
 3     201209       67.4%       56.8%     99.7%      43.2%       66.3%       53.1%     99.7%     46.9%      70.8%      55.8%    99.8%      44.2%
 3     201303       66.7%       60.3%     99.8%      39.7%       64.8%       55.1%     99.8%     44.9%      69.4%      58.1%    99.8%      41.9%
 3     201309       72.8%       60.8%     99.8%      39.2%       64.1%       58.9%     99.7%     41.1%      65.7%      63.6%    99.7%      36.4%
        Average:    69.5%       58.0%     99.8%      42.0%       65.0%       54.4%     99.7%     45.6%      68.8%      58.1%    99.7%      41.9%
(Table 3 - Panel B, cont.)
                                       C4.5 Decision Trees                         Logistic Regression                           Random Forests
                                                    True       False                             True      False                           True      False
                                                   Positive   Positive                         Positive   Positive                       Positive   Positive
   Bank      Test Date       Precision   Recall     Rate       Rate      Precision   Recall      Rate      Rate      Precision   Recall    Rate      Rate
     4        201109          46.1%       48.7%     99.4%      51.3%      46.7%       43.2%     99.5%      56.8%      52.0%      44.3%    99.5%      55.7%
     4        201203          25.2%       56.2%     98.5%      43.8%      46.0%       41.0%     99.6%      59.0%      52.9%      42.5%    99.7%      57.5%
     4        201209          53.4%       39.6%     99.7%      60.4%      43.8%       43.8%     99.5%      56.2%      47.3%      44.2%    99.5%      55.8%
     4        201303          51.3%       38.9%     99.7%      61.1%      48.5%       37.2%     99.7%      62.8%      45.4%      43.4%    99.6%      56.6%
     4        201309          46.3%       46.8%     99.5%      53.2%      44.7%       47.4%     99.5%      52.6%      54.4%      43.5%    99.7%      56.5%
              Average:        44.5%       46.0%     99.4%      54.0%      46.0%       42.5%     99.5%      57.5%      50.4%      43.6%    99.6%      56.4%


     5        201109          30.6%       43.8%     99.2%      56.2%      30.2%       34.6%     99.3%      65.4%      40.0%      36.5%    99.5%      63.5%
     5        201203          39.9%       31.2%     99.6%      68.8%      28.8%       32.4%     99.4%      67.6%      36.1%      37.1%    99.5%      62.9%
     5        201209          40.4%       33.7%     99.6%      66.3%      22.9%       46.6%     98.7%      53.4%      39.3%      35.8%    99.5%      64.2%
     5        201303          41.0%       31.2%     99.7%      68.8%      27.1%       37.4%     99.2%      62.6%      38.9%      34.5%    99.6%      65.5%
     5        201309          42.1%       34.6%     99.6%      65.4%      32.6%       31.4%     99.4%      68.6%      42.2%      36.1%    99.6%      63.9%
              Average:        38.8%       34.9%     99.5%      65.1%      28.3%       36.5%     99.2%      63.5%      39.3%      36.0%    99.5%      64.0%


     6        201109          48.0%       46.0%     99.4%      54.0%      48.3%       39.9%     99.5%      60.1%      56.0%      42.5%    99.6%      57.5%
     6        201203          52.9%       43.3%     99.5%      56.7%      47.8%       42.0%     99.4%      58.0%      53.5%      45.3%    99.5%      54.7%
     6        201209          42.9%       55.9%     98.9%      44.1%      52.1%       48.4%     99.4%      51.6%      58.2%      51.0%    99.5%      49.0%
     6        201303          58.3%       42.8%     99.6%      57.2%      54.2%       43.2%     99.5%      56.8%      59.3%      44.4%    99.6%      55.6%
     6        201309          47.7%       51.1%     99.2%      48.9%      48.6%       50.5%     99.3%      49.5%      54.1%      49.1%    99.4%      50.9%
              Average:        50.0%       47.8%     99.3%      52.2%      50.2%       44.8%     99.4%      55.2%      56.2%      46.4%    99.5%      53.6%
                                                       Panel C: 4 Quarter Forecast Horizon
                             C4.5 Decision Trees                         Logistic Regression                           Random Forests
                                          True       False                             True      False                           True      False
                                         Positive   Positive                         Positive   Positive                       Positive   Positive
Bank   Test Date   Precision   Recall     Rate       Rate      Precision   Recall      Rate      Rate      Precision   Recall    Rate      Rate
 1     201112       52.5%       38.9%     99.5%      61.1%       26.6%       38.2%     98.5%     61.8%      48.5%      42.1%    99.4%      57.9%
 1     201206       54.5%       36.5%     99.6%      63.5%       44.5%       35.5%     99.4%     64.5%      50.3%      39.2%    99.4%      60.8%
 1     201212       49.2%       39.0%     99.5%      61.0%       45.0%       34.8%     99.5%     65.2%      48.9%      40.4%    99.5%      59.6%
 1     201306       53.8%       34.4%     99.6%      65.6%       47.5%       29.1%     99.6%     70.9%      48.9%      35.3%    99.5%      64.7%
        Average:    52.5%       37.2%     99.5%      62.8%       40.9%       34.4%     99.2%     65.6%      49.2%      39.3%    99.4%      60.7%


 2     201112       47.3%       43.1%     98.0%      56.9%       42.1%       47.7%     97.2%     52.3%       N/A        N/A       N/A       N/A
 2     201206       53.6%       40.8%     98.5%      59.2%        6.6%       86.9%     46.2%     13.1%       N/A        N/A       N/A       N/A
 2     201212       47.1%       43.6%     98.2%      56.4%        5.6%       84.3%     48.4%     15.7%       N/A        N/A       N/A       N/A
 2     201306       51.0%       39.6%     98.6%      60.4%       12.9%       51.6%     86.9%     48.4%       N/A        N/A       N/A       N/A
        Average:    49.8%       41.7%     98.3%      58.3%       16.8%       67.6%     69.7%     32.4%       N/A        N/A      N/A        N/A


 3     201112       63.1%       47.8%     99.6%      52.2%       62.0%       43.9%     99.6%     56.1%      64.2%      47.6%    99.6%      52.4%
 3     201206       63.5%       41.9%     99.7%      58.1%       58.2%       41.3%     99.6%     58.7%      68.5%      40.0%    99.7%      60.0%
 3     201212       57.9%       44.3%     99.6%      55.7%       49.6%       40.8%     99.5%     59.2%      57.3%      46.0%    99.6%      54.0%
 3     201306       60.8%       43.9%     99.7%      56.1%       53.9%       44.3%     99.6%     55.7%      63.5%      42.7%    99.7%      57.3%
        Average:    61.3%       44.5%     99.6%      55.5%       55.9%       42.6%     99.6%     57.4%      63.4%      44.1%    99.7%      55.9%
(Table 3 - Panel C, cont.)
                                       C4.5 Decision Trees                         Logistic Regression                           Random Forests
                                                    True       False                             True      False                           True      False
                                                   Positive   Positive                         Positive   Positive                       Positive   Positive
   Bank      Test Date       Precision   Recall     Rate       Rate      Precision   Recall      Rate      Rate      Precision   Recall    Rate      Rate
     4        201112          38.8%       38.8%     99.2%      61.2%      37.0%       38.8%     99.1%      61.2%      44.3%      36.0%    99.4%      64.0%
     4        201206          38.2%       37.8%     99.2%      62.2%      39.3%       33.6%     99.3%      66.4%      44.4%      33.4%    99.4%      66.6%
     4        201212          42.9%       36.8%     99.4%      63.2%      40.2%       36.2%     99.3%      63.8%      40.6%      37.4%    99.3%      62.6%
     4        201306          26.3%       43.4%     98.4%      56.6%      42.5%       34.7%     99.4%      65.3%      45.3%      36.4%    99.4%      63.6%
              Average:        36.6%       39.2%     99.0%      60.8%      39.7%       35.8%     99.3%      64.2%      43.6%      35.8%    99.4%      64.2%


     5        201112            N/A        N/A       N/A        N/A        9.1%       31.2%     97.7%      68.8%       9.5%      24.7%    98.3%      75.3%
     5        201206            N/A        N/A       N/A        N/A        8.9%       9.8%      99.2%      90.2%      11.8%      16.6%    99.0%      83.4%
     5        201212            N/A        N/A       N/A        N/A        9.7%       25.8%     98.2%      74.2%      10.8%      22.0%    98.6%      78.0%
     5        201306            N/A        N/A       N/A        N/A        8.9%       33.9%     97.0%      66.1%      10.9%      24.0%    98.3%      76.0%
              Average:         N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A        9.1%       25.2%     98.0%      74.8%      10.8%      21.8%    98.5%      78.2%


     6        201112          49.9%       36.0%     99.4%      64.0%      48.1%       30.7%     99.4%      69.3%      47.0%      36.8%    99.3%      63.2%
     6        201206          55.7%       37.6%     99.4%      62.4%      45.0%       38.8%     99.0%      61.2%      52.3%      40.9%    99.2%      59.1%
     6        201212          38.9%       46.0%     98.6%      54.0%      54.0%       37.5%     99.4%      62.5%      49.5%      45.1%    99.1%      54.9%
     6        201306          52.9%       40.9%     99.3%      59.1%      54.0%       40.8%     99.3%      59.2%      52.2%      44.2%    99.2%      55.8%
              Average:        49.4%       40.1%     99.2%      59.9%      50.3%       36.9%     99.3%      63.1%      50.3%      41.8%    99.2%      58.2%
          Table 4 - F-Measure and Kappa Statistics by Bank and Time
This table shows the F-Measure and Kappa statistics by bank, time, and forecast horizon for each model type. The
statistics are defined in Figure 2. The statistics are based on the acceptance threshold that maximizes the respective
statistic for a given bank-time-model.
                                             Panel A: 2 Quarter Forecast Horizon
                                                 F-Measure                             Kappa Statistic
                                                              Random                                   Random
                 Bank        Time      C4.5 Tree   Logistic     Forest        C4.5 Tree   Logistic      Forest
                        1    201012        66.9%       27.5%      68.3%           69.8%      49.9%        70.0%
                        1    201106        66.3%       37.9%      66.6%           68.1%      49.9%        68.4%
                        1    201112        66.6%       61.3%      66.5%           68.7%      65.0%        68.8%
                        1    201206        66.7%       62.3%      66.7%           68.3%      64.4%        68.7%
                        1    201212        63.8%       58.9%      63.6%           67.3%      61.9%        66.2%
                        1    201306        66.4%       62.5%      66.9%           68.4%      65.7%        68.7%
                            Average:       66.1%       51.7%      66.4%           68.4%      59.5%        68.5%

                        2    201012       68.0%       67.7%       68.4%          69.2%       68.7%      69.1%
                        2    201106       67.3%       66.3%       66.7%          68.0%       66.9%      67.2%
                        2    201112       64.2%        6.0%       67.1%          67.9%       49.6%      67.9%
                        2    201206       68.1%       17.4%       67.4%          68.1%       49.6%      67.5%
                        2    201212       66.6%       66.0%       66.6%          67.3%       66.2%      66.8%
                        2    201306       67.8%       66.7%       66.2%          67.9%       66.9%      66.3%
                            Average:      67.0%       48.3%       67.0%          68.1%       61.3%      67.5%

                        3    201012       84.1%       78.4%       83.7%          83.5%       78.0%      83.2%
                        3    201106       79.2%       77.1%       83.0%          75.6%       76.2%      82.4%
                        3    201112       82.9%       77.5%       81.4%          82.6%       77.0%      81.9%
                        3    201206       82.3%       75.7%       82.1%          81.8%       75.3%      81.5%
                        3    201212       79.8%       75.3%       79.4%          77.8%       74.6%      77.6%
                        3    201306       81.1%       76.9%       79.4%          79.3%       75.6%      77.4%
                            Average:      81.6%       76.8%       81.5%          80.1%       76.1%      80.7%

                        4    201012       62.1%       59.6%       62.7%          65.3%       62.9%      65.1%
                        4    201106       65.3%       59.3%       64.7%          66.4%       63.2%      66.6%
                        4    201112       62.9%       58.4%       61.7%          66.3%       63.5%      65.2%
                        4    201206       64.3%       60.5%       63.0%          66.9%       62.8%      66.0%
                        4    201212       63.6%       61.4%       64.0%          67.7%       63.4%      66.0%
                        4    201306       64.6%       62.0%       65.1%          67.6%       64.2%      66.3%
                            Average:      63.8%       60.2%       63.5%          66.7%       63.3%      65.9%

                        5    201012       71.2%       67.9%       71.3%          72.0%       68.0%      71.6%
                        5    201106       69.3%       67.3%       69.8%          70.0%       67.7%      70.6%
                        5    201112       67.4%       64.2%       68.9%          69.6%       67.2%      70.3%
                        5    201206       70.5%       67.8%       70.0%          70.2%       67.6%      70.0%
                        5    201212       69.7%       68.4%       70.9%          70.4%       69.3%      70.7%
                        5    201306       69.7%       68.4%       69.3%          69.9%       68.7%      70.0%
                            Average:      69.6%       67.3%       70.0%          70.4%       68.1%      70.5%

                        6    201012       68.0%       65.5%       67.8%          68.7%       67.8%      69.7%
                        6    201106       67.4%       66.5%       67.4%          67.8%       68.3%      68.2%
                        6    201112       71.0%       70.5%       71.1%          72.3%       72.1%      72.0%
                        6    201206       58.1%       69.0%       69.5%          34.7%       69.6%      69.9%
                        6    201212       52.6%       70.0%       70.9%          13.0%       71.1%      72.2%
                        6    201306       67.3%       66.1%       66.4%          66.4%       64.4%      66.3%
                            Average:      64.1%       67.9%       68.9%          53.8%       68.9%      69.7%
(Table 4, cont.)
                                               Panel B: 3 Quarter Forecast Horizon
                                                   F-Measure                             Kappa Statistic
                                                                Random                                   Random
                   Bank        Time      C4.5 Tree   Logistic     Forest        C4.5 Tree   Logistic      Forest
                          1    201012        52.0%       47.9%      52.8%           60.9%      59.1%        61.1%
                          1    201106        50.8%       45.7%      50.7%           59.8%      57.9%        60.0%
                          1    201112        50.5%       45.5%      50.2%           59.2%      57.9%        59.9%
                          1    201206        48.7%       43.7%      47.4%           58.6%      56.1%        58.0%
                          1    201212        43.8%       42.9%      49.2%           30.5%      56.2%        59.1%
                              Average:       49.2%       45.1%      50.1%           53.8%      57.5%        59.6%

                          2    201012       51.9%       49.9%       51.6%          59.2%       58.7%      59.0%
                          2    201106       48.1%       47.8%       48.3%          57.8%       56.9%      57.0%
                          2    201112       51.5%        9.3%       51.1%          58.9%       49.2%      58.2%
                          2    201206       48.0%       15.6%      N/A             57.3%       49.4%     N/A
                          2    201212       50.8%       49.6%      N/A             56.9%       56.9%     N/A
                              Average:      50.0%       34.4%       50.3%          58.0%       54.2%      58.1%

                          3    201012       62.5%       57.5%       61.9%          67.4%       64.2%      67.1%
                          3    201106       62.1%       58.4%       62.2%          67.6%       64.4%      67.7%
                          3    201112       61.7%       59.0%       62.4%          67.3%       65.0%      67.7%
                          3    201206       63.4%       59.5%       63.2%          68.1%       62.4%      68.0%
                          3    201212       66.3%       61.4%       64.6%          69.9%       65.6%      65.5%
                              Average:      63.2%       59.2%       62.9%          68.1%       64.3%      67.2%

                          4    201012       47.3%       44.9%       47.9%          57.3%       55.6%      57.3%
                          4    201106       34.8%       43.4%       47.1%          -5.9%       55.8%      57.9%
                          4    201112       45.4%       43.8%       45.7%          56.6%       55.7%      56.8%
                          4    201206       44.2%       42.1%       44.4%          56.7%       54.9%      56.2%
                          4    201212       46.6%       46.0%       48.3%          58.1%       56.1%      57.7%
                              Average:      43.7%       44.0%       46.7%          44.6%       55.6%      57.2%

                          5    201012       36.0%       32.3%       38.2%          21.9%       49.8%      53.6%
                          5    201106       35.0%       30.5%       36.6%          53.3%       49.8%      52.9%
                          5    201112       36.8%       30.7%       37.5%          52.2%       49.8%      52.6%
                          5    201206       35.5%       31.4%       36.6%          52.4%       49.8%      52.7%
                          5    201212       38.0%       32.0%       38.9%          52.7%       49.8%      53.4%
                              Average:      36.2%       31.4%       37.6%          46.5%       49.8%      53.0%

                          6    201012       47.0%       43.7%       48.3%          47.7%       57.9%      58.1%
                          6    201106       47.6%       44.7%       49.1%          52.1%       58.1%      59.5%
                          6    201112       48.6%       50.1%       54.3%          40.4%       60.2%      61.0%
                          6    201206       49.4%       48.1%       50.8%          59.2%       58.8%      59.4%
                          6    201212       49.3%       49.6%       51.4%          47.2%       57.5%      57.5%
                              Average:      48.4%       47.2%       50.8%          49.3%       58.5%      59.1%
(Table 4, cont.)
                                               Panel C: 4 Quarter Forecast Horizon
                                                   F-Measure                             Kappa Statistic
                                                                Random                                   Random
                   Bank        Time      C4.5 Tree   Logistic     Forest        C4.5 Tree   Logistic      Forest
                          1    201012        44.7%       31.4%      45.1%           57.1%      49.6%        57.3%
                          1    201106        43.7%       39.5%      44.1%           56.8%      55.8%        56.9%
                          1    201112        43.5%       39.2%      44.3%           56.9%      55.4%        57.4%
                          1    201206        41.9%       36.1%      41.0%           56.2%      54.0%        56.2%
                              Average:       43.5%       36.5%      43.6%           56.7%      53.7%        56.9%

                          2    201012       45.1%       44.7%     N/A              55.2%       55.0%     N/A
                          2    201106       46.3%       12.3%     N/A              53.6%       48.9%     N/A
                          2    201112       45.3%       10.6%     N/A              55.5%       49.1%     N/A
                          2    201206       44.6%       20.7%     N/A              55.5%       49.1%     N/A
                              Average:      45.3%       22.1%     N/A              54.9%       50.5%     N/A

                          3    201012       54.4%       51.4%       54.7%          62.7%       61.0%      63.4%
                          3    201106       50.5%       48.3%       50.5%          61.7%       60.0%      62.1%
                          3    201112       50.2%       44.8%       51.0%          60.2%       56.7%      60.6%
                          3    201206       51.0%       48.6%       51.1%          61.7%       59.9%      61.7%
                              Average:      51.5%       48.3%       51.8%          61.6%       59.4%      62.0%

                          4    201012       38.8%       37.8%       39.7%          54.8%       53.9%      55.2%
                          4    201106       38.0%       36.2%       38.1%          53.9%       52.9%      54.3%
                          4    201112       39.6%       38.1%       38.9%          54.4%       53.5%      54.4%
                          4    201206       32.7%       38.2%       40.4%          10.2%       53.7%      54.7%
                              Average:      37.3%       37.6%       39.3%          43.3%       53.5%      54.6%

                          5    201012      N/A          14.1%       13.8%         N/A          49.8%      49.8%
                          5    201106      N/A           9.3%       13.8%         N/A          49.8%      49.8%
                          5    201112      N/A          14.1%       14.5%         N/A          49.7%      49.8%
                          5    201206      N/A          14.1%       15.0%         N/A          49.8%      49.8%
                              Average:     N/A          12.9%       14.3%         N/A          49.8%      49.8%

                          6    201012       41.8%       37.5%       41.3%          55.8%       55.1%      55.7%
                          6    201106       44.9%       41.7%       45.9%          53.4%       56.9%      57.4%
                          6    201112       42.1%       44.3%       47.2%          36.3%       56.9%      57.0%
                          6    201206       46.1%       46.5%       47.9%          51.9%       58.0%      57.6%
                              Average:      43.7%       42.5%       45.6%          49.4%       56.7%      56.9%
        Table 5 - Value Added by Bank and Time
This table shows the value added results by bank, time, and forecast horizon for each model type. The statistics are based on the
acceptance threshold that maximizes the respective statistic for a given bank-time-model. Value added is defined in Eq. (4). Each
value assed assumes a margin of 5% (r = 5%), a run-up of 30% ((Bd-Br)/Bd), and a discount horizon of three years (N = 3). The
numbers represent the percentage cost savings of implementing each model versus passive risk management. The profit margin is
used to estimate the opportunity cost of a false negative so that mis-classifying more profitable accounts is more costly.
                         Value Added - 2Q Forecast       Value Added - 3Q Forecast       Value Added - 4Q Forecast
                          C4.5             Random         C4.5            Random          C4.5            Random
   Bank        Time       Tree   Logistic Forest          Tree Logistic Forest            Tree Logistic Forest
          1    201106     51.5% -63.9% 53.8%               32.1% 26.9% 32.2%               22.9%   -9.6% 21.8%
          1    201112     51.4% -20.5% 51.6%               30.5% 24.4% 29.9%               22.7% 15.4% 21.6%
          1    201206     51.6%    43.8% 51.6%             29.0% 23.6% 28.6%               20.7% 15.5% 21.3%
          1    201212     51.4%    45.2% 51.7%             27.6% 21.9% 24.4%               21.0% 14.5% 18.6%
          1    201306     47.2%    40.2% 47.3%             12.1% 21.9% 28.2%               N/A     N/A      N/A
          1    201312     51.0%    45.4% 52.1%             N/A     N/A      N/A            N/A     N/A      N/A
              Average:    50.7%    15.1% 51.4%             26.3% 23.7% 28.6%               21.8%    8.9% 20.8%

          2    201106      54.1%   53.4%       54.4%       30.2% 28.6%         30.8%       21.3%     17.9%    N/A
          2    201112      53.4%   51.4%       52.3%       26.9% 23.7%         25.1%       24.7%   -471.2%    N/A
          2    201206      47.9% -1201%        52.5%       28.0% -618.7%       28.7%       21.3%   -555.0%    N/A
          2    201212      53.9% -209.7%       53.3%       25.6% -171.0%       N/A         22.3%   -106.4%    N/A
          2    201306      51.5%   50.7%       51.9%       28.5% 26.2%         N/A         N/A       N/A      N/A
          2    201312      53.8%   51.9%       51.3%       N/A     N/A         N/A         N/A       N/A      N/A
              Average:     52.4% -200.5%       52.6%       27.8% -142.2%       28.2%       22.4%   -278.6%    N/A

          3    201106      78.7%     69.4%     77.7%       45.5%     39.0%     44.7%       35.1%     31.7%    35.5%
          3    201112      73.9%     68.2%     76.2%       44.9%     40.1%     45.1%       31.0%     27.8%    31.7%
          3    201206      75.9%     68.4%     72.1%       44.3%     40.9%     45.3%       29.7%     22.0%    30.4%
          3    201212      75.4%     65.6%     75.1%       46.7%     41.5%     46.4%       31.1%     27.1%    31.6%
          3    201306      74.0%     65.3%     73.6%       50.5%     44.0%     48.5%       N/A       N/A      N/A
          3    201312      75.0%     68.4%     73.4%       N/A       N/A       N/A         N/A       N/A      N/A
              Average:     75.5%     67.5%     74.7%       46.4%     41.1%     46.0%       31.7%     27.1%    32.3%

          4    201106      44.8%     41.1%     45.7%        22.8%    20.8%     25.8%       11.0%      8.7%    15.4%
          4    201112      49.8%     40.2%     48.9%       -19.6%    19.2%     25.3%       10.1%     10.0%    14.4%
          4    201206      46.0%     39.5%     44.2%        23.9%    18.3%     21.8%       14.6%     11.8%    12.5%
          4    201212      47.9%     42.5%     46.2%        22.1%    19.3%     19.7%      -11.9%     13.4%    16.4%
          4    201306      47.2%     43.9%     47.7%        22.2%    20.8%     26.9%       N/A       N/A      N/A
          4    201312      48.3%     44.6%     49.3%        N/A      N/A       N/A         N/A       N/A      N/A
              Average:     47.3%     42.0%     47.0%        14.3%    19.7%     23.9%        6.0%     11.0%    14.7%

          5    201106      58.4%     53.8%     59.1%       -1.3%     -1.6%     11.6%       N/A     -110.0%    -81.4%
          5    201112      55.9%     52.6%     57.0%        9.9%     -3.9%      7.2%       N/A      -36.1%    -40.0%
          5    201206      52.3%     47.8%     55.3%       11.2%    -24.5%     10.8%       N/A      -83.2%    -60.3%
          5    201212      57.9%     53.7%     57.1%       10.9%     -8.2%      9.9%       N/A     -124.3%    -64.9%
          5    201306      56.1%     54.1%     58.4%       13.0%      1.9%     13.7%       N/A       N/A       N/A
          5    201312      57.1%     54.4%     56.2%       N/A       N/A       N/A         N/A       N/A       N/A
              Average:     56.3%     52.7%     57.2%        8.7%     -7.3%     10.6%       N/A      -88.4%    -61.7%

          6    201106      53.3%     49.9%     53.0%       23.4%     20.5%     27.3%       19.6%     15.7%    18.0%
          6    201112      52.9%     51.3%     52.9%       25.8%     21.2%     27.4%       24.0%     17.3%    23.9%
          6    201206      57.2%     57.3%     58.1%       22.2%     28.2%     34.3%       13.2%     23.0%    24.3%
          6    201212      35.6%     55.1%     56.1%       28.9%     26.6%     30.6%       24.4%     25.0%    25.8%
          6    201306      19.2%     56.3%     57.6%       25.7%     26.3%     30.1%       N/A       N/A      N/A
          6    201312      53.1%     51.2%     51.6%       N/A       N/A       N/A         N/A       N/A      N/A
              Average:     45.2%     53.5%     54.9%       25.2%     24.6%     30.0%       20.3%     20.2%    23.0%
         Table 6 – Credit Line Cuts
This table describes how banks manage credit lines. The numbers in the table represent the ratio of the percentage of accounts predicted to default whose
credit lines were cut divided by the total percentage of accounts whose credit lines were cut. A ratio greater than one means a bank is likely actively
targeting credit-card accounts to manage risk. The models are as defined above.
                                                           Panel A: 2 Quarter Forecast Horizon
                                  C4.5 Decision Trees                          Logistic Regression                         Random Forests

   Bank      Test Date    Q1          Q2        Q3        Q4          Q1          Q2         Q3       Q4          Q1         Q2         Q3        Q4
    1         201106      1.37        0.87       -         -          1.63        1.32        -        -          1.26       0.80        -         -
    1         201112      0.93        0.68       -         -          0.10        0.08        -        -          0.48       0.37        -         -
    1         201206      0.72        0.46       -         -          0.42        0.23        -        -          0.70       0.43        -         -
    1         201212      0.95        0.59       -         -          0.20        0.14        -        -          0.59       0.43        -         -
    1         201306      1.14        0.69       -         -          0.60        0.40        -        -          0.53       0.28        -         -
    1         201312      1.29        0.99       -         -          0.59        0.45        -        -          0.71       0.59        -         -
              Average:    1.07        0.71       -         -          0.59        0.43        -        -          0.71       0.48        -         -

     2        201106       0.86        0.68      -         -          0.60        0.37        -        -          0.90       0.65        -         -
     2        201112       0.47        0.41      -         -          0.58        0.56        -        -          0.36       0.36        -         -
     2        201206       7.69       26.22      -         -          1.69        1.94        -        -          7.58      28.46        -         -
     2        201212       9.01       24.86      -         -          2.03        1.74        -        -          9.05      25.80        -         -
     2        201306      10.40       11.39      -         -          8.13        9.77        -        -          9.74      11.03        -         -
     2        201312       3.30       11.04      -         -          2.64       10.80        -        -          2.76      11.09        -         -
              Average:     5.29       12.43      -         -          2.61        4.20        -        -          5.07      12.90        -         -

     3        201106      5.12        6.71       -         -          5.40        6.73        -        -          5.04       6.71        -         -
     3        201112      6.23        6.98       -         -          6.82        7.04        -        -          6.20       7.02        -         -
     3        201206      7.41        8.06       -         -          7.64        8.06        -        -          7.27       8.03        -         -
     3        201212      7.19        7.40       -         -          7.58        7.39        -        -          7.10       7.44        -         -
     3        201306      7.23        7.59       -         -          7.42        7.49        -        -          7.16       7.65        -         -
     3        201312      6.98        7.48       -         -          7.36        7.48        -        -          7.15       7.76        -         -
              Average:    6.69        7.37       -         -          7.04        7.37        -        -          6.65       7.43        -         -

     4        201106      0.34        0.19       -         -          0.00        0.00        -        -          0.00       0.00        -         -
     4        201112      0.29        0.16       -         -          0.00        0.00        -        -          0.17       0.10        -         -
     4        201206      0.00        0.00       -         -          0.00        0.00        -        -          0.00       0.00        -         -
     4        201212      0.00        0.00       -         -          0.00        0.00        -        -          0.00       0.00        -         -
     4        201306      0.00        0.00       -         -          0.00        0.00        -        -          0.00       0.00        -         -
     4        201312      0.00        0.00       -         -          0.00        0.00        -        -          0.00       0.00        -         -
              Average:    0.11        0.06       -         -          0.00        0.00        -        -          0.03       0.02        -         -
(Table 7 - Panel A, cont.)
                                    C4.5 Decision Trees               Logistic Regression               Random Forests

   Bank      Test Date       Q1        Q2         Q3      Q4   Q1        Q2         Q3      Q4   Q1      Q2        Q3    Q4
    5         201106         7.10      4.55        -       -   6.46      4.03        -       -   6.24    3.73       -     -
    5         201112         7.76      5.33        -       -   6.64      4.75        -       -   6.22    4.40       -     -
    5         201206         6.68      4.03        -       -   4.22      2.42        -       -   5.05    2.95       -     -
    5         201212         8.42      5.99        -       -   7.72      5.23        -       -   8.83    5.95       -     -
    5         201306         8.57      5.28        -       -   5.21      3.44        -       -   6.19    3.86       -     -
    5         201312         4.99      3.82        -       -   4.37      3.27        -       -   4.28    3.31       -     -
              Average:       7.25      4.83        -       -   5.77      3.86        -       -   6.13    4.03       -     -

     6        201106         1.12      0.34        -      -    2.60      0.80        -      -    0.88    0.27       -    -
     6        201112         0.79      0.60        -      -    0.25      0.14        -      -    0.14    0.08       -    -
     6        201206         0.91      0.33        -      -    0.43      0.20        -      -    0.78    0.29       -    -
     6        201212         0.34      0.14        -      -    0.36      0.17        -      -    0.23    0.11       -    -
     6        201306         0.00      0.12        -      -    0.12      0.07        -      -    0.14    0.08       -    -
     6        201312         0.47      0.28        -      -    0.24      0.21        -      -    0.25    0.15       -    -
              Average:       0.61      0.30        -      -    0.67      0.26        -      -    0.40    0.16       -    -
                                                  Panel B: 3 Quarter Forecast Horizon
                           C4.5 Decision Trees                        Logistic Regression                Random Forests
Bank   Test Date   Q1          Q2        Q3      Q4           Q1          Q2         Q3     Q4   Q1        Q2       Q3    Q4
 1      201109     0.93       0.90       0.85     -           0.66       0.56       0.51     -   0.79     0.74     0.68    -
 1      201203     1.36       0.93       0.74     -           0.45       0.34       0.28     -   0.76     0.55     0.43    -
 1      201209     0.99       0.78       0.76     -           0.36       0.22       0.24     -   0.56     0.46     0.48    -
 1      201303     1.41       1.18       1.07     -           0.69       0.56       0.43     -   0.37     0.30     0.31    -
 1      201309     2.72       1.68       1.29     -           0.46       0.54       0.49     -   0.25     0.31     0.33    -
        Average:   1.48       1.10       0.94     -           0.52       0.44       0.39     -   0.55     0.47     0.44    -

 2     201109       0.65      0.55       0.55     -          0.51        0.45      0.50     -    N/A      N/A      N/A    -
 2     201203       0.50      0.61       0.60     -          0.53        0.32      0.33     -    0.23     0.28     0.31   -
 2     201209       8.66     27.52      19.18     -          1.67        1.93      1.96     -    6.90    28.42    19.95   -
 2     201303      11.85     14.92      11.83     -          1.83        1.91      1.99     -    N/A      N/A      N/A    -
 2     201309       3.58      8.63       7.23     -          1.69        4.81      4.01     -    N/A      N/A      N/A    -
       Average:     5.05     10.45       7.88     -          1.25        1.89      1.76     -    3.56    14.35    10.13   -

 3     201109      5.90       7.43      5.78      -          6.76        7.48      5.78     -    5.71     7.49     5.82   -
 3     201203      6.33       7.01      5.85      -          6.54        7.12      5.92     -    6.32     7.12     5.92   -
 3     201209      7.12       7.45      5.89      -          7.33        7.58      5.99     -    7.07     7.56     5.98   -
 3     201303      7.44       7.37      5.88      -          7.05        6.45      5.31     -    7.36     7.44     5.93   -
 3     201309      5.80       6.06      4.77      -          6.61        6.76      5.32     -    7.08     7.61     5.97   -
       Average:    6.52       7.06      5.64      -          6.86        7.08      5.66     -    6.71     7.44     5.92   -

 4     201109      0.49       0.39      0.33      -          0.23        0.13      0.20     -    0.00     0.00     0.00   -
 4     201203      0.16       0.24      0.22      -          0.00        0.00      0.00     -    0.21     0.22     0.20   -
 4     201209      0.52       0.31      0.25      -          0.00        0.00      0.00     -    0.00     0.00     0.00   -
 4     201303      0.00       0.00      0.00      -          0.00        0.00      0.00     -    0.00     0.00     0.00   -
 4     201309      0.00       0.00      0.00      -          0.00        0.00      0.00     -    0.00     0.00     0.00   -
       Average:    0.23       0.19      0.16      -          0.05        0.03      0.04     -    0.04     0.04     0.04   -

 5     201109      11.43      7.69      6.00      -          2.52        1.70      1.20     -     5.35    3.29     2.93   -
 5     201203      10.62      7.33      5.74      -          2.83        1.99      1.68     -     7.84    5.62     4.40   -
 5     201209      11.57      7.82      6.21      -          1.58        0.91      0.64     -     6.70    4.35     3.55   -
 5     201303      13.67      9.44      7.61      -          2.99        2.18      1.74     -    11.53    8.10     6.18   -
 5     201309      11.18      7.10      6.02      -          2.09        1.52      1.22     -     6.85    4.12     3.31   -
       Average:    11.69      7.88      6.32      -          2.40        1.66      1.30     -     7.66    5.10     4.07   -

 6     201109      1.18       0.92      0.76      -          1.51        1.15      0.88     -    0.41     0.36     0.27   -
 6     201203      0.54       0.40      0.28      -          1.07        0.80      0.46     -    0.55     0.42     0.26   -
 6     201209      0.38       0.26      0.16      -          0.16        0.10      0.08     -    0.23     0.17     0.13   -
 6     201303      0.29       0.29      0.25      -          0.08        0.09      0.08     -    0.07     0.09     0.08   -
 6     201309      0.82       0.46      0.41      -          0.12        0.14      0.11     -    0.00     0.00     0.00   -
       Average:    0.64       0.46      0.37      -          0.58        0.46      0.32     -    0.25     0.21     0.15   -
                                                 Panel C: 4 Quarter Forecast Horizon
                          C4.5 Decision Trees                        Logistic Regression                 Random Forests
Bank   Test Date   Q1         Q2        Q3      Q4           Q1          Q2         Q3     Q4     Q1       Q2       Q3    Q4
 1      201112     1.37      1.11       0.94    0.85         0.11       0.10       0.10    0.10   0.86    0.64     0.56   0.51
 1      201206     1.05      0.80       0.71    0.64         0.40       0.30       0.26    0.26   0.78    0.62     0.53   0.46
 1      201212     1.60      1.22       1.08    0.96         0.35       0.29       0.32    0.25   0.78    0.69     0.60   0.53
 1      201306     1.30      0.88       0.87    0.78         0.67       0.50       0.55    0.51   0.27    0.21     0.25   0.25
        Average:   1.33      1.00       0.90    0.81         0.38       0.30       0.31    0.28   0.67    0.54     0.49   0.44

 2     201112      0.52      0.60       0.50     0.42       0.37        0.48      0.37     0.30   N/A     N/A      N/A    N/A
 2     201206      6.93     21.08      15.22    13.08       1.74        1.95      1.97     1.97   N/A     N/A      N/A    N/A
 2     201212      8.88     23.94      20.26    18.64       1.75        1.95      1.91     1.87   N/A     N/A      N/A    N/A
 2     201306      8.29      8.50       6.91     6.28       1.84        2.00      2.27     2.35   N/A     N/A      N/A    N/A
       Average:    6.15     13.53      10.72     9.60       1.42        1.59      1.63     1.62   N/A     N/A      N/A    N/A

 3     201112      6.41      6.88      5.81     5.07        6.43        6.94      5.84     5.09   6.26    6.92     5.84   5.10
 3     201206      7.28      7.76      6.15     5.13        7.35        7.75      6.14     5.12   7.25    7.93     6.26   5.21
 3     201212      7.02      7.21      5.70     4.84        7.47        7.11      5.63     4.78   7.10    7.37     5.81   4.93
 3     201306      7.03      7.26      5.74     4.81        7.12        7.05      5.63     4.74   N/A     N/A      N/A    N/A
       Average:    6.93      7.28      5.85     4.96        7.09        7.21      5.81     4.93   6.87    7.41     5.97   5.08

 4     201112      0.48      0.34      0.23     0.22        0.27        0.15      0.11     0.10   0.25    0.14     0.10   0.09
 4     201206      0.23      0.18      0.16     0.15        0.00        0.00      0.00     0.00   0.00    0.00     0.00   0.00
 4     201212      0.00      0.00      0.00     0.00        0.00        0.00      0.00     0.00   0.00    0.00     0.00   0.00
 4     201306      0.00      0.00      0.00     0.00        0.00        0.00      0.00     0.00   0.00    0.00     0.00   0.00
       Average:    0.18      0.13      0.10     0.09        0.07        0.04      0.03     0.02   0.06    0.03     0.02   0.02

 5     201112      N/A       N/A       N/A      N/A         0.00        0.00      0.00     1.74   N/A     N/A      N/A    N/A
 5     201206      N/A       N/A       N/A      N/A         0.00        4.01      5.45     4.31   N/A     N/A      N/A    N/A
 5     201212      N/A       N/A       N/A      N/A         0.00        1.16      0.85     1.36   N/A     N/A      N/A    N/A
 5     201306      N/A       N/A       N/A      N/A         0.00        1.19      0.87     0.75   N/A     N/A      N/A    N/A
       Average:    N/A       N/A       N/A      N/A         0.00        1.59      1.79     2.04   N/A     N/A      N/A    N/A

 6     201112      1.35      0.74      0.65     0.39        0.15        0.08      0.07     0.12   0.52    0.29     0.30   0.18
 6     201206      1.21      0.50      0.40     0.28        0.49        0.22      0.16     0.10   1.11    0.41     0.30   0.22
 6     201212      0.85      0.34      0.34     0.31        0.19        0.10      0.12     0.10   0.53    0.24     0.21   0.21
 6     201306      0.27      0.31      0.29     0.27        0.00        0.06      0.09     0.08   0.23    0.18     0.16   0.17
       Average:    0.92      0.47      0.42     0.31        0.21        0.12      0.11     0.10   0.60    0.28     0.25   0.20
        Table 7 – Attribute Analysis
This table shows the mean attribute ranking across all models, by forecast horizon, and by bank. For each unique bank and forecast horizon pair, the time series
of C4.5 decision tree models reported in Tables 3-6 are combined and attributes are assigned a score based on 1) the number of instances classified, 2) the
minimum leaf on each tree they appear, and 3) the number of models for which they are selected. The scores are standardized and summed to generate an
importance metric for each attribute for each bank-forecast horizon pair. More important attributes are ranked lower. The table is sorted based on the mean
ranking for each attribute across all bank-forecast horizon pairs. Columns 2-4 show the mean ranking by forecast horizon and columns 5-10 show the mean
ranking by bank. In all, 78 of the 87 attributes were selected in at least one model.
                                                           All           2Q         3Q         4Q
 Attribute                                               Models        Horizon    Horizon    Horizon       Bank 1   Bank 2    Bank 3   Bank 4    Bank 5   Bank 6
 Days past due                                            1.4            1.2        1.7        1.5           1.0      1.7       1.0      1.7       2.3      1.0
 Behavioral score                                         3.7            3.2        4.3        3.7           8.3      1.3       2.3      3.0       1.7      5.7
 Refreshed credit score                                   6.3            7.8        6.0        5.0           5.0      8.0       7.0      9.0       4.0      4.7
 Actual payment / minimum payment                         6.7            5.2        6.3        8.5           9.7     11.3       3.7      5.7       5.0      4.7
 1 mo. chg. in monthly utilization                        7.8            5.5        7.8       10.0           4.0      3.3      15.7     11.3       2.0     10.3
 Payment equal minimum payment in past 3 mo.s (0,1)       8.6            7.8        8.5        9.5           6.3      8.7       6.7     10.3       6.3     13.3
 Cycle end balance                                        9.8           10.8       10.2        8.3          11.0      6.3      12.7      7.7      17.0      4.0
 Cycle end balance                                        11.9           8.8       16.0       11.0           3.0     13.0      13.0     14.0      12.0     16.7
 Cycle utilization                                        12.1          19.3        8.7        8.3           8.7     21.3       4.7     22.3       9.0      6.7
 Number of accounts 30+ days past due                     12.6          12.8       12.7       12.2          18.7      5.0      10.3      7.3      13.0     21.0
 Total fees                                               15.9          16.2       12.8       18.8          15.0     21.3       8.3     14.3       9.3     27.3
 Workout program flag                                     16.8          23.5       14.2       12.7           6.7     19.3      10.3      4.0      24.0     36.3
 Total number of bank card accounts                       17.8          18.5       17.5       17.3          22.0     21.7      19.0     14.3      17.7     12.0
 Current credit limit                                     17.9          18.8       18.2       16.7          21.0      7.7      30.7     16.7      10.0     21.3
 Line frozen flag (current mo.)                           17.9          17.5       15.7       20.5           9.7     16.3      48.7      1.3       9.0     22.3
 Monthly utilization                                      19.9          21.5       15.3       23.0          16.7     30.0      42.3     12.0      13.7      5.0
 Number of accounts 60+ days past due                     23.2          22.3       27.2       20.0          21.0     19.0      20.7     18.7      19.3     40.3
 3 mo. chg. in credit score                               24.4          21.8       24.2       27.2           8.7     27.3      28.3     21.7      32.3     28.0
 Number of accounts in charge off status                  26.3          26.0       27.7       25.2          27.3     17.0      24.0     18.3      39.0     32.0
 1 mo. chg. in cycle utilization                          27.0          29.3       26.7       25.0          17.7     38.3      10.7     30.3      28.3     36.7
 6 mo. chg. in credit score                               27.1          28.8       28.3       24.2          12.7     42.3      25.0     41.3      20.3     21.0
 Total number of accounts 60+ days past due               27.9          21.5       32.3       30.0          31.7     24.3      18.0     11.3      41.3     41.0
 Total balance on all 60+ days past due accounts          30.2          36.5       30.5       23.7          36.3     28.0      19.7     17.7      32.3     47.3
 Total number of accounts verified                        30.3          32.3       28.0       30.7          46.7     18.7      42.7     31.0      24.7     18.3
 Flag if greater than 0 accounts 60 days past due         30.5          36.2       27.2       28.2          39.3     42.3      16.0     36.0      34.3     15.0
 Line frozen flag (1 mo. lag)                             30.9          15.5       34.5       42.7          16.3      8.0      33.3     29.0      47.3     51.3
 3 mo. chg. in monthly utilization                        33.4          30.2       34.8       35.2          19.0     22.7      31.7     42.7      40.0     44.3
 Number of accounts 90+ days past due                     33.7          43.5       29.8       27.8          34.3     25.0      33.3     31.7      36.0     42.0
 6 mo. chg. in behavioral score                           34.6          34.5       37.2       32.2          36.0     55.7      22.0     45.3      21.7     27.0
 Account exceeded the limit in past 3 mo.s (0,1)          35.3          28.5       46.0       31.3          31.0     23.0      64.7     28.3      34.0     30.7
(Table 7, cont.)
                                                          All      2Q        3Q        4Q
Attribute                                               Models   Horizon   Horizon   Horizon   Bank 1   Bank 2   Bank 3   Bank 4   Bank 5   Bank 6
3 mo. chg. in cycle utilization                          35.4     28.8      33.5      44.0      29.7     48.0     29.0     38.7     18.7     48.7
Flag if the card is securitized                          36.2     35.5      36.7      36.3      24.0     13.7     30.3     28.7     71.7     48.7
Total number of accounts opened in the past year         36.4     41.7      36.0      31.5      41.0     24.0     38.7     45.0     28.3     41.3
Total number of bank card accounts 60+ days past due     37.4     38.5      32.8      41.0      47.3     25.0     23.7     25.3     40.7     62.7
Total balance of all revolving accounts / total balance  39.3     41.0      34.5      42.5      30.0     40.3     43.0     43.3     33.3     46.0
Total number of accounts                                 41.3     34.2      48.7      41.0      40.7     26.3     35.3     32.3     64.0     49.0
Product type                                             41.4     38.5      41.7      44.0      20.3     61.0     73.0     71.7     11.3     11.0
Unemployment rate                                        41.6     41.8      37.2      45.7      42.3     36.7     48.3     54.7     29.3     38.0
Flag if greater than 0 accounts 30 days past due         41.6     47.7      39.7      37.5      55.3     37.3     35.7     44.7     22.0     54.7
Purchase volume / credit limit                           43.4     43.5      38.2      48.5      30.3     58.3     32.3     70.3     36.0     33.0
Utilizatiion of all bank card accounts                   45.2     53.5      39.5      42.7      39.0     54.0     63.3     52.7     28.3     34.0
Flag if greater than 0 accounts opened in the past year  45.8     49.7      44.0      43.8      64.0     25.7     56.7     58.0     38.7     32.0
Flag if greater than 0 accounts 90 days past due         46.2     47.7      44.8      46.0      42.7     38.3     28.3     54.7     60.0     53.0
Avg. weekly hours worked (private) (12 mo. chg.)         46.2     44.8      49.2      44.5      61.0     37.0     55.7     42.7     52.3     28.3
Avg. hourly wage (private) (3 mo. chg.)                  47.7     49.5      43.2      50.3      53.7     56.3     60.0     45.3     36.3     34.3
Avg. weekly hours worked (leisure) (12 mo. chg.)         47.9     49.7      43.0      51.0      53.3     40.0     57.0     60.7     54.3     22.0
Number of total nonfarm (NSA)                            48.2     53.2      48.2      43.3      40.7     54.3     52.0     48.7     49.7     44.0
Avg. weekly hours worked (trade and transportation) (1 48.6       46.7      51.0      48.2      49.3     49.0     34.3     52.0     51.0     56.0
Avg. weekly hours worked (private) (3 mo. chg.)          49.8     48.2      44.2      57.0      48.7     46.7     53.0     42.3     50.3     57.7
Number of total nonfarm (NSA) (12 mo. chg.)              50.2     49.7      45.2      55.7      45.3     58.0     50.3     44.3     49.0     54.0
Avg. weekly hours worked (trade and transportation) (3 50.3       50.8      50.3      49.7      52.7     44.0     55.0     61.0     44.7     44.3
Avg. hourly wage (trade and transportation) (3 mo. chg. 50.3      48.8      50.0      52.2      55.3     38.0     61.3     38.0     54.3     55.0
Total non-mortgage balance / total limit                 50.6     55.0      46.3      50.3      51.7     64.7     55.7     38.7     46.0     46.7
Avg. hourly wage (private) (12 mo. chg.)                 51.8     50.3      53.5      51.5      56.0     45.7     59.0     54.0     47.3     48.7
Avg. hourly wage (trade and transportation) (12 mo. ch   51.8     57.2      48.8      49.3      52.0     55.0     60.0     47.3     37.3     59.0
Avg. weekly hours worked (leisure) (3 mo. chg.)          51.9     52.5      50.5      52.7      51.3     43.3     39.7     59.7     64.7     52.7
6 mo. chg. in cycle utilization                          52.1     46.7      54.7      54.8      33.0     70.3     48.0     64.7     38.3     58.0
Avg. hourly wage (leisure) (12 mo. chg.)                 53.2     49.0      53.5      57.2      47.0     48.3     53.3     46.3     62.0     62.3
Avg. hourly wage (leisure) (3 mo. chg.)                  53.6     52.7      52.7      55.5      58.7     60.7     62.3     37.3     66.3     36.3
Total credit limit to number of open bank cards          54.0     52.0      52.3      57.7      68.0     56.0     45.3     41.7     49.0     64.0
Number of total nonfarm (NSA) (3 mo. chg.)               54.2     51.3      55.2      56.0      62.3     45.0     54.0     57.3     40.0     66.3
Flag if total limit on all bank cards greater than zero  54.8     50.0      60.2      54.3      59.3     72.0     43.7     33.3     67.3     53.3
Unemployment rate (3 mo. chg.)                           55.0     58.3      53.5      53.2      52.3     56.0     68.3     55.3     52.7     45.3
Number of total nonfarm (NSA) (3 mo. chg.)               55.9     59.2      64.2      44.3      58.0     61.7     50.0     55.0     62.0     48.7
Total private (NSA) (12 mo. chg.)                        56.0     57.5      53.5      57.0      53.3     47.7     54.3     64.3     56.3     60.0
Percent chg. in credit limit (lagged 1 mo.)              56.5     57.0      52.5      60.0      66.7     74.3     10.7     68.7     58.7     60.0
(Table 7, cont.)
                                                            All      2Q        3Q        4Q
Attribute                                                 Models   Horizon   Horizon   Horizon   Bank 1   Bank 2   Bank 3   Bank 4   Bank 5   Bank 6
Unemployment rate (12 mo. chg.)                            58.3     53.8      65.3      55.7      42.7     66.7     66.7     61.7     64.3     47.7
Percent chg. in credit limit current 1 mo.                 58.4     60.0      59.7      55.5      71.0     74.7     11.7     65.7     68.7     58.7
6 mo. chg. in monthly utilization                          58.6     48.7      65.5      61.5      46.0     59.0     50.3     72.7     62.0     61.3
Flag if total limit on all retail cards greater than zero  59.6     55.0      60.3      63.3      62.0     73.0     63.0     31.0     76.0     52.3
Total balance on all accounts / total limit                60.5     55.2      66.2      60.2      72.0     56.7     69.0     57.7     53.3     54.3
Flag if greater than 0 retail cards 60 days past due       60.9     68.0      61.8      53.0      68.7     43.3     55.3     63.7     75.7     59.0
Cash advance volume / credit limit                         61.7     64.5      64.5      56.2      72.7     47.0     74.0     63.0     59.0     54.7
Total credit limit to number of open retail accounts       67.0     66.7      67.3      67.0      70.7     72.7     74.0     69.7     67.7     47.3
Line increase in current mo. flag (0,1)                    67.8     68.7      69.0      65.7      74.7     75.3     57.0     64.7     67.0     68.0
Number of accounts in collection                           68.0     66.0      73.3      64.7      69.3     65.3     76.7     65.3     73.7     57.7
Flag if total balance over limit on all open bank cards = 68.1      65.8      67.0      71.3      74.7     76.7     70.0     63.7     66.7     56.7
Number of accounts under wage garnishment                  68.7     71.2      68.2      66.7      75.7     70.0     66.3     65.3     67.7     67.0
                                                            Relative Delinquency Rates

                                              3.5


                                               3
                  Relative Delinquency Rate
                                              2.5


                                               2

                                              1.5


                                               1

                                              0.5


                                               0
                                                    1   2          3          4          5   6
                                                                       Date
This figure shows the relative delinquency rates over time. Due to data confidentiality restrictions, we do not report the
actual delinquency rates over time. Each line represents an individual bank over time. The delinquency rates are all
reported relative to the bank with the lowest two quarter delinquency rate in 2010Q4.
        Figure 1 – Relative delinquency rates over time
                                                        Model Prediction
                                                    Good                 Bad
                                 Good        True Positive (TP) False Negative (FN)
              Actual Outcome
                                 Bad         False Positive (FP) True Negative (TN)

Precision = TN/(TN+FN)
Recall = TN/(TN+FP)
True Positive Rate = TP/(TP+FN)
False Positive Rate = FP/(FP+TN)
F-Measure = (2*Recall*Precision)/(Recall+Precision)
Kappa Statistic = (Pa – Pe)/(1-Pe), where Pa = (TP+TN)/N and Pe = [(TP+FN)/N]*[(TP+FN)/N]
This figure shows a sample confusion matrix and defines our performance statistics.

Figure 2 Performance Statistics
The figure plots the model-derived risk ranking versus an account’s credit score at the time of the forecast for
Bank 2. Accounts are rank-ordered based on a logistic regression model for a two quarter forecast horizon.
Green points are accounts that were current at the end of the forecast horizon; blue points are 30 days past
due; yellow points are 60 days past due; and red points are 90+ days past due.
       Figure 3- Model Risk Ranking versus Credit Score
                                           Bank 1: F-Measure                                                                      Bank 2: F-Measure
                                           2 Quarter Forecast                                                                     2 Quarter Forecast
                  90%                                                                                     90%

                  80%                                                                                     80%

                  70%                                                                                     70%

                  60%                                                                                     60%
  F-Measure (%)




                                                                                          F-Measure (%)
                  50%                                                                                     50%

                  40%                                                                                     40%

                  30%                                                                                     30%

                                                                 Bank 1 - C4.5 Tree                                                                     Bank 2 - C4.5 Tree
                  20%                                                                                     20%
                                                                 Bank 1 - Logistic                                                                      Bank 2 - Logistic
                                                                 Bank 1 - Random Forest                                                                 Bank 2 - Random Forest
                  10%                                                                                     10%
                         2010Q4   2011Q2   2011Q4     2012Q2    2012Q4       2013Q2                             2010Q4   2011Q2   2011Q4     2012Q2    2012Q4       2013Q2
                                                 Date                                                                                   Date
                                           Bank 3: F-Measure                                                                      Bank 4: F-Measure
                                           2 Quarter Forecast                                                                     2 Quarter Forecast
                  90%                                                                                     90%

                  80%                                                                                     80%

                  70%                                                                                     70%

                  60%                                                                                     60%
  F-Measure (%)




                                                                                          F-Measure (%)
                  50%                                                                                     50%

                  40%                                                                                     40%

                  30%                                                                                     30%

                                                                 Bank 3 - C4.5 Tree                                                                     Bank 4 - C4.5 Tree
                  20%                                                                                     20%
                                                                 Bank 3 - Logistic                                                                      Bank 4 - Logistic
                                                                 Bank 3 - Random Forest                                                                 Bank 4 - Random Forest
                  10%                                                                                     10%
                         2010Q4   2011Q2   2011Q4     2012Q2    2012Q4       2013Q2                             2010Q4   2011Q2   2011Q4     2012Q2    2012Q4       2013Q2
                                                 Date                                                                                   Date
                                           Bank 5: F-Measure                                                                      Bank 6: F-Measure
                                           2 Quarter Forecast                                                                     2 Quarter Forecast
                  90%                                                                                     90%

                  80%                                                                                     80%

                  70%                                                                                     70%

                  60%                                                                                     60%
  F-Measure (%)




                                                                                          F-Measure (%)




                  50%                                                                                     50%

                  40%                                                                                     40%

                  30%                                                                                     30%

                                                                 Bank 5 - C4.5 Tree                                                                     Bank 6 - C4.5 Tree
                  20%                                                                                     20%
                                                                 Bank 5 - Logistic                                                                      Bank 6 - Logistic
                                                                 Bank 5 - Random Forest                                                                 Bank 6 - Random Forest
                  10%                                                                                     10%
                         2010Q4   2011Q2   2011Q4     2012Q2    2012Q4       2013Q2                             2010Q4   2011Q2   2011Q4     2012Q2    2012Q4       2013Q2
                                                 Date                                                                                   Date

These figures plot the F-Measures for each model over time for each bank. The statistics plotted are for the two quarter
horizon forecasts.
                        Figure 4 F-Measures for each bank and model type over time.
                                                 Bank 1: Kappa Statistic                                                                           Bank 2: Kappa Statistic
                                                   2 Quarter Forecast                                                                                2 Quarter Forecast
                        90%                                                                                                90%

                        80%                                                                                                80%

                        70%                                                                                                70%
  Kappa Statistic (%)




                                                                                                     Kappa Statistic (%)
                        60%                                                                                                60%

                        50%                                                                                                50%

                        40%                                                                                                40%

                        30%                                                                                                30%

                                                                            Bank 1 - C4.5 Tree                                                                                Bank 2 - C4.5 Tree
                        20%                                                                                                20%
                                                                            Bank 1 - Logistic                                                                                 Bank 2 - Logistic
                                                                            Bank 1 - Random Forest                                                                            Bank 2 - Random Forest
                        10%                                                                                                10%
                               2010Q4   2011Q2    2011Q4     2012Q2        2012Q4       2013Q2                                   2010Q4   2011Q2    2011Q4     2012Q2        2012Q4       2013Q2
                                                        Date                                                                                              Date
                                                 Bank 3: Kappa Statistic                                                                           Bank 4: Kappa Statistic
                                                   2 Quarter Forecast                                                                                2 Quarter Forecast
                        90%                                                                                                90%

                        80%                                                                                                80%

                        70%                                                                                                70%
  Kappa Statistic (%)




                                                                                                     Kappa Statistic (%)
                        60%                                                                                                60%

                        50%                                                                                                50%

                        40%                                                                                                40%

                        30%                                                                                                30%

                                                                            Bank 3 - C4.5 Tree                                                                                Bank 4 - C4.5 Tree
                        20%                                                                                                20%
                                                                            Bank 3 - Logistic                                                                                 Bank 4 - Logistic
                                                                            Bank 3 - Random Forest                                                                            Bank 4 - Random Forest
                        10%                                                                                                10%
                               2010Q4   2011Q2    2011Q4     2012Q2        2012Q4       2013Q2                                   2010Q4   2011Q2    2011Q4     2012Q2        2012Q4       2013Q2
                                                        Date                                                                                              Date
                                                 Bank 5: Kappa Statistic                                                                           Bank 6: Kappa Statistic
                                                   2 Quarter Forecast                                                                                2 Quarter Forecast
                        90%                                                                                                90%

                        80%                                                                                                80%

                        70%                                                                                                70%
  Kappa Statistic (%)




                                                                                                     Kappa Statistic (%)




                        60%                                                                                                60%

                        50%                                                                                                50%

                        40%                                                                                                40%

                        30%                                                                                                30%

                                                                            Bank 5 - C4.5 Tree                                                                                Bank 6 - C4.5 Tree
                        20%                                                                                                20%
                                                                            Bank 5 - Logistic                                                                                 Bank 6 - Logistic
                                                                            Bank 5 - Random Forest                                                                            Bank 6 - Random Forest
                        10%                                                                                                10%
                               2010Q4   2011Q2    2011Q4     2012Q2        2012Q4       2013Q2                                   2010Q4   2011Q2    2011Q4     2012Q2        2012Q4       2013Q2
                                                        Date                                                                                              Date

These figures plot the Kappa Statistics for each model over time for each bank. The statistics plotted are for the two
quarter horizon forecasts.
                              Figure 5 - Kappa Statistics for each bank and model type over time.
                                             Bank 1: Value Added (%)                                                                        Bank 2: Value Added (%)
                                                2 Quarter Forecast                                                                             2 Quarter Forecast
                   80%                                                                                             80%

                   60%                                                                                             60%

                   40%                                                                                             40%

                   20%                                                                                             20%
 Value Added (%)




                                                                                                 Value Added (%)
                    0%                                                                                              0%

                   -20%                                                                                            -20%

                   -40%                                                                                            -40%

                                                                        Bank 1 - C4.5 Tree                                                                             Bank 2 - C4.5 Tree
                   -60%                                                                                            -60%
                                                                        Bank 1 - Logistic                                                                              Bank 2 - Logistic
                                                                        Bank 1 - Random Forest                                                                         Bank 2 - Random Forest
                   -80%                                                                                            -80%
                           2010Q4   2011Q2     2011Q4     2012Q2       2012Q4       2013Q2                                2010Q4   2011Q2     2011Q4     2012Q2       2012Q4       2013Q2
                                                     Date                                                                                           Date

                                             Bank 3: Value Added (%)                                                                        Bank 4: Value Added (%)
                                                2 Quarter Forecast                                                                             2 Quarter Forecast
                   80%                                                                                             80%

                   60%                                                                                             60%

                   40%                                                                                             40%

                   20%                                                                                             20%
 Value Added (%)




                                                                                                 Value Added (%)

                    0%                                                                                              0%

                   -20%                                                                                            -20%

                   -40%                                                                                            -40%

                                                                        Bank 3 - C4.5 Tree                                                                             Bank 4 - C4.5 Tree
                   -60%                                                                                            -60%
                                                                        Bank 3 - Logistic                                                                              Bank 4 - Logistic
                                                                        Bank 3 - Random Forest                                                                         Bank 4 - Random Forest
                   -80%                                                                                            -80%
                           2010Q4   2011Q2     2011Q4     2012Q2       2012Q4       2013Q2                                2010Q4   2011Q2     2011Q4     2012Q2       2012Q4       2013Q2
                                                     Date                                                                                           Date

                                             Bank 5: Value Added (%)                                                                        Bank 6: Value Added (%)
                                                2 Quarter Forecast                                                                             2 Quarter Forecast
                   80%                                                                                             80%

                   60%                                                                                             60%

                   40%                                                                                             40%

                   20%                                                                                             20%
 Value Added (%)




                                                                                                 Value Added (%)




                    0%                                                                                              0%

                   -20%                                                                                            -20%

                   -40%                                                                                            -40%

                                                                        Bank 5 - C4.5 Tree                                                                             Bank 6 - C4.5 Tree
                   -60%                                                                                            -60%
                                                                        Bank 5 - Logistic                                                                              Bank 6 - Logistic
                                                                        Bank 5 - Random Forest                                                                         Bank 6 - Random Forest
                   -80%                                                                                            -80%
                           2010Q4   2011Q2     2011Q4     2012Q2       2012Q4       2013Q2                                2010Q4   2011Q2     2011Q4     2012Q2       2012Q4       2013Q2
                                                     Date                                                                                           Date

These figures plot the Value Added as defined by Eq. (4) for each model over time for each bank. The statistics plotted
are for the two quarter horizon forecasts.
                          Figure 6- Value Added by Bank and Model
                                    All Banks C4.5 Tree Models: Value Added (%)                                                                        All Banks Logistic Models: Value Added (%)
                                                 2 Quarter Forecast                                                                                                2 Quarter Forecast
                    80%                                                                                                                 80%

                    70%                                                                                                                 70%

                    60%                                                                                                                 60%

                    50%                                                                                                                 50%
  Value Added (%)




                                                                                                                      Value Added (%)
                    40%                                                                                                                 40%

                    30%                                                              Bank 1 - C4.5 Tree                                 30%                                                  Bank 1 - Logistic
                                                                                     Bank 2 - C4.5 Tree                                                                                      Bank 2 - Logistic
                    20%                                                              Bank 3 - C4.5 Tree                                 20%                                                  Bank 3 - Logistic
                                                                                     Bank 4 - C4.5 Tree                                                                                      Bank 4 - Logistic
                    10%                                                              Bank 5 - C4.5 Tree                                 10%                                                  Bank 5 - Logistic
                                                                                     Bank 6 - C4.5 Tree                                                                                      Bank 6 - Logistic
                    0%                                                                                                                  0%
                           2010Q4    2011Q2     2011Q4     2012Q2                   2012Q4       2013Q2                                       2010Q4    2011Q2    2011Q4     2012Q2      2012Q4      2013Q2
                                                      Date                                                                                                              Date
                                                                                            All Banks Random Forest Models: Value Added (%)
                                                                                                           2 Quarter Forecast
                                                                             80%

                                                                             70%

                                                                             60%

                                                                             50%
                                                           Value Added (%)




                                                                             40%

                                                                             30%                                                         Bank 1 - Random Forest
                                                                                                                                         Bank 2 - Random Forest
                                                                             20%                                                         Bank 3 - Random Forest
                                                                                                                                         Bank 4 - Random Forest
                                                                             10%                                                         Bank 5 - Random Forest
                                                                                                                                         Bank 6 - Random Forest
                                                                             0%
                                                                                   2010Q4      2011Q2     2011Q4     2012Q2                   2012Q4   2013Q2
                                                                                                                Date

These figures plot the Value Added as defined by Eq. (4) over time. The statistics plotted are for the two quarter horizon
forecasts. Clockwise from the top left, the figures show the value added for C4.5 decision trees, logistic regression, and
random-forest models. Note the vertical axis is cut off at 0% and the logistic regression models for bank 1 and bank 2 are
negative for the first two and third and fourth time periods, respectively.
                          Figure 7 - Value Added by Model Type
                            All Banks C4.5 Tree Models: Value Added (%) versus Run-Up                                                             All Banks Logistic Models: Value Added (%) versus Run-Up
                                                 2 Quarter Forecast                                                                                                   2 Quarter Forecast
                  100%                                                                                                              100%

                   80%                                                                                                               80%

                   60%                                                                                                               60%

                   40%                                                                                                               40%




                                                                                                                  Value Added (%)
Value Added (%)




                   20%                                                                                                               20%

                    0%                                                                                                                0%

                  -20%                                                                                                              -20%
                                                                                    Bank 1 - C4.5 Tree                                                                                         Bank 1 - Logistic
                  -40%                                                              Bank 2 - C4.5 Tree                              -40%                                                       Bank 2 - Logistic
                                                                                    Bank 3 - C4.5 Tree                                                                                         Bank 3 - Logistic
                  -60%                                                              Bank 4 - C4.5 Tree                              -60%                                                       Bank 4 - Logistic
                  -80%                                                              Bank 5 - C4.5 Tree                              -80%                                                       Bank 5 - Logistic
                                                                                    Bank 6 - C4.5 Tree                                                                                         Bank 6 - Logistic
                  -100%                                                                                                             -100%
                          10%   20%   30%   40%    50% 60%                    70%   80%    90% 100%                                         10%     20%    30%    40%    50% 60%      70%    80%    90% 100%
                                                    Run-Up                                                                                                                Run-Up

                                                                                  All Banks Random Forest Models: Value Added (%) versus Run-Up
                                                                                                        2 Quarter Forecast
                                                                          100%

                                                                           80%

                                                                           60%

                                                                           40%
                                                        Value Added (%)




                                                                           20%

                                                                            0%

                                                                          -20%
                                                                                                                                       Bank 1 - Random Forest
                                                                          -40%                                                         Bank 2 - Random Forest
                                                                                                                                       Bank 3 - Random Forest
                                                                          -60%                                                         Bank 4 - Random Forest
                                                                          -80%                                                         Bank 5 - Random Forest
                                                                                                                                       Bank 6 - Random Forest
                                                                          -100%
                                                                                  10%   20%   30%    40%   50% 60%                    70%    80%      90% 100%
                                                                                                            Run-Up

These figures plot the Value Added as defined by Eq. (4) versus run-up. The statistics plotted are for the two quarter
horizon forecasts. Clockwise from the top left, the figures show the value added for C4.5 decision trees, logistic
regression, and random-forest models. Note the vertical axis is cut off at -100% and the logistic regression models for
bank 1, bank 2, and bank 3 are negative for low values of run-up.
                          Figure 8 - Value Added Versus Run-Up
                                                  All Banks C4.5 Tree Models: Line Cuts                                                                                                                       All Banks C4.5 Tree Models: Line Cuts
                                                           2 Quarter Forecast                                                                                                                                          3 Quarter Forecast
                                  3                                                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                Bank 1 - C4.5 Tree                                                                                                              Bank 1 - C4.5 Tree
                                                                                                                Bank 2 - C4.5 Tree                                                                                                              Bank 2 - C4.5 Tree
                                  2                                                                            Bank 3 - C4.5 Tree                                                  2                                                          Bank 3 - C4.5 Tree
                                                                                                                Bank 4 - C4.5 Tree                                                                                                              Bank 4 - C4.5 Tree




                                                                                                                                                    Log(Targeted Line Cuts Ratio)
  Log(Targeted Line Cuts Ratio)




                                  1                                                                            Bank 5 - C4.5 Tree                                                  1                                                          Bank 5 - C4.5 Tree
                                                                                                                Bank 6 - C4.5 Tree                                                                                                              Bank 6 - C4.5 Tree

                                  0                                                                                                                                                0


                                  -1                                                                                                                                               -1


                                  -2                                                                                                                                               -2


                                  -3                                                                                                                                               -3
                                    0.5Q    1Q   1.5Q    2Q      2.5Q      3Q                                   3.5Q      4Q     4.5Q                                                 0.5Q          1Q    1.5Q       2Q      2.5Q      3Q      3.5Q       4Q     4.5Q
                                                        Quarters Since Forecast                                                                                                                                     Quarters Since Forecast

                                                                                                                           All Banks C4.5 Tree Models: Line Cuts
                                                                                                                                    4 Quarter Forecast
                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                                                                                             Bank 1 - C4.5 Tree
                                                                                                                                                                                             Bank 2 - C4.5 Tree
                                                                                                       2                                                                                    Bank 3 - C4.5 Tree
                                                                                                                                                                                             Bank 4 - C4.5 Tree
                                                                       Log(Targeted Line Cuts Ratio)




                                                                                                       1                                                                                    Bank 5 - C4.5 Tree
                                                                                                                                                                                             Bank 6 - C4.5 Tree

                                                                                                       0


                                                                                                       -1


                                                                                                       -2


                                                                                                       -3
                                                                                                         0.5Q     1Q      1.5Q        2Q      2.5Q      3Q                                   3.5Q        4Q       4.5Q
                                                                                                                                     Quarters Since Forecast

The figures show how well banks target bad accounts and cut their credit lines relative to randomly selecting lines to cut.
The targeted line ratio is defined as the percentage of accounts that our models predict to become delinquent whose
lines are cut relative to the total percentage of accounts whose lines are cut. A ratio of one (log of zero) means a bank is
no more active in cutting credit lines of cards classified as bad than accounts classified as good. Higher ratios signal more
active risk management. The ratios for each bank are plotted on a log scale. The plots show the ratios for each quarter
following our forecast through the end of the forecast horizon. Clockwise from the top left, the figures show the value
added for C4.5 decision trees, logistic regression, and random-forest models.
                                        Figure 9 - Credit Line Cuts
Appendix 1: Variables Descriptions for Tradeline and Attributes Data
Account Level Features:                     Credit Bureau Features:                                   Macroeconomic Features:
Cycle end balance                           Flag if greater than 0 accounts 90 days past due          Unemployment rate
Refreshed credit score                      Flag if greater than 0 accounts 60 days past due          Unemployment rate (3 mo. chg.)
Behavioral score                            Flag if greater than 0 accounts 30 days past due          Unemployment rate (12 mo. chg.)
Current credit limit                        Flag if greater than 0 bank cards 60 days past due        Number of total nonfarm (NSA)
Line frozen flag (0,1)                      Flag if greater than 0 retail cards 60 days past due      Number of total nonfarm (NSA) (3 mo. chg.)
Line decrease in current mo. flag (0,1)     Flag if total limit on all bank cards greater than zero   Number of total nonfarm (NSA) (12 mo. chg.)
Line increase in current mo. flag (0,1)     Flag if total limit on all retail cards greater than zero Total private (NSA) (3 mo. chg.)
Actual payment / minimum payment            Flag if greater than 0 accounts opened in the past year Total private (NSA) (12 mo. chg.)
Days past due                               Total number of accounts                                  Avg. weekly hours worked (private) (3 mo. chg.)
Purchase volume / credit limit              Total balance on all accounts / total limit               Avg. weekly hours worked (private) (12 mo. chg.)
Cash advance volume / credit limit          Total non-mortgage balance / total limit                  Avg. hourly wage (private) (3 mo. chg.)
Balance transfer volume / credit limit      Total number of accounts 60+ days past due                Avg. hourly wage (private) (12 mo. chg.)
Flag is the card is securitized             Total number of bank card accounts                        Avg. weekly hours worked (trade and transportation) (3 mo. chg.)
chg. in securitization status (1 mo.)       Utilizatiion of all bank card accounts                    Avg. weekly hours worked (trade and transportation) (12 mo. chg.)
Percent chg. in credit limit (lagged 1 mo.) Number of accounts 30+ days past due                      Avg. hourly wage (trade and transportation) (3 mo. chg.)
Percent chg. in credit limit current 1 mo.) Number of accounts 60+ days past due                      Avg. hourly wage (trade and transportation) (12 mo. chg.)
Total fees                                  Number of accounts 90+ days past due                      Avg. weekly hours worked (leisure) (3 mo. chg.)
Workout program flag                        Number of accounts under wage garnishment                 Avg. weekly hours worked (leisure) (12 mo. chg.)
Line frozen flag (1 mo. lag)                Number of accounts in collection                          Avg. hourly wage (leisure) (3 mo. chg.)
Line frozen flag (current mo.)              Number of accounts in charge off status                   Avg. hourly wage (leisure) (12 mo. chg.)
Product type                                Total balance on all 60+ days past due accounts           House price index
3 mo. chg. in credit score                  Total number of acocunts                                  House price index (3 mo. chg.)
6 mo. chg. in credit score                  Total credit limit to number of open bank cards           House price index (12 mo. chg.)
3 mo. chg. in behavioral score              Total credit limit to number of open retail accounts
6 mo. chg. in behavioral score              Total number of accounts opened in the past year
mo.ly utilization                           Total balance of all revolving accounts / total balance on all accounts
1 mo. chg. in mo.ly utilization             Flag if total balance over limit on all open bank cards = 0%
3 mo. chg. in mo.ly utilization             Flag if total balance over limit on all open bank cards = 100%
6 mo. chg. in mo.ly utilization             Flag if total balance over limit on all open bank cards > 100%
Cycle utilization
1 mo. chg. in cycle utilization
3 mo. chg. in cycle utilization
Account exceeded the limit in past 3 mo.s (0,1)
Payment equal minimum payment in past 3 mo.s (0,1)
6 mo. chg. in cycle utilization
The figures on the left show the F-measure versus the acceptance threshold for each C4.5 model. The figures on the
right show the Kappa statistic versus the acceptance threshold. The acceptance threshold is given as a percentage. The
dots designate the acceptance threshold that maximizes the respective statistic.

        Figure A1 – Sensitivity to Choice of Acceptance Threshold for C4.5 Models
The figures on the left show the F-measure versus the acceptance threshold for each logistic regression model. The
figures on the right show the Kappa statistic versus the acceptance threshold. The acceptance threshold is given as a
percentage. The dots designate the acceptance threshold that maximizes the respective statistic.
        Figure A2 – Sensitivity to Choice of Acceptance Threshold for Logistic Regression Models
The figures on the left show the F-measure versus the acceptance threshold for each random-forest model. The figures
on the right show the Kappa statistic versus the acceptance threshold. The acceptance threshold is given as a
percentage. The dots designate the acceptance threshold that maximizes the respective statistic.
       Figure A3 – Sensitivity to Choice of Acceptance Threshold for Random-forest Models
