                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   CAN BUREAUCRATS REALLY BE PAID LIKE CEOS? SCHOOL ADMINISTRATOR
           INCENTIVES FOR ANEMIA REDUCTION IN RURAL CHINA

                                         Renfu Luo
                                         Grant Miller
                                        Scott Rozelle
                                         Sean Sylvia
                                    Marcos Vera-Hernández

                                      Working Paper 21302
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w21302


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            June 2015, Revised August 2018




Giardili and Ravi Somani provided excellent research assistance. We are grateful to Dana
Andersen, Antonio Cabrales, Syngjoo Choi, Adeline Delavande, Katherine Donato, Will Dow,
Eric French, Vivian Hoffmann, Rob Jensen, Victor Lavy, Hamish Low, Aprajit Mahajan, David
Pérez-Castrillo, Ian Preston, Carol Propper, Imran Rasul, Pedro Rey-Biel, and Alessandro
Tarozzi. for helpful comments. We are also grateful to the National Institutes of Health (Grant
Number: R01 HL106023), the Economic and Social Research Council via the ESRC-funded
Centre for the Microeconomic Analysis of Public Policy (grant reference ES/H021221/1) at the
Institute for Fiscal Studies, as well as the Global Underdevelopment Action Fund the Walter H.
Shorenstein Asia-Pacific Research Center at Stanford University for financial support. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Renfu Luo, Grant Miller, Scott Rozelle, Sean Sylvia, and Marcos Vera-Hernández.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Can Bureaucrats Really Be Paid Like CEOs? School Administrator Incentives for Anemia
Reduction in Rural China
Renfu Luo, Grant Miller, Scott Rozelle, Sean Sylvia, and Marcos Vera-Hernández
NBER Working Paper No. 21302
June 2015, Revised August 2018
JEL No. C93,H40,I12,M52,O15

                                           ABSTRACT

Unlike performance incentives for private sector managers, little is known about performance
incentives for managers in public sector bureaucracies. Through a randomized trial in rural China,
we study performance incentives rewarding school administrators for reducing student anemia—
as well as complementarity between incentives and orthogonally assigned discretionary
resources. Large (but not small) incentives and unrestricted grants both reduced anemia, but
incentives were more cost-effective. Although unrestricted grants and small incentives do not
interact, grants fully crowd-out the effect of larger incentives. Our findings suggest that
performance incentives can be effective in bureaucratic environments, but they are not
complementary to discretionary resources.

Renfu Luo                                                       Sean Sylvia
Chinese Academy of Sciences                                     School of Economics
luorf.ccap@igsnrr.ac.cn                                         Renmin University of China
                                                                No 59 Zhongguancun Ave
Grant Miller                                                    Beijing, China 100872
CHP/PCOR                                                        sean.sylvia@gmail.com
Stanford University
117 Encina Commons                                              Marcos Vera-Hernández
Stanford, CA 94305-6019                                         University College London
and NBER                                                        Department of Economics
ngmiller@stanford.edu                                           Gower St.
                                                                London WC1E 6BT
Scott Rozelle                                                   United Kingdom
Stanford University                                             m.vera@ucl.ac.uk
Freeman Spogli Institute for International Studies
Encina Hall E407
Stanford, CA 94305-6055
rozelle@stanford.edu




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
http://www.povertyactionlab.org/Hypothesis-Registry
An online appendix is available at
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w21302
      CAN BUREAUCRATS REALLY BE PAID LIKE CEOS?
SUBSTITUTION BETWEEN INCENTIVES AND RESOURCES AMONG
           SCHOOL ADMINISTRATORS IN CHINA

    Renfu Luo, Grant Miller, Scott Rozelle, Sean Sylvia, and Marcos Vera-Hernández†

                                                July 2018


                                              ABSTRACT:

Unlike performance incentives for private sector managers, little is known about
performance incentives for managers in public sector bureaucracies. Through a
randomized trial in rural China, we study performance incentives rewarding school
administrators for reducing student anemia—as well as complementarity between
incentives and orthogonally assigned discretionary resources. Large (but not small)
incentives and unrestricted grants both reduced anemia, but incentives were more
cost-effective. Although unrestricted grants and small incentives do not interact,
grants fully crowd-out the effect of larger incentives. Our findings suggest that
performance incentives can be effective in bureaucratic environments, but they are
not complementary to discretionary resources.

JEL Codes: O15, I12, H40, M52

Keywords: Performance Pay, Public Service Delivery, Managerial Incentives, Nutrition
Programs, China




†
  Luo: Peking University, email: luorf@pku.edu.cn; Miller: Stanford University and NBER, email:
ngmiller@stanford.edu; Rozelle: Stanford University, email: rozelle@stanford.edu; Sylvia: University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, email: sean_sylvia@unc.edu; Vera-Hernández: University College London
and IFS, email: m.vera@ucl.ac.uk. Soledad Giardili and Ravi Somani provided excellent research assistance.
We are grateful to Dana Andersen, Antonio Cabrales, Syngjoo Choi, Adeline Delavande, Katherine Donato,
Will Dow, Eric French, Vivian Hoffmann, Rob Jensen, Victor Lavy, Hamish Low, Aprajit Mahajan, David
Pérez-Castrillo, Ian Preston, Carol Propper, Imran Rasul, Pedro Rey-Biel, and Alessandro Tarozzi. for
helpful comments. We are also grateful to the National Institutes of Health (Grant Number: R01 HL106023),
the Economic and Social Research Council via the ESRC-funded Centre for the Microeconomic Analysis of
Public Policy (grant reference ES/H021221/1) at the Institute for Fiscal Studies, as well as the Global Under-
development Action Fund the Walter H. Shorenstein Asia-Pacific Research Center at Stanford University for
financial support.
                                                                                                            1
1. Introduction

       The provision of public services in many developing countries is low in quality

(World Bank 2004; Banerjee, Deaton, and Duflo 2004; Das, Hammer, and Leonard 2008;

Berendes et al. 2011). Although the underlying reasons are complex and incompletely

understood, the culprit is not simply lack of resources, inadequate training, or

deficiencies in provider knowledge. Supply-side incentives are also often poorly aligned

with social objectives. Absenteeism in many parts of the world is pervasive (Chaudhury

and Hammer 2004; Kremer et al. 2005; Chaudhury et al. 2006; Lewis 2006; Banerjee and

Duflo 2006), and providers often fail to do in practice what is within their knowledge and

means (Das and Hammer 2004; Alcázar et al. 2006; Chaudhury et al. 2006; Das and

Hammer 2007; Leonard and Masatu 2010; Das et al. 2012; Sylvia et al. 2015).

       To better align provider incentives with social objectives, performance pay has

become increasingly common in public sector service delivery (Oxman and Fretheim

2008; Eichler and Levine 2009; Miller and Babiarz 2014). Drawing on the logic of

performance pay in human resource management (Lazear 1995; Hall and Liebman 1998;

Lazear 2000), this approach provides direct financial rewards for achieving pre-specified

performance targets. Despite its growing prominence, however, there is remarkably little

empirical evidence on basic mechanism design considerations in the use of performance

pay to improve public service delivery (Miller and Babiarz 2014).

       This paper contributes to the literature on performance pay in developing

countries – and in particular, its design – through a large-scale experiment studying the

interaction of performance incentives and unconditional block grants, both of varying


                                                                                            1
sizes, for public sector administrators. Specifically, we provide primary school

administrators (lead principals who are the managers and executive decision-makers in

schools – hereafter “administrators”) with randomly assigned budget transfers (large and

small) and randomly assigned financial incentives (large and small) for improving the

health of their students. Our health focus is anemia, a leading child health problem in

rural China.2

        Our study yields four key findings. First, we find that larger incentives for anemia

reduction were effective when administrators had fewer resources at their disposal for

implementing the program. Incentives that provided substantial additional income to

administrators (mean realized payouts of about 2 months of annual salary) reduced

anemia among students who were anemic at baseline by 13.8 percentage points (or 38%).

Second, in contrast, small incentives (one tenth the size of the larger incentives) were

ineffective in reducing anemia – and were significantly less effective than large

incentives. Third, even absent explicit incentives, unrestricted budget transfers to school

administrators led to sizeable reductions in anemia, suggesting other motives among

administrators to allocate resources towards student nutrition. However, the resource cost

of reducing anemia through larger school budgets was approximately twice as great (per

case of anemia averted) as combining larger performance incentives with smaller budgets

– implying that school administrators with explicit financial incentives used smaller

budgets with greater productive efficiency.

        Finally, we find that explicit financial incentives and unrestricted grants can be

strong substitutes – and whether or not they are depends critically on incentive size.


2
 Previous studies have shown anemia rates among primary school aged students in poor regions of western
China to be around 30% on average (Luo et al. 2011; Miller et al. 2012).
                                                                                                      2
Specifically, we find that large incentives and grants are pronounced substitutes. The

effect is particularly strong: unrestricted resource transfers (of sizes chosen by

government planners in practice) crowd-out the effect of large incentives. Importantly,

we find this pattern of results not only with student nutritional outcomes, but also with

intermediate measures of resource allocation and effort (for example, the provision of

better nutrition and effort to persuade parents to improve their children’s diets at home).

Substitution therefore reflects reductions in administrator effort with larger budgets (and

not simply decreasing marginal returns to inputs in the biological production of child

nutrition).3

         Our findings contribute to existing literature on performance incentives in several

ways. First, previous studies on the role of performance pay in the public sector have

generally focused on front-line workers rather than public sector managers (or

“bureaucrats” – an exception is Rasul and Rogger 2013).4 However, the scope of

behavioral responses among managers is potentially much broader, possibly with greater

potential for improving public sector service delivery. Specifically, rather than simply



3
  In this paper, we study health (specifically, anemia). In a companion paper (which is in progress), we
examine the issue of multitasking – in particular, whether or not incentives to reduce anemia led schools to
focus on anemia reduction at the expense of teaching. We find no evidence that these incentives led to a
reduction in student test scores on standardized Math and Chinese exams designed by the research team
based on the national curriculum and designed to have good psychometric properties. However, we do find
some evidence of multitasking on margins of teaching where the costs to administrators and teachers of
diverting effort are lower (i.e. tasks that would likely be the first source of diverted effort). For example, in
“secondary subjects” (subjects other than math or Chinese, which are not a focus of high school entrance
exams and hence given less weight in the curriculum) we find evidence of diverted effort when children
were taught these subjects by a homeroom teacher (who was often given responsibilities related to the
anemia program).
4
  Several recent studies have examined performance pay provided as personal income to front line workers
in the health and education sectors, including Lavy (2002), Lavy (2009), Glewwe et al. (2010),
Muralidharan & Sundararaman (2011), Duflo et al. (2012), Ashraf et al. (2014) and Behrman et al. (2015).
Other recent studies have focused on incentives to institutions paid as budget revenue. These include
Bloom et al. (2006), Basinga et al. (2011), Gertler and Vermeersch (2012), Olken, Onishi, and Wong
(2014), and Yip et al. (2014). Behrman et al. (2015) also study incentives for school administrators, but
bundled with incentives to students and teachers.
                                                                                                                3
increasing effort, the actions of managers can have greater influence on productive and

allocative efficiency because of the resources under over which they have decision-

making authority (Holmstrom and Ricart i Costa 1986; Athey and Roberts 2001;

Bandiera, Barankay, and Rasul 2007; Burgess et al. 2010).

        Second, existing studies of performance pay for managers generally examine the

private sector, but insights from this literature cannot easily be easily extrapolated to

bureaucracies.5 Career concerns can be particularly strong in bureaucracies – and they

may overpower or interact with incentives created by performance pay (Gibbons and

Murphy 1992). Moreover, civil servants may be considerably more pro-socially or

intrinsically motivated (Francois 2000; Francois and Vlassopoulos 2008; Tonin and

Vlassopoulos 2015) – and performance pay may dampen the effects of these motivations

(see Fehr and Falk 2002; Gneezy, Meier, and Rey-Biel 2011; and Kamenica 2012 for

reviews). Finally, public sector production processes tend to be both more complex (due

to multiple objectives and multiple agents, for example – Dixit (2002)) and more

heterogeneous (due to a primary goal being to expand access, which necessitates

operation in a wider range of contexts than private sector organizations that have more

scope to select the markets in which they operate). Performance pay may therefore be

ineffective if rewards are not well-aligned with effective inputs across the range of

contexts within which an organization operates.




5
  On performance pay for corporate executives and private sector managers in developed countries, see
Jensen and Murphy (1990), Hall and Liebman (1998), Murphy (1999), Hall and Murphy (2003), and Oyer
and Shaefer (2005). Bandiera et al. (2007) and Bloom et al. (2011) study these virtues of performance pay
for private sector managers in developing countries. Burgess et al. (2010) study a team-based incentive
scheme in the context of a government agency in the UK; although the scheme was not explicitly targeted to
managers, the authors find that the team-based incentive induced managers to reallocate more efficient
workers to incentivized tasks.
                                                                                                        4
         Third, we contribute to existing literature by studying three mechanism design

considerations of performance pay. One is that we reward outputs directly. In contrast to

rewarding inputs, performance incentives for outputs strengthens incentives for managers

to draw on local information and contextual knowledge to improve both allocative and

productive efficiency – or to “innovate.” Our study is one of the first focused on health to

reward health outputs – and we do indeed find evidence of managerial innovation (school

administrators successfully work with parents to improve diets at home). 6 Another is that

we directly study differential behavioral responses to performance incentives of varying

sizes. Existing literature on this issue is split: a number of studies outside of

organizational settings report large responses to very modest rewards (as well as highly

elastic demand at prices close to zero),7 while others suggest small responses – or even

reductions in effort (when intrinsic motivation is crowded-out, for example).8 Our results

are more closely aligned with the latter.9 Finally, we provide first evidence on how

incentives interact with the amount of resources under contracted agents’ control. A

common focus is on the relative effects of incentive and resource-based approaches (see

Lavy 2002, Hanushek 2006); however, these two approaches are often implemented

simultaneously and are likely to interact in important ways. Theoretically, incentives and

resources available to managers can be complements or substitutes. We study this issue


6
  The two exceptions of which we are aware are Singh (2011) and (Miller et al. 2012). Though not studying
the health impacts of incentives tied to health outcomes, Leonard (2003) studies traditional healers’ use of
outcome-contingent contracts in Cameroun. In the education sector, performance pay rewarding good test
scores is more common (Lavy 2009; Muralidharan and Sundararaman 2011; Behrman et al. 2015).
7
  Kremer and Miguel 2007; Thornton 2008; Banerjee et al. 2010; Cohen and Dupas 2010; Karlan, List, and
Shafir 2011; Duflo, Kremer, and Robinson 2011.
8
  See Gneezy, Meier, and Rey-Biel 2011 for several examples.
9
  We also note at least two key differences with this previous literature: one is that receiving incentive
payments in our study required sustained behavior change (reducing iron deficiency anemia requires
several months of dietary chance), and another is that because all school administrators receive information
about anemia, the presence of incentives may not alter its salience as much (Benhassine et al. 2015).
                                                                                                          5
both theoretically and empirically, find evidence of strong substitution when incentives

and budgets are large.

           The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a conceptual

framework for understanding school administrators’ behavioral responses to output-based

performance incentives. Section 3 provides background on school-based nutrition

programs as well as the causes and consequences of anemia. Section 4 describes our

experimental design, data collection, and methods. Section 5 reports our results, and

Section 6 concludes.



2. Conceptual Framework

           In this section, we propose a simple model of the school administrator decision

problem that we study. Specifically, we consider the influence of both output-based

performance incentives and discretionary resources on organizational effort – as well as

how they interact (i.e., if they are substitutes or complements). We model the school

administrator (bureaucrat) as choosing effort e to reduce anemia in the school.10

Additionally, the school administrator also decides on the allocation of resources – in

particular, how to divide the school budget G between anemia reduction A and other

school functions G-A. The health production function !(#, %) combines the school

administrator’s effort e and the funds allocated to reducing anemia A in determining

student health H. The school administrator’s maximization problem is therefore:

                                 max - + /0 − 2 (#) + 3(4 − %)                                             (1)
                                  *,+


subject to:


10
     See Rogger (2014) and Nath (2015) for other models of bureaucratic behavior with choices of effort.
                                                                                                            6
                                     - = 60 + 7                                               (2)

                                     0 = !(#, %)                                              (3)

                                    4≤%                                                       (4)

         Total take-home pay w includes both base pay m and a reward or bonus for

improving student health, tH, which is the product of t, the marginal bonus, and H, the

net gain in student health (in our case, the net reduction in the number of students with

anemia). Disutility of effort, v(e), is also strictly increasing but convex: 2 9 > 0, 2 99 ≥ 0.

The parameter /, which is non-negative, allows the school administrator to be altruistic,

deriving direct utility from student health (pro-sociality and public service motivation are

often considered important among public sector workers – for example, see Besley and

Ghatak (2007) and Dal Bó, Finan, and Rossi (2013)). The school administrator also

derives utility from school functions unrelated to health, S(G-A), which is also assumed

to be increasing (3 9 > 0) and concave (3 99 ≤ 0). We make standard assumptions that the

health production function, ! (#, %), is increasing in both arguments and concave (!* >

0, !** < 0, !+ > 0, !++ < 0, !** !++ − !*+ ≥ 0) and the intuitive assumption that !*+ ≥ 0,

or that the marginal productivity of one input is non-decreasing in the level of the other

input.

         Assuming an interior solution, the solution to (1)-(4) is equivalent to the solution

to:

                     max (/ + 6)! (#, %) − 2(#) + 3(4 − %).                                   (5)
                      *,+


The first order conditions are:

                             >* ≡ (/ + 6)!* (#, %) − 2 9 (#) = 0,                             (6)

                             >+ ≡ (/ + 6)!+ (#, %) − 3′(4 − %) = 0.                           (7)

                                                                                                  7
The first order condition (6) implies that the optimal level of effort equates the marginal

benefit of increasing effort (the increase in health, !* (#, %), multiplied by 6 + /,

reflecting both the increase in take-home pay and the altruistic increase in direct utility)

with its marginal cost. Equivalently, the first order condition (7) implies that resources G

are invested in activities unrelated to nutrition up to the point that its marginal benefit,

3′(4 − %), equals the marginal benefit of investing in nutrition-related activities,

(/ + 6)!+ (#, %).

        The second order conditions required for a maximum are:

                               >** ≡ (/ + 6)!** (#, %) − 2 9 9 < 0                             (8)

                               >++ ≡ (/ + 6)!++ (#, %) + 3′′ < 0                               (9)

                            C
           |0| ≡ >** >++ − >*+ > 0 , where UEF ≡ ( / + 6)!*+ .                             (10)



2.1 Comparative Statics

        We analyze how the school administrator’s choice of effort and resources

dedicated to nutrition changes both with incentives t and discretionary resources G – both

separately and in combination (as we study empirically through our experiment). First,

we consider each effect separately; the corresponding first order comparative statics (see

the Appendix for these and other derivations and proofs) are:


                          G*       IJK L(MNH)JOO NP QQ RN(MNH)JO JKO
                               =                                        > 0,               (11)
                          GH                      |S|


                           G+       IJO L(MNH)JKK NT QQ RN(MNH)JK JKO
                                =                                       > 0,               (12)
                           GH                        |S|


                           G*       I(MNH)JKO P QQ
                                =                    > 0,                                  (13)
                           GU             |S|


                                                                                                8
                           G+       L(MNH)JKK IT QQ RP QQ
                                =                           > 0.                           (14)
                           GU               |S|



Intuitively, an increase in the incentive rate t leads to an increase in both effort and the

amount of resources dedicated to nutrition (11-12). Notably, these increases are greater

when !*+ is larger. Naturally, the larger that !*+ is, the larger is the marginal productivity

of either # or % when the other input increases, accentuating the effect of increasing the

incentive rate.

       An increase in discretionary resources also raises both effort and resources

devoted to nutrition (13-14). Note in (13) that if the marginal productivity of effort were

independent of the level of % – that is, if !*+ = 0, then changes in discretionary resources

would not influence effort. This is not a general property, but rather a result of our

simplifying assumption that 2(#) and 3(4 − %) are additive in the utility function, so

# and % only interact through the production function.

       An important result is also that 0 < V%/V4 < 1. This means that an increase in 4

translates into a positive but smaller increase in %, implying that the full increase in 4 is

not entirely allocated to %, but rather a share is invested in non-nutritional activities. This

is clear from (7): if 4 and % increased by the same amount, then the term 3′(4 − %)

would not change – and hence could not be equal to (/ + 6)!+ (#, %).

       From first order conditions (11-14), it then follows that:

                                GS            G*            G+
                                      = !* GH + !+ GH > 0,                                (15)
                                GH

                                GS           G*         G+
                                      = !* GU + !+ GU > 0.                                (16)
                                GU




                                                                                                 9
To understand the conditions under which incentives and resources are complements or

substitutes, we must compute the cross-partial derivatives of #, %, and 0 with respect to

6 and 4. Note that because the first order comparative statics (11-14) depend on the

second derivatives of v(e), S(G-A), and f(e, A), the cross-partial derivatives will

necessarily depend on the third order derivatives of v(e), S(G-A), and f(e,A). In order to

gain insight, we make the simplifying assumption that the third order derivatives of the

production function are null (i.e., that the production function is quadratic) while leaving

2 999 and 3 999 unrestricted.11

            Using the chain rule on 0 = !(#, %), the cross-partial derivative of 0 with respect

to t and G is:


      GS                G* G*    G+ G+            G* G+     G* G+           G*          G+
             = Y!** GU GH + !++ GU GH Z + !+* YGU GH + GH GU Z + !* GHGU + !+ GHGU ,                     (17)
     GHGU




which could be positive (implying that t and G are complements) or negative (implying

that they are substitutes) because the first term in brackets is negative, the second term is

positive (and its size crucially depends on !*+ ), and the third and fourth could be positive

or negative (as shown in the Appendix, which provides expressions for V#/

V6V4 and V%/V6V4). Because the sign of V0/V6V4 cannot be determined a priori, we

discuss in what follows how its sign depends on the sign and size of key derivatives:

3 999 , 2 999 , !*+ .

            A key determinant of V0/V6V4 is !*+ , how much the productivity of effort

increases when % increases. A larger !*+ favors complementarity between t and G


11
 Note that the third order derivatives of the production function include feee, fAAA, feeA, and feAA; the solution
would be very cumbersome if we did not assume that these are zero.
                                                                                                                10
(V0/V6V4 > 0). Intuitively, larger values of 4 imply larger values of %, leading to effort

being more productive (!*+ > 0), and hence a larger response to the incentive.12

Mathematically, !*+ multiplies the second term in (17), which is positive, and also enters

into the formulae for V#/V6V4 and V%/V6V4.

         The third derivative of 2(#), 2 999 , defines whether the marginal cost of effort, 2 9 ,

is convex (2 999 > 0) or concave (2 999 < 0). A convex (concave) marginal cost of effort

favor substitution (complementarity). To understand the intuition, assume that the

marginal cost of effort is concave, that is, 2 999 < 0 (i.e. 2 (#) = # ] , 2 < _ < 3), and

consider the following approximation:

                                          bKcdedf ,gh bKcdedi ,gh
                                G*                    I
                                      ≈       bg              bg
                                                                    , 4j > 4k .                               (18)
                               GHGU                U f IU i




Note that V#/V4 > 0, so effort is greater for 4 j than for 4 k . Moreover, the concavity of

the marginal cost of effort implies that, at higher levels of effort, the marginal cost of effort

increases at a lower rate. Hence, the marginal cost of effort increases at a lower rate at 4 j

than at 4 k . Hence, the response of effort to an increase in incentives, V#(4, 6)/V6, i.e. the

terms in the numerator of (18), might be larger for 4 j than 4 k because the increase in the

marginal cost of effort will be smaller.

         A similar argument can be made to explain why 3 999 > 0 is conducive to

complementarity. Ultimately, both # and % are inputs in the health production function,




12
   Note that if 3 999 < 0, the term 3 999 !*+ , which is part of V#/V6V4 (see the Appendix), can partially offset
this effect.
                                                                                                                11
but 2(#) is increasing in # while 3(4 − %) is decreasing in %. This explains why if 2 999 <

0 favors complementarity, 3 999 > 0 also does.13

        The flexibility of the model means that our predictions depend on three key

parameters. Having discussed the effect of each of them individually, Table 1 below

summarises the necessary and sufficient conditions that the model provides.

     Table 1. Summary of necessary and sufficient conditions implied by the model
                                                                       V0
      3 999 ≤ 0, and 2 999 ≥ 0, and !*+ = 0      imply that                 <0
                                                                      V6V4

                                                                                         V0
       3 999 > 0, or 2 999 < 0, or !*+ > 0        are necessary conditions for               >0
                                                                                        V6V4



3. Background

3.1 School-Based Nutrition Programs

        School-based interventions are believed to be among the most cost-effective

approaches for delivering health and nutrition services to children in developing countries

(Bundy and Guyatt 1996; Jukes, Drake, and Bundy 2008; Orazem, Glewwe, and Patrinos

2008). Because schools are natural points of contact with school-aged children, they may

provide a platform from which health and nutrition interventions can be delivered at

relatively low cost (Bundy and Guyatt 1996; Bundy et al. 2006; Jukes, Drake, and Bundy

2008). Because of this, school-based health, nutrition and feeding programs are a

ubiquitously central function of schools, particularly in developing countries.




13
   Note that if one assumed a simple power function such as 3(4 − %) = (4 − %)l , the condition that 3 99 <
0, would also imply necessarily that 3 999 > 0. However, this would not be the case for other functional
forms, such as a cubic polynomial.
                                                                                                        12
         In China, schools have the legal responsibility to promote the health of their

students (Education Law of the Peoples Republic of China, 1995). Although school

administrators are evaluated as part of the cadre evaluation system (ganbu kaohe zhidu) –

a system for evaluating public officials and servants in China (Whiting 2004) – measures

of child health are not typically included as criteria for evaluation.

3.2 The Causes and Consequences of Anemia

         Our study examines school-based programs to reduce anemia. Anemia is

estimated to affect nearly one quarter of all school-aged children worldwide (World

Health Organization 2001). Although there are many causes of anemia (including a

variety of genetic disorders and infections as well as nutritional deficiencies), iron

deficiency accounts for about 50% of cases globally (Balarajan et al. 2011; Pasricha et al.

2013)14 – and 85-95% of cases in China (Du et al. 2000).

         The consequences of iron deficiency—with or without anemia—can be

substantial, particularly for children at critical stages of development. A large literature

links iron deficiency to fatigue and reduced work capacity among adolescents and adults,

impaired cognition and cognitive development among children, and reduced immune

response for all age groups (Thomas et al. 2006; R. Yip 2001; World Health Organization

2001; Balarajan et al. 2011). School-aged children with anemia (the focus of our study)

have also been shown to have inferior educational outcomes (grades, attendance, and

school attainment – Taras 2005; Nokes, van den Bosch, and Bundy 1998).

3.3 Biomedical Strategies for Reducing Anemia


14
   There is some debate in the public health literature on the proportion of the anemia burden attributable to
iron deficiency (Balarajan et al. 2011). Intestinal worms are unlikely to be a major cause of anemia in our
study areas as the prevalence of hookworm (the parasite most commonly associated with anemia) is low (Xu
et al. 1995).
                                                                                                           13
         Increasing iron consumption can effectively prevent iron deficiency anemia.

Worldwide, fortifying staple foods with iron has historically been an effective approach

to addressing micronutrient deficiencies (Allen et al. 2006). Fortification is an attractive

strategy because it requires little behavior change and because it can be implemented on a

large scale. However, fortification of staple foods may be ineffective in areas like

Northwest China in which households grow and consume their own food (Allen et al.

2006).

         An alternative approach is to increase the consumption of naturally iron-rich

foods and those that promote iron absorption during digestion. Animal sources (including

red meats, fish, and poultry) provide heme iron, which is more easily absorbed during

digestion; plant sources (including green, leafy vegetables) provide non-heme iron, which

is less readily absorbed – but can be promoted by consumption of vitamin C (and

inhibited by consumption of milk and other calcium-rich products).

         Finally, a third approach is the delivery of micronutrient supplements (for

example, vitamins) containing iron. To be effective, however, regular consumption over

several few months is necessary – and so inadequate compliance may render

supplementation ineffective (Bobonis et al. 2006; Bhutta et al. 2013; Pasricha et al. 2013;

Martorell et al. 2015).15




15
   Previous trials addressing iron deficiency and anemia have suffered from low levels of compliance or
attempted to preempt compliance problems. Bobonis et al. (2006), for example, instructed preschool teachers
to provide children with iron therapy for 30 days following health camps but found that only around 18 days
were actually administered. The WISE study in Indonesia (Thomas et al. 2006) hired facilitators to regularly
visit participants and remind them to take their supplements.
                                                                                                         14
4. The Experiment

4.1 Sampling

         To draw our study sample, we began with all 36 counties officially designated by

the Chinese government as “poverty counties” in five regions (prefectures) in western

China (Haidong in Qinghai Province, Dingxi, Tianshui, and Longnan in Gansu Province,

and Ankang in Shaanxi Province – see Figure 1). In August 2011, we conducted a

canvass survey in each county to construct a list of all rural primary schools and the

number of students enrolled in each. Restricting our sampling frame to primary schools

with 150-300 students total,16 we randomly selected 170 of 1,410 eligible schools for

inclusion in our study (and limited our selection to one school per township17). Our

sample size was based on power calculations conducted using data from primary schools

in the same region of China (Miller et al. 2012).18

         Within study schools, we randomly sampled 50 fourth and fifth grade students

from each school. In China, fourth and fifth grade students are typically 10 to 11 years

old, and we chose these grades to select students whom we considered sufficiently old to

provide meaningful survey responses – but also sufficiently young to be generally pre-

pubescent (given the independent effect of menarche on hemoglobin concentration). We


16
   A lower bound of 150 students was chosen to ensure that the number of samples students per school was
enough to meet power requirements. 300 was chosen as the upper bound to keep the project within budget.
These bounds are on reported school sizes; actual numbers of students are often significantly less than
reported. Note that 39.9% of rural primary schools in the sampling frame (all rural primary schools in
project counties) were reported to be within this range.
17
   Local administration of schools is generally done at the school district level, which is below the
township. Contamination due to two school administrators meeting at events organized at higher levels, for
example, was thus unlikely.
18
   Using data from Miller et al. (2012), we performed Montecarlo simulations to conduct power
calculations for students who were anemic at the time of that study’s baseline survey. The intra-class
correlation was estimated adjusting for covariates (baseline hemoglobin concentration, the number of
students in each school, whether schools had a kitchen, student-teacher ratio, distance to the furthest village
served by the school, percent boarding students, and county dummies), which we also specified as
covariates in the current study’s pre-analysis plan.
                                                                                                            15
also conducted physical exams and collected data from students from other grades at

baseline to obfuscate our focus on fourth and fifth graders.

4.2 Data Collection

        We conducted our baseline survey in September 2011 and our follow-up survey in

May 2012 (at the beginning and end of the 2011-2012 academic year), collecting detailed

information on students, households, school administrators, and schools.

        Student Surveys. We interviewed all sampled students at their school, collecting

information on student background, health behaviors related to anemia, school activities,

and general health. To collect information on school and home feeding practices, students

were also given standard food frequency questionnaires to record information about food

consumption at school and at home over the past week.19

        We also measured student blood hemoglobin (Hb) concentration at the time of the

student survey. Nurses from the Medical School of Xi’an Jiaotong University

accompanied study enumerators, collecting finger-prick blood samples to analyze on-site

(at schools) using HemoCue Hb 201+ assessment systems.

        Household Surveys. For each sampled student, we also collected information on

students’ households using forms completed by parents.20 Specifically, these surveys

collected information about interactions between parents and the school, household



19
   Information on food consumption was collected using a seven-day recall “food frequency questionnaires”
(FFQs) completed by students as part of the endline survey. These questionnaires asked children the number
of times they had eaten each of 33 food items in the past seven days, separately for school and home. Food
frequency questionnaires (FFQs) have long been used in nutrition research and have been recommended for
use in large surveys of children given low cost and low respondent burden (McPherson et al. 2000; Magarey
et al. 2011). FFQ responses by children about their own consumption has been shown to be more accurate
than the responses of their parents (Burrows et al. 2013).
20
   For budgetary reasons, household surveys were given to students to take home and return. As a result,
household forms are missing for approximately 20% of students. All possible information on students and
households was collected with the student survey, which was administered by enumerators.
                                                                                                       16
income and assets, health-related expenditures, expenditures on food and information on

other household members, focusing on household characteristics that students would be

unlikely to know themselves.

       School Administrator Surveys. We interviewed school administrators

(bureaucrats) at three different points in time: before and after school administrators were

told about the incentive contract and block grant to which they were assigned and again

at endline. At baseline, school administrators provided information about their

background, job history, salary, and compensation as well as perceptions of professional

responsibilities and anemia knowledge. Using scales adapted from Grant (2008), we also

measured the intrinsic and pro-social motivation of administrators. Following their

participation in the training session on anemia (conducted 3 weeks after the baseline

survey) administrators were given a second short survey to measure their understanding

of the training material.

       School Surveys. Finally, we collected basic information from schools (about

enrollment, staffing, facilities, finances, and meal provision) and teachers (about teacher

characteristics, communication with parents, and teaching practices).

4.3 Experimental Design

       We designed our study as a cluster-randomized trial using a 3×2 crosscutting

design (Figure 2). After conducting our baseline survey, we provided all school

administrators with information about anemia (see our written materials in the online

appendix – and which also included a video presentation by a Chinese nutrition

specialist), and schools were randomly assigned one of six experimental cells (see Figure

3 for the study timeline). The first three paths of Figure 2 show randomly-assigned


                                                                                          17
incentive groups: a group without incentives (Group A), a “small” incentive group

(Group B), and a “large” incentive group (Group C). Across these arm are two

orthogonally-assigned block grant groups: a “small” block grant group (Group 1) and a

“large” block grant group (Group 2). The reference group in our six-cell design is the

default policy (education about anemia coupled with a modest resource transfer and no

incentives, Group A1).21

         To improve power, we used a stratified randomization procedure. Specifically,

using joint quintiles of the baseline distribution of school-level hemoglobin concentration

and combined standardized math and Chinese exam scores – yielding 25 strata, we

randomized cell assignment within each stratum. Stratification improves power by

ensuring balance on these covariates between experimental groups. Our analysis takes

this randomization procedure into account, conditioning on stratum fixed effects (Bruhn

and McKenzie 2009).

         Incentives for Anemia Reduction. In the large incentive arm (65 schools, Group C

in Figure 2), we offered school administrators financial incentives to be paid as private

income according to the net reduction in number of students identified as anemic between

the beginning and end of the school year. The specific structure of the large incentive

contract was:

                         125 pqr ∗ (tu − t* )                    v! (tu − t* ) > 0
                      m=n
                             0                                      w6ℎ#y-vz#


21
  Thus, all schools in the experiment received a small or large grant. This was done to ensure that all schools
had access to resources that could be devoted to anemia reduction. In a previous study, we find that educating
school administrators on anemia (including the same information as in the current study) alone, without
incentives or grants, had no detectable impact on anemia rates (Miller et al. 2012). Our reference group also
mimics how a recent Chinese school nutrition program (costing 16 billion yuan per year) was designed.
Under the program, local education bureaus and schools receive 3 yuan per day per student (4 yuan for
boarding students) to provide nutritious meals. How exactly the program is implemented and monitored
varies widely across localities.
                                                                                                            18
where tu is the number of students found to be anemic at baseline and t* is the number

of who were anemic at the time of the endline survey.22 Based on an earlier study (Miller

et al. 2012), the contract increment (125 yuan (RMB), or about $19.4023) per student

reduction was chosen to provide roughly two months of a school administrator’s annual

salary for a feasible reduction in anemia given previous studies (a reduction of about

50%).24 Actual payouts for school administrators with the large incentive and small

block were ultimately 3,303 yuan (or about $516) – approximately two month’s base pay

for school administrators in this region. We did not reveal the identity of students who

were anemic at baseline to administrators (and when we asked teachers to identify

students who were anemic at endline, they were unable to do so).25

         The small incentive arm (40 schools, Group B in Figure 2) was identical to the

large incentive arm except that the magnitude of the incremental incentive was ten times

smaller (12.5 RMB, or about $1.95 per student reduction in anemia between baseline and

follow-up in our sample). This magnitude of this incentive provides roughly 0.2

additional months of annual salary for the same feasible reduction in anemia given

previous studies.


22
   We measured anemia using a sample of 50 4th and 5th graders and calculated the implied number of
anemic children in the school using the prevalence rate in our sample. Although administrators could
possibly discern which students were tested at baseline (although testing was done before contract
assignment), they were later told explicitly that another sample of students would be drawn at the end of the
school year. Moreover, unreported analyses show that teachers were unable to correctly name or identify
anemic students at endline.
23
   We use a conversion rate of $1 = 6.4 RMB, the approximate exchange rate at the time of the baseline
survey (September 2011).
24
   There are presumably superior contract structures, but optimal contract design requires substantial
information not available to us, including information about the cost of provider effort, the productivity of
provider effort, and the utility functions of both providers and the contracting ‘principal’ (Laffont and Tirole
1993; Salanié 2005). Simple, easily understandable contracts may also appear more transparent to school
administrators and promote credibility.
25
   We did reveal the identity of students who were severely anemic (with hemoglobin concentration below
80 g/L) as these students required immediate medical attention. There were 3 such students found at
baseline.
                                                                                                             19
        At the time that school administrators signed incentive contracts, they were told

the (implied) number of anemic students in their schools (the identity of anemic children

was not revealed).26 Contracts were written using official letterhead of the Chinese

Academy of Sciences (a government agency) and counter-signed by the deputy director

of the implementing research center (school administrators signed two copies of the

contract, one of which they kept). Note that all interventions were implemented in

partnership with local education bureaus, signifying to school administrators that the

project was sanctioned by local governments.

        Block Grants. The small block grant (Group 1 in Figure 2) was 0.3 RMB ($0.05)

per student per day (85 schools), which we calculated to be adequate for school

administrators to purchase vitamins for each student to take daily. The large block grant

(Group 2 in Figure 2) was 0.7 RMB ($0.11) per student per day (85 schools). In total,

small block grant schools received 7,452 yuan ($1,164) on average and large block grant

schools received 17,388 yuan ($2,717). These grants were given to schools in two

installments, once at the beginning of the program and another approximately half way

through the school year.27 Although funds were given in the context of the nutrition

program roll-out, administrators were explicitly told that they were free to allocate these

at their discretion to other school functions benefitting students – whether this be for




26
   Note that administrators in all study cells were provided the same information about the number of
anemic children in their respective schools.
27
   After explaining block grant assignment to administrators, we asked them to complete a non-binding
budget plan for how they intended to use the block grant. Our study team emphasized that this plan was non-
binding, but this plan would be used to coordinate orders for iron supplements to be delivered to schools.
This was necessary because the market for supplements in rural areas is limited. Administrators were free to
change their supplement orders at any time. Administrators had no reason to believe that second installments
were conditional on performance – they were given an explicit time frame and told an explicit amount for
the second installment.
                                                                                                         20
educational goods, health specific goods, or general school supplies.28 Indeed, Figure 4

shows that administrators used a substantial share of their grants for activities unrelated

to nutrition.

         Health Education. Because knowledge about anemia in our study areas was poor,

prior to revealing treatment assignment, we provided health education about nutrition and

anemia to all school administrators in our study (see online appendix for materials). Our

health education materials were based on published, peer-reviewed studies and

specifically included information about: 1) the prevalence and causes of anemia, 2) the

consequences of anemia (including its effect on cognitive development and academic

performance), and 3) efficacious nutritional approaches to reduce anemia (increasing

dietary intake of iron-rich foods, nutritional supplementation with iron fortified soy and

flour or with supplements, etc.).

4.4 Balance and Attrition

         Summary statistics and tests for balance across study arms are shown in Table 2.29

Panel A shows student level characteristics (N=2051), Panel B shows characteristics of

schools (N=167), and Panel C shows characteristics of school administrators (N=167).30

The first two columns of the table give the mean and standard deviation of each variable

in the comparison (small block grant, no incentive) group. Columns (3) – (7) show



28
   Note that while these transfers were not large compared to total school expenditures, they do represent a
significant increase in budgetary autonomy for school administrators as the bulk of school expenditures are
earmarked for specified uses at higher levels of administration. While administrators often have discretion
over small expenditures, larger expenses require approval from upper levels.
29
   This table shows summary statistics and tests balance for our main analysis sample of students initially
anemic at baseline. Summary statistics and balance tests for the full sample are given in Appendix Table 1.
30
   Although 170 schools were included in the study, no students were found to be anemic in 3 schools at
baseline. No schools refused participation in the study. The baseline anemia rate (defined as Hb<120 g/L)
in the full sample was 24%. Appendix Table 11 shows transitions in and out of anemia status in the
comparison (Small Grant Only) group.
                                                                                                          21
coefficients on treatment variables and interactions estimated using Equation (19),

controlling only for randomization strata fixed effects. The final column shows the p-

value from a test that the coefficients are jointly zero for each characteristic. Only 4 of

the 75 tests are significant at the 10% level, and a test for joint equality is rejected at the

10% level for only one characteristic (the number of times meat was consumed in the

past week). Joint tests for all 15 characteristics reveal no significant differences.31

         The overall attrition rate between baseline and endline surveys was 6.2% in our

sample of children anemic at baseline (5% for the full sample). Defining attrition as a

missing hemoglobin measurement at endline for students with a baseline measurement,

Appendix Table 2 shows that there were no meaningful differences in attrition across

treatment groups (Columns 1 & 2). Analyzing the correlates of a missing household

survey at endline conditional on a child not dropping out, Appendix Table 2 also shows

that neither the treatment indicators nor other covariates are significantly correlated with

a missing household survey form.

4.5 Empirical Strategy

         Given random assignment of schools to treatment cells shown in Figure 2,

comparisons of outcome variable means across treatment groups provides unbiased

estimates of the effect of each experimental treatment. However, to increase power (and

to account for our stratified randomization procedure), we condition our estimates on a

set of covariates used in power calculations. With few exceptions, all of the analyses

presented (including outcome variables, regression specifications, and hypotheses tested)

were pre-specified in a pre-analysis plan written and filed before endline data were


31
  These tests were conducted by regressing treatment status on all 15 baseline covariates and testing that
the coefficients were jointly zero. The smallest p-value from these F-tests was 0.29.
                                                                                                             22
available for analysis.32 In reporting results below, we explicitly note analyses that

deviate from the pre-analysis plan.

        As specified in advance, we use ordinary least-squares (OLS) regression to

estimate the effect of cell assignment on child-level outcomes with the following

specification:
                                                                                 9
{|,} = _ + ~ 3Ä} + ~C ÅÄ} + ~Ç Å4} + ~É Ñ3Ä} Ö × ÑÅ4} Ö + ~á ÑÅÄ} Ö × ÑÅ4} Ö + à|,} â + ä|,}   (19)

where {|,} is the outcome for child i in school j; 3Ä} is a dummy that equals 1 if the

administrator in school j was assigned to receive a small incentive contract and 0

otherwise; ÅÄ} is equal to 1 if the administrator in school j was assigned to receive a large

anemia reduction incentive contract; Å4} is equal to 1 if the school received a large block

grant; à|,} is a vector of child controls (age, class-year, and gender, and baseline value of

the outcome variable), school controls (number of students, student-teacher ratio, whether

the school has a kitchen, proportion of boarding students, and distance to the farthest

village in the school’s catchment area); and dummy variables for counties and

randomization strata. We adjusted our standard errors for clustering at the school level

using Liang-Zeger clustered standard errors.

        In addition to estimating effects on our two primary outcomes (hemoglobin

concentration and a dichotomous indicator for anemia status), we use the same

specification to estimate effects on secondary outcomes to examine the behavioral

mechanisms underlying changes in primary outcomes. For these secondary outcomes,

we focus our analysis on summary indices constructed using groups of closely-related



32
   This analysis plan was filed with the Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab at
http://www.povertyactionlab.org/Hypothesis-Registry.
                                                                                                       23
outcome variables (as we specified in advance). To construct these indices, we used the

GLS weighting procedure described by Anderson (2008). For each individual, we

constructed a variable z̅|} as the weighted average of å normalized outcome variables in

group (ç|}é ). The weight placed on each outcome variable is the sum of its row entries in

the inverted covariance matrix for group è such that:

                                               I     I         I
                                  z̅|} = cê′ëìí êh         cê′ëìí î|} h

                                           I
where ê is a column vector of 1s, ëìí           is the inverted covariance matrix, and î|} is a

column vector of all outcomes for individual v in group è. In addition to reducing the

number of tests required, this weighting procedure can improve efficiency by placing less

weight on outcomes that are highly correlated and more weight on those less correlated.

The summary index variable can also be created for individuals with a subset of missing

outcomes (these outcomes simply receive less weight in the construction of the index).

Although we emphasize these indices in our discussion, we also report estimates for each

individual index component in Appendix Tables 5 to 8.

         A note on correcting for multiple comparisons is also warranted. For our primary

estimates, we test eight null hypotheses: five for treatment main effects and their

interactions (shown in Equation 19)) and three additional ones – that the small and large

incentives have the same average effect (~ = ~C ), that the large incentive and the large

block grant have the same average effect (~C = ~Ç ), and that the average effect of the

large incentive in presence of a large grant is zero (~C + ~á = 0).33 We therefore adjust




33
  We did not pre-specify the last of these (whether or not the joint effect of the large grant and large
incentive is negative), but we did pre-specify whether or not incentives and large grants are complements or
substitutes (~É = 0, ~á = 0).
                                                                                                         24
our p-values to control the Family Wise Error Rate (FWER), or the probability of at least

one Type I error. Specifically, we use the free step-down resampling method of Westfall

and Young (1993). This procedure accounts for the dependency of the data, and is

therefore more powerful than procedures that do not (a Bonferroni correction, for

example). For secondary outcomes, we adjust our p-values according to the total number

of tests within a family of outcomes (the number of outcomes in the family times five –

the number of treatment coefficients in each regression).



5. Results: Childhood Anemia and Underlying Behavioral Responses

         In this section, we first present results obtained by estimating Equation (19) for

anemia status and hemoglobin concentration, and in Section 5.2, we then investigate the

underlying behavioral responses that may have produced them. Following our pre-

analysis plan, we emphasize estimates from our sub-sample of children who were anemic

at baseline. In the Appendix Tables we report results for the full sample of children

receiving hemoglobin tests (Appendix Tables 3, 4, 6, and 8).

5.1. Childhood Anemia

         The first five rows of Table 3 report estimates for each treatment and their

interactions (and the seventh row reports comparison group means for the no incentive,

small grant group at endline). For each estimate, we report the regression coefficient, the

standard error and corresponding p-value, and the p-value adjusted for multiple

hypotheses testing.34




34
  Table 3 reports results for students found to be anemic at baseline as pre-specified. Appendix Table 3
shows main results for the full sample.
                                                                                                           25
        Result 1: Large Incentives. First, we find that the large incentive significantly

reduced the probability of anemia at endline in schools receiving a small grant.

Specifically, the large incentive was associated with a 14 percentage point reduction in

anemia (Table 3, Row 2, Column 1; unadjusted p-value=0.001, adjusted p-value=0.064),

implying a 37.9% reduction relative to the comparison group (small grant, no incentive

schools) at endline. The corresponding increase in hemoglobin was about 2.6 g/L (Table

3, Row 2, Column 2; unadjusted p-value=0.015, adjusted P-value=0.285). These

empirical findings agree with our model’s prediction derived in Equations (11-12).

        Because our incentives rewarded anemia reduction (and not hemoglobin levels

per se) and anemia status reflects shifts in the distribution of altitude adjusted hemoglobin

concentrations across the 120g/L threshold, Figure 5A plots the distribution of endline

hemoglobin concentrations (adjusted for covariates included in Equation 19) by study

arm among children who were anemic at baseline. The distribution for the large incentive

group is shifted to the right of the control group distribution (Kolmogorov-Smirov test p-

value=0.02). This relative shift in mass is greater in the left tail of the distribution,

implying that the large incentive reduced the share of children falling below the anemia

threshold.

        Result 2: Small Incentives. Second, in contrast, the small incentive had no

detectable effect on the probability of anemia at endline (Table 3, Row 1, Column 1).

Comparing the estimates for small and large incentives (~ = ~C in Equation (19)), we

also reject the null hypothesis that the two estimates are equal (Table 3, Row 8, Column

1; adjusted p-value=0.089). Taken together, the estimates for the small and large

incentives suggest that the price effect of incentives is meaningful independent of


                                                                                            26
information conveyed by the presence of an incentive contract (Gneezy and Rustichini

2000). Figure 5A shows that the shift in the hemoglobin distribution for the small

incentive arm relative to the control group arm is smaller – particularly in the left tail of

the distribution.

        An important question in the literature on financial incentives is whether or not

they crowd-out intrinsic or pro-social motivation (Deci and Ryan 1985; Gneezy and

Rustichini 2000; Fehr and Falk 2002; Francois and Vlassopoulos 2008; Gneezy, Meier,

and Rey-Biel 2011; Kamenica 2012). We find that the effects of the small incentive on

anemia was significantly more positive amongst school administrators who score higher

at baseline on a pro-sociality scale (adapted from Grant (2008)) (Appendix Table 10,

Row 1, Columns 1–3; adjusted p-value = 0.038). We also find a similar effect for

intrinsic motivation (also adapted from Grant (2008)), but the difference in effects is not

statistically significant (Appendix Table 10, Row 4, Columns 1–3; adjusted p-value =

0.570). However, the effect of the large incentive is not heterogeneous by pro-social or

intrinsic motivation (the coefficients are close to zero and not statistically significant),

implying that if monetary incentives are large, crowding-out of pro-social motivation

may be overcome by extrinsic motivation provided by incentives.

        Result 3: Large Block Grants. Third, in the absence of any explicit incentive, the

large block grant alone reduced the probability of student anemia at endline (an

unambiguous prediction of our model, as Equations 13, 14 and 16 show). Specifically,

Table 3 (Column 1, Row 3) shows that the large block grant was associated with a 14.5

percentage point reduction in anemia (adjusted p-value=0.047), implying a 39.8%

reduction relative to the comparison group at endline. This reduction is very similar to the


                                                                                                27
effect of the large incentive (-0.145 vs. -0.138), but the average increase in hemoglobin

concentration is larger (4.205 vs. 2.567), although not statistically so (Table 3, Row 9,

Column 2; adjusted p-value=0.597).

         Result 4: Interactions between Incentives and Grants. Whether or not incentives

and unrestricted grants are complements or substitutes is an empirical issue. The model in

Section 2 makes clear that both complements or substitutes are possible depending on

cross partial derivatives of the hemoglobin production function as well as the curvature of

the marginal cost of effort and the marginal utility that the school administrator obtains

from non-nutritional activities. We do not find evidence of complementarity – and

notably, incentives and block grants can be strong substitutes if the incentives are

sufficiently large.

         Table 3 shows that the interaction between the large incentive and the large block

grant (~á in Equation 19; Table 3, Column 1, Row 5) is positive and statistically

significant (adjusted p-value=0.072). Moreover, the magnitude of substitution implies

that the large incentive and the large block grant fully crowd each other out: the marginal

effect of the large incentive given the large block grant in Column 1 (~C + ~á = 0.058) is

not statistically different from zero (adjusted p-value = 0.65) for the probability of

anemia.35 Although this point estimate is positive, we are not able to rule out a negative

effect of the large incentive given a large block grant on anemia as predicted by Equation

(15) of the model in Section 2. Adding coefficients, the estimated total effect of the Large

Incentive and Large Grant on anemia is -0.087 (adjusted p-value: 0.177).




35
  Likewise, ~Ç + ~á , the marginal effect of increasing the grant amount given large incentives is
insignificant (~Ç + ~á = 0.051, adjusted p-value 0.742).
                                                                                                     28
       Given decreasing marginal returns to inputs in the reduction of anemia, a natural

question arising from these results is if substitution between incentives and resources is

due to (i) the biological relationship between inputs and anemia (i.e., although more

inputs are used, there is no effect on anemia because of biological constraints) or (ii)

conscious decisions by administrators. Our results for input use in Section 5.2 are

consistent with the latter interpretation (we find direct evidence of substitution in input

use). (We also note that efficacy trials of iron supplementation suggest that much larger

reductions in anemia are biologically possible (Gera et al. 2007)). Given that we find

similar results for input use in the full sample (Appendix Table 4), differences in the

effects of incentives and resources on anemia rates between the sample of children

anemic at baseline (Table 3) and the full sample (Appendix Table 3) are likely explained

by decreasing marginal returns to inputs in the reduction of anemia rather than

diminishing marginal returns to effort on the part of administrators.



5.2. Behavioral Responses Underlying Changes in Anemia

       We next examine the underlying behavioral responses to our interventions that

may have produced the changes in anemia described in Section 5.1. To do so, we focus

on actions taken by administrators and subsequent responses among students and their

parents – specifically, student consumption of iron-rich foods, direct iron

supplementation, communication between parents and schools about anemia and its

nutritional basis. For each family of outcome variables, we examine indices as described

in Section 4.5.




                                                                                              29
         Behavioral Responses Underlying Result 1: Large Incentives. We first consider

the behavioral responses underlying Result 1 – that in the presence of the small block

grant, the large incentive significantly reduced the probability of student anemia. The

results in Table 4 suggest that the large incentive led administrators to increase vitamin

supplementation and the provision of iron-rich foods (Column 1, Row 2; adjusted p-value

0.105). This increase in iron-rich foods seems driven largely by home consumption (Row

2, Column 5, adjusted p-value 0.090).36

         An interesting issue is if the increase is vitamin supplementation and provision of

iron-rich foods occurred because school administrators with large incentives spent the

block grant differently – or instead because they exerted more effort. As Figure 4 shows,

reported use of block grants for different types of nutrition interventions (vitamins, food,

fortification), and other uses is similar for incentive and non-incentives schools receiving

a small grant, suggesting that greater anemia reduction due to incentives is driven by

effort rather than differential allocation of the block grant.

         In exploring how administrators were able to increase child consumption of iron

rich foods at home, we examine contact with parents. Row 2, Column 8 of Table 4

reports a positive (but insignificant) increase in contact. However, Appendix Table 7

shows that estimates for several components of this index appear meaningful and

important, albeit insignificant at conventional levels using adjusted p-values (largely

because of the large number of hypotheses being tested (11×5=55).37 These results are


36
   Sub-indices for supplements and food (including separate indices for food at home and school) were not
explicitly specified in the pre-analysis plan. Appendix Table 9 reproduces Table 4, including additional
tests of linear combinations of coefficients estimated using Equation (19). These additional tests were not
pre-specified.
37
   Specifically, the number of individual meetings between administrators and households over the past
semester increased by 0.52 (Column 2, Row 2) – an increase of 59%; whether or not schools contacted
parents about nutrition in the past semester rose by 12 percentage points (Column 3, Row 2) – an increase
                                                                                                          30
suggestive that the large incentive led administrators to engage more regularly with

households – specifically about nutrition and anemia – which in turn appears to have

improved children’s diets at home.

         The finding that administrators responded to large incentives by engaging with

households is important for at least two related reasons. First, it demonstrates innovation

and the use of local knowledge in response to performance incentives that reward outputs

(health outcomes) as opposed to those that rigidly reward the use of pre-specified inputs

(such as vitamin consumption at school), as most performance incentives in the health

sector do (Miller and Singer Babiarz, 2014). Second, for outcomes jointly produced with

beneficiary households (like good child nutrition), it demonstrates the potential of

performance incentives that reward outputs to minimize offsetting compensatory

behavior among beneficiaries (a common finding among studies of school lunch

programs, for example) (Jacoby 2002; Leonard 2003; Kazianga et al. 2009; Das et al.

2013).38

         Behavioral Responses Underlying Result 2: Small Incentives. Second, we study

the behavioral responses underlying Result 2 – that the small incentive did not reduce

anemia prevalence. Table 4 (Column 1) shows that administrators with small incentives

did not significantly increase the provision of supplements or Food (Row 1, Columns 1 to




of 29%; and whether or not schools contacted parents about feeding children iron-rich foods rich in the past
semester rose by 10 percentage points (Column 4, Row 2) – an increase of 47%. Note that the number of
school-wide parent meetings and number of individual meetings with parents were not pre-specified to be
part of this index.
38
   We speculate that the bureaucratic environment is one reason that administrators chose to work through
households. Administrators may have viewed this strategy as a way to reduce anemia (and increase
rewards) while avoiding the risk of career harm due to possible adverse events. This career harm may also
be more severe under incentives if incentives altered perceptions of administrators’ motivation for reducing
anemia (analogous to how incentives may crowd-out effort if they alter the motives for prosocial tasks
perceived by others – Bénabou and Tirole (2006)).
                                                                                                         31
3), nor did they increase their contact with households (Column 8) (Appendix Table 7,

Row 1 also shows that none of the individual components of this index are statistically

significant (even using unadjusted p-values).

       Behavioral Responses Underlying Result 3: Large Block Grants. Third, we

examine behavioral responses to large block grants, which reduced the prevalence of

student anemia. The large block grant significantly increased the provision of

supplements and food (Table 4, Row 3, Column 1; adjusted p-value 0.004). This increase

appears due to increases in both iron supplements (Column 2, adjusted p-value 0.051)

and iron-rich food (Column 3, adjusted p-value 0.092).

       Interestingly, the large block grant may have also increased school contact with

parents – suggesting that administrators worked through households to reduce anemia

without any explicit incentives to do so. Although the estimate for the index in Table 4 is

not statistically significant (Row 3, Column 8), some estimates for index components are

larger than those for incentives. This may reflect intrinsic or prosocial motivation – or a

sense of obligation or organizational mission (Ashraf, Bandiera, and Jack, 2014).

Furthermore, although the large block grant increased communication with households,

the impact of block grants on food consumption at home is insignificant. We speculate

that this could reflect less effort (relative to administrators with incentives) devoted to

mitigating compensatory behavior by households in response to greater food provision at

school (which seems to have increased, although not significantly, with large grants).

       Behavioral Responses Underlying Result 4: Substitution between Large Incentives

and Large Block Grants. Finally, with the combination of large incentives and large

block grants, we find direct evidence of crowding-out of inputs consistent with our


                                                                                              32
anemia estimates in Table 3. Specifically, Table 4 shows that for vitamin

supplementation and consumption of iron-rich foods (both at school and at home),

estimates for the interaction between the large incentive and large block grant are

negative, implying substitution (Row 5). The interaction between the small incentive and

large grant is also negative, but smaller in magnitude and only marginally significant.

Overall, there is no evidence that resources and incentives are complements – and that at

sufficiently high levels, they are substitutes.39

5.3. Comparative Cost-Effectiveness

        Finally, we examine the comparative cost-effectiveness of each of our

intervention combinations. In doing so, we consider both the sub-sample of children

anemic at baseline and our full sample of children, and we present both “programmatic”

cost-effectiveness (direct monetary program costs to the implementing organization) and

social cost-effectiveness calculations. We calculate total social costs as the sum of: (a)

programmatic costs; (b) the cost of public funds; and (c) costs incurred by households in

responding to the interventions. From social costs we exclude incentive payments (apart

from their contribution the cost of public funds), considering these payments to be

transfers (Kremer, Miguel and Thornton 2009). Incentive payments may also not be

considered a cost, but rather simply another way of allocating salary expenditures

(Muralidharan and Sundararaman 2011). Note that while we only consider comparative

cost-effectiveness in reducing anemia prevalence (the primary outcome of the study), it is

possible that the treatments, particularly the block grant, do produce other benefits not

considered here. Moreover, if the sole purpose of transfers to schools is to reduce anemia,


39
  Given our experimental design, we are unable to rule out the possibility of complementarity at lower
levels of resources.
                                                                                                         33
there may be more cost-effective options than unrestricted block grants. Our goal is not to

conduct a full cost-benefit analysis, but rather to compare strategies for reducing anemia.

Although we find no intervention effects on standardized exam scores, even these

(together with anemia measures) may fail to fully capture intervention benefits.

         Table 5 presents these results.40 The key finding that we highlight is that although

large block grants were as effective in reducing student anemia as large incentives, they

were more expensive. First, considering full social costs and using the full sample, the

relative cost per case of anemia averted was 1,453 yuan (about $227) in the large

incentive/small block grant group – but 44% larger in the large block grant group (2,099

yuan, or about $328).41 Second, the cost-effectiveness of these two interventions relative

to each other is similar when we restrict our calculations to children anemic at baseline

(as we do in Sections 4 and 5, following our pre-analysis plan). Specifically, the large

incentive/small block grant intervention is approximately 50% more cost effective than

large block grant intervention without incentives (723 yuan, or $113, per case of anemia

averted vs. 1,447 yuan, or $226). Finally, considering calculating only programmatic

costs and using children anemic at baseline, the cost-effectiveness of the large

incentive/small block grant intervention is roughly one third of that of the large block

grant (114 yuan, or about $18 vs 331 yuan, or about $52).




40
   See table notes for further details about these calculations.
41
   These estimates exclude administrative costs of the incentive scheme (assuming these would be rolled
into existing policies as noted in the notes to Table 5). When the costs incurred for anemia testing (6.7
RMB per child in a sample of 50 children per school annually) are included in costs of the incentive
scheme, the large incentive/small block grant remains more socially cost-effective than the large block
grant at 1,848 yuan per case averted.
                                                                                                            34
6. Conclusion

       This paper provides new evidence on how public sector managers respond to the

provision of performance incentives. To the best of our knowledge, it is the first study to

analyze how behavioral responses to performance pay interact with exogenously assigned

levels of resources – a critical issue in the design of incentive systems under stringent

resource constraints (as is common in many developing countries).

       We report four key findings. First, when school administrators have fewer

budgetary resources available to them, large performance incentives (with realized

payments equivalent to a couple of months of annual salary) lead to substantial

improvement in service delivery. This seems driven by greater effort rather than changes

in budgetary resource allocation. In particular, we find evidence that school

administrators were able to innovate, working through their students’ parents to alter

nutritional practices at home. Second, smaller incentives (one tenth the size of the larger

ones) were ineffective on average and had negative effects on pro-socially motivated

administrators. Third, even absent explicit performance incentives, increasing school

administrators’ budgets led to important improvements in performance (but was

considerably less cost-effective than using performance incentives), implying the

presence of other motives – potentially including intrinsic ones – in our context.

       Fourth, we find that performance incentives and unrestricted grants are substitutes

in the production of health when incentives are large. The degree of substitution is

substantial: at the policy-relevant levels that we study, increasing the size of unrestricted

block grants completely crowds-out the effect of incentives (and vice-versa). This is an

important result for resource-poor environments in which both budgetary resources and


                                                                                            35
performance incentives are used simultaneously as policy levers for improving the

quality of public service delivery.

       There are of course limitations to this study. One is that, as with all empirical

studies, our results are not generalizable to settings beyond our study context. However,

school-based nutrition programs like the one we study are nearly ubiquitous in low- and

middle-income countries (Del Rosso and Marek 1996, Wanjirũ and Flisher 2004, Bundy

et al. 2006, Orazem et al 2008). Because a large share of children attend school in most

countries, school-based programs are widely considered to be among the most cost-

effective means of delivering child health interventions (Orazem et al 2008). We believe

that our study provides behavioral insights relevant in a variety of settings in which

managers have budgetary discretion – and increasingly also face high powered

incentives. Another is that our study estimates short-run intervention effects. Longer-run

effects may differ, particularly as administrators learn more about the relationships

among their effort, various inputs, and anemia reduction. Finally, although we find that

incentives for school administrators to reduce student anemia were effective, we also note

features that may make our setting conducive to the use of performance incentives. One

is that the rewarded outcome (anemia reduction) can be measured objectively and

reliably. Relative to other settings, frontline workers (teachers in our setting) in China

may also be relatively responsive to instruction from administrators, which might

alleviate problems of moral hazard in teams that could be more prevalent elsewhere.

       Overall, among public sector administrators in rural China, we find evidence that

appropriately designed performance incentives (sufficiently large, and absent substantial

discretionary resources) can improve public sector service delivery – and ultimately,


                                                                                             36
child outcomes. Despite the bureaucratic environment, our study suggests that

performance pay can be an effective approach to motivating public sector managers.




                                                                                     37
                                      References

Alcázar, Lorena, F. Halsey Rogers, Nazmul Chaudhury, Jeffrey Hammer, Michael

       Kremer, and Karthik Muralidharan. 2006. “Why Are Teachers Absent? Probing

       Service Delivery in Peruvian Primary Schools.” International Journal of

       Educational Research 45 (3): 117–36.

Allen, Lindsay H., Bruno De Benoist, Omar Dary, and Richard Hurrell. 2006.

       “Guidelines on Food Fortification with Micronutrients.” Geneva: World Health

       Organization.

Anderson, Michael L. 2008. “Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the Effects of

       Early Intervention: A Reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and

       Early Training Projects.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 103

       (484): 1481–95.

Ashraf, Nava, Oriana Bandiera, and B. Kelsey Jack. 2014. “No Margin, No Mission? A

       Field Experiment on Incentives for Public Service Delivery.” Journal of Public

       Economics 120 (December): 1–17.

Athey, Susan, and John Roberts. 2001. “Organizational Design: Decision Rights and

       Incentive Contracts.” The American Economic Review 91 (2): 200–205.

Balarajan, Yarlini, Usha Ramakrishnan, Emre Özaltin, Anuraj H Shankar, and SV

       Subramanian. 2011. “Anaemia in Low-Income and Middle-Income Countries.”

       The Lancet 378 (9809): 2123–35.

Bandiera, Oriana, Iwan Barankay, and Imran Rasul. 2007. “Incentives for Managers and

       Inequality among Workers: Evidence from a Firm-Level Experiment.” The

       Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (2): 729–73.


                                                                                        38
Banerjee, Abhijit, Angus Deaton, and Esther Duflo. 2004. “Health, Healthcare, and

       Economic Development: Wealth, Health, and Health Survices in Rural

       Rajisthan.” The American Economic Review 94 (2): 326–30.

Banerjee, Abhijit, and Esther Duflo. 2006. “Addressing Absence.” The Journal of

       Economic Perspectives 20 (1): 117–32.

Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Rachel Glennerster, and Dhruva Kothari. 2010.

       “Improving Immunisation Coverage in Rural India: Clustered Randomised

       Controlled Evaluation of Immunisation Campaigns with and without Incentives.”

       BMJ: British Medical Journal 340.

Basinga, Paulin, Paul Gertler, Agnes Binagwaho, Agnes Soucat, Jennifer Sturdy, and

       Christel MJ Vermeersch. 2011. “Effect on Maternal and Child Health Services in

       Rwanda of Payment to Primary Health-Care Providers for Performance: An

       Impact Evaluation.” The Lancet 377 (9775): 1421–28.

Behrman, Jere, Susan Parker, Petra Todd, and Kenneth Wolpin. 2015. “Aligning

       Learning Incentives of Students and Teachers: Results from a Social Experiment

       in Mexican High Schools.” Journal of Political Economy 123 (2): 325-364.

Bénabou, R., Tirole, J., 2006. “Incentives and Prosocial Behavior.” American Economic

       Review 96, 1652–1678.

Benhassine, Najy, Florencia Devoto, Esther Duflo, Pascaline Dupas, and Victor

       Pouliquen. 2015. “Turning a Shove into a Nudge? A “Labeled Cash Transfer” for

       Education.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7(3): 86-125.

Berendes, Sima, Peter Heywood, Sandy Oliver, and Paul Garner. 2011. “Quality of

       Private and Public Ambulatory Health Care in Low and Middle Income


                                                                                     39
       Countries: Systematic Review of Comparative Studies.” PLoS Med 8 (4):

       e1000433.

Besley, Tim, and Maitreesh Ghatak. 2007. “Reforming Public Service Delivery.” Journal

       of African Economies 16 (1): 127.

Bhutta, Zulfiqar, Jai Das, Arjumand Rizvi, Michelle Gaffey, Neff Walker, Susan Horton,

       Patrick Webb, Anna Lartey, and Robert E Black. 2013. “Evidence-Based

       Interventions for Improvement of Maternal and Child Nutrition: What Can Be

       Done and at What Cost?” The Lancet 382 (9890): 452–77.

Bloom, Erik, Elizabeth King, Indu Bhushan, Michael Kremer, David Clingingsmith,

       Benjamin Loevinsohn, Rathavuth Hong, and J. Brad Schwartz. 2006.

       “Contracting for Health: Evidence from Cambodia.” Brookings Institution Report.

Bloom, Nicholas, Benn Eifert, Aprajit Mahajan, David McKenzie, and John Roberts.

       "Does management matter? Evidence from India." The Quarterly Journal of

       Economics 128, no. 1 (2013): 1-51.

Bobonis, Gustavo, Edward Miguel, and Charu Puri-Sharma. 2006. “Anemia and School

       Participation.” Journal of Human Resources 41 (4): 692–721.

Bruhn, Miriam, and David McKenzie. 2009. “In Pursuit of Balance: Randomization in

       Practice in Development Field Experiments.” American Economic Journal:

       Applied Economics 1 (September): 200–232.

Bundy, Donald AP Sheldon Shaeffer, Matthew Jukes, Kathleen Beegle, Amaya Gillespie,

       Lesley Drake, Sueng-hee Francis Lee, et al. 2006. “School-Based Health and

       Nutrition Programs.” In Disease Control Priorities in Developing Countries,




                                                                                     40
       30:75. New York: World Bank, World Health Organization, National Institutes of

       Health.

Bundy, Donald, and Helen Guyatt. 1996. “Schools for Health: Focus on Health,

       Education and the School-Age Child.” Parasitology Today 12 (8): 1–14.

Burgess, Simon, Carol Propper, Marisa Ratto, Kessler Scholder, Stephanie von Hinke,

       and Emma Tominey. "Smarter Task Assignment or Greater Effort: the impact of

       incentives on team performance." The Economic Journal 120, no. 547 (2010):

       968-989.

Burrows, T.L., H. Truby, P.J. Morgan, R. Callister, P.S.W. Davies, and C.E. Collins.

       2013. “A Comparison and Validation of Child versus Parent Reporting of

       Children’s Energy Intake Using Food Frequency Questionnaires versus Food

       Records: Who’s an Accurate Reporter?” Clinical Nutrition 32 (4): 613–18.

Chaudhury, Nazmul, Jeffrey Hammer, Michael Kremer, Karthik Muralidharan, and F.

       Halsey Rogers. 2006. “Missing in Action: Teacher and Health Worker Absence in

       Developing Countries.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 20 (1): 91–116.

Chaudhury, Nazmul, and Jeffrey S. Hammer. 2004. “Ghost Doctors: Absenteeism in

       Rural Bangladeshi Health Facilities.” The World Bank Economic Review 18 (3):

       423–41.

Cohen, Jessica, and Pascaline Dupas. 2010. “Free Distribution or Cost-Sharing? Evidence

       from a Randomized Malaria Prevention Experiment.” The Quarterly Journal of

       Economics 125 (1): 1–45.




                                                                                       41
Dal Bó, Ernesto, Frederico Finan, and Martín A. Rossi. 2013. “Strengthening State

       Capabilities: The Role of Financial Incentives in the Call to Public Service.” The

       Quarterly Journal of Economics 128 (3): 1169–1218.

Das, Jishnu, Alaka Holla, Veena Das, Manoj Mohanan, Diana Tabak, and Brian Chan.

       2012. “In Urban And Rural India, A Standardized Patient Study Showed Low

       Levels Of Provider Training And Huge Quality Gaps.” Health Affairs 31 (12):

       2774–84.

Das, Jishnu, Stefan Dercon, James Habyarimana, Pramila Krishnan, Karthik

       Muralidharan, and Venkatesh Sundararaman. 2013. “School Inputs, Household

       Substitution, and Test Scores.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics

       5 (2): 29–57.

Das, Jishnu, and Jeffrey Hammer. 2004. “Strained Mercy: Quality of Medical Care in

       Delhi.” Economic and Political Weekly, 951–61.

———. 2007. “Money for Nothing: The Dire Straits of Medical Practice in Delhi, India.”

       Journal of Development Economics 83 (1): 1–36.

Das, Jishnu, Jeffrey Hammer, and Kenneth Leonard. 2008. “The Quality of Medical

       Advice in Low-Income Countries.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives 22 (2):

       93–114.

Del Rosso, Joy Miller, and Tonia Marek. Class action: improving school performance in

       the developing world through better health and nutrition. World Bank

       Publications, 1996.

Deci, Edward L., and Richard M. Ryan. 1985. Intrinsic Motivation and Self-

       Determination in Human Behavior. Springer Science & Business Media.


                                                                                        42
Dixit, Avinash. 2002. “Incentives and Organizations in the Public Sector: An

       Interpretative Review.” The Journal of Human Resources 37 (4): 696–727.

Duflo, Esther, Rema Hanna, and Stephen P. Ryan. 2012. “Incentives Work: Getting

       Teachers to Come to School.” The American Economic Review 102 (4): 1241–

       78.

Duflo, Esther, Michael Kremer, and Jonathan Robinson. 2011. “Nudging Farmers to Use

       Fertilizer: Theory and Experimental Evidence from Kenya.” American Economic

       Review 101 (6): 2350–90.

Du, Shufa, Fengying Zhai, Youfa Wang, and Barry M. Popkin. 2000. “Current Methods

       for Estimating Dietary Iron Bioavailability Do Not Work in China.” The Journal

       of Nutrition 130 (2): 193–98.

Education Law of the Peoples Republic of China. (Adopted at the Third Session of the

       Eighth National People's Congress on March 18, 1995, promulgated by Order

       No.45 of the President of the People's Republic of China on March 18, 1995 and

       effective as of September 1, 1995).

       http://www.china.org.cn/english/education/184669.htm#3

Eichler, Rena, and Ruth Levine. 2009. Performance Incentives for Global Health:

       Potential and Pitfalls. Center for Global Development. Brookings Institution

       Press: Baltimore, MD.

Fehr, Ernst, and Armin Falk. 2002. “Psychological Foundations of Incentives.” European

       Economic Review 46 (4–5): 687–724.

Francois, Patrick. 2000. “‘Public Service Motivation’ as an Argument for Government

       Provision.” Journal of Public Economics 78 (3): 275–99.


                                                                                       43
Francois, Patrick, and Michael Vlassopoulos. 2008. “Pro-Social Motivation and the

       Delivery of Social Services.” CESifo Economic Studies 54 (1): 22–54.

Gera, T., Sachdev, H., Nestel, P., Sachdev, S.S., 2007. Effect of Iron Supplementation on

       Haemoglobin Response in Children: Systematic Review of Randomised

       Controlled Trials: Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition 44, 468–

       486.

Gertler, Paul J., and Christel Vermeersch. 2012. “Using Performance Incentives to

       Improve Health Outcomes.” Working Paper, June.

Gibbons, Robert, and Kevin J. Murphy. 1992. “Optimal Incentive Contracts in the

       Presence of Career Concerns: Theory and Evidence.” Journal of Political

       Economy 100 (3): 468–505.

Glewwe, Paul, Nauman Ilias, and Michael Kremer. 2010. “Teacher Incentives.”

       American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2 (3): 205–27.

Gneezy, U., S. Meier, and P. Rey-Biel. 2011. “When and Why Incentives (Don’t) Work

       to Modify Behavior.” Journal of Economic Perspectives.

Gneezy, Uri, and Aldo Rustichini. 2000. “Pay Enough or Don’t Pay at All.” The

       Quarterly Journal of Economics 115 (3): 791–810.

Grant, A.M.. Does intrinsic motivation fuel the prosocial fire? Motivational synergy in

       predicting persistence, performance, and productivity. Journal of Applied

       Psychology, 93(1):48, 2008.

Hall, Brian J., and Jeffrey B. Liebman. 1998. “Are CEOs Really Paid Like Bureaucrats?”

       The Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (3): 653–91.




                                                                                          44
Hall, Brian J., and Kevin J. Murphy. 2003. “The Trouble with Stock Options.” Journal of

       Economic Perspectives 17 (3): 49–70.

Hanushek, Eric A. 2006 "School resources." Handbook of the Economics of Education 2:

       865-908.

Holmstrom, Bengt, and Joan Ricart i Costa. 1986. “Managerial Incentives and Capital

       Management.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 101 (4): 835–60.

Jacoby, Hanan G. 2002. “Is There an Intrahousehold ‘flypaper Effect’? Evidence from a

       School Feeding Programme.” The Economic Journal 112 (476): 196–221.

Jensen, Michael C., and Kevin J. Murphy. 1990. “Performance Pay and Top-

       Management Incentives.” Journal of Political Economy 98 (2): 225–64.

Jukes, Matthew C.H, Lesley J Drake, and Donald A.P Bundy. 2008. School Health,

       Nutrition and Education for All: Levelling the Playing Field. CABI.

Kamenica, Emir. 2012. “Behavioral Economics and Psychology of Incentives.” Annual

       Review of Economics 4 (1): 427–52.

Karlan, Dean, John A. List, and Eldar Shafir. 2011. “Small Matches and Charitable

       Giving: Evidence from a Natural Field Experiment.” Journal of Public Economics

       95 (5–6): 344–50.

Kazianga, Harounan, De Walque, Damien, and Harold Alderman. 2009. “Educational

       and Health Impacts of Two School Feeding Schemes: Evidence from a

       Randomized Trial in Rural Burkina Faso.” World Bank Policy Research Working

       Paper, No. 4976.

Kremer, Michael, Nazmul Chaudhury, F. Halsey Rogers, Karthik Muralidharan, and

       Jeffrey Hammer. 2005. “Teacher Absence in India: A Snapshot.” Journal of the


                                                                                      45
       European Economic Association 3 (2-3): 658–67. doi:10.1162/jeea.2005.3.2-

       3.658.

Kremer, Michael, and Edward Miguel. 2007. “The Illusion of Sustainability.” The

       Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (3): 1007–65.

Kremer, M., Miguel, E., Thornton, R., 2009. “Incentives to Learn.” The Review of

       Economics and Statistics 91(3): 437–456.

Laffont, Jean-Jacques, and Jean Tirole. 1993. A Theory of Incentives in Procurement and

       Regulation. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Lavy, Victor. 2002. “Evaluating the Effect of Teachers’ Group Performance Incentives

       on Pupil Achievement.” Journal of Political Economy 110 (6): 1286–1317.

———. 2009. “Performance Pay and Teachers’ Effort, Productivity, and Grading

       Ethics.” American Economic Review 99 (5): 1979–2011.

Lazear, Edward P. 1995. Personnel Economics. MIT Press.

———. 2000. “Performance Pay and Productivity.” The American Economic Review 90

       (5): 1346–61.

Leonard, Kenneth. L., 2003. African traditional healers and outcome-contingent contracts

       in health care. Journal of Development Economics 71, 1–22.

Leonard, Kenneth L., and Melkiory C. Masatu. 2010. “Using the Hawthorne Effect to

       Examine the Gap between a Doctor’s Best Possible Practice and Actual

       Performance.” Journal of Development Economics 93 (2): 226–34.

Lewis, Maureen. 2006. “Governance and Corruption in Public Health Care Systems.”

       Center for Global Development Working Paper 78 (January): 1–57.




                                                                                       46
Luo, Renfu, Xiaobing Wang, Linxiu Zhang, Chengfang Liu, Yaojiang Shi, Grant Miller,

       Scott Rozelle, Elaine Yu, and Reynaldo Martorell. 2011. “Alarmingly High

       Anemia Prevalence in Western China.” Southeast Asian Journal of Tropical

       Medicine and Public Health 42 (5).

Magarey, Anthea, Jane Watson, Rebecca K. Golley, Tracy Burrows, Rachel Sutherland,

       Sarah A. Mcnaughton, Elizabeth Denney-Wilson, Karen Campbell, and Clare

       Collins. 2011. “Assessing Dietary Intake in Children and Adolescents:

       Considerations and Recommendations for Obesity Research.” International

       Journal of Pediatric Obesity 6 (1): 2–11.

Martorell, Reynaldo, Melany Ascencio, Luis Tacsan, Thelma Alfaro, Melissa F. Young,

       O. Yaw Addo, Omar Dary, and Rafael Flores-Ayala. 2015. “Effectiveness

       Evaluation of the Food Fortification Program of Costa Rica: Impact on Anemia

       Prevalence and Hemoglobin Concentrations in Women and Children.” The

       American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 101 (1): 210–17.

McPherson, R.Sue, Deanna M Hoelscher, Maria Alexander, Kelley S Scanlon, and Mary

       K Serdula. 2000. “Dietary Assessment Methods among School-Aged Children:

       Validity and Reliability.” Preventive Medicine 31 (2): S11–33.

Miller, Grant, and Kimberly Singer Babiarz. 2014. “Pay-for-Performance Incentives in

       Low- and Middle-Income Country Health Programs.” Encyclopedia of Health

       Economics. pp 457–466.

Miller, Grant, Renfu Luo, Linxiu Zhang, Sean Sylvia, Yaojiang Shi, Patricia Foo, Qiran

       Zhao, Reynaldo Martorell, Alexis Medina, and Scott Rozelle. 2012.




                                                                                       47
       “Effectiveness of Provider Incentives for Anaemia Reduction in Rural China: A

       Cluster Randomised Trial.” BMJ 345: e4809.

Muralidharan, Karthik, and Venkatesh Sundararaman. 2011. “Teacher Performance Pay:

       Experimental Evidence from India.” Journal of Political Economy 119 (1): 39–77.

Murphy, Kevin J. 1999. “Chapter 38 Executive Compensation.” In Handbook of Labor

       Economics, Volume 3, Part B: 2485–2563. Elsevier.

Nath, Anusha. 2015. “Bureaucrats and Politicians: How Does Electoral Competition

       Affect Bureaucratic Performance?” Working paper 269, Institute of Economic

       Development, Boston University.

Nokes, Catherine, Claire van den Bosch, and Donald A.P. Bundy. 1998. “The Effects of

       Iron Deficiency and Anemia on Mental and Motor Performance, Educational

       Achievement, and Behavior in Children.” A Report of the INACG. Washington,

       DC: International Life Sciences Institute.

Olken, Benjamin A., Junko Onishi, and Susan Wong. 2014. “Should Aid Reward

       Performance? Evidence from a Field Experiment on Health and Education in

       Indonesia.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 6 (4): 1–34.

Orazem, P., P. Glewwe, and H. Patrinos. 2008. “The Benefits and Costs of Alternative

       Strategies to Improve Educational Outcomes.” Copenhagen Consensus 2008

       Challeng Paper: Education.

Oxman, A.D., and A. Fretheim. 2008. An Overview of Research on the Effects of

       Results-Based Financing. Nasjonalt kunnskapssenter for helsetjenesten

       (Norwegian Knowledge Centre for the Health Services).




                                                                                       48
Oyer, Paul, and Scott Schaefer. 2005. “Why Do Some Firms Give Stock Options to All

       Employees?: An Empirical Examination of Alternative Theories.” Journal of

       Financial Economics 76 (1): 99–133.

Pasricha, Sant-Rayn, Hal Drakesmith, James Black, David Hipgrave, and Beverley-Ann

       Biggs. 2013. “Control of Iron Deficiency Anemia in Low- and Middle-Income

       Countries.” Blood 121 (14): 2607–17.

Rasul, Imran, and Daniel Rogger. "Management of bureaucrats and public service

       delivery: Evidence from the nigerian civil service." The Economic Journal (2013).

Rogger, Daniel. 2014. The Causes and Consequences of Political Interference in

       Bureaucratic Decision Making: Evidence from Nigeria. Mimeo.

Salanié, Bernard. 2005. “The Economics of Contracts: A Primer.” MIT Press Books.

Singh, Prakarsh. 2011. Performance Pay and Information: Reducing Child Malnutrition

       in Urban Slums. MPRA Working Paper 29403. University Library of Munich,

       Germany.

Sylvia, S., Shi, Y., Xue, H., Tian, X., Wang, H., Liu, Q., Medina, A., Rozelle, S., 2015.

       Survey using incognito standardized patients shows poor quality care in China’s

       rural clinics. Health Policy Plan. 30, 322–333.

Taras, Howard. 2005. “Nutrition and Student Performance at School.” Journal of School

       Health 75 (6): 199–213.

Thomas, Duncan, Elizabeth Frankenberg, Jed Friedman, Jean-Pierre Habicht,

       Mohammed Hakimi, Nicholas Ingwersen, Nathan Jones, et al. 2006. “Causal

       Effect of Health on Labor Market Outcomes: Experimental Evidence.” Working

       Paper, California Center for Population Research, UCLA.


                                                                                            49
Thornton, Rebecca L. 2008. “The Demand For, and Impact Of, Learning HIV Status.”

       American Economic Review 98 (5): 1829–63.

Tonin, Mirco, and Michael Vlassopoulos. "Are public sector workers different? Cross-

       European evidence from elderly workers and retirees." IZA Journal of Labor

       Economics 4, no. 1 (2015): 11.

Wanjirũ Mũkoma, Alan J. Flisher; Evaluations of health promoting schools: a review of

       nine studies. Health Promot Int 2004; 19 (3): 357-368.

Westfall, P. and Young, S. 1993. Resampling-Based Multiple Testing, New York: Wiley

Whiting, S. The cadre evaluation system at the grass roots: The paradox of party rule. In

       Naughton B, Yang D, eds. Holding China together: Diversity and national

       integration in the post-Deng era, page 101–119. Cambridge University Press,

       New York, 2004.

World Bank. 2004. “World Development Report 2004: Making Services Work for Poor

       People.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

World Health Organization. 2001. Iron Deficiency Anemia: Assessment, Prevention, and

       Control - A Guide for Program Managers. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health

       Organization.

Xu, Longqi, Senhai Yu, Zexiao Jian, JialunYang, Changqiu Lai, Xianjun Zhang, and

       Changqian Zheng. 1995. “Soil-Transmitted Helminthiases: Nationwide Survey in

       China.” Bulletin of the World Health Organization 73 (4): 507–13.

Yip, Ray. 2001. “Iron Deficiency and Anemia.” In Nutrition and Health in Developing

       Countries, edited by Richard D. Semba and Martin W. Bloem, 327–42. Humana

       Press.


                                                                                        50
Yip, Winnie, Timothy Powell-Jackson, Wen Chen, Min Hu, Eduardo Fe, Mu Hu, Weiyan

      Jian, Ming Lu, Wei Han, and William C. Hsiao. 2014. “Capitation Combined

      With Pay-For-Performance Improves Antibiotic Prescribing Practices In Rural

      China.” Health Affairs 33 (3): 502–10.




                                                                                    51
Figure 1: Study Regions




                          52
                   Figure 2: Experimental Design



                                       300 Schools




Group A: No           Group B: Small             Group C: Large        Other Experimental
Administrator        Anemia Reduction           Anemia Reduction             Groups
  Incentive        Incentive (40 Schools)     Incentive (65 Schools)     (130 Schools)
(65 Schools)



 A1. Small Block        B1. Small Block              C1. Small Block
      Grant                  Grant                        Grant
  (32 Schools)           (20 Schools)                 (33 Schools)

 A2. Large Block        B2. Large Block              C2. Large Block
      Grant                  Grant                        Grant
  (33 Schools)           (20 Schools)                 (32 Schools)




                                                                                            53
                               Figure 3: Data Collection and Intervention Timeline

              Anemia Training,
              Grant Notification,
              Incentive Contract
              Signing and Post-
 Baseline     Training Survey                                                                           Endline
 Survey                                                                                                 Survey

                      School Administrators Contacted         School Administrators Contacted
                      to Confirm First Grant and              to Confirm Second Grant and
                      Supplement Installment                  Supplement Installment

                           Delivery of First Grant                 Delivery of Second Grant
                           Installment and                         Installment and
                           Supplements (if ordered)                Supplements (if ordered)



September   October       November      December        January     February       March        April         May
  2011                                                                                                        2012




                                                                                                                     54
              Figure 4: Reported Use of Block Grants by Category




NOTES: Figure shows mean values of reported use of block grants by experimental group from the
endline survey. Expenditure amounts are per student.




                                                                                                 55
 Figure 5: Distributions of Hemoglobin Concentration

                    Figure 5A: Small Block Grant




                    Figure 5B: Large Block Grant




NOTES: Figures plot the distributions of student level hemoglobin concentrations
(in g/L) at endline across incentive treatment groups separately by small and large
block grant groups. Endline Hb concentrations are adjusted for pre-specified
baseline control variables. Kolmogrov-Smirnov P-values for Small Anemia
Incentive vs. No Incentive are in 0.93 Panel A and 0.12 in Panel B. For Large
Anemia vs. No Incentive these are in 0.02 Panel A and 0.24 in Panel B.
                                                                                      56
Table 2: Descriptive Statistics and Balance Check
                                 No Incentive, Small
                                                                             Coefficient (standard error) on:
                                    Grant Group
                                                                                                    (Small-       (Large      Joint Test P-
                                                             Small        Large
                                     Mean         SD                                 Large Grant Incentive)X Incentive)X       value: All
                                                           Incentive    Incentive
                                                                                                 (Large Grant) (Large Grant) Coefficients=0 Observations
                                      (1)         (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)            (8)          (9)
Panel A: Child Characteristics
(1) Hemoglobin Concentration        118.446      7.541      -0.965       -1.525        -0.653          2.868           1.479           0.420           2051
    (g/L)                                                   (1.326)      (1.163)       (1.438)        (1.959)         (1.761)
(2) Age (years)                     10.514       1.153       0.046        0.077         0.113          -0.002         -0.070           0.914           2051
                                                            (0.166)      (0.125)       (0.134)        (0.242)         (0.189)
(3) 5th Grade (0/1)                  0.468         --       0.055*       -0.002         -0.003       -0.106**          0.016           0.177           2051
                                                            (0.032)      (0.029)       (0.031)        (0.050)         (0.042)
(4) Female (0/1)                     0.530         --        0.003       -0.021         -0.009         0.001           0.044           0.945           2051
                                                            (0.044)      (0.035)       (0.039)        (0.060)         (0.052)
(5) Times Consumed Meat in           3.922       4.145       -0.534     -1.293***       -0.352         -0.039          0.909          0.091*           2051
    Past Week (incl. Chicken,                               (0.618)       (0.453)      (0.709)        (0.888)         (0.790)
    Pork, Beef, Lamb)
Panel B: School Characteristics
(6) Number of Students              203.733      55.788     2.424         7.060        -1.925         21.948          9.631            0.725            167
                                                           (16.959)      (14.194)     (15.304)       (25.245)        (20.780)
(7) Has Kitchen (0/1)                0.067         --        0.135        0.068         0.054          -0.071         -0.052           0.732            167
                                                            (0.099)      (0.077)       (0.085)        (0.161)         (0.120)
(8) Student-Teacher Ratio           16.192       4.356      2.859**       1.190         0.019          -1.804          0.866           0.185            167
                                                            (1.377)      (1.216)       (1.182)        (1.928)         (1.678)
(9) Time to Furthest Village        61.167       37.570     12.294        -2.256        4.020         -7.468          4.605            0.918            167
    Served (mins)                                          (13.474)      (11.962)     (12.520)       (21.139)        (17.681)
(10) Percent Boarding Students       4.277       9.493       2.228        0.756         1.310          -0.757          -1.804          0.985            167
     (%)                                                    (3.976)      (2.899)       (3.400)        (6.204)         (5.107)
 Panel C. School Administrator Characteristics
(11) Male (0/1)                    0.967           --        -0.015       0.028         0.038          0.014          -0.070           0.606            167
                                                            (0.051)      (0.032)       (0.034)        (0.053)         (0.046)
(12) Age (years)                    39.567       7.398       1.550        1.299         1.599          -4.730          0.090           0.383            167
                                                            (2.112)      (1.837)       (1.882)        (3.022)         (2.601)
(13) Higher Education Degree         0.900         --        0.018        -0.007        -0.107         0.032           -0.007          0.558            167
     (0/1)                                                  (0.092)      (0.081)       (0.093)        (0.136)         (0.126)
(14) Experience (years)              8.333       6.227       -0.194       1.124         0.898          -2.761         -0.165           0.137            167
                                                            (1.531)      (1.786)       (1.630)        (2.210)         (2.577)
(15) Monthly Base Salary           1855.067 706.106                                                                                    0.602            167
                                                            -57.049     -110.575       -36.880       -312.491         -35.944
     (yuan)
                                                           (196.310)    (178.286)     (182.302)      (305.716)      (247.052)
NOTES. Data source: baseline survey. Table uses sample of children testing anemic at baseline. Children are considered anemic if they have an altitude-
adjusted hemoglobin concentration below 120 g/L (per WHO guidelines). The first and second columns show the mean and standard deviation in the
comparison (small grant, no incentives) group. Columns 3 through 7 show coefficients and standard errors from a regression of each characteristic on
indicators for incentive and large grant treatment group indicators and there interactions, controlling for randomization strata. Column 8 shows the p-
value from a test that coefficients are jointly zero. All tests account for clustering at the school level. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5% and




                                                                                                                                                                  57
Table 3: Impacts of School Administrator Anemia Reduction Incentives and Block Grant Size on Student Hemoglobin
Concentration and Anemia Prevalence
                                                             Anemic at Endline             Hemoglobin Concentration
Dependent Variable:
                                                               (Hb<120 g/L)                          (g/L)
                                                                     (1)                              (2)
Panel A: Impacts Relative to Comparison (No Incentive, Small Grant) Group
 (1) B1: Small Incentive                                               -0.012                                 -0.387
                                                                      (0.040)                                (1.101)
                                                                      [0.771]                                [0.726]
                                                                      {0.972}                                {0.792}
 (2) B2: Large Incentive                                                 -0.138*                              2.567
                                                                         (0.039)                             (1.044)
                                                                         [0.001]                             [0.015]
                                                                         {0.064}                             {0.285}
 (3) B3: Large Grant                                                    -0.145**                             4.205**
                                                                         (0.038)                              (1.123)
                                                                        [<0.001]                             [<0.001]
                                                                         {0.047}                              {0.045}
 (4) B4: (Small Incentive)X(Large Grant)                                  -0.042                              1.445
                                                                         (0.056)                             (1.541)
                                                                         [0.453]                             [0.350]
                                                                         {0.888}                             {0.664}
 (5) B5: (Large Incentive)X(Large Grant)                                  0.196*                              -4.580
                                                                          (0.058)                            (1.586)
                                                                         [<0.001]                            [0.004]
                                                                          {0.072}                            {0.173}
 (6) Observations                                                         1923                                1923
 (7) Mean in No Incentive, Small Grant Group                              0.364                              129.901

Panel B: P-values of Additional Comparisons
 (8) B1–B2: Effect of Large Incentive vs. Effect of Small                [0.002]                             [0.014]
      Incentive given Small Grant                                        {0.089}                             {0.285}
 (9) B2–B3: Effect of Large Incentive given Small Grant                  [0.854]                             [0.169]
     vs. Effect of Increasing Grant Amount                               {0.972}                             {0.597}
 (10) B2 + B5: Effect of Large Incentive given Large                         [0.141]                             [0.080]
      Grant                                                                  {0.650}                             {0.511}
NOTES. Table uses sample of children testing anemic at baseline. Children are considered anemic if they have an altitude-
adjusted hemoglobin concentration below 120 g/L (per WHO guidelines). Rows 1-5 in Panel A show estimated coefficients for
treatment group indicators and interactions obtained by estimating equation (19) (controlling for baseline hemoglobin
concentration, student age, student grade, student sex, number of students in the school, whether the school has a canteen,
student teacher ratio, distance to the furthest village served, percent of boarding students, whether the school has implemented
the "Free Lunch" policy, county dummy variables, and dummy variables for randomization strata). Standard errors are shown
in parentheses, unadjusted p-values are shown in square brackets and p-values adjusted for multiple inference are shown in
curly brackets. Adjusted p-values were constructed using the free step-down resampling method of Westfall and Young (1993)
with 10,000 iterations. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5% and 1% based on adjusted p-values. Panel B shows
unadjusted and adjusted p-values from tests of linear combinations of coefficients in Panel A.




                                                                                                                               58
Table 4: Child and Household Reported Receipt of Supplements and Iron-Rich Food
                                                             Index:                                                    Sub-index:                                                 Sub-index:          Sub-index:
                                                                                Sub-index:         Sub-index:                             Sub-index:             Index:
Dependent Variable:                                        Supplements                                                  Food at                                                 Information to      Information to
                                                                               Supplements           Food                                Food at Home         Information
                                                            and Food                                                     School                                                    Students          Households
                                                               (1)                  (2)                 (3)                (4)                 (5)                (6)                 (7)                (8)

 (1) B1: Small Incentive                                       0.059              0.138               -0.033              -0.08               0.072              0.027              0.062               0.045
                                                              (0.047)            (0.084)             (0.044)             (0.055)             (0.061)            (0.075)            (0.126)             (0.084)
                                                               [0.21]            [0.104]             [0.452]             [0.151]             [0.243]            [0.724]            [0.623]             [0.594]
                                                              {0.331}            {0.234}              {0.56}             {0.555}             {0.403}            {0.935}            {0.911}             {0.690}
 (2) B2: Large Incentive                                       0.114              0.158               0.073               0.039               0.187*             0.070              0.111               0.130
                                                              (0.045)            (0.080)             (0.038)             (0.048)             (0.064)            (0.072)            (0.101)             (0.084)
                                                              [0.011]            [0.052]             [0.057]             [0.427]             [0.004]            [0.332]            [0.272]             [0.124]
                                                              {0.105}            {0.234}             {0.339}             {0.601}             {0.090}            {0.800}            {0.796}             {0.430}
 (3) B3: Large Grant                                         0.190***            0.241*              0.138*               0.133               0.189              0.162              0.136               0.233
                                                              (0.041)            (0.072)             (0.047)              (0.06)             (0.075)            (0.076)            (0.107)             (0.113)
                                                             [<0.001]            [0.001]             [0.004]             [0.029]             [0.013]            [0.034]            [0.207]             [0.041]
                                                              {0.004}            {0.051}             {0.092}             {0.27}              {0.126}            {0.326}            {0.768}             {0.352}
 (4) B4: (Small Incentive)X(Large Grant)                      -0.200*             -0.269              -0.114              -0.105              -0.150             -0.037             0.190               -0.314
                                                              (0.068)            (0.116)             (0.072)              (0.09)             (0.105)            (0.123)            (0.178)             (0.148)
                                                              [0.004]            [0.021]             [0.116]             [0.243]             [0.157]            [0.766]            [0.288]             [0.036]
                                                              {0.071}            {0.186}              {0.36}             {0.601}             {0.403}            {0.935}            {0.796}             {0.352}
 (5) B5: (Large Incentive)X(Large Grant)                     -0.248**             -0.289             -0.212*              -0.209              -0.292             -0.117             -0.039              -0.356
                                                              (0.064)            (0.106)             (0.067)             (0.079)             (0.110)            (0.108)            (0.151)             (0.146)
                                                             [<0.001]            [0.007]             [0.002]             [0.009]             [0.009]            [0.282]            [0.797]             [0.016]
                                                              {0.016}            {0.124}             {0.074}             {0.16}              {0.122}            {0.800}            {0.911}             {0.271}
 (6) Observations                                              1932                 1932                1928                  1920                1927               1932               1928               1548
 (7) Mean in No Incentive, Small Grant Group                   0.031               -0.055               0.039                 0.033              -0.053             -0.040             -0.017            -0.082
NOTES. Table uses sample of children testing anemic at baseline. Children are considered anemic if they have an altitude-adjusted hemoglobin concentration below 120 g/L (per WHO guidelines). Rows 1-5
show estimated coefficients for treatment group indicators and interactions obtained by estimating equation (12) (controlling for the baseline value of the dependent variable, student age, student grade, student
sex, number of students in the school, whether the school has a canteen, student teacher ratio, distance to the furthest village served, percent of boarding students, whether the school has implemented the "Free
Lunch" policy, county dummy variables, and dummy variables for randomization strata). The dependent variable in each regression is a summary index constructed using the GLS weighting procedure in
Anderson (2008). Estimates for the individual components of each index are shown in Appendix Tables 5 and 6. Standard errors are shown in parentheses, unadjusted p-values are shown in square brackets
and p-values adjusted for multiple inference are shown in curly brackets. Adjusted p-values were constructed using the free step-down resampling method of Westfall and Young (1993) with 10,000 iterations.
*, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5% and 1%. based on adjusted p-values.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 59
Table 5: Comparative Cost Effectiveness Calculations
                                     Incremental Amount Relative to Comparison (Small Block Grant, No Incentives) Group
                                                    Small Block
                               Small Block Grant,  Grant, Large      Large Block Grant, Large Block Grant, Large Block Grant,
                                Small Incentives     Incentives        No Incentives     Small Incentives   Large Incentives
Panel A: Costs
Programmatic Costs
(1) Block Grant                        0.0                 0.0                 48.0                48.0                 48.0
(2) Incentive Payments                 1.1                15.7                 0.0                 1.4                  17.5
Cost of Public Funds
(3) Cost of Public Funds               0.3                 4.7                 14.4                14.8                 19.7
Costs to Households
(4) Full Sample                       45.5                60.7                 90.8                38.3                 62.7
(5) Anemic Sample                     34.6                95.0                147.5                26.6                 49.4
Total Costs
(6) Programmatic                     1.1                   15.7                48.0                 49.4                 65.5
(7) Social - Full Sample            45.8                   65.4               153.2                101.1                130.3
(8) Social - Anemic Sample          34.9                   99.7               209.9                 89.5                117.0
Panel B: Anemia Reduction (Percentage Point Reduction)
 (9) Full Sample                   0.028                0.045                 0.073                0.074                0.032
(10) Anemic Sample                    0.012             0.138                 0.145                0.199                0.087
Panel C: Cost Effectiveness (Cost of Averting One Anemia Case)
Full Sample
(11) Programmatic                     N.S.                349.6               657.5                668.1               2,047.4
(12) Social                           N.S.               1,452.7             2,098.6              1,366.1              4,072.4
Anemic Sample
(13) Programmatic                      N.S.                114.0                331.0               248.4                 753.1
(14) Social                            N.S.                722.5               1,447.3              449.6                1,345.1
NOTES. All costs in renminbi per child (exchange rate as of Sept. 2012 was 6.3 USD/RMB). Costs of the information intervention
and anemia testing are excluded as these are constant across treatments. The cost of the information intervention was 1,020 yuan
per school and the cost of anemia testing was 6.7 yuan per child. Additional administrative costs are assumed to be negligible as
administration of block grants could be built into the administration of other school finances, administrative costs of rewards into
administration of existing school administrator evaluation policies and policies, and monitoring of anemia into existing policies
stipulating annual checkups for school children. In the absence of good estimates for China (and other developing countries), the
cost of public funds is assumed to be 0.3 based on estimates for the US (Ballard, Shoven and Whalley, 1985). Social costs include
costs incurred by households and exclude incentive payments (except the deadweight loss to taxation) considering them a transfer.
Costs to households include costs of purchasing additional food and additional time spent attending parent meetings. Estimates for
additional food costs are based on estimates for impact on meat, vegetable, and fruit consumption at home reported in Appendix
Tables 5 & 6. Reported increases in times foods were consumed in the past week are assumed to be constant across all 24 weeks of
the program. Serving sizes are assumed to be half of the recommended daily consumption (25g of meat, 150g of vegetables and
100g of fruit). Food prices are based on prices in local markets as reported by the school accountant at baseline. Time spent in
parent meetings is based on estimates in Appendix Tables 7 & 8. One meeting is assumed to have an opportunity cost of 60 yuan
(approximately half of local daily wages). Anemia reduction estimates in Panel B are calculated from estimates in Table 2 and
Appendix Table 3. Effects not significant (N.S.) for the Small Block Grant, No Incentives intervention.




                                                                                                                                       60
   Appendices
For Online Publication
                                                Appendix A: Appendix Tables


Appendix Table 1: Descriptive Statistics and Balance Check (Full sample)
                                No Incentive,
                                 Small Grant                        Coefficient (standard error) on:
                                    Group
                                                                                            (Small-       (Large      Joint Test P-
                                                     Small        Large
                                Mean       SD                              Large Grant Incentive)X Incentive)X         value: All
                                                   Incentive Incentive
                                                                                         (Large Grant) (Large Grant) Coefficients=0 Observations
                                 (1)       (2)        (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)           (7)            (8)          (9)

Panel A: Child Characteristics
(1) Hemoglobin Concentration 134.191 12.912              -0.912       -1.192       0.514          0.140          -0.021          0.541           8398
    (g/L)                                               (1.127)      (1.009)      (1.028)        (1.501)        (1.476)
(2) Anemic (0/1)                   0.233    0.423        0.024        0.017        -0.015         -0.001         0.003           0.222           8398
                                                        (0.017)      (0.019)      (0.018)        (0.024)        (0.025)
(3) Age (years)                   10.713    1.173       -0.172       -0.041       -0.030         0.352*         -0.013           0.379           8398
                                                        (0.128)      (0.111)      (0.106)        (0.185)        (0.144)
(4) 5th Grade (0/1)                0.531    0.499       -0.002        0.001       -0.005          0.007          0.001           0.941           8398
                                                        (0.006)      (0.006)      (0.008)        (0.011)        (0.010)
(5) Female (0/1)                   0.485    0.500        0.003       -0.008       -0.009          0.024          0.010           0.808           8398
                                                        (0.020)      (0.017)      (0.019)        (0.030)        (0.025)
(6) Times Consumed Meat in         3.826    3.966        -0.194    -1.174***       -0.402         -0.432        0.962*         0.002***          8398
    Past Week (incl. Chicken,                           (0.435)      (0.316)      (0.442)        (0.604)        (0.550)
    Pork, Beef, Lamb)
Panel B: School Characteristics
(7) Number of Students          207.094 64.823          -1.276       3.623         -5.396        25.344          12.357          0.797            170
                                                       (17.567)     (14.959)      (16.043)      (25.554)        (20.856)
(8) Has Kitchen (0/1)              0.063    0.246        0.141        0.074        0.059          -0.075         -0.068          0.681            170
                                                        (0.101)      (0.075)      (0.083)        (0.162)        (0.120)
(9) Student-Teacher Ratio         16.228    4.227       2.538*        0.893        -0.286         -1.506         1.064           0.257            170
                                                        (1.354)      (1.210)      (1.159)        (1.911)        (1.657)
(10) Time to Furthest Village     62.031 36.695         12.218       -2.281         3.878        -7.346          3.764           0.921            170
     Served (mins)                                     (13.109)     (11.564)      (12.945)      (21.467)        (17.794)
(11) Percent Boarding Students     5.327   11.404        1.511        0.106        0.610          -0.079         -1.611          0.991            170
     (%)                                                (4.112)      (3.006)      (3.492)        (6.293)        (5.179)
 Panel C. School Administrator Characteristics
(12) Male (0/1)                   0.938 0.246            0.015        0.056        0.065          -0.012        -0.093*          0.488            170
                                                        (0.058)      (0.041)      (0.042)        (0.059)        (0.051)
(13) Age (years)                  39.313    7.253        1.883        1.620        1.892         -5.022*         -0.399          0.351            170
                                                        (2.047)      (1.777)      (1.831)        (2.957)        (2.560)
(14) Higher Education Degree       0.906    0.296        0.002       -0.022       -0.122          0.047          0.010           0.506            170
     (0/1)                                              (0.089)      (0.078)      (0.090)        (0.133)        (0.122)
(15) Experience (years)            8.031    6.141        -0.242       1.088        0.838          -2.706         -0.310          0.141            170
                                                        (1.472)      (1.729)      (1.569)        (2.156)        (2.520)
(16) Monthly Base Salary         1854.750692.449        -48.275      -103.680     -26.684        -321.983       -17.503          0.641            170
     (yuan)                                            (190.039)    (175.240)    (178.777)      (304.280)      (242.283)
NOTES. Data source: baseline survey. Table uses full sample of children tested for hemoglobin concentration. Children are considered anemic if they
have an altitude-adjusted hemoglobin concentration below 120 g/L (per WHO guidelines). The first and second columns show the mean and standard
deviation in the comparison (small grant, no incentives) group. Columns 3 through 7 show coefficients and standard errors from a regression of each
characteristic on indicators for incentive and large grant treatment group indicators and there interactions, controlling for randomization strata. Column
8 shows p-values from a test that coefficients are jointly zero. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5% and 1%.




                                                                            1
Appendix Table 2: Attrition

Dependent Variable:                                   Hb Measurement Missing at      Household Survey Missing at
                                                              Endline                         Endline
                                                          (1)          (2)               (3)           (4)
Panel A: Treatments and Interactions
  (1) B1: Small Incentive                                0.014          0.017            0.164          0.176
                                                        (0.019)        (0.020)          (0.100)        (0.099)
                                                        [0.473]        [0.404]          [0.102]        [0.078]
                                                        {0.892}        {0.851}          {0.546}        {0.529}
 (2)    B2: Large Incentive                              -0.027         -0.027           0.124          0.133
                                                        (0.017)        (0.017)          (0.081)        (0.081)
                                                        [0.127]        [0.117]          [0.126]        [0.102]
                                                        {0.545}        {0.546}          {0.546}        {0.529}
 (3)    B3: Large Grant                                  0.010          0.009            0.019          0.042
                                                        (0.023)        (0.022)          (0.098)        (0.104)
                                                        [0.647]        [0.703]          [0.846]        [0.689]
                                                        {0.893}        {0.932}          {0.890}        {0.931}
 (4)    B4: (Small Incentive)X(Large Grant)              -0.059         -0.063           -0.233         -0.265
                                                        (0.031)        (0.031)          (0.139)        (0.149)
                                                        [0.056]        [0.042]          [0.095]        [0.077]
                                                        {0.400}        {0.372}          {0.546}        {0.529}
 (5)    B5: (Large Incentive)X(Large Grant)              -0.007         0.000            0.069          0.044
                                                        (0.031)        (0.031)          (0.140)        (0.139)
                                                        [0.835]        [0.992]          [0.626]        [0.750]
                                                        {0.893}        {0.994}          {0.890}        {0.931}
Panel B: Child Characteristics
  (6) Baseline Hemoglobin Concentration (g/L)            -0.000         -0.000           0.001           0.001
                                                        (0.001)        (0.001)          (0.001)         (0.001)
 (7)    Age (years)                                                    0.013*                            -0.010
                                                                       (0.007)                          (0.009)
 (8)    5th Grade (0/1)                                                 -0.011                           0.007
                                                                       (0.011)                          (0.023)
 (9)    Female (0/1)                                                    -0.018                           -0.019
                                                                       (0.013)                          (0.014)
Panel C: School Characteristics
 (10) Number of Students                                                -0.000                           0.001
                                                                       (0.000)                          (0.001)
 (11)   Has Kitchen (0/1)                                               0.006                            0.143
                                                                       (0.025)                          (0.112)
 (12)   Student-Teacher Ratio                                           -0.001                           -0.006
                                                                       (0.002)                          (0.007)
 (13)   Time to Furthest Village Served (mins)                          -0.000                           0.000
                                                                       (0.000)                          (0.001)
 (14)   Percent Boarding Students (%)                                   -0.000                           -0.003
                                                                       (0.001)                          (0.003)
 (15)   "Free Lunch" Policy School                                      0.019                            -0.167
                                                                       (0.056)                          (0.258)
 (16)   Constant                                         0.118          0.027            -0.095          0.117
                                                        (0.103)        (0.124)          (0.243)         (0.412)

  (17) Observations                                         2051          2051             1923           1923
  (18) R-squared                                           0.046         0.051            0.334          0.347
  (19) Mean in No Incentive, Small Grant Group                    0.087                           0.154
NOTES. Table uses sample of children testing anemic at baseline. Children are considered anemic if they have an
altitude-adjusted hemoglobin concentration below 120 g/L (per WHO guidelines). The dependent variable in
columns 1 and 2 is a dummy variable indicating missing hemoglobin measurements at endline. The dependent
variable in columns 3 and 4 is a dummy variable indicating missing household forms at endline conditional on a
child's hemoglobin measurement being non-missing. In addition to what is shown regressions also control for
county and randomization strata fixed effects. Standard errors are shown in parentheses, unadjusted p-values are
shown in square brackets and p-values adjusted for multiple inference are shown in curly brackets. Adjusted p-
                                                           2
values were constructed using the free step-down resampling method of Westfall and Young (1993) with 10,000
iterations. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5% and 1%. based on adjusted p-values.
Appendix Table 3: Effects of School Administrator Anemia Reduction Incentives and Block Grant Size on Student
Hemoglobin Concentration and Anemia Prevalence (Full Sample)
                                                           Anemic at Endline            Hemoglobin Concentration
Dependent Variable:
                                                             (Hb<120 g/L)                          (g/L)
                                                                  (1)                               (2)

Panel A: Treatment Effect Regressions
 (1) B1: Small Incentive                                                -0.028                               1.054
                                                                       (0.020)                              (0.987)
                                                                       [0.163]                              [0.287]
                                                                       {0.587}                              {0.747}
 (2) B2: Large Incentive                                                -0.045                               0.918
                                                                       (0.022)                              (0.946)
                                                                       [0.046]                              [0.333]
                                                                       {0.373}                              {0.767}
 (3) B3: Large Grant                                                   -0.073**                              2.872
                                                                        (0.021)                             (0.989)
                                                                        [0.001]                             [0.004]
                                                                        {0.049}                             {0.117}
 (4) B4: (Small Incentive)X(Large Grant)                                0.027                                -0.857
                                                                       (0.027)                              (1.340)
                                                                       [0.321]                              [0.523]
                                                                       {0.647}                              {0.829}
 (5) B5: (Large Incentive)X(Large Grant)                                0.086                                -3.312
                                                                       (0.031)                              (1.404)
                                                                       [0.006]                              [0.019]
                                                                       {0.149}                              {0.235}
 (6) Observations                                                       7945                                 7945
 (7) Mean in No Incentive, Small Grant Group                            0.176                               136.334

Panel B: P-values for Additional Hypotheses
 (8) B1–B2: Effect of Large Incentive vs. Effect of                    [0.383]                              [0.884]
      Small Incentive given Small Grant                                {0.647}                              {0.908}
 (9) B2–B3: Effect of Large Incentive given Small                      [0.146]                              [0.036]
     Grant vs. Effect of Increasing Grant Amount                       {0.587}                              {0.301}
 (10) B2 + B5: Effect of Large Incentive given Large                       [0.038]                            [0.013]
       Grant                                                               {0.373}                            {0.209}
NOTES. Table uses full sample of children tested for hemoglobin concentration. Rows 1-5 in Panel A show estimated
coefficients for treatment group indicators and interactions obtained by estimating equation (12) (controlling for baseline
hemoglobin concentration, student age, student grade, student sex, number of students in the school, whether the school has
a canteen, student teacher ratio, distance to the furthest village served, percent of boarding students, whether the school has
implemented the "Free Lunch" policy, county dummy variables, and dummy variables for randomization strata). Standard
errors are shown in parentheses, unadjusted p-values are shown in square brackets and p-values adjusted for multiple
inference are shown in curly brackets. Adjusted p-values were constructed using the free step-down resampling method of
Westfall and Young (1993) with 10,000 iterations. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5% and 1%. based on
adjusted p-values. Panel B shows unadjusted and adjusted p-values from tests between coefficients.




                                                               3
Appendix Table 4: Child and Household Reported Receipt of Supplements and Iron-Rich Food (Full Sample)
                                                             Index:                                                    Sub-index:                                                Sub-index:          Sub-index:
                                                                                Sub-index:         Sub-index:                             Sub-index:            Index:
Dependent Variable:                                        Supplements                                                  Food at                                                Information to      Information to
                                                                               Supplements           Food                                Food at Home        Information
                                                            and Food                                                     School                                                   Students          Households
                                                               (1)                  (2)                (3)                 (4)                (5)                 (6)                (7)                (8)

 (1) B1: Small Incentive                                      0.109*             0.191*               0.013              -0.039              0.126              0.079               0.197               -0.002
                                                              (0.045)            (0.072)             (0.037)            (0.049)             (0.049)            (0.069)             (0.116)             (0.076)
                                                              [0.015]            [0.008]             [0.722]            [0.429]             [0.011]            [0.250]             [0.092]             [0.984]
                                                              {0.062}            {0.083}             {0.771}            {0.854}             {0.126}            {0.504}             {0.390}             {0.986}
 (2) B2: Large Incentive                                      0.118*             0.191*               0.045              0.021               0.130              0.116               0.199               0.131
                                                              (0.044)            (0.075)             (0.039)            (0.053)             (0.047)            (0.065)             (0.086)             (0.084)
                                                              [0.008]            [0.011]             [0.249]            [0.695]             [0.007]            [0.073]             [0.022]             [0.120]
                                                              {0.062}            {0.083}             {0.665}            {0.854}             {0.107}            {0.394}             {0.204}             {0.519}
 (3) B3: Large Grant                                         0.173***           0.247***              0.094              0.107               0.100             0.197*               0.226               0.187
                                                              (0.041)            (0.060)             (0.047)            (0.064)             (0.053)            (0.067)             (0.095)             (0.097)
                                                             [<0.001]           [<0.001]             [0.049]            [0.097]             [0.062]            [0.004]             [0.019]             [0.055]
                                                              {0.005}            {0.008}             {0.346}            {0.503}             {0.293}            {0.079}             {0.204}             {0.410}
 (4) B4: (Small Incentive)X(Large Grant)                     -0.226**           -0.364**              -0.066             -0.056              -0.101             -0.123              -0.037              -0.216
                                                              (0.061)            (0.100)             (0.057)            (0.077)             (0.076)            (0.113)             (0.165)             (0.132)
                                                             [<0.001]           [<0.001]             [0.249]            [0.464]             [0.187]            [0.280]             [0.822]             [0.105]
                                                              {0.013}            {0.016}             {0.665}            {0.854}             {0.443}            {0.504}             {0.859}             {0.519}
 (5) B5: (Large Incentive)X(Large Grant)                      -0.179*            -0.259*              -0.101             -0.13               -0.106             -0.139              -0.158              -0.200
                                                              (0.062)            (0.095)             (0.067)            (0.086)             (0.077)            (0.094)             (0.129)             (0.142)
                                                              [0.004]            [0.007]             [0.129]            [0.130]             [0.169]            [0.144]             [0.221]             [0.161]
                                                              {0.053}            {0.083}             {0.531}            {0.535}             {0.443}            {0.490}             {0.526}             {0.519}
 (6) Observations                                                7965                7959                7949               7894               7947                7961                 7943                 6484
 (7) Mean in No Incentive, Small Grant Group                    0.0137              -0.118              0.043              0.034               0.008              -0.108               -0.152              -0.084
NOTES. Table uses full sample of children tested for hemoglobin concentration. Rows 1-5 show estimated coefficients for treatment group indicators and interactions obtained by estimating equation (12)
(controlling for the baseline value of the dependent variable, student age, student grade, student sex, number of students in the school, whether the school has a canteen, student teacher ratio, distance to the
furthest village served, percent of boarding students, whether the school has implemented the "Free Lunch" policy, county dummy variables, and dummy variables for randomization strata). The dependent
variable in each regression is a summary index constructed using the GLS weighting procedure in Anderson (2008). Estimates for the individual components of each index are shown in Appendix Tables 5 and
6. Standard errors are shown in parentheses, unadjusted p-values are shown in square brackets and p-values adjusted for multiple inference are shown in curly brackets. Adjusted p-values were constructed
using the free step-down resampling method of Westfall and Young (1993) with 10,000 iterations. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5% and 1% based on adjusted p-values.




                                                                                                         4
Appendix Table 5: Child and Household Reported Receipt of Supplements and Iron-Rich Food, Index Components
Index:                                                                                           Supplements                                                                                                                               Food
Sub-index:                                                                                                                                                                                           Food at School                                              Food at Home
                                                                                                                          School
                                                                                                                         provided
                                                             Household            School            Times per         supplements to                                                                      Times                                                      Times
                                                              received           provided              week             take home         All classmates        Days given                              consumed                                                   consumed
Dependent Variable:
                                                          supplements to      supplements to       supplements           over the              take            supplements           Times                green               Times                  Times           green               Times
                                                           give to child         children         distributed by         weekend          supplements           last month         consumed            vegetables at       consumed                consumed       vegetables at        consumed
                                                            (Household            (Child          school (Child           (Child              (Child              (Child         meat at school       school in past     fruit in school          meat at home    home in past       fruit at home
                                                             Response)          Response)           Response)           Response)          Response)            Response)         in past week            week            in past week            in past week       week             in past week
                                                                 (1)                (2)                 (3)                 (4)                 (5)                  (6)               (7)                 (8)                  (9)                   (10)            (11)                (12)

 (1) B1: Small Incentive                                       0.042              0.200               0.805               -0.025              -0.314              0.030               0.044              -0.564                -0.18                 0.413           0.616               0.455
                                                              (0.101)            (0.065)             (0.439)             (0.075)             (0.522)             (1.774)             (0.197)               (0.3)               (0.2)                (0.403)         (0.711)             (0.562)
                                                              [0.679]            [0.002]             [0.068]             [0.738]             [0.549]             [0.987]             [0.825]             [0.062]             [0.371]                [0.307]         [0.387]             [0.419]
                                                              {1.000}            {0.569}             {0.995}             {1.000}             {1.000}             {1.000}             {0.949}              {0.43}              {0.73}                {1.000}         {1.000}             {1.000}

 (2) B2: Large Incentive                                       0.262               0.179              0.109               -0.084              -0.490              -0.350              0.201               0.153              -0.005                  1.120           1.393               0.988
                                                              (0.086)             (0.061)            (0.444)             (0.057)             (0.426)             (1.759)             (0.186)             (0.242)            (0.169)                 (0.364)         (0.705)             (0.563)
                                                              [0.003]             [0.004]            [0.806]             [0.147]             [0.252]             [0.843]              [0.28]             [0.528]            [0.975]                 [0.002]         [0.050]             [0.081]
                                                              {0.596}             {0.661}            {1.000}             {1.000}             {1.000}             {1.000}             {0.811}             {0.858}            {0.982}                 {0.580}         {0.988}             {0.996}

 (3) B3: Large Grant                                           0.108               0.192              0.300               0.045               -0.675              2.732               0.105               0.502              0.488                   1.048           1.634               1.039
                                                              (0.093)             (0.075)            (0.435)             (0.066)             (0.435)             (1.877)             (0.199)             (0.298)            (0.211)                 (0.393)         (0.831)             (0.651)
                                                              [0.250]             [0.012]            [0.491]             [0.499]             [0.123]             [0.147]             [0.598]             [0.094]            [0.022]                 [0.008]         [0.051]             [0.113]
                                                              {1.000}             {0.866}            {1.000}             {1.000}             {1.000}             {1.000}             {0.949}              {0.43}            {0.222}                 {0.801}         {0.988}             {0.999}

 (4) B4: (Small Incentive)X(Large Grant)                       -0.073             -0.445*             -1.310              -0.042              0.265               1.084               0.097               0.05               -0.794                  -0.975          -1.160              -0.853
                                                              (0.142)             (0.107)            (0.681)             (0.081)             (0.727)             (2.751)             (0.289)             (0.442)            (0.309)                 (0.569)         (1.118)             (0.970)
                                                              [0.607]             [0.000]            [0.056]             [0.599]             [0.716]             [0.694]             [0.738]             [0.911]            [0.011]                 [0.088]         [0.301]             [0.381]
                                                              {1.000}             {0.094}            {0.991}             {1.000}             {1.000}             {1.000}             {0.949}             {0.933}            {0.173}                 {0.997}         {1.000}             {1.000}

 (5) B5: (Large Incentive)X(Large Grant)                       -0.388              -0.332             -0.398              0.025               0.383               0.117               -0.455             -0.723              -0.485                  -1.620          -1.721              -2.146
                                                              (0.140)             (0.093)            (0.621)             (0.080)             (0.609)             (2.517)             (0.253)             (0.392)             (0.293)                (0.598)         (1.136)             (0.892)
                                                              [0.006]             [0.000]            [0.522]             [0.753]             [0.530]             [0.963]             [0.074]             [0.067]               [0.1]                [0.007]         [0.132]             [0.017]
                                                              {0.754}             {0.283}            {1.000}             {1.000}             {1.000}             {1.000}             {0.468}              {0.43}              {0.46}                {0.781}         {0.999}             {0.910}

  (6) Observations                                              1496               1909                1920                1910                1842                1920               1884                1889                 1883                  1924                 1924                1925
 (7) Mean in No Incentive, Small Grant Group                   0.500               0.842               3.216               0.152               1.506              8.915               0.674               1.137               1.089                 3.837                11.519              7.414
NOTES. Table uses sample of children testing anemic at baseline. Children are considered anemic if they have an altitude-adjusted hemoglobin concentration below 120 g/L (per WHO guidelines). Rows 1-5 show estimated coefficients for treatment group indicators and interactions
obtained by estimating equation (12) (controlling for the baseline value of the dependent variable, student age, student grade, student sex, number of students in the school, whether the school has a canteen, student teacher ratio, distance to the furthest village served, percent of boarding
students, whether the school has implemented the "Free Lunch" policy, county dummy variables, and dummy variables for randomization strata). Standard errors are shown in parentheses, unadjusted p-values are shown in square brackets and p-values adjusted for multiple inference across
all tests corresponding to each index are shown in curly brackets. Adjusted p-values were constructed using the free step-down resampling method of Westfall and Young (1993) with 10,000 iterations. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5% and 1% based on adjusted p-values.




                                                                                                                                                 5
Appendix Table 6: Child and Household Reported Receipt of Supplements and Iron-Rich Food, Index Components, Full Sample
Index:                                                                                             Supplements                                                                                                                           Food
Sub-index:                                                                                                                                                                                         Food at School                                              Food at Home
                                                                                                               School
                                                                                                             provided
                                                       Household          School           Times per      supplements to                                                                                Times                                                     Times
                                                        received         provided            week           take home                    All classmates       Days given                              consumed                                                  consumed
Dependent Variable:
                                                    supplements to    supplements to     supplements         over the                         take           supplements            Times               green               Times                  Times          green               Times
                                                     give to child       children       distributed by       weekend                     supplements          last month          consumed           vegetables at       consumed                consumed      vegetables at        consumed
                                                      (Household          (Child        school (Child          (Child                        (Child             (Child          meat at school      school in past     fruit in school          meat at home   home in past       fruit at home
                                                       Response)        Response)         Response)         Response)                     Response)           Response)          in past week           week            in past week            in past week      week             in past week
                                                           (1)              (2)               (3)                (4)                           (5)                 (6)                (7)                (8)                  (9)                    (10           (11)                (12)

 (1) B1: Small Incentive                                      0.049               0.168              0.751               0.099               -0.105             2.194               0.055               -0.229             -0.144                  0.686          0.824               0.915
                                                             (0.092)             (0.061)            (0.441)             (0.057)             (0.424)            (1.555)             (0.204)             (0.302)            (0.198)                 (0.309)        (0.492)             (0.398)
                                                             [0.598]             [0.006]            [0.090]             [0.084]             [0.804]            [0.160]             [0.787]              [0.45]            [0.469]                 [0.028]        [0.096]             [0.023]
                                                             {1.000}             {0.646}            {0.993}             {0.993}             {1.000}            {0.999}             {0.985}             {0.962}            {0.681}                 {0.912}        {0.993}             {0.887}

 (2) B2: Large Incentive                                      0.215               0.128              0.427               -0.022              -0.480             1.596               0.328               -0.019             -0.165                  0.732          0.708               0.799
                                                             (0.066)             (0.066)            (0.477)             (0.047)             (0.304)            (1.791)             (0.211)             (0.239)            (0.175)                 (0.271)        (0.464)             (0.398)
                                                             [0.001]             [0.052]            [0.372]             [0.634]             [0.116]            [0.374]             [0.123]             [0.937]            [0.346]                 [0.008]        [0.129]             [0.046]
                                                             {0.344}             {0.976}            {1.000}             {1.000}             {0.998}            {1.000}             {0.558}             {0.999}            {0.681}                 {0.699}        {0.997}             {0.965}

 (3) B3: Large Grant                                          0.161               0.153              0.567               0.071               -0.273             4.394               0.011               0.222              0.502                   0.565          0.062               1.053
                                                             (0.077)             (0.065)            (0.418)             (0.048)             (0.336)            (1.758)             (0.248)             (0.342)            (0.233)                 (0.310)        (0.521)             (0.438)
                                                             [0.038]             [0.019]            [0.177]             [0.136]             [0.417]            [0.013]             [0.965]             [0.516]            [0.032]                 [0.070]        [0.905]             [0.017]
                                                             {0.955}             {0.866}            {1.000}             {0.998}             {1.000}            {0.822}             {0.985}             {0.962}             {0.27}                 {0.987}        {1.000}             {0.851}

 (4) B4: (Small Incentive)X(Large Grant)                      -0.168             -0.402*             -1.452              -0.192              -0.021             -2.005              0.103               0.066              -0.482                  -0.633         -0.179              -0.991
                                                             (0.121)             (0.098)            (0.602)             (0.069)             (0.532)            (2.498)             (0.315)             (0.426)            (0.331)                 (0.452)        (0.745)             (0.637)
                                                             [0.166]             [0.000]            [0.017]             [0.006]             [0.969]            [0.423]             [0.743]             [0.878]            [0.147]                 [0.163]        [0.810]             [0.122]
                                                             {0.999}             {0.063}            {0.857}             {0.646}             {1.000}            {1.000}             {0.985}             {0.999}            {0.538}                 {0.999}        {1.000}             {0.997}

 (5) B5: (Large Incentive)X(Large Grant)                      -0.272              -0.263             -0.641              -0.033              0.032              -2.117              -0.382              0.026              -0.435                  -0.637         0.529               -1.359
                                                             (0.110)             (0.088)            (0.626)             (0.067)             (0.421)            (2.600)             (0.321)             (0.408)            (0.282)                 (0.456)        (0.743)             (0.578)
                                                             [0.014]             [0.003]            [0.307]             [0.629]             [0.939]            [0.417]             [0.235]              [0.95]            [0.124]                 [0.164]        [0.478]             [0.020]
                                                             {0.833}             {0.499}            {1.000}             {1.000}             {1.000}            {1.000}             {0.709}             {0.999}            {0.538}                 {0.999}        {1.000}             {0.869}

 (6) Observations                                               6271               7853                 7902                 7829                  7650               7857                7740                7776              7772               7944             7944               7938
 (7) Mean in No Incentive, Small Grant Group                   0.429               0.799               2.900                 0.132                 1.245              6.839              0.879                0.937             1.029              4.118           12.336              7.610
NOTES. Table uses full sample of children tested for hemoglobin concentration. Rows 1-5 show estimated coefficients for treatment group indicators and interactions obtained by estimating equation (12) (controlling for the baseline value of the dependent variable, student age, student
grade, student sex, number of students in the school, whether the school has a canteen, student teacher ratio, distance to the furthest village served, percent of boarding students, whether the school has implemented the "Free Lunch" policy, county dummy variables, and dummy variables
for randomization strata). Standard errors are shown in parentheses, unadjusted p-values are shown in square brackets and p-values adjusted for multiple inference across all tests corresponding to each index are shown in curly brackets. Adjusted p-values were constructed using the free
step-down resampling method of Westfall and Young (1993) with 10,000 iterations. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5% and 1% based on adjusted p-values.




                                                                                                                                               6
Appendix Table 7: Nutritional Information to Students and Households, Index Components
Index:                                                                                 Information to Households                                                                                    Information to Students
                                                                                                                                                       Parent
                                                           Number of          Number of           School                                             correctly
                                                          school-wide         individual        contacted                                            identifies           School        Times school                                             School
                                                              parent        meetings with       household         Household                        foods that can       provided         spoke with                              Student       provided
Dependent Variable:                                          meetings         teacher or      about student      told to give    Parent reports       prevent          nutritional     students about                            reports    information to
                                                          attended this     administrator     nutrition this    student foods     knowing of       anemia (iron-     information to      nutrition in    Students told        knowing of      students on
                                                             semester       this semester        semester        rich in iron       anemia          rich foods)           student       past semester     to eat meat            anemia          anemia
                                                          (Household         (Household        (Household        (Household       (Household        (Household           (Student          (Student         (Student            (Student        (Student
                                                            response)         response)         response)         response)        response)         response)          reported)         reported)        reported)           reported)       reported)
                                                               (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)             (5)               (6)                  (7)              (8)              (9)                 (10)           (11)

 (1) B1: Small Incentive                                      0.013             0.135             -0.010           0.030             0.059             -0.020            0.031             0.155             -0.086             0.026           0.177
                                                             (0.206)           (0.189)           (0.077)          (0.067)           (0.045)           (0.199)           (0.070)           (0.474)           (0.057)            (0.082)         (0.087)
                                                             [0.949]           [0.477]           [0.893]          [0.651]           [0.198]           [0.920]           [0.653]           [0.744]           [0.132]            [0.757]         [0.043]
                                                             {1.000}           {1.000}           {1.000}          {1.000}           {0.995}           {1.000}           {1.000}           {1.000}           {0.975}            {1.000}         {0.833}

 (2) B2: Large Incentive                                      0.021             0.520             0.122            0.107             -0.045            0.294             0.029             0.039             0.005              0.048           0.194
                                                             (0.198)           (0.231)           (0.066)          (0.056)           (0.042)           (0.236)           (0.066)           (0.355)           (0.065)            (0.065)         (0.065)
                                                             [0.915]           [0.026]           [0.069]          [0.055]           [0.296]           [0.215]           [0.663]           [0.913]           [0.937]            [0.459]         [0.003]
                                                             {1.000}           {0.786}           {0.919}          {0.895}           {0.998}           {0.995}           {1.000}           {1.000}           {1.000}            {1.000}         {0.347}

 (3) B3: Large Grant                                          0.685             0.697             0.072            0.138             0.016             0.186             0.021             0.001             0.020              0.087           0.213
                                                             (0.205)           (0.246)           (0.095)          (0.069)           (0.047)           (0.235)           (0.058)           (0.352)           (0.070)            (0.061)         (0.090)
                                                             [0.001]           [0.005]           [0.452]          [0.049]           [0.737]           [0.430]           [0.719]           [0.999]           [0.772]            [0.159]         [0.019]
                                                             {0.290}           {0.523}           {1.000}          {0.881}           {1.000}           {1.000}           {1.000}           {1.000}           {1.000}            {0.981}         {0.679}

 (4) B4: (Small Incentive)X(Large Grant)                      -0.970            -0.727            -0.062           -0.084            -0.051            -0.055            -0.013            0.271             0.256              0.098           0.004
                                                             (0.298)           (0.320)           (0.123)          (0.103)           (0.068)           (0.313)           (0.098)           (0.608)           (0.093)            (0.104)         (0.130)
                                                             [0.001]           [0.025]           [0.614]          [0.418]           [0.452]           [0.860]           [0.897]           [0.656]           [0.006]            [0.351]         [0.976]
                                                             {0.322}           {0.786}           {1.000}          {1.000}           {1.000}           {1.000}           {1.000}           {1.000}           {0.455}            {1.000}         {1.000}

 (5) B5: (Large Incentive)X(Large Grant)                      -0.693            -0.904            -0.152           -0.267            0.038             -0.422            0.018             0.742             0.001              -0.062          -0.233
                                                             (0.285)           (0.372)           (0.125)          (0.099)           (0.065)           (0.328)           (0.080)           (0.505)           (0.095)            (0.088)         (0.114)
                                                             [0.016]           [0.017]           [0.227]          [0.008]           [0.562]           [0.201]           [0.821]           [0.143]           [0.988]            [0.480]         [0.043]
                                                             {0.729}           {0.729}           {0.995}          {0.593}           {1.000}           {0.995}           {1.000}           {0.976}           {1.000}            {1.000}         {0.833}

 (6) Observations                                                  1366              1354             1464             1209             1481              1525               1916             1909               1925             1914               1913
 (7) Mean in No Incentive, Small Grant Group                       1.401            0.886             0.427            0.277            0.769             1.776             0.792            1.956              0.257             0.587              0.199
NOTES. Table uses sample of children testing anemic at baseline. Children are considered anemic if they have an altitude-adjusted hemoglobin concentration below 120 g/L (per WHO guidelines). Rows 1-5 show estimated coefficients for treatment
group indicators and interactions obtained by estimating equation (12) (controlling for the baseline value of the dependent variable, student age, student grade, student sex, number of students in the school, whether the school has a canteen, student
teacher ratio, distance to the furthest village served, percent of boarding students, whether the school has implemented the "Free Lunch" policy, county dummy variables, and dummy variables for randomization strata). Standard errors are shown in
parentheses, unadjusted p-values are shown in square brackets and p-values adjusted for multiple inference across all tests corresponding to each index are shown in curly brackets. Adjusted p-values were constructed using the free step-down resampling
method of Westfall and Young (1993) with 10,000 iterations. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5% and 1% based on adjusted p-values.




                                                                                                                             7
Appendix Table 8: Nutritional Information to Students and Households, Index Components (Full Sample)
Index:                                                                                    Information to Households                                                                                            Information to Students
                                                                                                                                                              Parent
                                                             Number of          Number of            School                                                 correctly
                                                            school-wide         individual         contacted                                                identifies            School         Times school                                                  School
                                                                parent        meetings with        household          Household                           foods that can        provided          spoke with                                Student          provided
Dependent Variable:                                            meetings         teacher or       about student       told to give       Parent reports       prevent           nutritional      students about                              reports       information to
                                                            attended this     administrator      nutrition this     student foods        knowing of       anemia (iron-      information to       nutrition in      Students told        knowing of         students on
                                                               semester       this semester         semester         rich in iron          anemia          rich foods)            student        past semester       to eat meat            anemia             anemia
                                                            (Household         (Household         (Household         (Household          (Household        (Household            (Student           (Student           (Student            (Student           (Student
                                                              response)         response)          response)          response)           response)         response)           reported)          reported)          reported)           reported)          reported)
                                                                 (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)               (6)                  (7)                (8)                (9)                 (10)              (11)

 (1) B1: Small Incentive                                       0.140              -0.090             -0.034             0.030               -0.012            -0.012              0.084              0.584              0.031              0.098              0.136
                                                              (0.174)            (0.169)            (0.067)            (0.058)             (0.040)           (0.153)             (0.065)            (0.430)            (0.053)            (0.065)            (0.076)
                                                              [0.422]            [0.593]            [0.618]            [0.600]             [0.756]           [0.935]             [0.196]            [0.176]            [0.559]            [0.133]            [0.075]
                                                              {1.000}            {1.000}            {1.000}            {1.000}             {1.000}           {1.000}             {0.966}            {0.959}            {0.996}            {0.932}            {0.854}

 (2) B2: Large Incentive                                       -0.027             0.356              0.097              0.130               0.010             0.296               0.114              0.344              0.103              0.033              0.157
                                                              (0.176)            (0.180)            (0.064)            (0.056)             (0.035)           (0.196)             (0.056)            (0.302)            (0.053)            (0.053)            (0.059)
                                                              [0.878]            [0.050]            [0.132]            [0.023]             [0.772]           [0.133]             [0.041]            [0.256]            [0.054]            [0.531]            [0.008]
                                                              {1.000}            {0.868}            {0.973}            {0.720}             {1.000}           {0.973}             {0.754}            {0.975}            {0.798}            {0.996}            {0.399}

 (3) B3: Large Grant                                           0.612              0.378              0.055              0.089               0.024             0.152               0.094              0.473              0.099              0.084              0.163
                                                              (0.177)            (0.207)            (0.075)            (0.060)             (0.038)           (0.184)             (0.052)            (0.371)            (0.059)            (0.054)            (0.077)
                                                              [0.001]            [0.069]            [0.465]            [0.140]             [0.518]           [0.410]             [0.072]            [0.203]            [0.092]            [0.122]            [0.035]
                                                              {0.174}            {0.915}            {1.000}            {0.973}             {1.000}           {1.000}             {0.854}            {0.966}            {0.887}            {0.929}            {0.722}

 (4) B4: (Small Incentive)X(Large Grant)                       -0.904             -0.167             -0.024             -0.111              -0.002            -0.232              -0.076             -0.330             0.064              -0.031             0.022
                                                              (0.289)            (0.272)            (0.098)            (0.083)             (0.059)           (0.260)             (0.087)            (0.551)            (0.088)            (0.090)            (0.116)
                                                              [0.002]            [0.539]            [0.803]            [0.186]             [0.970]           [0.374]             [0.383]            [0.550]            [0.470]            [0.730]            [0.853]
                                                              {0.295}            {1.000}            {1.000}            {0.984}             {1.000}           {0.999}             {0.990}            {0.996}            {0.994}            {0.996}            {0.996}

 (5) B5: (Large Incentive)X(Large Grant)                       -0.424             -0.554             -0.069             -0.125             0.033              -0.332              -0.077             -0.037             -0.094             -0.018             -0.196
                                                              (0.276)            (0.316)            (0.103)            (0.085)            (0.053)            (0.279)             (0.068)            (0.531)            (0.078)            (0.071)            (0.097)
                                                              [0.127]            [0.082]            [0.506]            [0.144]            [0.528]            [0.236]             [0.255]            [0.944]            [0.228]            [0.798]            [0.044]
                                                              {0.973}            {0.934}            {1.000}            {0.973}            {1.000}            {0.993}             {0.975}            {0.996}            {0.969}            {0.996}            {0.758}

 (6) Observations                                               5750                5734              6187                5129                6211                6372                7870               7861              7923               7878              7855
 (7) Mean in No Incentive, Small Grant Group                    1.434              0.966              0.422               0.255               0.746               1.817               0.692              1.479             0.199              0.539             0.200
NOTES. Table uses full sample of children tested for hemoglobin concentration. Rows 1-5 show estimated coefficients for treatment group indicators and interactions obtained by estimating equation (12) (controlling for the baseline value of the dependent
variable, student age, student grade, student sex, number of students in the school, whether the school has a canteen, student teacher ratio, distance to the furthest village served, percent of boarding students, whether the school has implemented the "Free Lunch"
policy, county dummy variables, and dummy variables for randomization strata). Standard errors are shown in parentheses, unadjusted p-values are shown in square brackets and p-values adjusted for multiple inference across all tests corresponding to each
index are shown in curly brackets. Adjusted p-values were constructed using the free step-down resampling method of Westfall and Young (1993) with 10,000 iterations. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5% and 1% based on adjusted p-values.




                                                                                                                                    8
Appendix Table 9: Child and Household Reported Receipt of Supplements and Iron-Rich Food
                                                        Index:                                                         Sub-index:                                                 Sub-index:          Sub-index:
                                                                        Sub-index:       Sub-index:                                       Sub-index:             Index:
Dependent Variable:                                  Supplements                                                        Food at                                                 Information to      Information to
                                                                       Supplements         Food                                          Food at Home         Information
                                                       and Food                                                          School                                                    Students          Households
                                                          (1)               (2)             (3)                            (4)                 (5)                (6)                 (7)                (8)

Panel A: Impacts Relative to Comparison (No Incentive, Small Grant) Group
 (1) B1: Small Incentive                                     0.059                0.138               -0.033              -0.08               0.072              0.027              0.062               0.045
                                                           (0.047)               (0.084)             (0.044)             (0.055)             (0.061)            (0.075)            (0.126)             (0.084)
                                                            [0.21]               [0.104]             [0.452]             [0.151]             [0.243]            [0.724]            [0.623]             [0.594]
                                                           {0.572}               {0.534}             {0.599}             {0.676}             {0.700}            {0.984}            {0.982}             {0.809}
 (2) B2: Large Incentive                                       0.114              0.158               0.073               0.039               0.187               0.07              0.111                0.13
                                                              (0.045)             (0.08)             (0.038)             (0.048)             (0.064)            (0.072)            (0.101)             (0.084)
                                                              [0.011]            [0.052]             [0.057]             [0.427]             [0.004]            [0.332]            [0.272]             [0.124]
                                                              {0.199}            {0.456}             {0.498}             {0.676}             {0.149}            {0.926}            {0.906}             {0.699}
 (3) B3: Large Grant                                         0.190**             0.241*               0.138               0.133               0.189              0.162              0.136               0.233
                                                              (0.041)            (0.072)             (0.047)              (0.06)             (0.075)            (0.076)            (0.107)             (0.113)
                                                             [<0.001]            [0.001]             [0.004]             [0.029]             [0.013]            [0.034]            [0.207]             [0.041]
                                                             {0.010}             {0.089}             {0.178}             {0.378}             {0.25}             {0.468}            {0.868}             {0.532}
 (4) B4: (Small Incentive)X(Large Grant)                       -0.200             -0.269              -0.114              -0.105              -0.15              -0.037             0.19                -0.314
                                                              (0.068)            (0.116)             (0.072)              (0.09)             (0.105)            (0.123)            (0.178)             (0.148)
                                                              [0.004]            [0.021]             [0.116]             [0.243]             [0.157]            [0.766]            [0.288]             [0.036]
                                                              {0.127}            {0.338}             {0.599}             {0.676}             {0.700}            {0.984}            {0.906}             {0.532}
 (5) B5: (Large Incentive)X(Large Grant)                     -0.248**             -0.289              -0.212              -0.209              -0.292             -0.117             -0.039              -0.356
                                                              (0.064)            (0.106)             (0.067)             (0.079)              (0.11)            (0.108)            (0.151)             (0.146)
                                                             [<0.001]            [0.007]             [0.002]             [0.009]             [0.009]            [0.282]            [0.797]             [0.016]
                                                              {0.032}            {0.206}             {0.128}             {0.233}             {0.205}            {0.915}            {0.984}             {0.398}
 (6) Observations                                              1932                1932               1928                1920                1927                1932               1928                1548
 (7) Mean in No Incentive, Small Grant Group                   0.031              -0.055              0.039               0.033              -0.053              -0.040             -0.017              -0.082

Panel B: Additional Comparisons
                                                               -0.055               -0.02             -0.106              -0.118              -0.115             -0.044             -0.049              -0.085
     B1–B2: Effect of Large Incentive vs. Effect of            (0.04)             (0.072)             (0.04)             (0.049)             (0.063)            (0.073)            (0.124)             (0.085)
 (8)
     Small Incentive given Small Grant                        [0.169]             [0.785]            [0.009]             [0.018]             [0.071]            [0.549]             [0.69]             [0.317]
                                                              {0.572}              {0.86}            {0.217}             {0.315}             {0.537}            {0.984}            {0.984}             {0.809}
                                                               -0.076             -0.083              -0.065              -0.094              -0.002             -0.091             -0.024              -0.102
     B2–B3: Effect of Large Incentive given Small             (0.042)            (0.074)             (0.046)             (0.061)             (0.068)            (0.085)            (0.114)             (0.105)
 (9)
     Grant vs. Effect of Increasing Grant Amount               [0.07]            [0.268]             [0.161]             [0.124]             [0.976]            [0.281]            [0.832]             [0.332]
                                                              {0.439}            {0.725}             {0.599}             {0.676}             {0.982}            {0.915}            {0.984}             {0.809}
                                                               -0.134             -0.132              -0.139              -0.17               -0.105             -0.047             0.073               -0.225
       B2 + B5: Effect of Large Incentive given Large         (0.043)            (0.066)             (0.051)             (0.059)             (0.074)             (0.08)            (0.111)             (0.117)
(10)
       Grant                                                  [0.002]            [0.048]             [0.007]             [0.004]             [0.163]            [0.561]            [0.513]             [0.056]
                                                              {0.105}            {0.456}             {0.217}             {0.175}             {0.700}            {0.984}            {0.968}              {0.56}
                                                               -0.058              -0.049             -0.074              -0.076              -0.102             0.045              0.097               -0.123
       B3 + B5: Effect of Increasing Grant Amount given       (0.049)             (0.082)            (0.046)             (0.057)             (0.074)             (0.08)            (0.112)               (0.1)
(11)
       Large Incentive                                        [0.242]             [0.553]            [0.108]             [0.183]             [0.168]            [0.578]             [0.39]              [0.22]
                                                              {0.572}              {0.86}            {0.599}             {0.676}             {0.700}            {0.984}            {0.939}             {0.797}
NOTES. Table uses sample of children testing anemic at baseline. Children are considered anemic if they have an altitude-adjusted hemoglobin concentration below 120 g/L (per WHO guidelines). Rows 1-5
show estimated coefficients for treatment group indicators and interactions obtained by estimating equation (19) (controlling for the baseline value of the dependent variable, student age, student grade, student
sex, number of students in the school, whether the school has a canteen, student teacher ratio, distance to the furthest village served, percent of boarding students, whether the school has implemented the "Free
Lunch" policy, county dummy variables, and dummy variables for randomization strata). The dependent variable in each regression is a summary index constructed using the GLS weighting procedure in
Anderson (2008). Estimates for the individual components of each index are shown in Appendix Tables 5 and 6. Standard errors are shown in parentheses, unadjusted p-values are shown in square brackets
                                                                                                           9 using the free step-down resampling method of Westfall and Young (1993) with 10,000 iterations.
and p-values adjusted for multiple inference are shown in curly brackets. Adjusted p-values were constructed
*, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5% and 1% based on adjusted p-values. Panel B shows unadjusted and adjusted p-values from tests of linear combinations of coefficients in Panel A.
Appendix Table 10: Heterogeneous Effects by Administrator Prosocial and Intrinsic Motivation

                                           Anemic at Endline (Hb<120 g/L)                        Hemoglobin Concentration (g/L)

Panel A: Prosocial Motivation
                                                          High                                                  High
                                    Low Prosocial                      Difference        Low Prosocial                        Difference
                                                        Prosocial                                             Prosocial
                                           (1)             (2)              (3)                (4)               (5)              (6)
                                         -0.178           0.132           0.31**              2.991             -3.59           -6.581
                                        (0.064)          (0.044)          (0.079)            (1.629)           (1.315)         (2.123)
 (1) Small Incentive
                                        [0.006]          [0.003]         [<0.001]            [0.068]           [0.007]         [0.002]
                                        {0.183}         {0.156}           {0.038}            {0.526}          {0.249}          {0.156}
                                         -0.154           -0.093          0.061               2.500             1.856           -0.644
                                        (0.068)           (0.05)         (0.093)             (1.764)           (1.313)         (2.371)
 (2) Large Incentive
                                        [0.025]          [0.065]         [0.511]             [0.158]           [0.159]         [0.786]
                                        {0.316}          {0.436}         {0.621}             {0.653}           {0.653}         {0.840}

                                       -0.237**           -0.082          0.156               5.621             3.601           -2.020
                                        (0.057)          (0.057)         (0.085)             (1.772)           (1.434)         (2.312)
 (3) Large Grant
                                       [<0.001]          [0.151]         [0.067]             [0.002]           [0.013]         [0.384]
                                        {0.023}          {0.468}         {0.436}             {0.155}           {0.278}         {0.750}

Panel B: Intrinsic Motivation
                                                          High                                                   High
                                     Low Intrinsic                     Difference         Low Intrinsic                       Difference
                                                        Intrinsic                                             Intrinsic
                                           (1)             (2)             (3)                 (4)                (5)             (6)
                                         -0.078           0.072           0.149               1.828             -3.236          -5.063
                                        (0.061)          (0.054)         (0.083)              (1.62)           (1.466)         (2.197)
 (4) Small Incentive
                                        [0.204]          [0.186]         [0.075]             [0.261]           [0.029]         [0.022]
                                        {0.774}         {0.774}          {0.570}             {0.764}          {0.440}          {0.416}
                                         -0.176           -0.129          0.047               2.957             2.499           -0.458
                                        (0.069)          (0.055)         (0.097)             (1.893)            (1.43)         (2.531)
 (5) Large Incentive
                                        [0.012]           [0.02]         [0.628]              [0.12]           [0.082]         [0.857]
                                        {0.313}          {0.356}         {0.914}             {0.624}           {0.584}         {0.934}

                                         -0.149           -0.181          0.031               4.972             4.131           -0.841
                                        (0.052)          (0.059)         (0.080)             (1.575)           (1.493)         (2.056)
 (6) Large Grant
                                        [0.005]          [0.003]         [0.694]             [0.002]           [0.006]         [0.683]
                                        {0.230}          {0.190}         {0.914}             {0.170}           {0.265}         {0.934}
NOTES. Table uses sample of children testing anemic at baseline. Children are considered anemic if they have an altitude-adjusted
hemoglobin concentration below 120 g/L (per WHO guidelines). Panel A shows heterogeneous effects of small and large incentives
(given small grants) by low and high prosociality scores and Panel B shows heterogeneous effects by low and high intrinsic motivation
scores. Both scores are derived from psychological scales in Grant (2008) with individual responses corresponding to each scale
combined into indices using the GLS weighting procedure in Anderson (2008). Administrator scores are categorized as low if scores are
below the median in the sample at baseline and high if they are above the median. Heterogeneous effects are estimated using equation
(19) and interacting treatment dummies with indicators for high baseline prosocial or intrinsic motivation (and controlling for baseline
hemoglobin concentration, student age, student grade, student sex, number of students in the school, whether the school has a canteen,
student teacher ratio, distance to the furthest village served, percent of boarding students, whether the school has implemented the "Free
Lunch" policy, county dummy variables, and dummy variables for randomization strata). Standard errors are shown in parentheses,
unadjusted p-values are shown in square brackets and p-values adjusted for multiple inference are shown in curly brackets. Adjusted p-
values were constructed using the free step-down resampling method of Westfall and Young (1993) with 10,000 iterations. *, **, and
*** indicate significance at 10%, 5% and 1% based on adjusted p-values.




                                                                    10
Appendix Table 11: Anemia Status Transitions in the Small Grant Only Group
                                                                 Endline
                                                Anemic                        Not Anemic

                     Anemic                     36.40%                            63.60%
 Baseline
                   Not Anemic                   12.10%                            87.90%




                 Appendix Table 12: Bonus Payment Amounts
                 Group                                    Mean           SD

                 Small Incentive, Small Grant            220.45         195.09
                 Small Incentive, Large Grant            323.22         332.95
                 Large Incentive, Small Grant           3,303.33       4,324.39
                 Large Incentive, Large Grant           3,835.98       4,052.33
                 Note: Amoutns in renminbi exchange rate as of Sept. 2012 was
                 6.3 USD/RMB).




                                                11
            Appendix B: Theoretical Framework



1     The problem
The school principal’s problem is to:



                       M ax{e,A} w + ✓H v(e) + S(G                 A)
                             s.t. w = tH + m
                                    H = f (e, A)
                                    AG

Assuming an internal solution, the problem is equivalent to solving:

                   M ax{e,A}     (✓ + t)f (e, A)    v(e) + S(G          A)

The first order conditions are:


                           Ue ⌘ (✓ + t)fe (e, A)     v 0 (e) = 0                       (1)


                       UA ⌘ (✓ + t)fA (e, A)       S 0 (G   A) = 0                     (2)

For simplicity of notation, we suppress the arguments of the functions in the
following, so that fiij refers to fiij (e, A) for i, j = {e, A}, v 0 refers to v 0 (e), S 0
refers to S 0 (G A) and similar for the second and third order derivatives of v
and S.
The second order conditions are:


                               Uee ⌘ (✓ + t)fee     v 00 < 0


                             UAA ⌘ (✓ + t)fAA + S 00 < 0


                                            1
                                 2
             |H| ⌘ Uee UAA      UeA >0       , where UeA = (✓ + t)feA


2    First-order comparative statics
Rewriting 1 and 2 as:
                           ⇣                      ⌘
                         Ue e(t, G), A(t, G), t, G = 0                  (3)

                           ⇣                      ⌘
                         UA e(t, G), A(t, G), t, G = 0                  (4)

And di↵erentiating both equations with respect to t, we obtain:

                                @e       @A
                          Uee      + UeA    + Uet = 0                   (5)
                                @t       @t

                                @e       @A
                         UAe       + UAA    + UAt = 0                   (6)
                                @t       @t
Applying Cramer’s Rule to the above system of equations, we obtain:


               @e       Uet UAA + UAt UeA
                  =
               @t             |H|
                          h                 i
                        fe (✓ + t)fAA + S 00 + (✓ + t)fA feA
                  =                                            >0
                                         |H|


               @A        UAt Uee + Uet UAe
                  =
               @t              |H|
                           h               i
                         fA (✓ + t)fee v 00 + (✓ + t)fe feA
                   =                                           >0
                                         |H|

Equivalently but di↵erentiating 3 and 4 with respect to G, we obtain:

                               @e       @A
                         Uee      + UeA    + UeG = 0                    (7)
                               @G       @G

                               @e       @A
                         UAe      + UAA    + UAG = 0                    (8)
                               @G       @G

                                         2
And correspondingly, using Cramer’s Rule:


                                  @e          UeA S 00
                                     =
                                  @G           |H|
                                              (✓ + t)feA S 00
                                        =                     >0
                                                  |H|


                               @A           Uee UAG
                                  =
                               @G            |H|
                                         h                  i
                                          (✓ + t)fee    v 00 S 00
                                    =                               >0
                                                 |H|

                                    @A
Note that the numerator of          @G    can be written as:
                                 h                   i
                 |H|     (✓ + t)2 fee fAA         2
                                                 feA   + (✓ + t)v 00 fAA < |H|

                   @A
Implying that      @G   < 1, which will be useful in the following1 .


3      Second order comparative statics
To understand when resources and incentives are complements or substitutes,
                                                     @H
we must find under what conditions the sign of @t@G      is positive or negative,
respectively. In general the second order comparative statics depend on the
third derivatives of f (e, A), S(G A), and v(e). Because interpreting the third-
order derivatives is far from trivial, to make progress we assume that the third
derivatives of f (e, A) are zero, but allow S(G A) and v(e) unrestricted.2 Using
the chain rule on H = f (e, A), we obtain the second-order comparative statics
for H:


                                @H      h     @e @e       @A @A i
                                      = fee         + fAA         +
                               @t@G          @G @t        @G @t
                                            h @e @A @e @A i
                                      + fAe          +        +
                                             @G @t     @t @G
                      @A        @e
                 +fA      + fe      ,                                                            (9)
                     @t@G      @t@G
                                   h                i
    1 Note            @e
           also that @G   = ffeA @G  @A
                                         + v 00 S 00 , which will also be useful for simplifying the
                                ee
following expressions further.
    2 Note that the third derivatives of f (e, A) include f
                                                            eee , feeA , feAA , fAAA so they are more
complex to interpret than the third derivatives of S(G A) and v(e).


                                                 3
which could be positive (complements) or negative (substitutes): the first term
in brackets is negative, the second term is positive, and its size crucially depends
on fAe and the third and fourth could be positive or negative. In what follows,
                       @A         @e                                        @H
we study the sign of @t@G   and @t@G , to help us understand the sign of @t@G   , and
hence ascertain when resources and incentives are complements or substitutes.
              @A           @e
To obtain    @t@G   and   @t@G ,   we rewrite 5 and 6 as:

                    h                        i @e                     @A
                      (✓ + t)fee      v 00          + (✓ + t)feA         + fe = 0                   (5’)
                                              @t                      @t

                                   @e h                   i @A
                    (✓ + t)feA        + (✓ + t)fAA + S 00      + fA = 0                             (6’)
                                   @t                       @t

Di↵erentiating with respect to G we get3 :


       @A           @A h @A      ih              i           @A h                     i
|H|        = S 000              1 (✓ + t)fee v 00 + (✓ + t)                        2
                                                                       fee fAA + feA
      @t@G          @t @G h                    i             @G
                   (✓ + t)S 00              2         00 00
                                  fee fAA + feA + fAA v S              @e @e
             v 00                                                v 000        (✓ + t)feA ,
                                        |H|                            @G @t
                                                                                     (10)


       @e                    h @A    i      @A
|H|        =     (✓ + t)feA         1 S 000
      @t@G                     @G            @t
                         h                     i    @e h                                      i f v 00 (S 00 )2
               000 @e @e                    00                                             2     eA
            +v             (✓ + t)fAA + S + (✓ + t)                             fAA fee + feA  +                .
                   @G @t                            @G                                              |H|
                                                                                                 (11)

The expressions (10) and (11) are complex but they can be understood if we
take into account that:
   1. |H| > 0,
   2. the terms that include S 000 have the same sign as the sign of S 000 ,
   3. the terms that include v 000 have the opposite sign as the sign of v 000 ,
                                                         feA v 00 (S 00 )2
   4. all other terms are negative, except                    |H|            in (11), which can be null
      or positive.
                                                                              @H
Given the above, the conditions that are more favorable to complements @t@G        >
0 are S 000 > 0, v 000 < 0, and a large value of feA . Analogously, the conditions
                                           @H
that are more favorable to substitutes @t@G     < 0 are: S 000 <= 0, v 000 >= 0, and
a small value of feA .
  3 And   assuming that the third derivatives of f are null as previously discussed


                                                     4
