NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE, OCCUPATIONAL TASKS AND
DECLINING IMMIGRANT OUTCOMES:
IMPLICATIONS FOR EARNINGS AND INCOME INEQUALITY IN CANADA
Casey Warman
Christopher Worswick
Working Paper 21307
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21307
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2015

The analysis presented in this paper was conducted at the Atlantic Research Data Centre, which is
part of the Canadian Research Data Centre Network (CRDCN). The services and activities provided
by the Atlantic Research Data Centre are made possible by the financial or in-kind support of the
SSHRC, the CIHR, the CFI, Statistics Canada, and Dalhousie University. This paper is part of a
forthcoming special edition of the Canadian Journal of Economics on Income Inequality. Worswick is
also an External Research Fellow with the Centre for Research and Analysis of Migration, University
College London. We would like to thank David Green, and two anonymous referees for helpful
comments and suggestions. We would also like to thank Charles Beach and participants at the IRPPCLSRN conference "Inequality in Canada: Driving Forces, Outcomes and Policy", the North American
Productivity Workshop in Ottawa, and seminar participants at the University of Waterloo and
Dalhousie University. We are also grateful to the RDC analyst Heather Hobson for her assistance,
as well as Lachlan MacLeod. The views expressed in this paper do not necessarily represent the
CRDCNs or those of its partners, nor does it necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Casey Warman and Christopher Worswick. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Technological Change, Occupational Tasks and Declining Immigrant Outcomes: Implications
for Earnings and Income Inequality in Canada
Casey Warman and Christopher Worswick
NBER Working Paper No. 21307
June 2015
JEL No. J15,J24,J31,J61,J71
ABSTRACT
The earnings and occupational task requirements of immigrants to Canada are analyzed. The growing
education levels of immigrants in the 1990s have not led to a large improvement in earnings as one
might expect if growing computerization and the resulting technological change was leading to a rising
return to non-routine cognitive skills and a greater wage return to university education. Controlling
for education, we find a pronounced cross-arrival cohort decline in earnings that coincided with cross-cohort
declines in cognitive occupational task requirements and cross-cohort increases in manual occupational
task requirements. The immigrant earnings outcomes had only a small effect on overall Canadian earnings
inequality.
Casey Warman
Department of Economics
Dalhousie University
6214 University Avenue, Room A23
Halifax, NS B3H 4R2
and NBER
warmanc@dal.ca
Christopher Worswick
Department of Economics
Room C-870, Loeb Building
Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By Drive
Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6
Christopher.Worswick@carleton.ca

1

Introduction

Concerns over the poor performance of recent immigrants to Canada, combined with evidence that income inequality has been growing in Canada, naturally leads to the question
of whether the challenges faced by Canada’s large immigration program is unintentionally
contributing to inequality. At the same time, substantial changes in technology resulting
from the rapid innovation in the IT sector raise questions about how skill is valued within
developed economies. Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003) identify adoption of computers
over the past several decades, and the resulting differences in tasks that can be routinized
by computers and tasks that cannot be routinized, as an important reason for the growing
US earnings gap between university and high school educated workers. These technological
shifts may have changed the way in which immigrant education and work experience are
valued in the Canadian labour market making it more difficult for immigrants to successfully integrate. However, these technological changes have coincided with a period of rapid
changes in Canadian immigration. Specifically, a large increase in immigrant intake coupled
with a large shift towards highly educated immigrants coincided with a shift away from
traditional immigrant sending countries such as the UK, US and European countries and
towards countries in Asia, Africa and Latin America.
Our goal in this paper is to investigate the potential interaction between immigration
and technological change in the Canadian case. The new more highly educated immigrants
admitted to Canada should have benefited from the kind of rapid technological changes
found in the US (Autor, Levy, and Murnane, 2003). However, that would only be the
case if the new immigrants found jobs in the part of the task distribution that benefited
from the technological change. If the shift of source countries meant that their language
skills were weaker than earlier cohorts leading to their occupational outcomes not reflecting
their higher education, then the technological change would have worsened their economic
outcomes rather than improving them.
To investigate these possibilities, we analyze the earnings and occupational skill require-

1

ments of immigrants and the Canadian born using the 1991 to 2006 Canadian Census Master
files. The detailed information in the Census allows us to evaluate whether immigrants and
comparable native born end up in similar types of occupations in terms of tasks and allow
us to explore how this has changed over time. Using the Occupational Information Network
(O*NET), we determine the tasks similar to Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003), who identify
routine and non-routine cognitive and manual tasks, and we match these tasks to the 3 digit
SOC information in the Canadian Census data.1

2

Immigrant Earnings and Returns to Human Capital
in North America:

The labour market performance of immigrants in both Canada and the United States has
received considerable attention in the economics literature due to concern that more recent
cohorts have received lower earnings, for the same number of years in the receiving country,
than did immigrants of earlier arrival cohorts (see for the US, Chiswick (1978), Borjas (1995),
and Borjas and Friedberg (2009); see for Canada Baker and Benjamin (1994) and Grant
(1999)). For the case of Canada, the declines across the 1980s were large while the declines
in the 1990s were larger and have been documented using Canadian Census data (see, for
example, Aydemir and Skuterud (2005) and Warman and Worswick (2004)).2 While both
Canada and the US have very different immigration policies, a shared experience since the
1960s of dramatic changes in source country composition has led to significant challenges in
integrating the new immigrants into the receiving country labour markets.
A number of studies have attributed at least part of the poor performance of immigrant
arrival cohorts to Canada after the 1970s to macroeconomic fluctuations and industry specific shocks. McDonald and Worswick (1998) argue that the poor earnings performance of
immigrants to Canada in the 1980s relative to earlier decades could be due at least in part to
1
2

See Imai, Stacey, and Warman (2011) for a description of this method.
See Warman (2007) for an overview of the reasons for the declining outcomes.

2

the poor macroeconomic conditions over much of the period. Hou and Picot (2009) analyze
the outcomes of immigrants to Canada in the 2000s at the time of the sharp decline in the
information technology (IT) industry. They attribute a large part of the poor performance
of immigrants who arrived in the 2000s to the decline in the outcomes of immigrants who
came to Canada with the intention of working in either IT or engineering occupations.
However, evidence also suggests that longer run trends in the Canadian labour market are
also important in understanding the labour market outcomes of successive arrival cohorts of
immigrants. Green and Worswick (2012) analyze the earnings of immigrants in Canada and
found strong negative cohort effects in the present discounted value of earnings of immigrant
arrival cohorts to Canada since the early 1980s that coincided with a similar decline in the
earnings of successive labour market entry cohorts of the Canadian born. They also find that
the earnings returns to foreign experience went from being positive and comparable to those
of the Canadian born to being basically zero between the early 1980s and the 1990s. Green
and Worswick (2012) find that the lack of returns to foreign experience is a feature of the
earnings patterns for non-English speaking, non-European immigrants in particular and the
cross-cohort decline can be attributed primarily to the shifting source country composition.

2.1

Occupational Outcomes and Earnings of Immigrants

Green (1999) uses Canadian Census data and administrative data on immigrant landings to
analyze the occupational outcomes and occupational mobility of immigrants to Canada. He
finds that immigrants from more recent arrival cohorts are less represented in high skilled
occupations than was the case in earlier arrival cohorts. Also, immigrants are more occupationally mobile than are the Canadian born and this is still present at higher values of
years-since-migration.
A common result in the North American immigration literature is that the return to
foreign education is significantly lower than that of education obtained in the host country
(see, for example, Ferrer and Riddell (2008)). A number of studies have investigated whether

3

immigrants are more likely to be over-educated for their occupations. If the wage return to
the extra year of education is expected to be low for these workers, this could explain the low
returns to education found for immigrants in Canada and the US. Chiswick and Miller (2008)
show that the lower payoff to schooling for the foreign born in the US is linked to the labour
market outcomes of immigrants in jobs mismatched to their education levels. Specifically
they find that two thirds of the smaller effect of schooling on earnings was attributable to
differences by nativity in the payoffs to over/under education. Similar results were found
for immigrants in Canada (Chiswick and Miller, 2010). Li and Sweetman (2014) highlight
the importance of differences in source country educational quality in determining labour
market outcomes in Canada.
Warman, Sweetman, and Goldmann (2015) find that immigrants have difficulty matching
their occupation when they first arrive in Canada and often end up working in low skilled
occupations that are very different from their source country occupations or what we would
expect given their education. Imai, Stacey, and Warman (2011) also study the capacity of
immigrants to transfer their occupational human capital to the Canadian labour market but
use occupational skill requirement created from the O*NET3 , similar to the approach in this
paper. Using factor analysis4 , the detailed O*NET information on each occupation’s skill
requirement is reduced to a number of indexes. The authors then combine these indexes of
occupational skill requirements with the Longitudinal Study of Immigrants to Canada data.
They develop a model of occupational choice and skill accumulation and derive predictions
about the international transferability of occupational human capital. Prior to immigration,
male immigrants to Canada are employed mainly in occupations that require high levels of
cognitive skills but not high levels of manual skills. However, the pattern is reversed after
migration with employment more likely to be in occupations requiring manual skills rather
than cognitive skills. It is important to note that the LSIC data is based on a single arrival
cohort of immigrants to Canada. Consequently, they were unable to look at the cross-cohort
3

See Robinson (2011) and Poletaev and Robinson (2008) for the advantages of using skill requirements
over occupational classifications when measuring occupational transitions and occupational mismatches.
4
See also Ingram and Neumann (2006).

4

patterns in terms of occupational skill requirements for immigrants.
The underlying causes for the occupational mismatches found in these studies remain
an open question. It could be that the changing source country composition of immigrants
to Canada means that the education and work experiences of the new immigrants are not
easily transferred to the Canadian labour market. This could either be due to a lack of full
equivalency to Canadian education and work experience, or due to a lack of English or French
language fluency, on the part of the immigrants, needed for highly skilled workers to be able
to find jobs in high skill occupations in Canada. Another possibility is that the changing
source country composition of immigrants means that a higher share of immigrants arriving
in Canada were members of visible minority groups and thus more likely to experience
discrimination in the cohorts after 1980 than in the relatively more successful cohorts prior
to 1980.
Oreopoulos (2011) provides evidence of employer discrimination in the Canadian labour
market. Using thousands of randomly manipulated resumes sent in response to online job
postings in Toronto, he finds evidence of substantial discrimination against applicants with
foreign work experience as well as those with names whose origins are from India, Pakistan,
China and Greece, relative to those of English origins. However, actual evidence of the
impact of ethnic or racial discrimination on wages is difficult to measure given the presence
of alternative explanations. When attention is restricted to the Canadian born, evidence of
wage differentials across visible minority groups in Canada is present but is much smaller than
the immigrant/Canadian-born wage gaps found for the equivalent visible minority groups.5

3

Technological Change and The Return to Skills:

The deteriorating immigrant entry outcomes corresponded with a period in which there
were substantial structural changes in both the Canadian and US economies. For the US,
a number of studies identified a shift in the wage structure that benefited college educated
5

See, for examples, Pendakur and Pendakur (1998) and Skuterud (2010).

5

workers relative to other workers (see, for examples, Katz and Murphy (1992) and Juhn and
Pierce (1993)). For Canada, Beaudry and Green (2000) demonstrate declining entry earnings
across successive labour market entry cohorts for Canadian-born men. They show that this
is true for different levels of education. Consequently, there was not the large widening of
the return to a university degree in Canada as was the case in the US.
As noted above, Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003) provide a plausible explanation for the
increasing return to skill in the US over this period. They outline the importance that computerization had on changing job skill demand in the US. The authors show how computers
act as substitutes for jobs that rely on tasks that follow explicit rules and are complements for
jobs with tasks requiring non-routine problem solving and complex communications. They
find that this can explain much of the increased demand for college educated workers in the
US.
More recently evidence of a reversal in the demand for skill and cognitive tasks has
emerged (see Beaudry, Green, and Sand (2014)). Since 2000, evidence for the US suggests
that the strong ongoing increase in the demand for skilled workers has reversed. High
skilled workers have moved down the occupational ladder and accepted jobs traditionally
held by lower-skilled workers who consequently end up being pushed even further down the
occupational ladder.6

4

Canadian Immigration Policy since 1985

Given that our Census data cover the period 1991 through 2006, we focus on two key
changes in Canadian immigration policy since the mid 1980s (see Figure 1). Specifically,
we are interested in the implications for immigrant earnings and overall income inequality
in Canada due to: 1) the large and sustained expansion of annual immigrant intake to
Canada beginning in the late 1980s; and 2) the increased emphasis on university education
6

Beaudry, Green, and Sand (2013) present a model that considered cognitive tasks as a stock rather than
a flow and show that this model can explain the demand reversal.

6

on immigrants selected under the point system beginning in 1993 (see Beach, Green, and
Worswick (2011) and Sweetman and Warman (2013, 2014)).
Figure 1 demonstrates the steady increase in the level of immigration since the mid 1980s.
Immigrant landings went from 99,354 in 1986 to 216,452 in 1990 reaching 256,641 in 1993
before levelling off and for the most part remaining reasonably stable in the range between
212,000 and 281,000 (with the exception of a dip to 174,195 in 1998 and one to 189,951 in
1999).7 Figure 1 also demonstrates the growth in the share of economic immigrants over this
period.
The second policy change that we consider relates to the increase in points allocated for
post-secondary education in the 1990s (see McWhinney (1998)’s Regime 12). The Principal
Applicants under the Federal Skilled Worker program must pass the point system in order to
be admitted. On August 9th , 1993, the point system was amended placing much more weight
on post-secondary education (see Beach, Green, and Worswick (2011)). Not surprisingly,
this shift made it much easier for university graduates to qualify under the point system for
admission as economic immigrants and much more difficult for other applicants.
Figure 2 is based on the Census data and demonstrates the sharp increase in the fraction of
immigrants landing each year with a university degree after this policy change.8 This fraction
more than doubled between the early 1990s and the late 1990s and this was true for both
immigrant men and immigrant women. Given that the figure represents all immigrants and
the policy change only directed affected Principal Applicants in the Skilled Worker category,
the size of this effect is remarkable since the policy changes did not affect the accompanying
spouses or dependents and did not affect family reunification or humanitarian immigrants.
Next, we carry out a standard human capital earnings estimation using the 1991 to 2006
Census data. Following much of the literature, we employ a cohort/year-since-migration
7

These figures were taken from the 2013 Facts and Figures, Immigration Overview, Permanent and
Temporary Residents, Digital Library of Citizenship and Immigration Canada.
8
For the 1970 to 1990 yearly cohorts, the level of education is determined at the time of the 1991 Census,
for the 1991 to 1995 cohorts at the time of 1996 Census, for the 1996 to 2000 cohorts at the time of the 2001
Census and for the 2001 to 2005 cohorts at the time of the 2006 Census.

7

(YSM) structure for the right-hand side variables (in addition to the controls for education
and a quadratic in age).9 The dependent variable is the log of weekly earnings in the reference
year and the model is estimated over the pooled sample of immigrants and the Canadian
born. In the Figure 3, we present the immigrant/native-born estimated differences in log
weekly earnings over each immigrant arrival cohort’s relevant years-since-migration over the
1991-2006 period using two versions of our simple earnings model. On the left is a plot of the
arrival cohort profiles for a model without controls for language fluency or source country
region of the immigrants. To the right, the earnings profiles by arrival cohort come from a
model that includes fixed effects for language fluency and source country region. The graph
to the right is for the default category for the region controls (English language developed
economies) and this explains the fact that the profiles are generally for higher levels of weekly
earnings than is the case in the graph to the left where region controls are not included. The
steady decline in log earnings across immigrant arrival cohorts is apparent in both graphs
but the cross-cohort differences are larger based on the model without controls for language
fluency or source country region. It should be noted that each model controls for education
so that the increase in education levels for the post 1993 cohorts will be absorbed into the
education fixed effects of the model. These two graphs are intended to demonstrate the
cross-cohort decline in log weekly wages across recent immigrants and should be kept in
mind when considering the analysis of the immigrant/native born occupational task skill
requirements below.

5

Expected Implications of the Immigration Policy Changes
for the Earnings Performance of New Immigrants

The fact that Canadian immigration policy expanded at a time in which concern had begun
to be raised about the economic performance of immigrants in Canada could have led to a
9

We interact the cohort dummies with the years-since-migration term but have a common quadratic
years-since-migration term. (See Aydemir and Skuterud (2005)).

8

worsening of immigrant outcomes and a worsening of income inequality in Canada. However,
the sharp increase in education levels of new immigrants should have led to relatively better
economic outcomes for new immigrants as was certainly the intent of the policy change.10
Therefore, the net effect of the expansion and the new focus on post-secondary education is
ambiguous in terms of the expected impact on the earnings performance of new immigrants.
At the same time as the policy shift toward more highly educated immigrants in Canada,
the pattern of increasing returns to education was emerging in the US. As noted above,
Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003) argue that the rapid decline in the price of computers
reduced the demand for routine manual tasks and increased the return to non-routine tasks.
This would have caused an increase in the return to education which one would expect to
have also occurred in Canada over the same period given that the rapid decline in the cost
of computers was also a feature of Canada’s economy. We investigate this for Canada to see
whether it may have led to weaker outcomes for less skilled immigrants thus increasing the
inequality in the immigrant population and perhaps also in the Canadian population as a
whole. It may also have led to better earnings outcomes for the more skilled immigrants who
could have benefited from the increase in returns to non-routine tasks. These two effects
could have led to an increase in income inequality among the entering immigrants to Canada.
However, the shifting source country distribution of immigrants to Canada over the 1980s
and 1990s meant that the proportion of new immigrants who had strong English and/or
French language skills was dropping sharply (see Green and Worswick (2012)) making it less
likely for new immigrants to have their foreign education and foreign work experience recognized by employers in terms of the types of jobs offered to the new immigrants. While there
was a large increase in the levels of formal education over the period of declining immigrant
entry outcomes, the shift in source countries resulted in poorer local labour market language
ability, which has been found to be one of the main reasons for the immigrant/native born
wage differential (see Ferrer, Green, and Riddell (2006)). The declining language ability
of new immigrants at a period where computerization placed a premium on non-routine
10

Kahanec and Zimmermann (2009) find that high skilled immigrants tend to reduce inequality in Europe.

9

complex communication tasks may have pushed immigrants into occupations requiring less
language intensive tasks that could be made routine with computers. As well, the difficulty that employers have in terms of assessing the foreign credentials of immigrants from
non-traditional sending countries may also have resulted in immigrants only being hired in
occupations characterized primarily by routine cognitive tasks, instead of non-routine problem solving. Therefore, the shifting source countries at a time of computerization of the
economy may have pushed immigrants into lower paying occupations.
Dustmann, Frattini, and Preston (2013) show that immigrants experience poorer than
expected outcomes when they first arrive in the UK. They show that when allocating immigrants across the wage distribution based on their observed age and educational distribution,
immigrants are much more concentrated in the lower part of the distribution and underrepresented in the upper percentiles than what we would expect given their education.
A preliminary look at our data suggests that something similar may have happened
in Canada as education levels of immigrants were rising in the 1990s. Figure 4 provides
similar information for Canada. Rather than predicting wages to calculate where immigrants
would be in terms of the native wage structure, we use counterfactual density estimates
(see DiNardo, Fortin, and Lemieux (1996)) to produce the log weekly earnings density of
recent immigrants if they had been paid based on the native wage structure, and we then
difference the native-born densities from these counterfactual densities. As well, we present
the differences between the actual densities of the immigrants and the native born. The
counterfactual densities are calculated by re-weighting the native born’s log weekly earnings
function taking into consideration the characteristics of the immigrants. We use highest
level of education dummies interacted with age dummies, as well as controls for province
and major CMA of residence. We calculate these separately by gender. We want to examine
how this has changed over the period in which there was a dramatic increase in educational
attainment of new immigrants and therefore present the figures for the 1985-89 cohort versus
the native born in 1991 and the 2000-04 cohort versus the native born in 2006.
Points above the horizontal axis represent part of the weekly earnings distribution where
10

the immigrant density is greater than the native-born density whereas points below show
where the native density is greater than the immigrant density. When we consider the actual
densities, we see that the line is above the horizontal axis over the lower part of the weekly
earnings distribution and below the axis over the upper part of the earnings distribution.
This is consistent with the native-born distribution having greater mass at the upper part
of the weekly earnings distribution relative to the immigrant distribution. This is true both
for the 1985-89 cohort in 1991 and for the 2000-04 cohort in 2006. We see the same general
patterns for men and women.
For the counterfactual analysis, the line for the 1985-89 cohort in 1991 is close to the
horizontal axis which suggests that assigning this immigrant cohort the returns to education
of the native born has a large effect pushing the mass of the weekly earnings distributions
towards higher values of weekly earnings and leading to a distribution that is very similar
to that of the native born in the same year. For the 2000-04 cohort, we see a similar change
in that the line is much closer to the horizontal axis. However, it is worth noting that for
this cohort, we see a range of weekly earnings for which the line is above the horizontal axis
meaning that there is greater mass in the immigrant counterfactual earnings distribution
than in the same range of the native-born distribution. The same can be said for the earlier
arrival cohort but the size of this effect is much larger for the 2000-04 cohort in 2006. This
is consistent with the large increase in education levels in the 1990s meaning that the new
immigrants would have appeared in the upper part of the weekly earnings distribution if
they had received the same returns to education as the native born. However, the fact that
they did not receive the same returns means that they were more likely than the native
born to appear in the lower part of the weekly earnings distribution. This is similar to what
Dustmann, Frattini, and Preston (2013) found for the UK in that the immigrants should be
more represented at higher values of earnings given their high education levels but instead
are observed at lower parts of the earning distribution due to poor returns to their education.
A key issue for our analysis is whether these highly educated immigrants to Canada ended
up in jobs suited to their education allowing them to benefit from the increase in demand

11

for non-routine cognitive task requirements that Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003) observed
in the US. If instead, as our preliminary analysis suggests, they primarily found jobs lower
down the income distribution perhaps with lower cognitive occupational task requirements
and greater manual task requirements then they would have missed out on any wage gains
due to any increasing demand for university education that might have been experienced by
the university-educated native born.

6
6.1

Methodology
Task Construction using the O*NET data

We define the following five task groupings: non-routine analytical tasks, non-routine interactive tasks, routine cognitive tasks, non-routine manual, and routine manual used in
Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003). We use the Occupation Information Network (O*NET)
to create these tasks using principal component analysis.11 The O*NET provides detailed
information on the tasks and skills required to perform a given occupation. For example,
we can identify the amount of non-routine analytical tasks from variables such as Innovation, Critical Thinking and Active Leaning (see Table A.11) or cognitive skills that can be
routinized from variables such as Information Ordering, Memorization and Number Facility
(see Table A.13). We reduce the information in the O*NET by performing factor analysis.
We first separate job characteristics that are related to each of the five tasks and reduce the
variables using perform principal component analysis for each of the groups separately. As
outlined in Yamaguchi (2012), Imai, Stacey, and Warman (2011) and elsewhere, performing
factor analysis on separate pre-created groups rather than on all these characteristics gets
around the problem of assuming that the resulting factors are orthogonal.12 Each task was
found to be characterized by a single factor. In Appendix A we describe the five tasks and
11

Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003) use the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT) which was replaced
by the O*NET.
12
See Yamaguchi (2012) for a detailed discussion of the benefits of pre-selected groupings.

12

outline the variables used to create them.
We match the 1,000 plus O*NET occupations to the 1991 Standard Occupation Classification available in the Census.13 We weight the factor analysis using the occupational
distribution of the Canadian population from the 1991 Census Masterfile.14 This allows for
jobs that are more important in the economy to have a larger influence on determining the
factors and less frequent jobs having less impact on the estimates. The resulting scores can
be interpreted as having mean zero and a standard deviation equal to one with respect to
the 1991 Canadian population.

6.2

Data and Sample Selection:

The data used in the estimation come from the 1991, 1996, 2001 and 2006 Canadian confidential census master files. This 20% sample of the Canadian population contains rich information on a number of personal characteristics. The age range in the analysis is restricted
to individuals age 24 to 59. We have restricted the sample of immigrants to individuals aged
18 or older at the time of arrival in Canada in order to remove child arrival immigrants who
would have acquired most of their education in Canada and have a very different experience
than the adult arrival immigrants.15 This could be especially problematic in a cohort analysis since the early cohorts will have child arrivals appearing whereas the later cohorts will
have very few child arrivals since they would not yet be old enough to appear in the adult
age range of the most recent Census.

6.3

Earnings and Task Requirement Regression Analysis

In Table 1 we present the first set of regression estimates of equation 1. We pool the data
for immigrants and the native born and focus on the immigrant/native born differences by
arrival cohort and years-since-migration.
13

We rely mainly on the matching in Imai, Stacey, and Warman (2011).
The weights are for the population 18 to 64 who had occupational information.
15
Around 18% of immigrants aged 24 to 59 immigrated prior to age 18.
14

13

Yi = Xi β + δ1 immi +

k
X

δj Cj + α1 Y SMi + α2 Y SMi2 + i

(1)

j=2

We estimate models where Yi is either log weekly earnings or one of the five tasks.16 In
each model, the vector Xi includes a common set of controls for the respondent’s age in
linear/quadratic form, marital status, region of residence, with the default being Toronto,
and Census year indicators.17 We also estimate specifications with highest level of education
dummies (less than high school, high school graduate (default), post secondary education
below a Bachelor’s degree, Bachelor’s degree and a Graduate degree) and then add 10 region
of origin dummies and knowledge of official language controls.18
The first three columns are estimates from a model where the dependent variable is
the log of the weekly wage, and act as a point of reference for thinking about the cohort
patterns in the tasks models to follow.19 In the first column, where controls for education,
official language fluency and place of birth are not included, the cross-cohort profile indicates
declining weekly earnings across arrival cohorts but the magnitude of these effects are not
that large especially for the 1995-99 cohort (-0.059). This reflects the fact that education
is increasing across arrival cohorts in the 1990s and this goes against the overall trend of
declining earnings of immigrants up to that point. When we compare this to the second
column where education controls are included, the cohort effects are negative and larger in
absolute value over the late 1990s and early 2000s which is not surprising since the education
differences by cohort are controlled for in the analysis and are therefore not reflected in
16

Note that the reference period for earnings is that of the calendar year prior to the May enumeration
day while for the occupational information, it is the week prior to enumeration. If the respondent did not
have a job during the reference week, then the job of longest duration since January 1st of the reference
year is used to calculate occupational tasks. For ease of presentation, we refer to the reference year in the
remainder of the paper.
17
We have separate controls for the rest of Ontario, Vancouver, the rest of British Columbia, Montreal
and the rest of Quebec. Toronto, Montreal and Vancouver cities received well over 50% of the immigrants to
Canada during our sample period. Consequently, it is important to control for them separately from their
respective provincial controls.
18
See Adserà and Ferrer (2014) for analysis examining the importance of mother tongue linguistic proximity
on occupational outcomes.
19
The 1970-74 cohort is the default group.

14

the cohort effects. In the third column, the set of controls is further expanded to include
three indicators for fluency in the two official languages, English, French and bilingual. As
expected these controls are strongly significant with higher weekly earnings associated with
(self-reported) fluency in English and/or French. Relative to immigrants from the default
region of the predominantly English language developed countries (US, UK, Australia, New
Zealand, Ireland and White South African), lower weekly earnings are found for immigrants
who were born in Western Europe (-.103), Southern Europe (-.172), Eastern Europe (-.257),
the Caribbean, Central America or South America (-.331), sub-Saharan Africa (-.340), North
Africa and Western Asia (-.391), Eastern Asia (-.438), South and Southeast Asia (-.369), and
Oceania and all other countries (-.361).20 Including these controls leads to a reduction of
the coefficient on the immigrant indicator to -.222 which reflects the fact that the default
group of immigrants are now those that come from countries with strong English language
fluency and with education that is more easily transferred to the Canadian economy than the
education of immigrants from other source country regions. The coefficients on the arrival
cohort controls are also generally closer to zero although the 2000-04 cohort remains negative
at -.082. This suggests that the declining cross-cohort pattern in weekly earnings found in
the first two columns can largely be explained by the cross-cohort trend towards immigrants
with weaker fluency in either English or French and/or immigrants being more likely to come
from the newer source regions.
In the fourth, fifth and sixth columns of Table 1, we present the regression estimates for
the three equivalent models where the non-routine analytical task requirement index is used
as the dependent variable (instead of log weekly earnings). In the fourth column, without
controls for education, language fluency or region of birth, we see significantly lower nonroutine analytical task requirements for the earlier arrival cohort (from the -.186 coefficient
on the immigrant indicator) and a cross-cohort pattern of declining cohort effects from the
late 1960s through to the early 1990s then small but positive coefficients for the 1995-99
cohort (.036) and the 2000-04 cohort (.020). In the fifth column, this ‘bounce back’ for the
20

The coefficients not shown in the table due to room constraints but available upon request.

15

last two cohorts is much less pronounced for the 1995-99 cohort (-.065) and really not present
at all for the 2000-04 cohort (-.166). Recall that this coefficient can be interpreted as 16.6%
of a standard deviation in the index so it represents a meaningful difference in this dimension
of the occupational skill requirement. In column 6, the same model is estimated but with
controls for language fluency and region of birth. The coefficient on the immigrant indicator
is close to zero indicating that immigrants from English-language background countries have
similar non-routine analytical task requirements in their occupations to those of otherwise
similar Canadian born. The cohort coefficients are generally close to zero and are similar
to those of column 3 in the weekly earnings analysis. Controlling for language and source
country appears to account for the remaining cross-cohort pattern in this task requirement
index that was found in column 5 (with education controls present).
In the next six columns of Table 1 equivalent models are estimated where the dependent variable is the non-routine interactive task requirement variable (columns 7-9) and the
routine cognitive task requirement variable (columns 10-12). Strong similarities are present
across the equivalent model for each of these three task requirement variables. Focusing
on the simplest model and comparing columns 4, 7 and 10, we see that immigrants in the
default arrival category (1970-74) are at a disadvantage compared to otherwise equivalent
native born and the cross-cohort pattern is towards lower values of the task requirement variable through the early 1990s cohort and then a pronounced improvement after that for the
latter two cohorts. However, once education controls are introduced (columns 5, 8 and 11)
the coefficients on the immigrant indicator suggest that the earliest arrival cohort have lower
task requirements associated with their jobs along the three dimensions and the cross-cohort
pattern in each case is generally towards lower task requirements values of each index. Finally, once the controls are expanded to include official language and region of birth variables
(columns 6, 9 and 12), the coefficient on the immigrant indicator is either not significantly
different from zero or is much closer to zero (column 9), and the cross-cohort pattern is much
less pronounced with the absolute values of the coefficients closer to zero than in the models
with education controls but no language or source country controls.

16

In the final six columns of Table 1, estimates from equivalent models are presented for
the non-routine manual and the routine manual task requirement indexes. In the relatively
simple model of columns 13 and 16, we see that immigrants in the earliest arrival cohort
(1970-74) have somewhat lower levels of the non-routine manual task requirement index (.061) and significantly higher values of the routine manual index (.119) than do otherwise
similar Canadian born. There is a clear cross arrival cohort pattern of positive cross-cohort
difference starting with the 1975-79 cohort and ending with the 1985-89 cohort, similar
but somewhat lower levels for the 1990-94 cohort, then a new pattern of decreasing cohort
differences through to the 2000-04 cohort. In contrast, once we control for education (columns
14 and 17), the overall pattern is of positive cohort differences from the earliest cohorts to the
most recent cohorts. Finally, when we consider the models with the richest set of controls
(education, official language fluency and region of birth), we see fairly flat cross arrival
cohort profiles until the late 1990s. For the routine-manual model the 1995-99 cohort has a
somewhat smaller and positive cohort effect (.045) and the 2000-04 cohort has a larger still
positive cohort effect (.138). For the routine manual model in column 17, the coefficient on
the 1995-99 cohort is .023 and the coefficient on the 2000-04 cohort is .083.
In summary, the immigrant cross-cohort patterns in our Table 1 analysis suggest that the
relevant task requirement distinction that is important for understanding the cross-cohort
declining earnings of immigrants in Canada is not “routine versus non-routine” (as one might
expect based on the computerization hypothesis of Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003)) but
“manual versus non-manual”. For the three non-manual groupings (non-routine analytical,
non-routine interactive and routine cognitive) the cohort profiles are similar to what was
found in the log weekly earnings analyses of columns 1-3. Specifically, without controls for
education, language or region of origin, outcomes were weaker across arrival cohorts until the
mid 1990s and then improved somewhat after that. However, once education is included in
the model, the effect of the large increase in education levels of immigrants arriving after the
early 1990s is absorbed into the education controls and we see a reasonably clear pattern of
cross-cohort declines in the skill requirements across these three non-manual task areas that

17

is similar to the almost monotonic cross-cohort decline in earnings in column 2. However, for
the two manual task groupings (routine manual and non-routine manual), quite a different
cross-cohort pattern is present. Without education, language or region controls, we see rising
manual task requirements in jobs held across cohorts through the late 1980s, a slight decline
for the early 1990s and then a pronounced decline for the cohorts arriving after 1994. In the
models with education controls, we see a pattern of monotonic positive cross-cohort effects.
In the model with education, language and region of birth, we see very little in the way of a
cross-cohort pattern except for a modest increase in the index for the last two cohorts.
We interpret these findings as evidence that the move to a more educated inflow of
economic immigrants had a significant impact making new immigrants more likely to be
in jobs with non-manual task requirements and less likely to be in jobs with manual task
requirements. However, this occurred within a context of a strong cross-cohort trend of
declining non-manual task requirements and increasing manual task requirements. Most of
these trends can be explained by controls for language fluency and region of birth suggesting
that the changing source country composition was a key factor in the cross-cohort trends
away from non-manual jobs and towards manual jobs. It should be noted that we cannot
identify from our analysis the underlying causes of this trend. As discussed in the literature
review, they could include language fluency issues, discrimination or problems of credential
equivalency and incomplete information.

6.4

The Earnings Return to Occupational Task Requirements

The final part of our regression analysis involves estimating equation 2 where we estimate the
earnings models of the first three columns of Table 1 but re-estimating them after controlling
for the five occupational task requirement indexes denoted by Si . In the first set regressions
we include the five tasks. The signs and magnitudes of these coefficients are interesting in
their own right. However, we are also interested in seeing whether their inclusion has an
effect on the estimated return to education and on the immigrant arrival cohort profiles.

18

Yi = Xi β + Si η + (δ1 immi +

k
X

δj Cj ) × (Si η) + α1 Y SMi + α2 Y SMi2 + i

(2)

j=2

In the last three columns, we also include interactions of the five task variables with the
cohort dummies.
The first column of Table 2 contains the coefficient estimates of the model which contains
the same specification as in the first column of Table 1: controls for immigrant status,
age, marital status, Census year, immigrant arrival cohort (default of 1970-74), years-sincemigration, region of residence in Canada and the five occupational task requirement indexes.
The coefficient on the non-routine analytical tasks index is largest of the five indexes at
0.191 and strongly statistically significant. This indicates that a one standard deviation
increase in this index (relative to the 1991 distribution) is associated with approximately
19% higher weekly wages for men. While each of the other indexes is statistically significant,
the absolute values of their effects is much smaller ranging from a negative effect of -0.029
for the routine manual task index to 0.047 for the routine cognitive index.
In the second column of Table 2, the equivalent model’s estimates are presented but with
the education controls also included. The estimated coefficients are generally quite similar
to what was found in the first column. However, the negative cohort effects for the last two
cohorts, 1995-99 and 2000-04 are larger in absolute value which is consistent with what we
found in Table 1 when education controls were included. In the third column of Table 2,
we present equivalent estimates based on a model which also conditions on official language
fluency controls and region of birth controls. The coefficient on the immigrant indicator in
column 3 is -.208 which is lower than the coefficient in column 2 (-.4). This is not surprising
given that the inclusion of the source country controls means that the coefficient on the
immigrant indicator can be interpreted as the immigrant/Canadian born earnings difference
for immigrants born in the primarily English-speaking developed economies. The coefficients
on the arrival cohort controls are largely unaffected by the inclusions of the language fluency

19

and region of birth controls.21
It is important to note that the inclusion of the five task requirement indexes does not
appear to have a significant effect on the cross-cohort patterns when we compare the first
three columns of Table 2 to their counterparts in the first three columns of Table 1. This
suggests that the task requirement indexes cannot fully explain the underling patterns in
earnings outcomes across immigrant arrival cohorts.
The first column of Table 3 contains the coefficients on the immigrant interaction for
each occupational task index taken from column 6 of Table 2. Recall that this specification
includes the education controls but does not include the controls for official language fluency
or source country region. Each subsequent column of Table 3 contains the interaction of
the index with each of the immigrant arrival cohorts. Given the default is the 1970-74
arrival cohort, the first column gives the interaction effect for that group of immigrants. The
remaining cells in each row provide an estimate of the differences between the 1970-74 cohort
interaction with the index and each of the other cohort interactions with the index. For the
case of the non-routine analytical tasks index, the cross-cohort pattern is basically flat until
the 1990s where we see an upward trend (at least through the end of the 1990s). This is
consistent with the return on these types of tasks being increasing for more recent immigrant
cohorts, although not for the 2000-04 cohort. Conversely, the opposite pattern is found for
non-routine interactive tasks with statistically significant cohort differences (relative to the
1970-74 cohort) with the largest difference being -0.108 for the 1995-1999 cohort. The cohort
patterns are less clear for the routine cognitive. For the non-routine manual task index, we
once again see a negative cross-cohort pattern that is strongly significant. In contrast, the
cross-cohort pattern in returns for the case of the routine manual tasks index is positive
and significant beginning with the 1990-94 cohort with the largest effect being 0.055 for the
2000-04 cohort.
21

The returns to skills and the coefficients on the cohort dummies are very similar to the results presented
in column (3) of Table 2 when we add a set of 25 occupation group dummies.

20

The shifting source country composition of arrival cohorts over this period may in part
explain these patterns. A lack of English and/or French language fluency may have made
it relatively difficult to earn as much as a Canadian-born person when employed in an
occupation with a relatively high level of non-routine interactive task requirements. In
addition, the fact that there was a shift towards field of study in the engineering and IT
sectors in the 1990s and early 2000s (Hou and Picot, 2009) could explain the rising return
to non-routine analytical task requirements.22 Since our model does not control for field of
study, it may be falling into these returns as the composition of immigrant field of study
shifted towards relatively high paying fields, at least until the IT Bust of the early 2000s.
The fact that the coefficient on the interaction falls from 0.081 for the 1995-99 cohort to
-0.017 for the 2000-2004 cohort is consistent with this interpretation. The opposite pattern
of cohort interactions for the non-routine manual and routine manual tasks may also be
explained by the shifting source country composition across arrival cohorts.
It may be that language is relatively unimportant in occupations with large routine
manual requirements since once one learns the skills required, consulting with colleagues
may be relatively less important than in the non-routine manual occupations where the
fact that job activities are often not routine may necessitate greater communication with
colleagues in order to learn how to resolve issues that are changing regularly. However, it is
important to note that the equivalent interactions of the five task variables with the arrival
cohort variables from the model of Table 2 that includes the language variables and the
source country variables (column 6) has largely the same patterns of estimates as to what
we present in Table 3. Consequently, it does not appear that cross arrival cohort variation
in source country or language fluency can be used to explain these patterns.
22

See also Sweetman and McBride (2004) for a study showing the importance of field of study in determining the earnings of immigrants to Canada within post-secondary educational categories.

21

7

Analysis of Earnings and Occupational Task Requirements for Immigrant Women

The analysis above has been repeated for women with broadly similar findings. We present
equivalent regression results from Table 1 in Table 4 based on estimation over the sub-sample
of women. As can be seen from Table 4, the coefficient estimates are generally similar to
those of Table 1 for men. The same patterns of declining earnings across more recent arrival
cohorts are present as well as declining occupational task requirements in the three cognitive
areas as well as cross-cohort increases in the task requirements in the two manual indexes.
One notable difference from the results for men is that the improvement in the cognitive task
indexes for the late 1990s and early 2000s cohorts are not nearly as pronounced for women
as they are for men in models where education controls are not included. This could reflect
the fact that men are more likely than women to be the Principal Applicants under the point
system; therefore, the shift in educational focus in immigrant selection may have directly
impacted on the education levels of the Principal Applicants who were more likely to be men
(See Sweetman and Warman (2010)). That said, the strong increase in university education
for these cohorts that is shown in Figure 2 for men is also present in the equivalent figure for
women so there was a large increase in university education for the immigrant women in these
cohorts. The differences may be related to selection effects due to differential labour force
participation behaviour for immigrant women compared to immigrant men. We condition all
of our analysis on individuals who are employed at the time of the Census since we need the
occupational information in order to generate the occupational task requirements. Research
on these differences for immigrant women is an important area for future research.

8

Earnings Inequality of New Immigrants to Canada

Using the Gini Coefficients, we next examine the importance of immigrants on Canadian
income inequality and take into consideration the interaction between immigrants and tech22

nical change. The Gini Coefficient is a measure of the degree of income inequality in a
population and can be interpreted in terms of the Lorenz Curve.23 The Gini can be shown
to be an increasing function of the area between the Lorenz curve and the line of absolute
equality, which is represented by a 45 degree line. The less inequality there is, the closer the
Lorenz curve is to the 45 degree line. The Gini Coefficient includes the range of real numbers from zero to one, where a coefficient of zero would indicate perfect equality, so everyone
would have the same income while a coefficient of one would indicate perfect inequality so
that one person would have all the income.
In column one of Table 5, we present the overall Gini Coefficients for weekly earnings,
first separately by year.24 The Gini Coefficient increases over the fifteen-year period starting
at .368 in 1991 and increasing to .407 in 2006. This is a notable increase in inequality of
around 11%. In column 2, we present the Gini Coefficients using the actual weekly earnings
of the native born but for immigrants we calculate what their earnings would have been if
they had been assigned the tasks they would be given if they were native born. To calculate
the counterfactual, we take each immigrant and adjust the person’s actual earnings for the
extra earnings that he/she would have received according to our reduced form models of: 1)
tasks and 2) earnings returns to tasks if he/she had the same value of each occupational task
requirement variable as an otherwise similar native-born person (based on gender and highest
level of completed education). We end up with five task adjustment values per person and
we use the coefficients from an earnings model with the five occupational task requirement
variables on the right-hand side to determine one earnings adjustment for each immigrant.
We then add that number (either positive or negative) to the immigrant’s actual earnings
and calculate the Gini coefficient with this adjusted earnings sample of observations.
Even with the increase in tasks and resulting weekly earnings,25 we find that there is
23

The Lorenz Curve represents the share of income held by a share of the population after the population
has been sorted by income going from lowest to highest.
24
We present five % confidence intervals in parentheses based on 99 bootstrap replications.
25
We find the resulting increase in earnings grows over the sample period with the average increase in
weekly earnings of $43.5 in 1991 and $87.4 in 2006 for men, or about $2,262 and $4,546 in terms of annual
earnings. We find similar results for females.

23

very little change in the Gini Coefficients with them dropping from .368 to .366 in 1991
and from .407 to .402 in 2006. In column 3, we go even further by dropping immigrants
and re-estimating the Gini Coefficients using only the native-born population in our sample.
Again, we see very little change in the Gini Coefficient in each year.26
In the last two columns of Table 5, we focus on earnings inequality within the immigrant
population and first investigate whether it has changed over time in the 1991-2006 period.
The immigrant population in our sample experiences rising earnings inequality over the
period from a Gini of .387 in 1991 to .426 in 2006 which mirrors the trend in inequality we
see in column 3 for the native-born population but represents greater income inequality in
each year than that of the native born. In the final column, we again focus on the immigrant
sub-sample and calculate the Gini after assigning the immigrants the task levels across each
of the five dimensions of otherwise equivalent native-born men using the method described
above for the simulation of column 2. This leads to a small decline in the Gini in each year
which is significant from 1996 onwards. The upward trend in earnings inequality is smaller
in column 5 relative to column 4 which suggests that the low cognitive task requirements
and the high manual task requirements received by immigrants (relative to otherwise similar
native born) led to an increased level of inequality within the immigrant sub-population in
Canada.
This simulation ignores possible General Equilibrium effects that may occur from the
presence of the immigrants in Canada. For example, the presence of immigrants may have
an impact on the wages of the Canadian born which could have an impact on overall income
inequality in Canada and this would not be captured by our analysis. The majority of studies
on the impact of immigration on the wages of the native born find either no statistically
significant effect or a modest positive or negative effect (see, for examples, Altonji and Card
(1991), Card (2001) for the US and Tu (2010) for Canada. However, Aydemir and Borjas
(2007), find that a 10% labour supply increase is associated with a 3%-4% decline in wages.
26

If we use the Theil Index, although the increase in inequality between 1991 and 2006 is much more
pronounced, the impact on inequality of assigning immigrants the tasks of the native born or dropping
immigrants from the sample again is only negligible. See Table A.16 in the appendix

24

They also find that international migration narrowed wage inequality in Canada while it
raised wage inequality in the United States. Peri and Sparber (2009) find that the effect of
the large inflow of low skilled immigrants in the US had only a small impact on the wages
of the less educated. They conclude that less skilled immigration in the US led the highly
skilled American-born workers to be more likely to pursue jobs with more communication
intensive tasks. Consequently, we see this debate over the likely impact of immigration on
the wages of natives as still unresolved but an important area for future work, especially for
Canada.
Another possibility is that it was the expansion of the university educated part of the
Canadian workforce over the 1980s and 1990s which held back the widening of the so called
‘college premium’ in Canada preventing it from being apparent in the data. This might
also be an explanation for why we do not find a growing return to non-routine cognitive
and non-routine interactive task requirements and a declining return to routine manual task
requirements for Canada as one would expect given the findings of Autor, Levy, and Murnane
(2003) in the US. In an early study on the topic, Freeman and Needels (1991) note that the
college/high school differential increased much less in Canada in the 1980s than it did in the
US and attribute this in part to the greater growth in the university graduate proportion
of the labour force in Canada than the US. It may be that the highly skilled immigration
that followed further served to hold back the growth in wages of the university educated.
However, the low occupational task requirements in the three cognitive related areas and
the high occupational task requirements in the two manual areas for these highly educated
recent cohorts of immigrants indicate that these immigrants competed more directly with
workers at the middle to bottom part of the skill distribution in Canada than workers at the
top of the skill distribution.

25

9

Conclusions

The declining earnings outcomes of successive immigrant arrival cohorts to Canada since
the 1970s have raised considerable attention in the policy and academic communities. In
this paper, we explore the underlying causes of the poorer performance of new immigrants
by focusing on the different types of occupational task requirements of the jobs held by
immigrants and Canadian born.
Coinciding with the pattern of cross-cohort declines in the entry earnings of immigrant
to Canada was a somewhat complex cohort pattern in terms of task requirements. Without
accounting for the individual’s education level, we observe declining levels of non-routine
analytical, non-routine interactive and routine cognitive task requirements across the 1980s
immigrant entry cohorts through the early 1990s entry cohorts. However, the pattern then
reverses with an increase in these three occupational task requirements for immigrant men in
the late 1990s and early 2000s which coincided with the expansion of a more highly educate
inflow of immigrants to Canada. An almost opposite cohort pattern is found for each of
the manual occupational task requirement indexes (routine and non-routine). Once, we
control for education, the improvement in the late 1990s in the levels of the three cognitive
dimensions (non-routine analytical, non-routine interactive and routine cognitive) is either
eliminated or diminished. We interpret the finding as indicating that the underlying causes
of the cross-cohort decline in immigrants to Canada apparent in the earnings data have been
manifested in occupations that have relied in a generally increasing way on manual skills
rather than cognitive skills.
The cross-cohort patterns in both earnings and the different occupational task requirement dimensions can be explained by the strong change in immigrant source country distribution (moving away from countries where individuals are likely to have strong fluency
in English) coupled with the shift in field of study towards engineering and other IT related area of studies in the 1990s. The former shift meant that recent immigrants may have
struggled in spite of their high levels of education to interact effectively with colleagues (as

26

suggested by the low levels and returns to non-routine interactive tasks requirements) and
may have been forced to take jobs with manual task requirements. The second shift could
explain the fact that we see strong returns to non-routine analytical tasks requirements for
the late 1990s cohort. However, this return drops dramatically at the time of the IT collapse
in the early 2000s. Consequently, careful consideration of the links between education, intended occupation and language fluency in the selection of economic immigrants appear to
be of paramount importance. The increased emphasis on language testing which occurred
in Canada shortly after the end of the period covered by our data may have led to better
outcomes for immigrants. Future research should explore this possibility.
The final part of our analysis involves an investigation of the role of immigration in determining overall income inequality in Canada. We find evidence of growing income inequality
for both the native born and for immigrants with the overall level of earnings inequality
somewhat higher for immigrants than for the native born in each Census year. The importance of immigration for overall income inequality in Canada appears to be small based on
our Gini Coefficient analysis. We carried out simulations in which immigrants were assigned
the occupational task requirement values of otherwise similar native born to see the impact
that this would have on the overall level of earnings inequality in Canada and earnings inequality within the immigrant sub-population. The effect was small and not statistically
significant for the overall earnings inequality. In terms of immigrant earnings inequality,
the counterfactual exercise led to a slight reduction in inequality which was statistically significant in the 1996 and later Census years and was largest for the most recent Census of
2006.

27

References
Adserà, Alı́cia and Ana Ferrer. 2014. “The effect of linguistic proximity on the occupational assimilation of immigrant men.” CLSSRN working papers 144, Vancouver School
of Economics.
Altonji, Joseph G. and David Card. 1991. “The Effects of Immigration on the Labor Market
Outcomes of Less-skilled Natives.” In Immigration, Trade and the Labor Market. NBER
Chapters, 201–234.
Autor, David, H. Frank Levy, and Richard J. Murnane. 2003. “The Skill Content of Recent Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
118 (4):1279–1333.
Aydemir, Abdurrahman and George Borjas. 2007. “Cross-Country Variation in the Impact
of International migration: Canada, Mexico, and the United States.” Journal of the
European Economic Association 5 (4):663–708.
Aydemir, Abdurrahman and Mikal Skuterud. 2005. “Explaining the deteriorating entry
earnings of Canada’s immigrant cohorts: 1966-2000.” Canadian Journal of Economics
38 (2):641–672.
Baker, Michael and Dwayne Benjamin. 1994. “The performance of immigrants in the Canadian labor market.” Journal of Labor Economics 12 (3):369–405.
Beach, Charles, Alan Green, and Christopher Worswick. 2011. “Towards Improving Canada’s
Skilled Immigration Policy: An Evaluation Approach.” Policy Study 45, CD Howe Institute, Toronto, Canada.
Beaudry, Paul and David A. Green. 2000. “Cohort Patterns in Canadian Earnings: Assessing
the Role of Skill Premia in Inequality Trends.” Canadian Journal of Economics 33 (4):907–
36.

28

Beaudry, Paul, David A Green, and Benjamin M Sand. 2013. “The Great Reversal in the
Demand for Skill and Cognitive Tasks.” Tech. rep., NBER Working Paper 18901.
———. 2014. “The Declining Fortunes of the Young since 2000.” American Economic
Review, Papers and Proceedings 104 (5):381–386.
Borjas, George J. 1995. “Assimilation and changes in cohort quality revisited: What happened to immigrant earnings in the 1980s?” Journal of Labor Economics 13 (2):201–245.
Borjas, George J. and Rachel M. Friedberg. 2009. “Recent trends in the earnings of new
immigrants to the United States.” Tech. rep., NBER Working Paper 15406.
Card, David. 2001. “Immigran Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts of Higher Immigraion.” Journal of Labor Economics 19 (1):22–64.
Chiswick, Barry R. 1978. “The Effect of Americanization on the Earnings of Foreign-born
Men.” Journal of Political Economy 86 (5):239–249.
Chiswick, Barry R. and Paul Miller. 2008. “Why Is the Payoff to Schooling Smaller for
Immigrants.” Labour Economics 15 (6):1317–40.
———. 2010. “An Explanation for the Lower Payoff to Schooling for Immigrants in the
Canadian Labour Market.” In Canadian Immigration: Economic Evidence for a Dynamic
Policy Environment, edited by A. Sweetman T. McDonald, E. Ruddick and C. Worswick.
Montreal and Kingston: McGill Queen’s University Press, Queen’s Policy Studies Series.
DiNardo, John, Nicole M Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux. 1996. “Labor Market Institutions
and the Distribution of Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric Approach.” Econometrica
64 (5):1001–44.
Dustmann, Christian, Tommaso Frattini, and Ian P. Preston. 2013. “The Effect of Immigration along the Distribution of Wages.” Review of Economic Studies 80 (1):145–173.
Ferrer, Ana, David A. Green, and W. Craig Riddell. 2006. “The effect of literacy on immigrant earnings.” Journal of Human Resources 41 (2):380–410.
29

Ferrer, Ana and W. Craig Riddell. 2008. “Education, credentials, and immigrant earnings.”
Canadian Journal of Economics 41 (1):186–216.
Freeman, Richard and Karen Needels. 1991. “Skill Differentials in Canada in an Era of
Rising Labor Market Inequality.” Tech. rep., NBER Working Paper 3827.
Grant, Mary L. 1999. “Evidence of New Immigrant Assimilation in Canada.” Canadian
Journal of Economics 32 (4):930–55.
Green, David A. 1999. “Immigrant Occupational Attainment: Assimilation and Mobility
over Time.” Journal of Labor Economics 17 (1):49–79.
Green, David A. and Christopher Worswick. 2012. “Immigrant earnings profiles in the
presence of human capital investment: Measuring cohort and macro effects.” Labour
Economics 19 (2):241–259.
Hou, Feng and Garnett Picot. 2009. “The Effect of Immigrant Selection and the IT Bust
on the Entry Earnings of Immigrants.” Working Papers 29, Canadian Labour and Skills
Research Network.
Imai, Susumu, Derek Stacey, and Casey Warman. 2011. “From Engineer to Taxi Driver?
Occupational Skills and the Economic Outcomes of Immigrants.” Working Papers 1275,
Queen’s University.
Ingram, Beth F. and George R. Neumann. 2006. “The returns to Skill.” Labour Economics
13 (1):35–59.
Juhn, K.M. Murphy, C. and B. Pierce. 1993. “Wage Inequality and the rise in returns to
skill.” Journal of Political Economy 101 (3):410–442.
Kahanec, Martin and Klaus F Zimmermann. 2009. “International Migration, Ethnicity, and
Economic Inequality.” In The Oxford Handbook of Economic Inequality. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 455–490.

30

Katz, L.F. and K.M. Murphy. 1992. “Changes in relative wages, 1963-1987: supply and
demand factors.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (1):35–78.
Li, Qing and Arthur Sweetman. 2014. “The quality of immigrant source country educational
outcomes: Do they matter in the receiving country?” Labour Economics 26 (C):81–93.
McDonald, James Ted and Christopher Worswick. 1998. “The earnings of immigrant men
in Canada: Job tenure, cohort, and macroeconomic conditions.” Industrial and Labor
Relations Review 51 (3):465–482.
McWhinney, Mike. 1998. “A Selection Criteria Chronology, 1967-1997: Critical Changes
in Definition, the Point System and Priority Processing.” Strategic research and review
branch, citizenship and immigration canada.
Oreopoulos, Philip. 2011. “Why Do Skilled Immigrants Struggle in the Labor Market?
A Field Experiment with Thirteen Thousand Resumes.” American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy 3 (4):148–171.
Pendakur, Krishna and Ravi Pendakur. 1998. “The colour of money: earnings differentials
among ethnic groups in Canada.” Canadian Journal of Economics 31:518–548.
Peri, Giovanni and Chad Sparber. 2009. “Task Specialization, Immigration and Wages.”
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1 (3):135–169.
Poletaev, Maxim and Chris Robinson. 2008. “Human capital specificity: Evidence form the
Dictionary of Occupational Titles and Displaced Worker Surveys, 1984-2000.” Journal of
Labor Economics 26 (3):387–420.
Robinson, Chris. 2011. “Occupational Mobility, Occupation Distance and Specific Human
Capital.” Working Paper 2011-5, University of Western Ontario, CIBC Centre for Human
Capital and Productivity Working Papers.
Skuterud, Mikal. 2010. “Visible Minority Earnings Gap Across Generations of Canadians.”
Canadian Journal of Economics 43 (3):860–881.
31

Sweetman, Arthur and Stephan McBride. 2004. “Postsecondary Field of Study and the
Canadian Labour Market Outcomes of Immigrants and Non-Immigrants.” Research paper
233, Analytical Studies Branch, Statistics Canada, October.
Sweetman, Arthur and Casey Warman. 2010. “How Far Does the Points System Stretch?
The Spouses of Skilled Worker Principal Applicants.” In Canadian Immigration: Economic Evidence for a Dynamic Policy Environment, edited by A. Sweetman T. McDonald,
E. Ruddick and C. Worswick. Montreal and Kingston: McGill Queen’s University Press,
Queen’s Policy Studies Series.
———. 2013. “Canada’s Immigration Selection System and Labour Market Outcomes.”
Canadian Public Policy 39 (s1):141–160.
———. 2014. “Former Temporary Foreign Workers and International Students as Sources
of Permanent Immigration.” Canadian Public Policy 40 (4):392–407.
Tu, Jiong. 2010. “The Impact of Immigration on the Labour Market Outcomes of NativeCanadians.” IZA discussion paper no. 5129.
Warman, Casey. 2007. “Ethnic enclaves and immigrant earnings growth.” Canadian Journal
of Economics 40 (2):401–422.
Warman, Casey, Arthur Sweetman, and Gustave Goldmann. 2015. “The Portability of
New Immigrants’ Human Capital: Language, Education and Occupational Matching.”
Canadian Public Policy Forthcoming.
Warman, Casey and Christopher Worswick. 2004. “Immigrant Earnings Performance in
Canadian Cities: 1981 through 2001.” Canadian Journal of Urban Research 13 (1):62–84.
Yamaguchi, Shintaro. 2012. “Tasks and heterogeneous human capital.” Journal of Labor
Economics 30 (1):1 – 53.

32

Figure 1: Immigrant Landings in Canada, All Immigrants and Economic Immigrants,
1980-2012
300000
250000
200000
150000
100000
50000
0
1980

1984

1988

1992

1996
Year

Permanent Residents

33

2000

2004

2008

Economic Immigrants

2012

0

20

%

40

60

Figure 2: Highest Level of Education by Arrival Cohort, Males.

1970

1975

1980

1985
1990
Year of Arrival

Less than High School
post secondary below Bachelor

34

1995

2000

2005

High School
Bachelor or higher

Figure 3: Weekly earnings, Males.
Base controls + education

.25

+ Region and language controls

.15
.05
−.05
−.15
−.25
−.35
−.45
−.55
−.65
−.75
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35 0

5

10

15

20

25

Years since migration
1970−74
1985−89
2000−04

1975−79
1990−94

35

1980−84
1995−99

30

35

Figure 4: Immigrant-Native Born Differences in Earning Densities, For Recent Immigrant Cohort

−.25

−.15

−.05

.05

.15

.25

Males

−.35

Immigrant density−Native−born density

Females

4.5 5 5.5 6 6.5 7 7.5 8 8.5

4.5 5 5.5 6 6.5 7 7.5 8 8.5

Log weekly earnings
Actual 1991
Actual 2006

Notes: 1991: 1985-89 cohort, 2006: 2000-04 cohort.

36

Predicted 1991
Predicted 2006

37
NO
0.083
1,374,200

-0.404∗∗
(0.0086)
-0.0023
(0.0052)
-0.0545∗∗
(0.0059)
-0.0964∗∗
(0.0064)
-0.160∗∗
(0.0069)
-0.0589∗∗
(0.0079)
-0.114∗∗
(0.0092)
0.0189∗∗
(0.0007)
-0.0260∗∗
(0.0022)

NO
0.123
1,374,200

-0.467∗∗
(0.0084)
0.0079
(0.0050)
-0.0322∗∗
(0.0057)
-0.0611∗∗
(0.0062)
-0.129∗∗
(0.0067)
-0.0904∗∗
(0.0077)
-0.172∗∗
(0.0090)
0.0218∗∗
(0.0007)
-0.0324∗∗
(0.0021)
-0.136∗∗
(0.0027)
0.113∗∗
(0.0022)
0.329∗∗
(0.0027)
0.488∗∗
(0.0038)

earnings
(2)

YES
0.127
1,374,200

-0.222∗∗
(0.0087)
0.0214∗∗
(0.0050)
0.0117∗
(0.0056)
0.0069
(0.0062)
-0.0446∗∗
(0.0066)
-0.0052
(0.0077)
-0.0816∗∗
(0.0089)
0.0211∗∗
(0.0007)
-0.0315∗∗
(0.0021)
-0.127∗∗
(0.0027)
0.108∗∗
(0.0022)
0.323∗∗
(0.0027)
0.474∗∗
(0.0038)

(3)

NO
0.029
1,374,200

-0.186∗∗
(0.0107)
-0.0101
(0.0065)
-0.0802∗∗
(0.0073)
-0.174∗∗
(0.0080)
-0.199∗∗
(0.0086)
0.0364∗∗
(0.0101)
0.0200+
(0.0117)
0.0054∗∗
(0.0008)
-0.0061∗
(0.0026)

NO
0.252
1,374,200

-0.364∗∗
(0.0092)
0.0198∗∗
(0.0055)
-0.0204∗∗
(0.0062)
-0.0788∗∗
(0.0068)
-0.118∗∗
(0.0074)
-0.0649∗∗
(0.0087)
-0.166∗∗
(0.0102)
0.0135∗∗
(0.0007)
-0.0232∗∗
(0.0022)
-0.283∗∗
(0.0028)
0.302∗∗
(0.0025)
1.017∗∗
(0.0030)
1.400∗∗
(0.0037)
YES
0.261
1,374,200

-0.0431∗∗
(0.0096)
0.0292∗∗
(0.0054)
0.0311∗∗
(0.0061)
-0.0052
(0.0067)
-0.0336∗∗
(0.0073)
0.0167+
(0.0086)
-0.0763∗∗
(0.0101)
0.0145∗∗
(0.0007)
-0.0267∗∗
(0.0022)
-0.259∗∗
(0.0028)
0.295∗∗
(0.0025)
0.995∗∗
(0.0031)
1.356∗∗
(0.0037)

Non-Routine Analytical
(4)
(5)
(6)

Regressions include controls for region of residence, year, marital status, age and age squared. ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1.

Region/Language
R-squared
Observations

Graduate Degree

Bachelor Degree

Post Sec. below Uni

< High school

YSM2 /100

YSM

imm x 20-04

imm x 95-99

imm x 90-94

imm x 85-89

imm x 80-84

imm x 75-79

Immigrants

(1)

NO
0.031
1,374,200

NO
0.204
1,374,200

-0.397∗∗
(0.0093)
0.0141∗
(0.0058)
-0.0296∗∗
(0.0063)
-0.0676∗∗
(0.0070)
-0.100∗∗
(0.0076)
-0.1230∗∗
(0.0087)
-0.193∗∗
(0.0101)
0.0120∗∗
(0.0007)
-0.0183∗∗
(0.0022)
-0.283∗∗
(0.0030)
0.164∗∗
(0.0027)
0.871∗∗
(0.0031)
1.232∗∗
(0.0039)
YES
0.213
1,374,200

-0.0718∗∗
(0.0097)
0.0275∗∗
(0.0056)
0.0378∗∗
(0.0063)
0.0226∗∗
(0.0069)
0.0025
(0.0075)
-0.0212∗
(0.0086)
-0.0829∗∗
(0.0100)
0.0130∗∗
(0.0007)
-0.0220∗∗
(0.0022)
-0.262∗∗
(0.0030)
0.158∗∗
(0.0027)
0.851∗∗
(0.0031)
1.193∗∗
(0.0039)

Non-Routine Interactive
(7)
(8)
(9)
-0.242∗∗
(0.0103)
-0.0132∗
(0.0065)
-0.0789∗∗
(0.0072)
-0.1470∗∗
(0.0079)
-0.165∗∗
(0.0085)
-0.0210∗
(0.0097)
-0.0110
(0.0112)
0.0047∗∗
(0.0008)
-0.0031
(0.0025)

Table 1: Log Weekly Earnings and Task Regressions, Men Part 1

38
NO
0.024
1,374,200

-0.112∗∗
(0.0106)
-0.0045
(0.0065)
-0.0684∗∗
(0.0073)
-0.152∗∗
(0.0080)
-0.189∗∗
(0.0086)
0.0233∗
(0.0100)
0.0124
(0.0116)
0.0058∗∗
(0.0008)
-0.0084∗∗
(0.0026)

NO
0.177
1,374,200

-0.250∗∗
(0.0095)
0.0171∗∗
(0.0058)
-0.0156∗
(0.0064)
-0.0695∗∗
(0.0071)
-0.116∗∗
(0.0077)
-0.0393∗∗
(0.0090)
-0.109∗∗
(0.0105)
0.0122∗∗
(0.0008)
-0.0224∗∗
(0.0023)
-0.267∗∗
(0.0028)
0.316∗∗
(0.0026)
0.833∗∗
(0.0031)
1.003∗∗
(0.0038)
YES
0.184
1,374,200

-0.0107
(0.0099)
0.0189∗∗
(0.0057)
0.0090
(0.0064)
-0.0293∗∗
(0.0071)
-0.0731∗∗
(0.0077)
-0.00420
(0.0089)
-0.0692∗∗
(0.0105)
0.0132∗∗
(0.0007)
-0.0256∗∗
(0.0023)
-0.246∗∗
(0.0028)
0.311∗∗
(0.0025)
0.813∗∗
(0.0031)
0.963∗∗
(0.0039)

Routine Cognitive
(11)
(12)

NO
0.027
1,374,200

-0.0608∗∗
(0.0101)
0.0158∗
(0.0062)
0.0513∗∗
(0.0069)
0.1210∗∗
(0.0077)
0.0927∗∗
(0.0083)
-0.0395∗∗
(0.0096)
-0.0378∗∗
(0.0111)
0.0086∗∗
(0.0008)
-0.0152∗∗
(0.0024)

NO
0.208
1,374,200

0.0795∗∗
(0.0092)
-0.0117∗
(0.0056)
0.0076
(0.0062)
0.0515∗∗
(0.0069)
0.0428∗∗
(0.0075)
0.0856∗∗
(0.0086)
0.177∗∗
(0.0102)
0.0013+
(0.0007)
0.0002
(0.0022)
0.376∗∗
(0.0029)
0.0578∗∗
(0.0028)
-0.911∗∗
(0.0030)
-1.046∗∗
(0.0036)
YES
0.217
1,374,200

-0.108∗∗
(0.0096)
-0.0107+
(0.0055)
-0.0274∗∗
(0.0061)
0.0090
(0.0068)
0.0036
(0.0074)
0.0450∗∗
(0.0086)
0.138∗∗
(0.0101)
0.0003
(0.0007)
0.0034
(0.0021)
0.351∗∗
(0.0030)
0.0599∗∗
(0.0028)
-0.883∗∗
(0.0030)
-1.003∗∗
(0.0036)

Non-Routine manual
(13)
(14)
(15)

Regressions include controls for region of residence, year, marital status, age and age squared. ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1.

Region/Language
R-squared
Observations

Graduate Degree

Bachelor Degree

Post Sec. below Uni

< High school

YSM2 /100

YSM

imm x 20-04

imm x 95-99

imm x 90-94

imm x 85-89

imm x 80-84

imm x 75-79

Immigrants

(10)

NO
0.020
1,374,200

NO
0.183
1,374,200

0.248∗∗
(0.0097)
0.0037
(0.0062)
0.0301∗∗
(0.0067)
0.0547∗∗
(0.0074)
0.0513∗∗
(0.0080)
0.0987∗∗
(0.0092)
0.159∗∗
(0.0107)
-0.0015+
(0.0008)
0.0030
(0.0023)
0.308∗∗
(0.0028)
0.141∗∗
(0.0028)
-0.849∗∗
(0.0031)
-1.019∗∗
(0.0047)
YES
0.193
1,374,200

-0.0219∗
(0.0103)
-0.0012
(0.0061)
-0.0220∗∗
(0.0067)
-0.0127+
(0.0073)
-0.0220∗∗
(0.0079)
0.0227∗
(0.0091)
0.0834∗∗
(0.0106)
-0.0020∗∗
(0.0007)
0.0055∗
(0.0023)
0.282∗∗
(0.0028)
0.145∗∗
(0.0028)
-0.823∗∗
(0.0031)
-0.976∗∗
(0.0048)

Routine manual
(17)
(18)

0.119∗∗
(0.0106)
0.0307∗∗
(0.0068)
0.0652∗∗
(0.0074)
0.112∗∗
(0.0081)
0.0880∗∗
(0.0087)
-0.0350∗∗
(0.0010)
-0.0660∗∗
(0.0115)
0.0053∗∗
(0.0008)
-0.0109∗∗
(0.0025)

(16)

Table 1: Log Weekly Earnings and Task Regressions, Men continued

Table 2: Log Weekly Earnings Regressions with Task Controls, Men
No Interactions:
-0.359∗∗
-0.400∗∗
-0.208∗∗
(0.0083) (0.0082) (0.0086)
imm X 1975-79
0.0000
0.0051
0.0170∗∗
(0.0049) (0.0049) (0.0049)
imm X 1980-84
-0.0370∗∗ -0.0280∗∗
0.0081
(0.0056) (0.0055) (0.0055)
imm X 1985-89
-0.0592∗∗ -0.0482∗∗
0.0081
(0.0061) (0.0061) (0.0061)
imm X 1990-94
-0.116∗∗
-0.108∗∗ -0.0371∗∗
(0.0066) (0.0065) (0.0065)
imm X 1995-99
-0.0665∗∗ -0.0816∗∗ -0.00940
(0.0076) (0.0075) (0.0075)
imm X 2000-04
-0.119∗∗
-0.150∗∗ -0.0742∗∗
(0.0088) (0.0087) (0.0087)
Non-Routine Analytical
0.191∗∗
0.134∗∗
0.131∗∗
(0.0025) (0.0025) (0.0025)
Non-Routine Interactive
-0.0085∗∗ 0.0076∗∗
0.0070∗∗
(0.0019) (0.0019) (0.0019)
Routine Cognitive
0.0470∗∗
0.0530∗∗
0.0540∗∗
(0.00176) (0.0017) (0.0018)
Non-Routine Manual
0.0428∗∗
0.0683∗∗
0.0663∗∗
(0.0016) (0.0016) (0.0016)
Routine Manual
-0.0291∗∗ -0.0299∗∗ -0.0270∗∗
(0.00168) (0.00167) (0.00167)
Years since migration
0.0174∗∗
0.0191∗∗
0.0183∗∗
(0.0007) (0.0007) (0.0007)
Years since migration2 /100
-0.0241∗∗ -0.0279∗∗ -0.0266∗∗
(0.0021) (0.0020) (0.0020)
< High school
-0.0981∗∗ -0.0940∗∗
(0.0027) (0.0027)
Post Secondary < Bachelor’s
0.0547∗∗
0.0514∗∗
(0.0022) (0.0022)
Bachelor’s Degree
0.179∗∗
0.179∗∗
(0.0028) (0.0028)
Graduate Degree
0.279∗∗
0.275∗∗
(0.0040) (0.0041)

Interactions by Cohort
-0.367∗∗
-0.406∗∗
-0.213∗∗
(0.0085) (0.0085) (0.0088)
-0.0023
0.0023
0.0170∗∗
-0.0057
(0.0056) (0.0056)
-0.0346∗∗ -0.0265∗∗ 0.0119+
(0.0062) (0.0061) (0.0061)
-0.0547∗∗ -0.0467∗∗ 0.0114+
(0.0066) (0.0065) (0.0065)
-0.116∗∗
-0.111∗∗ -0.0387∗∗
(0.0070) (0.0069) (0.0069)
-0.0837∗∗ -0.0996∗∗ -0.0265∗∗
(0.0081) (0.0081) (0.0080)
-0.119∗∗
-0.153∗∗ -0.0768∗∗
(0.0092) (0.0092) (0.0092)
0.177∗∗
0.120∗∗
0.119∗∗
(0.0028) (0.0029) (0.0029)
0.0005
0.0158∗∗
0.0160∗∗
(0.0021) (0.0021) (0.0021)
0.0494∗∗
0.0571∗∗
0.0571∗∗
(0.0020) (0.0020) (0.0020)
0.0428∗∗
0.0691∗∗
0.0703∗∗
(0.0018) (0.0018) (0.0018)
-0.0285∗∗ -0.0312∗∗ -0.0305∗∗
(0.00192) (0.00191) (0.00191)
0.0173∗∗
0.0191∗∗
0.0186∗∗
(0.0007) (0.0007) (0.0007)
-0.0246∗∗ -0.0283∗∗ -0.0276∗∗
(0.0021) (0.0020) (0.0020)
-0.0981∗∗ -0.0942∗∗
(0.0027) (0.0027)
0.0554∗∗
0.0522∗∗
(0.0022) (0.0022)
0.179∗∗
0.180∗∗
(0.0028) (0.0028)
0.275∗∗
0.274∗∗
(0.0041) (0.0041)

Region/Language
R-squared
Observations

NO
0.148
1,374,200

Immigrant

NO
0.148
1,374,200

NO
0.158
1,374,200

YES
0.160
1,374,200

NO
0.158
1,374,200

YES
0.161
1,374,200

Regressions include controls for region of residence, year, marital status, age and age squared. ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1.

39

Table 3: Cohort by Task interaction effects, Men

Non-Routine Analytical
Non-Routine Interactive
Routine Cognitive
Non-Routine Manual
Routine Manual

Immigrant

Imm X
1975-79

Imm X
1980-84

Imm X
1985-89

Imm X
1990-94

Imm X
1995-99

Imm X
2000-04

0.0750∗∗
(0.0105)
-0.0126
(0.0079)
-0.0465∗∗
(0.0070)
0.0061
(0.0069)
-0.0048
(0.0070)

-0.0025
(0.0143)
-0.0138
(0.0108)
0.0210∗
(0.0097)
0.0122
(0.0095)
-0.0141
(0.0094)

0.0183
(0.0145)
-0.0324∗∗
(0.0111)
0.0190+
(0.0097)
-0.0141
(0.0097)
0.0019
(0.0094)

-0.0145
(0.0136)
-0.0194+
(0.0105)
0.0206∗
(0.0091)
0.0013
(0.0090)
0.0006
(0.0090)

0.0353∗∗
(0.0135)
-0.0659∗∗
(0.0106)
0.0156+
(0.0091)
-0.0151+
(0.0090)
0.0171+
(0.0090)

0.0814∗∗
(0.0143)
-0.108∗∗
(0.0115)
0.0115
(0.0101)
-0.0396∗∗
(0.0101)
0.0422∗∗
(0.0101)

-0.0171
(0.0161)
-0.0520∗∗
(0.0131)
0.0461∗∗
(0.0112)
-0.0435∗∗
(0.0109)
0.0552∗∗
(0.0110)

Regressions include controls for region of residence, year, marital status, age and age squared. ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1.

40

41
NO
0.038
1,281,380

-0.285∗∗
(0.0093)
-0.0216∗∗
(0.0056)
-0.0613∗∗
(0.0063)
-0.0836∗∗
(0.0069)
-0.163∗∗
(0.0074)
-0.134∗∗
(0.0086)
-0.203∗∗
(0.0100)
0.0138∗∗
(0.0007)
-0.0166∗∗
(0.0022)

NO
0.107
1,281,380

-0.318∗∗
(0.0091)
-0.0157∗∗
(0.0054)
-0.0330∗∗
(0.0061)
-0.0500∗∗
(0.0067)
-0.136∗∗
(0.0072)
-0.162∗∗
(0.0083)
-0.275∗∗
(0.0098)
0.0163∗∗
(0.0007)
-0.0232∗∗
(0.0021)
-0.210∗∗
(0.0031)
0.163∗∗
(0.0023)
0.486∗∗
(0.0027)
0.659∗∗
(0.00451)

earnings
(2)

YES
0.109
1,281,380

-0.221∗∗
(0.0095)
-0.0077
(0.0054)
-0.0122∗
(0.0061)
-0.0190∗∗
(0.0067)
-0.0975∗∗
(0.0072)
-0.121∗∗
(0.0084)
-0.231∗∗
(0.0098)
0.0160∗∗
(0.0007)
-0.0228∗∗
(0.0021)
-0.200∗∗
(0.0032)
0.160∗∗
(0.0023)
0.474∗∗
(0.0027)
0.639∗∗
(0.00456)

(3)

NO
0.025
1,281,380

-0.358∗∗
(0.0110)
-0.0236∗∗
(0.0067)
-0.0917∗∗
(0.0076)
-0.1270∗∗
(0.0083)
-0.176∗∗
(0.0090)
-0.0238∗
(0.0104)
-0.0331∗∗
(0.0121)
0.0093∗∗
(0.0009)
-0.0069∗∗
(0.0026)

NO
0.247
1,281,380

-0.438∗∗
(0.0098)
-0.0092
(0.0059)
-0.0330∗∗
(0.0066)
-0.0552∗∗
(0.0073)
-0.117∗∗
(0.0079)
-0.0821∗∗
(0.0091)
-0.187∗∗
(0.0108)
0.0146∗∗
(0.0008)
-0.0195∗∗
(0.0023)
-0.328∗∗
(0.0030)
0.364∗∗
(0.0025)
1.038∗∗
(0.0029)
1.472∗∗
(0.00431)
YES
0.254
1,281,380

-0.151∗∗
(0.0101)
0.0056
(0.0058)
0.0094
(0.0065)
0.0048
(0.0072)
-0.0327∗∗
(0.0078)
0.0004
(0.0091)
-0.104∗∗
(0.0107)
0.0140∗∗
(0.0008)
-0.0196∗∗
(0.0023)
-0.305∗∗
(0.0030)
0.358∗∗
(0.0025)
1.023∗∗
(0.0029)
1.436∗∗
(0.00436)

Non-Routine Analytical
(4)
(5)
(6)

Regressions include controls for region of residence, year, marital status, age and age squared. ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1.

Region/Language
R-squared
Observations

Graduate Degree

Bachelor Degree

Post Sec. below Uni

< High school

YSM2 /100

YSM

imm x 20-04

imm x 95-99

imm x 90-94

imm x 85-89

imm x 80-84

imm x 75-79

Immigrants

(1)

NO
0.025
1,281,380

NO
0.224
1,281,380

-0.442∗∗
(0.0092)
-0.0087
(0.0057)
-0.0418∗∗
(0.0064)
-0.0574∗∗
(0.0070)
-0.114∗∗
(0.0075)
-0.109∗∗
(0.0086)
-0.182∗∗
(0.0101)
0.0146∗∗
(0.0007)
-0.0199∗∗
(0.0022)
-0.298∗∗
(0.0028)
0.317∗∗
(0.0024)
0.929∗∗
(0.0028)
1.316∗∗
(0.00441)
YES
0.231
1,281,380

-0.152∗∗
(0.0095)
0.0071
(0.0056)
0.0048
(0.0063)
0.0077
(0.0069)
-0.0240∗∗
(0.0074)
-0.0198∗
(0.0085)
-0.0939∗∗
(0.0100)
0.0138∗∗
(0.0007)
-0.0198∗∗
(0.0021)
-0.275∗∗
(0.0029)
0.311∗∗
(0.0024)
0.914∗∗
(0.0028)
1.282∗∗
(0.00446)

Non-Routine Interactive
(7)
(8)
(9)
-0.371∗∗
(0.0103)
-0.0215∗∗
(0.0065)
-0.0943∗∗
(0.0072)
-0.122∗∗
(0.0079)
-0.166∗∗
(0.0084)
-0.0562∗∗
(0.0097)
-0.0443∗∗
(0.0112)
0.00981∗∗
(0.0008)
-0.0085∗∗
(0.0024)

Table 4: Log Weekly Earnings and Task Regressions, Women

42
NO
0.022
1,281,380

-0.404∗∗
(0.0108)
-0.0004
(0.0066)
-0.0583∗∗
(0.0074)
-0.0670∗∗
(0.0081)
-0.118∗∗
(0.0088)
0.0492∗∗
(0.0101)
0.0687∗∗
(0.0117)
0.0105∗∗
(0.0009)
-0.0045+
(0.0026)

NO
0.125
1,281,380

-0.430∗∗
(0.0100)
0.0040
(0.0060)
-0.0245∗∗
(0.0067)
-0.0306∗∗
(0.0075)
-0.0898∗∗
(0.0081)
0.0140
(0.0093)
-0.0144
(0.0109)
0.0136∗∗
(0.0008)
-0.0141∗∗
(0.0024)
-0.408∗∗
(0.0032)
0.198∗∗
(0.0025)
0.517∗∗
(0.00271)
0.736∗∗
(0.0040)
YES
0.133
1,281,380

NO
0.021
1,281,380

NO
0.073
1,281,380

0.331∗∗
(0.00806)
-0.0027
(0.0048)
0.0485∗∗
(0.0055)
0.0227∗∗
(0.0060)
0.0620∗∗
(0.0065)
0.0257∗∗
(0.0075)
0.0142
(0.0088)
-0.0046∗∗
(0.0006)
-0.0006
(0.0019)
0.364∗∗
(0.0026)
0.0111∗∗
(0.0021)
-0.194∗∗
(0.00226)
-0.273∗∗
(0.0034)
YES
0.086
1,281,380

0.0629∗∗
(0.00818)
-0.0087+
(0.0047)
0.0152∗∗
(0.0053)
-0.0215∗∗
(0.0059)
0.00131
(0.0064)
-0.0282∗∗
(0.0074)
-0.0364∗∗
(0.0086)
-0.0036∗∗
(0.0006)
-0.000869
(0.0018)
0.338∗∗
(0.0027)
0.0170∗∗
(0.0021)
-0.176∗∗
(0.00228)
-0.236∗∗
(0.0034)

Non-Routine manual
(13)
(14)
(15)

-0.175∗∗
0.328∗∗
(0.0102) (0.00845)
0.0013
-0.0039
(0.0059)
(0.0051)
-0.0116+
0.0642∗∗
(0.0067)
(0.0058)
-0.0071
0.0379∗∗
(0.0074)
(0.0064)
-0.0550∗∗
0.0713∗∗
(0.0080)
(0.0068)
0.0390∗∗
0.0024
(0.0092)
(0.0079)
0.0062
-0.0317∗∗
(0.0108)
(0.0092)
0.0130∗∗ -0.00264∗∗
(0.0008)
(0.0007)
-0.0144∗∗ -0.0074∗∗
(0.0023)
(0.0020)
-0.380∗∗
(0.0032)
0.193∗∗
(0.0025)
0.500∗∗
(0.00272)
0.699∗∗
(0.0040)

Routine Cognitive
(11)
(12)

Regressions include controls for region of residence, year, marital status, age and age squared. ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1.

Region/Language
R-squared
Observations

Graduate Degree

Bachelor Degree

Post Sec. below Uni

< High school

YSM2 /100

YSM

imm x 20-04

imm x 95-99

imm x 90-94

imm x 85-89

imm x 80-84

imm x 75-79

Immigrants

(10)

NO
0.016
1,281,380

NO
YES
0.085
0.094
1,281,380 1,281,380

0.353∗∗
0.0502∗∗
(0.00976) (0.0101)
-0.0121∗ -0.0322∗∗
(0.0061) (0.0059)
0.0255∗∗ -0.0297∗∗
(0.0068) (0.00662)
0.0125+ -0.0627∗∗
(0.0074) (0.0073)
0.0337∗∗ -0.0677∗∗
(0.0080) (0.0079)
0.0380∗∗ -0.0609∗∗
(0.0091) (0.0090)
0.0626∗∗ -0.0385∗∗
(0.0107) (0.0106)
-0.0030∗∗ -0.0023∗∗
(0.0007) (0.0007)
-0.0031
-0.0031
(0.0023) (0.0022)
0.234∗∗
0.209∗∗
(0.0028) (0.0028)
0.0856∗∗
0.0922∗∗
(0.0025) (0.0025)
-0.458∗∗
-0.439∗∗
(0.00298) (0.00301)
-0.669∗∗
-0.628∗∗
(0.0053) (0.0054)

Routine manual
(17)
(18)

0.310∗∗
(0.0101)
-0.0075
(0.0063)
0.0509∗∗
(0.0071)
0.0477∗∗
(0.0077)
0.0585∗∗
(0.0083)
-0.0029
(0.0095)
-0.0325∗∗
(0.0110)
0.0005
(0.0008)
-0.0107∗∗
(0.0024)

(16)

Table 4: Log Weekly Earnings and Task Regressions, Women continued.

Table 5: Gini Coefficients
Year

Everyone

Immigrants
assigned Tasks of
Native born

1991

0.3675
(.3655-.3694)

0.3656
(.3638-.3675)

0.3651
(.3629-.3673)

0.3871
(.3833-.3909)

0.3701
(.3648-.3754)

1996

0.3833
(.3809-.3856)

0.3801
(.3777-.3824)

0.3790
(.3762-.3819)

0.4104
(.4072-.4136)

0.3862
(.3833-.3890)

2001

0.3954
(.3932-.3975)

0.3921
(.3899-.3943)

0.3914
(.3886-.3942)

0.4173
(.4140-.4206)

0.3959
(.3924-.3993)

2006

0.4069
(.4042-.4096)

0.4017
(.3987-.4046)

0.4028
(.3995-.4060)

0.4263
(.4201-.4326)

0.3953
(.3901-.4005)

Immigrants
Dropped

Five % confidence intervals in parentheses based on 99 bootstrap replications.

43

Immigrants only

Immigrants only,
but assigned Tasks
of Native born

A

Principal Component Factor Analysis
Table A.1: Non-Routine Analytical

Factor
Eigenvalue
Factor1
8.62834
Factor2
0.98362
Factor3
0.77061
Factor4
0.46508
Factor5
0.27906
Factor6
0.23086
Factor7
0.19867
Factor8
0.13792
Factor9
0.11266
Factor10
0.09649
Factor11
0.07028
Factor12
0.02642

Difference
7.64472
0.21301
0.30553
0.18602
0.0482
0.03219
0.06076
0.02526
0.01617
0.0262
0.04386
.

Proportion
0.719
0.082
0.0642
0.0388
0.0233
0.0192
0.0166
0.0115
0.0094
0.008
0.0059
0.0022

Table A.2: Factor Loadings NonRoutine Analytical
Variable
var4A2b4
var4A2b2
var4A2b1
var4A2a3
var2B4e
var2B2i
var2A2b
var2A2a
var1C7b
var1C7a
var1A1b2
var1A1b1

Factor1 Uniqueness
0.8544
0.27
0.8777
0.2297
0.9004
0.1892
0.7494
0.4384
0.8874
0.2126
0.8697
0.2436
0.8353
0.3023
0.8808
0.2242
0.8239
0.3211
0.7146
0.4894
0.8828
0.2207
0.8772
0.2306

44

Cumulative
0.719
0.801
0.8652
0.904
0.9272
0.9465
0.963
0.9745
0.9839
0.9919
0.9978
1

Table A.3: Non-Routine Interactive
Factor
Factor1
Factor2
Factor3
Factor4
Factor5
Factor6
Factor7
Factor8

Eigenvalue
5.38242
0.83214
0.6326
0.36919
0.30246
0.17375
0.17111
0.13634

Difference
4.55028
0.19954
0.26341
0.06674
0.12871
0.00264
0.03477
.

Proportion
0.6728
0.104
0.0791
0.0461
0.0378
0.0217
0.0214
0.017

Cumulative
0.6728
0.7768
0.8559
0.902
0.9399
0.9616
0.983
1

Table A.4: Factor Loadings NonRoutine Interactive
Variable
var4A4c2
var4A4b1
var4A4a4
var4A4a1
var2B5d
var2B1c
var2A2d
var1C2b

Factor1 Uniqueness
0.8038
0.354
0.8388
0.2964
0.7485
0.4397
0.7844
0.3848
0.8606
0.2593
0.8369
0.2996
0.8686
0.2455
0.8134
0.3384

Table A.5: Routine Cognitive
Factor
Factor1
Factor2
Factor3
Factor4

Eigenvalue
2.79523
0.63577
0.32835
0.24065

Difference
2.15946
0.30742
0.08771
.

Proportion
0.6988
0.1589
0.0821
0.0602

Table A.6: Factor Loadings Routine Cognitive
Variable
var2A1e
var1A1d1
var1A1c2
var1A1b6

Factor1 Uniqueness
0.7715
0.4048
0.8126
0.3396
0.8796
0.2263
0.8752
0.2341

45

Cumulative
0.6988
0.8578
0.9398
1

Table A.7: Routine Manual
Factor
Factor1
Factor2
Factor3

Eigenvalue
2.21793
0.46723
0.31484

Difference
1.7507
0.15239
.

Proportion
0.7393
0.1557
0.1049

Cumulative
0.7393
0.8951
1

Table A.8: Factor Loadings Routine Manual
Variable
var1A2c2
var1A2a3
var1A2a2

Factor1
0.8363
0.8491
0.8931

Uniqueness
0.3007
0.279
0.2024

Table A.9: Non-Routine Manual
Factor
Factor1
Factor2
Factor3
Factor4
Factor5
Factor6
Factor7

Eigenvalue
5.52296
0.45597
0.33859
0.26236
0.21284
0.13873
0.06856

Difference
5.06699
0.11738
0.07623
0.04951
0.07411
0.07017
.

Proportion
0.789
0.0651
0.0484
0.0375
0.0304
0.0198
0.0098

Table A.10: Factor Loadings NonRoutine Manual
Variable
var4A3a4
var1A2b1
var2B3l
var4A3a3
var4A3a1
var1A2b4
var1A2b2

Factor1 Uniqueness
0.8685
0.2457
0.9061
0.1789
0.7975
0.364
0.9051
0.1807
0.892
0.2043
0.9111
0.1699
0.9309
0.1334

46

Cumulative
0.789
0.8541
0.9025
0.94
0.9704
0.9902
1

Table A.11: Variables Used to Create Non-Routine Analytical Tasks
Variable ID
1.A.1.b.1

Variable Name
Fluency of Ideas

1.A.1.b.2

Originality

1.C.7.a

Innovation

1.C.7.b

Analytical Thinking

2.A.2.a

Critical Thinking

2.A.2.b

Active Learning

2.B.2.i

Complex Problem Solving

2.B.4.e

Judgment and Decision
Making

4.A.2.a.3

Evaluating Information
to Determine Compliance
with Standards

4.A.2.b.1

Making Decisions and
Solving Problems
Thinking Creatively

4.A.2.b.2

4.A.2.b.4

Developing
Objectives
and Strategies

Description
The ability to come up with a number of ideas
about a topic (the number of ideas is important, not their quality, correctness, or creativity).
The ability to come up with unusual or clever
ideas about a given topic or situation, or to
develop creative ways to solve a problem.
Job requires creativity and alternative thinking
to develop new ideas for and answers to workrelated problems.
Job requires analyzing information and using
logic to address work-related issues and problems.
Using logic and reasoning to identify the
strengths and weaknesses of alternative solutions, conclusions or approaches to problems.
Understanding the implications of new information for both current and future problemsolving and decision-making.
Identifying complex problems and reviewing related information to develop and evaluate options and implement solutions.
Considering the relative costs and benefits of
potential actions to choose the most appropriate one.
Using relevant information and individual
judgment to determine whether events or processes comply with laws, regulations, or standards.
Analyzing information and evaluating results
to choose the best solution and solve problems.
Developing, designing, or creating new applications, ideas, relationships, systems, or products, including artistic contributions.
Establishing long-range objectives and specifying the strategies and actions to achieve them.

47

Table A.12: Variables Used to Create Non-Routine Interactive Tasks
Variable ID
1.C.2.b

Variable Name
Leadership

2.A.2.d

Monitoring

2.B.1.c

Persuasion

2.B.5.d

Management of Personnel Resources

4.A.4.a.1

Interpreting the Meaning
of Information for Others
Establishing and Maintaining Interpersonal Relationships
Coordinating the Work
and Activities of Others
Staffing Organizational
Units

4.A.4.a.4

4.A.4.b.1
4.A.4.c.2

Description
Job requires a willingness to lead, take charge,
and offer opinions and direction.
Monitoring/Assessing performance of yourself,
other individuals, or organizations to make improvements or take corrective action.
Persuading others to change their minds or behaviour.
Motivating, developing, and directing people as
they work, identifying the best people for the
job.
Translating or explaining what information
means and how it can be used.
Developing constructive and cooperative working relationships with others, and maintaining
them over time.
Getting members of a group to work together
to accomplish tasks.
Recruiting, interviewing, selecting, hiring, and
promoting employees in an organization.

48

Table A.13: Variables Used to Create Routine Cognitive Tasks
Variable ID
1.A.1.b.6

Variable Name
Information Ordering

1.A.1.c.2

Number Facility

1.A.1.d.1

Memorization

2.A.1.e

Mathematics

Description
The ability to arrange things or actions in a
certain order or pattern according to a specific
rule or set of rules (e.g., patterns of numbers,
letters, words, pictures, mathematical operations).
The ability to add, subtract, multiply, or divide
quickly and correctly.
The ability to remember information such as
words, numbers, pictures, and procedures.
Using mathematics to solve problems.

Table A.14: Variables Used to Create Routine Manual Tasks
Variable ID
1.A.2.a.2

Variable Name
Manual Dexterity

1.A.2.a.3

Finger Dexterity

1.A.2.c.2

Wrist-Finger Speed

Description
The ability to quickly move your hand, your
hand together with your arm, or your two
hands to grasp, manipulate, or assemble objects.
The ability to make precisely coordinated
movements of the fingers of one or both hands
to grasp, manipulate, or assemble very small
objects.
The ability to make fast, simple, repeated
movements of the fingers, hands, and wrists.

49

Table A.15: Variables Used to Non-Routine Manual Tasks
Variable ID
1.A.2.b.2

Variable Name
Multilimb Coordination

1.A.2.b.4

Rate Control

4.A.3.a.1

Performing
General
Physical Activities

4.A.3.a.3

Controlling Machines and
Processes

2.B.3.l

Repairing

1.A.2.b.1

Control Precision

4.A.3.a.4

Operating
Vehicles,
Mechanized Devices, or
Equipment

Description
The ability to coordinate two or more limbs (for
example, two arms, two legs, or one leg and one
arm) while sitting, standing, or lying down. It
does not involve performing the activities while
the whole body is in motion.
The ability to time your movements or the
movement of a piece of equipment in anticipation of changes in the speed and/or direction
of a moving object or scene.
Performing physical activities that require considerable use of your arms and legs and moving your whole body, such as climbing, lifting,
balancing, walking, stooping, and handling of
materials.
Using either control mechanisms or direct physical activity to operate machines or processes
(not including computers or vehicles).
Repairing machines or systems using the
needed tools.
The ability to quickly and repeatedly adjust
the controls of a machine or a vehicle to exact
positions.
Running, maneuvering, navigating, or driving vehicles or mechanized equipment, such as
forklifts, passenger vehicles, aircraft, or water
craft.

50

Table A.16: Theil Index
Year

1991

Everyone

0.2829
(.2756-.2901)
1996
0.3106
(.3007-.3205)
2001
0.3414
(.3315-.3513)
2006
0.3895
(.3729-.4061)

Immigrants
assigned Tasks of
Native born

Immigrants
Dropped

0.2802
(.2730-.2875)
0.3058
(.2961-.3155)
0.3362
(.3266-.3458)
0.3808
(.3639-.3978)

0.2780
(.2694-.2866)
0.3037
(.2921-.3154)
0.3349
(.3229-.3469)
0.3809
(.3632-.3986)

Five % confidence intervals in parentheses based on 99 bootstrap replications.

51

Immigrants only

Immigrants only,
but assigned Tasks
of Native born

0.3257
(.3083-.3432)
0.3605
(.3475-.3735)
0.3811
(.3658-.3964)
0.4363
(.3852-.4873)

0.2988
(.2765-.3212)
0.3207
(.3100-.3314)
0.3441
(.3300-.3582)
0.3805
(.3386-.4224)

