NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IS THE WTO PASSÉ?
Kyle Bagwell
Chad P. Bown
Robert W. Staiger
Working Paper 21303
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21303

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2015

Bagwell thanks the Center for Advanced Studies in the Behavioral Sciences for support and hospitality.
Bown acknowledges financial support from the World Bank's Multi-Donor Trust Fund for Trade and
Development. We thank Steven Durlauf, Douglas Irwin, Nuno Limão, Daniel Trefler and six anonymous
referees for very useful and detailed comments on an earlier draft. Semira Ahdiyyih provided outstanding
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21303.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Kyle Bagwell, Chad P. Bown, and Robert W. Staiger. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Is the WTO passé?
Kyle Bagwell, Chad P. Bown, and Robert W. Staiger
NBER Working Paper No. 21303
June 2015
JEL No. F13,F15,F53,F55
ABSTRACT
The WTO has delivered policy outcomes that are very different from those likely to emerge out of
the recent wave of preferential trade agreements (PTAs). Should economists see this as an efficient
institutional hand-off, where the WTO has carried trade liberalization as far as it can manage, and
is now passing the baton to PTAs to finish the job? We survey a growing economics literature on international
trade agreements and argue on this basis that the WTO is not passé. Rather, and subject to some caveats,
our survey of research to date suggests that the WTO is structured in a way that is likely to encourage
policy outcomes that are viewed as efficiency enhancing by WTO member governments, while the
analogous claim for PTA-led liberalization is less clear.

Kyle Bagwell
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Landau Economics Building
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
kbagwell@stanford.edu
Chad P. Bown
Development Economics Research Group
The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW, MSN MC3-303
Washington, DC 20433 USA
cbown@worldbank.org

Robert W. Staiger
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
319 Silsby
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
rstaiger@dartmouth.edu

1

Introduction

Together with its predecessor the General Agreement on Tari¤s and Trade (GATT), the World
Trade Organization (WTO) has delivered policy outcomes for its member governments that are very
di¤erent from those likely to emerge out of the recent wave of preferential trade agreements (PTAs).
Over nearly 70 years, the GATT/WTO concluded 8 rounds of multilateral trade negotiations,
reducing the average ad valorem tari¤ on industrial goods to below 4 percent and expanding the
multilateral system’s membership from 23 to 161 economies. But the GATT/WTO liberalization
process has ground to a halt with the 9th and seemingly moribund Doha Development Round.
Furthermore, the scope of GATT/WTO liberalization, with its focus on border measures, has
mainly been shallow.1 By contrast, PTAs have emerged as the vehicle by which countries reduce
their tari¤s from current WTO levels down to zero, albeit on a discriminatory basis: the number
of PTAs has expanded from roughly 100 in 1990 to nearly 400 today. And the intended scope of
PTA liberalization, which reaches further and further behind the border, is increasingly deep.
Should economists see the current state of a¤airs as an e¢ cient institutional hand-o¤, with
the GATT/WTO having carried trade liberalization as far as it could manage, and now passing
the baton to PTAs to …nish the job and help governments arrive at their international e¢ ciency
frontier?2 And if so, can PTAs rely on their own systems of dispute resolution to ensure that
governments remain at the frontier? If these questions can be answered in the a¢ rmative, then
economists could view PTAs as a legitimate successor to the GATT/WTO and reasonably conclude
that “the WTO is passé.” But there are alternative interpretations of these developments.
One possibility is that PTAs are indeed needed to complete or complement the liberalization
process and move governments to the international e¢ ciency frontier, but that a central role for
dispute resolution would continue to reside at the WTO. Under this view PTAs and the WTO are
complementary to an e¢ cient multilateral trading system, and both deserve support.
More ominously, the current state of a¤airs might be seen as ultimate proof that PTAs are
stumbling blocks to the multilateral system. According to this interpretation, the WTO still has
important liberalization work to do, but it has stalled out short of its goal because of the existence
and ready availability of PTAs. From this perspective, liberalization under the GATT/WTO may
have ground to a halt short of the international e¢ ciency frontier, but PTAs should be seen as a
1

Here and throughout our survey we focus on international agreements to liberalize market access for traded goods
and services, which for short we refer to as “trade agreements.” The GATT focused on liberalizing market access
for goods and, as we explain further below, took a shallow integration approach. The WTO’s General Agreement
on Trade in Services (GATS) extended the market access focus of GATT to trade in services, but GATS has yet to
produce meaningful liberalization (Francois and Hoekman, 2010). The WTO Agreements also include the Agreement
on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS), the principal concern of which is the protection
of intellectual property rights rather than issues of market access. While distinct from our trade agreements focus,
in the conclusion we brie‡y discuss a literature related to the TRIPS agreement in the context of our discussion of
linkage across issue areas in trade agreements.
2
By “international e¢ ciency frontier” we mean policy choices that could not be adjusted to generate Pareto gains
across countries when each country’s welfare is judged by the preferences of its government. This focus on government
preferences generally follows the literature, though a distinction is made in some of the literature between ex-ante
and ex-post government preferences. We discuss these points further in our survey. Our survey does not focus on
research that assesses the value of trade agreements from the perspective of a speci…c country or subset of countries.

1

root cause of the WTO’s current woes rather than its legitimate successor.
A third possibility is that governments may have already achieved the international e¢ ciency
frontier under the GATT/WTO liberalization process – or if not yet, they could achieve it with
selective …xes – so that the WTO is in better shape than it appears; and rather it is the kind of
additional liberalization associated with the recent rise of PTAs that represents a failure of e¢ cient
international trade policy cooperation. With this interpretation PTAs are liberalization run amok.
In this paper we make use of a growing economics literature on international trade agreements to
sort through these interpretations and suggest answers to the questions posed above. To facilitate
our discussion, we adopt a simple organizing principle: we group papers in the literature by their
stance on what makes a trade agreement valuable to its member governments, that is, by the
nature of the “problem”that a trade agreement is supposed to “solve”for its member governments.
According to this organizing principle, there are four strands of the literature.
The oldest and most established strand of the literature is the “terms-of-trade”theory of trade
agreements. This theory posits that governments use trade agreements to undo the policy ine¢ ciencies that are associated with unilateral policy choices when those choices can shift the costs of
intervention onto trading partners through movements in foreign exporter prices (terms of trade).
In this theory, addressing an international externality (which travels through the terms of trade) is
the central purpose of a trade agreement. The “commitment”theory also has a well-established history in the literature, but here the central role for an international externality is absent. Instead,
governments value trade agreements as a way to tie their hands (make commitments) against
their own lobbies and citizens. The two remaining strands of the literature, what we call the
“delocation/pro…t-shifting” and the “o¤shoring” theories of trade agreements, are more recent arrivals. They can be viewed as attempts to identify new international externalities that go beyond
the terms-of-trade externality to include the local prices in each country, and that can give rise to
and shape international trade agreements. The delocation/pro…t-shifting theory argues that such
non-terms-of-trade externalities have been important for understanding real-world trade agreements
all along, while the o¤shoring theory suggests that non-terms-of-trade externalities may only have
become prominent with the recent rise of o¤shoring and international supply chains.
As might be anticipated, the strength of the literature’s support for the various interpretations
of recent developments depends on which purposes are central to real-world trade agreements.
While we discuss below evidence that lends support to all four theories, a growing body of evidence
points to the terms-of-trade theory as central for understanding the actual trade agreements that
we see. We therefore …rst evaluate these developments from the perspective of the terms-of-trade
theory, surveying both the theoretical and empirical literature to assess the various interpretations
and establish some initial answers. We then survey the commitment, delocation/pro…t-shifting
and o¤shoring theories, describing where they yield di¤erent assessments of these interpretations,
and we utilize this description in combination with a survey of the relevant empirical literature to
suggest quali…cations to the answers provided by the terms-of-trade theory.
To preview, the literature we survey does not support the view that the WTO is passé. On

2

the contrary, from the perspective of the terms-of-trade-theory strand of the literature, the WTO
appears to be structured in a way that is likely to encourage policy outcomes that are viewed
as e¢ ciency enhancing by WTO member governments, while the analogous claim for PTA-led
liberalization is less clear. The commitment, delocation/pro…t-shifting and o¤shoring theories do
raise important caveats to unquali…ed support for the WTO, and there are features of PTAs that
these theories support. But until more empirical evidence suggests otherwise, these other strands
of the literature do not establish that PTAs rather than the WTO should be entrusted with the
rules of globalization.
To set the stage, we next provide a brief overview of the main institutional features of the
world trading system, focusing on the multilateral framework provided by the GATT/WTO and
the current state of PTAs. Section 3 reviews the terms-of-trade theory of trade agreements and
surveys the empirical literature that relates to its essential tenets. In Sections 4 and 5 we use the
terms-of-trade strand of the literature as a lens through which to evaluate the GATT/WTO and
PTA approaches to trade liberalization, and from this perspective we interpret recent developments
in the world trading system. Section 6 surveys the literature on the commitment, delocation/pro…tshifting, and o¤shoring theories of trade agreements and identi…es insights from each that suggests
quali…cations to the answers provided by the terms of trade theory. Section 7 turns to an evaluation
of dispute settlement in the world trading system. Finally, Section 8 concludes, identi…es directions
for future research, and discusses the possible role of critical mass and plurilateral agreements in
strengthening and revitalizing the GATT/WTO approach.

2

The World Trading System: a brief overview

Individuals and …rms ultimately drive globalization, but governments set the rules of the game,
and the rules can be very important to the outcome. Here we brie‡y summarize the two main sets
of rules for the world trading system: the policy commitments and their enforcement under the
GATT/WTO, and the sets of rules associated with the web of PTAs currently in force. We describe
how the recent wave of PTAs is changing the rules of globalization along a number of important
dimensions relative to the rules established by the GATT/WTO and even previous PTAs, and we
suggest that there are important choices embedded in these two institutional forms.

2.1

The GATT/WTO Multilateral System

We begin with some background on the GATT/WTO multilateral System.
A short history of tari¤ liberalization under the GATT and WTO

From the backdrop

of the Smoot-Hawley tari¤s imposed by the US in 1930 and the international retaliatory response
that followed, the GATT was created in 1947 with 23 countries and grew in membership over the
next …ve decades before being consolidated into the WTO in 1995. As of 2015, the WTO counts

3

161 member economies –including both the EU and each of the 28 EU member states individually.3
The trans-Atlantic economies of the US, Canada, and a number of European countries were not
only a driving force behind the creation of the GATT, but they provide perhaps the most familiar
story line for how the GATT facilitated gradual, multilateral trade liberalization and allowed countries to sustain an extensive period of low most-favored-nation (MFN) tari¤s. These countries used
the GATT forum to reduce MFN tari¤s reciprocally through periodic negotiating rounds (WTO,
2007), and they then locked in those low tari¤s through legally binding commitments. Table 1
illustrates the multilateral trade liberalization process of negotiations (percentage tari¤ cuts) covering 1947-1994, and Table 2 documents the resulting average applied ad valorem tari¤ rates for a
number of these countries in 1952 and again in 2005 after eight rounds of GATT negotiations.4
The trans-Atlantic GATT experience is not, however, how countries have universally liberalized
their MFN tari¤s or even entered into the GATT/WTO system. There are two prominent classes
of exceptions that are best illustrated by the GATT/WTO experience of other member countries.
First, some countries did not enter the system at its inception; indeed, many “latecomers” did
not seek or were not admitted entrance into the agreement until well after the initial set of GATT
Contracting Parties had already substantially negotiated MFN tari¤ liberalization. As such, the
GATT/WTO has had the ‡exibility to accommodate accessions by major economies, including
West Germany in 1951, Japan in 1955, China in 2001, and Russia in 2012.5
Second, many developing countries chose not to participate in the reciprocal tari¤ liberalization
negotiations that took place under successive GATT rounds. Instead, countries including GATT
founders India and Brazil requested and utilized “special and di¤erential treatment” exemptions
from reciprocity in order to pursue import substitution policies. While such countries may currently
apply relatively low (in historical terms) MFN tari¤s, their liberalization episodes frequently were
not undertaken reciprocally, but instead unilaterally (e.g., India) or in concert with a period of
preferential liberalization (e.g., Brazil). These and other countries also did not follow the transAtlantic approach of gradually lowering their MFN tari¤s over decades; instead, their period of
low and sustained multilateral tari¤s began suddenly and not until the 1990s. And unlike the US
and the EU, the relatively low MFN tari¤ rates that countries like Brazil and India apply have not
been legally bound under the WTO at similarly low levels.
3

The EU is a member of the WTO; for legal reasons it was o¢ cially known until 2009 as the European Communities.
The 28 individual countries of the EU are also WTO members in their own right. The EU is a single customs union
with a single trade policy and tari¤, and the European Commission “speaks” on behalf of the EU member states in
most WTO matters. Nevertheless, most other customs unions are not represented in the WTO in this manner, with
individual countries retaining WTO membership rights and obligations.
4
By 1952, average import tari¤s expressed in ad valorem terms had already fallen substantially from peak levels
in the 1930s and 1940s due to a combination of in‡ation, as many were imposed as speci…c duties, and the negotiated
liberalization of the …rst three GATT rounds. Irwin (1995, Table 5.2) reports average tari¤ rates in 1931 (after the
US imposition of its Smoot-Hawley tari¤) for France, Germany, and Italy of 38, 40, and 48 percent, respectively.
Irwin (2011, 2012) describes the political-economy forces behind the import protection that increased sharply during
the Great Depression, and Irwin, Mavroidis, and Sykes (2008) describe the negotiations that ultimately led to
establishment of the GATT in the late 1940s. WTO (2007) also provides an extensive analysis tracking the multilateral
trade liberalization that took place over the 60 year period following the GATT 1947 inception.
5
China was an original Contracting Party to the GATT but withdrew in 1950. The other two original Contracting
Parties to subsequently withdraw from the GATT were Lebanon and Syria.

4

Finally, the WTO’s 161 members notwithstanding, there are at least three dozen countries that
are not yet members. While most are developing countries and some liberalized their trade regimes
independently of the WTO (through either preferential or unilateral tari¤ liberalization), there
remain roughly 500 million people that reside in countries entirely outside of the WTO system.
Seven percent of the global population has not taken on WTO obligations and does not enjoy the
WTO legal bene…ts that we describe in more detail below.
Contemporary tari¤ commitments under the WTO

Table 3 summarizes many of the

salient features resulting from the GATT/WTO’s “shallow” integration approach to trade liberalization, including information on contemporary multilateral tari¤s across and within the major
economies. The table splits countries into three groups –the high income members of the Group of
20 (G20), the emerging economy members of the G20 (which includes the BRICS, namely, Brazil,
Russia, India, China and South Africa), and a selected sample of other major developing countries
with 2012 populations of over 50 million - some of which are not (yet) WTO members, as they are
currently only WTO “observers.”6 Overall, the tari¤ data indicate substantial heterogeneity across
countries and industries and include many examples of applied MFN import tari¤s, as well as the
bindings that have been legally negotiated to constrain them, that are not close to free trade.
Consider …rst the US. The simple average MFN tari¤ that the US applies to imports from any
other WTO member is 3.4 percent. One hundred percent of the US tari¤ lines are bound at some
level, and the simple average binding rate is 3.5 percent. The rate above which a country promises
not to raise its applied MFN tari¤ is referred to as the binding, and the binding serves as the formal
legal commitment that a country submits to the WTO membership. The WTO permits countries
to apply tari¤s below their bound rates, provided that such o¤erings are made to all other members
on a nondiscriminatory (MFN) basis. That the US applied MFN import tari¤ is pushing up against
the binding rate is an indicator that it has very little scope to unilaterally increase its applied MFN
import tari¤s without running afoul of WTO rules.
While average US applied and bound MFN tari¤s are quite low, there is considerable heterogeneity both across and within even high-income countries. Most major industrialized economies
have almost universal binding coverage and applied rates that are relatively close to their tari¤
bindings. Nevertheless, while applied MFN tari¤s may be low in historical terms, they range from
an average of 2.7 percent (Australia) to 13.3 percent (South Korea). There also remain important
examples of outliers or tari¤ “peaks” in high-income economies; for example, 2.7 percent of US
tari¤s have applied MFN rates higher than 15 percent, with the highest rate being 350 percent.
Canada, the EU, and South Korea each have more than 5 percent of MFN tari¤ lines with rates
higher than 15 percent, and maximum applied rates in these economies are greater than 500 percent.
Tari¤s exhibit even more heterogeneity across emerging and developing economies. While average applied MFN tari¤s are also relatively low for these countries in historical terms, the rates
applied by even the relatively advanced (G20) emerging economies are typically substantially higher
6

Governments with WTO observer status are non-members that are granted limited rights (e.g., access to certain
WTO meetings) and are expected to uphold certain obligations (e.g., minimal contributions to the WTO’s budget).

5

than their high-income country counterparts. Furthermore, some countries (e.g., India) have not
committed to legally binding a signi…cant share of their tari¤ lines at any level. Finally, within
the set of products that countries have committed to legally bind, there can be signi…cant di¤erentials between applied rates and the binding commitment. This last point holds for all of the G20
emerging economies (including Argentina, Brazil, India, and Mexico) with the exception of the
relatively new WTO accession countries of China (2001) and Russia (2012), for which the existing
membership demands included relatively low levels of MFN tari¤ bindings.7
Heterogeneity across the tari¤ data can be even more extreme for other major (but poorer)
developing countries. Some WTO members (e.g., Bangladesh, Burma, Nigeria) have committed
to upper limits for tari¤ bindings on fewer than 20 percent of their import tari¤ lines. Even on
products for which these WTO members bind their tari¤s, the average binding rates may be more
than 100 percentage points higher than applied rates.
There are also important di¤erences in applied MFN tari¤ heterogeneity within countries across
sectors. As one important example, Table 3 shows many instances of sharp di¤erences between
average applied tari¤s in agricultural products relative to overall rates of protection. Within the
G20, a few countries such as Argentina, Australia, and Brazil o¤er lower average import tari¤s for
agriculture than they do for other products. For most others, however, the rates in agriculture are
substantially higher (Anderson, Rausser, and Swinnen, 2013).
Finally, applied MFN tari¤s are not the only important trade policy instrument within the
multilateral WTO system. An increasing number of countries since the early 1990s have begun
to invoke GATT/WTO exceptions to their negotiated tari¤ bindings and use the temporary trade
barrier (TTB) policies of antidumping, safeguards, and countervailing duties.
Before 1990, industrialized economies such as Australia, Canada, the EU and the US dominated
overall use of TTBs, and especially the most predominant antidumping policy (Blonigen and Prusa,
2003). Since the early 1990s, a number of emerging economies have subsequently become major
users of TTBs (Bown, 2011a) as they reduced their applied import tari¤s. The last column of Table
3 provides data on the import coverage of the TTBs cumulatively applied in 2012. As examples,
eleven di¤erent G20 economies had more than 1 percent of their tari¤ lines also subject to an
imposed TTB in 2012; some of these countries did not even have an antidumping law in place
25 years earlier. Many also had one or more episodes over this 25 year period during which the
cumulative TTB import coverage rose to as high as 4-6 percent.
Table 3 reveals two other features of TTB use. First, not all WTO members use these policies.
Indeed most of the poorest WTO members have never implemented a formal antidumping or
safeguard proceeding, a feature that can be partially explained by the fact that the tari¤ bindings
of these countries are su¢ ciently above their applied rates that they can adjust tari¤s upward
unilaterally in response to shocks. Second, even members of a customs union –i.e., countries that
eliminate tari¤s on internal trade with each other and share a common applied MFN tari¤ toward
7

As of 2012, Russia had not yet fully phased in its MFN applied tari¤ cuts under its WTO accession terms and
thus its average applied rate was still above its average binding commitment.

6

non-members, examples of which we describe in more detail below – do not necessarily apply a
common set of TTB policies. In 2012, for example, customs union partners Argentina and Brazil
had di¤erent shares of product lines covered by TTBs, as did the partners Turkey and the EU.
GATT/WTO commitments relating to behind-the-border measures The GATT traditionally eschewed e¤orts to negotiate restrictions on the use of behind-the-border measures of its
member governments. As Hudec (1990) describes in his depiction of the genesis of GATT’s shallowintegration approach, while governments understood that behind-the-border measures could have
trade e¤ects, the GATT never had its heart in deep integration:
“...The standard trade policy rules could deal with the common types of trade policy
measure governments usually employ to control trade. But trade can also be a¤ected
by other ‘domestic’measures, such as product safety standards, having nothing to do
with trade policy.”[When GATT was created in 1947,]...governments would never have
agreed to circumscribe their freedom in all these other areas for the sake of a mere trade
agreement.” Hudec (1990)
The WTO emphasizes a shallow-integration approach as well but has attempted to venture into
the realm of “deeper” integration, most substantively with the aborted Doha Round attempts to
negotiate directly over the “Singapore issues” of foreign investment and competition policy.8 It is
also important to point out that many of the deep-integration issues of apparent focal interest to
recent PTAs are not entirely absent from consideration by the WTO Agreements (WTO, 2012). It
is simply that the GATT/WTO shallow-integration approach has addressed such issues di¤erently.
For example, it is true that WTO member governments maintain considerable freedom to
implement unilaterally a variety of public policy interventions, including those that adversely a¤ect
trade ‡ows. Examples include allowances for the protection of plant, animal and human health
as well as the establishment of product standards. But the WTO provides governments with
guidance so as to discourage such interventions from becoming non-tari¤ barriers applied without
a legitimate public policy motive. For trade in goods, these exceptions and guidelines are outlined
in the GATT’s basic rules on national treatment found in Article III and are further elaborated
under the GATT’s original Article XX, and the WTO’s Agreements on Technical Barriers to Trade
(TBT), and Sanitary and Phytosanitary (SPS) Measures. Furthermore, countries can bring nontari¤ issues to light by also …ling “speci…c trade concerns”with relevant WTO standing committees.
Finally, the GATT/WTO provides member governments with the right to initiate, under formal
8

In addition to foreign investment and competition policy, the Singapore issues included trade facilitation and
government procurement. Trade facilitation focused on the removal of non-tari¤ barriers “at the border” (e.g.,
procedures for clearing customs), and the Doha Round has produced a Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA). The
attempt in the context of the Doha Round to negotiate multilateral rules for government procurement failed along
with the attempts to negotiate a multilateral agreement covering foreign investment and competition policy, and
instead a revised version of the plurilateral Government Procurement Agreement (GPA) …rst signed in 1979 was
negotiated among 43 WTO members and entered into force on April 6 2014. The WTO TRIPS Agreement is a deep
integration agreement, but it is not considered a market access agreement (see also note 1).

7

dispute settlement proceedings, “violation” complaints against behind-the-border measures that
violate these guidelines, and even “non-violation” complaints against behind-the-border measures
that do not violate the guidelines but still erode negotiated market access commitments.
Dispute Settlement under the WTO and GATT

Access to formal dispute settlement pro-

cedures has always been part of the GATT/WTO system. The 1947 GATT’s Article XXIII established the basic provisions whereby government-to-government dispute resolution would take place,
and over the subsequent 50 years, Contracting Parties initiated more than 250 disputes under the
GATT fora in attempts to formally resolve a variety of trading frictions that arose.9 Legal scholars generally characterize the GATT-provided mediation that took place during this period as a
“diplomacy-based” approach to dispute resolution.
Many elements of the system changed dramatically in 1995 with the WTO inception, as the
current system is much more “legalistic”than its GATT predecessor. Members initiated nearly 500
formal WTO disputes against one another between 1995 and 2014, or nearly twice as many as during
the GATT period of 1947-1994. The literature identi…es a number of contributing explanations,
including that more countries are now actively involved in the trading system, there is substantially
more trade, and countries have taken on more legally binding commitments.
Over time, more and more WTO members have found themselves involved in formal disputes.
To date, nearly 50 out of the 161 WTO members have initiated a case as a “complainant”(i.e., the
plainti¤) and more than 50 members have faced a dispute as a “respondent” (i.e., the defendant).
More than half of the membership has been formally involved in at least one dispute via the legal
status as an “interested third party.” This can be an important role even for countries without
trade stakes in a particular dispute, given that jurisprudence arising from a dispute between any
two countries –e.g., a policy dispute pitting Colombia versus Panama or Moldova versus Ukraine–
could have policy implications for the entire WTO membership, including the US and EU.
The US and the EU are the two most frequent WTO litigants; combined they have initiated
roughly 40 percent of all disputes, roughly 50 percent of all disputes involve one or the other as a
respondent, and a signi…cant share involves one challenging the other. Nevertheless, many other
industrialized countries have also been frequent WTO litigants, including Australia, Canada, Japan,
New Zealand, and South Korea. Finally, the share of WTO disputes involving developing country
members, with the exception of least developed countries, has risen over time, and includes a large
number of developing country versus developing country disputes.10 Developing countries that are
frequent WTO litigants include Argentina, Brazil, Chile, China, Colombia, Guatemala, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Mexico, Panama, Peru, Philippines, and Thailand.
9

See Bown (2002; Table 1).
The poorest and least developed country members of the WTO system –of which there are dozens –are almost
entirely absent from participation in formal WTO dispute settlement. Bown and Hoekman (2008) provide a discussion
of the political-economic hurdles faced by these countries in the WTO that can help account for this fact.
10

8

2.2

PTAs

While a central pillar of the GATT/WTO system is the MFN principle, GATT Article XXIV
provides an exception to MFN that allows GATT/WTO members to form PTAs that satisfy certain
features. The key stipulations are that the PTA must eliminate tari¤s on “substantially all” trade
among the member countries, and that the external MFN tari¤s that member countries continue
to apply to imports from outside the PTA not increase as a result of PTA formation.
For decades during the post-World War II period, much of the analysis of PTAs centered
primarily on one successful experience of regional integration - i.e., the continuing and ongoing
evolution of western Europe. The 1951 Treaty of Paris established the European Coal and Steel
Community (ECSC) which was expanded with the 1957 Treaty of Rome to create the six-country
European Economic Community (EEC). Today’s EU is the result of continued integration over the
subsequent …ve decades, including numerous country accessions (28 member countries, as of 2015)
as well as substantial “deepening” of negotiations and agreements beyond trade preferences and
toward factor market, economic, monetary, and even political integration.
Beginning in the late 1980s, a number of other potentially economically meaningful PTAs arose
that have subsequently been sustained. These include the 1987 CUSFTA (Canada-US Free Trade
Agreement) that was subsequently expanded into the NAFTA (North American Free Trade Agreement) through the addition of Mexico in 1994. There are also increasingly important developing
country PTAs, including the MERCOSUR (Mercado Común del Sur) customs union involving
Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay in the early 1990s, ASEAN (Association of Southeast
Asian Nations) Free Trade Area involving Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore and
Thailand in the early 1990s, and CAFTA-DR (Central American Free Trade Area – Dominican
Republic) involving the US and …ve Central American economies in the mid-2000s. As of 2014, the
WTO reports that it has been noti…ed of nearly 600 reciprocal trade agreements in existence, and
nearly 400 agreements are currently in force (WTO, 2014a).11
Tari¤s and behind-the-border measures in PTAs

There are two key areas in which PTAs

push beyond the multilateral, WTO commitments. The …rst is by reducing import tari¤s even
lower than WTO levels, albeit on a discriminatory basis. The second is by negotiating beyond
tari¤s directly over new, behind-the-border policy instruments.
WTO (2011) provides a recent and relatively comprehensive characterization of the patterns of
tari¤s and trade taking place under PTAs. With the sharp increase in PTAs since 1990, the value
of trade between PTA members has grown faster than the world average; not surprisingly the share
of intra-PTA trade in world trade has nearly doubled from 18 percent in 1990 to 35 percent in
11

The number of noti…cations and trade agreements in force di¤er for several reasons. One is because noti…cations
include not only new agreements, but also the accession of new countries to existing agreements - e.g., Croatia’s
accession to the EU in 2013. Second, some agreements noti…ed to the GATT/WTO later become “inactive” (or
no longer in force), when they become superseded by a subsequent agreement that was later noti…ed and which is
currently in force - e.g., CUSFTA is no longer in force as it was superseded by NAFTA.

9

2008.12 And when intra-EU trade ‡ows are included in these statistics, intra-PTA trade as a share
of world trade increased from 28 percent to 51 percent over this period. However, the WTO (2011)
data analysis, based on a matching of product-level trade ‡ows to tari¤s and preferential tari¤s
to MFN tari¤s, reveals a number of other stylized facts, some of which challenge the conventional
wisdom regarding the degree to which PTAs serve as a force for discriminatory tari¤ liberalization.
First, while many theoretical models typically assume PTAs result in zero applied tari¤s between partners, real-world PTAs do not always lead to zero tari¤s on all intra-PTA goods trade.
Empirically, the many negotiated exceptions within PTAs have resulted in a signi…cant number of
PTA tari¤s remaining at levels above zero, including eight percent of tari¤s for the major PTAs of
the US, Canada, EU, and Japan (Damuri, 2012). Indeed, in an analysis of the PTAs involving 85
countries and 90 percent of world trade in 2007, the WTO (2011, pp. 124-125) …nds that roughly
66 percent of tari¤ lines with MFN tari¤ “peaks” (MFN rates de…ned as greater than 15 percent)
have not been reduced at all through PTAs. Hence, while existing PTAs should be viewed as a
signi…cant force in eliminating (roughly one third of, and on a discriminatory basis) the tari¤ peaks
that remain among WTO members, a majority of these tari¤ peaks are nevertheless still in place.
Second, while a large and increasing share of world trade takes place between PTA members, this
share substantially overstates the amount of preferential trade between members. In many instances
there is no preference margin because the MFN tari¤s are also zero. Furthermore, even where
positive preference margins exist, exporters may not utilize available preferences because of both
the resource costs (to sourcing inputs from less e¢ cient suppliers in PTA markets) and bureaucratic
costs (to proving legal compliance) due to rules of origin and local value-added requirements needed
to gain access to the lower preferential rates.13
How much trade really takes place under preferential tari¤s? First, between 49 percent (including intra-EU trade) and 65 percent (excluding intra-EU trade) of world trade takes place between
countries that are not part of a common PTA.14 Second, excluding intra-EU trade, the WTO estimates that only 16 percent of global trade is eligible for any preferential tari¤s and less than 2
percent is eligible to receive preferences with margins above 10 percentage points. Including intraEU trade in these statistics implies that 30 percent of global trade is eligible for any preferential
tari¤s and 4 percent is eligible for margins over 10 percentage points. Despite the explosive increase
in PTA adoption, the WTO estimates that overall, excluding (including) intra-EU trade, 84 percent
(70 percent) of world merchandise trade still takes place on an MFN basis.
These numbers can help put the impact of existing PTAs in perspective. PTAs have served as the
primary conduit for tari¤ discrimination in the WTO system. And they have led to discriminatory
tari¤ reductions below MFN levels that are far from insigni…cant. But it would appear that to
date PTAs have not delivered discriminatory tari¤ liberalization on a wide enough scale to cause
12

The data reported here and below derives speci…cally from section II of WTO (2011, pp. 47-86).
See, however, Keck and Lendle (2014) for a recent challenge to the position that preferences often go unutilized.
14
Considering these …gures with and without intra-EU trade ‡ows may be important depending on the context,
given that the EU is a unique PTA in that it is not only a customs union but has undertaken deeper integration along
many dimensions - including factor markets and monetary integration for a substantial subset of member countries and also steps toward political integration.
13

10

widespread “trade diversion” (the reduction in imports from third countries; see Viner, 1950).15
Finally, an increasingly important characteristic of many of the current PTA negotiations is
that they are no longer primarily about tari¤ liberalization but instead are pushing toward deeper
integration that addresses non-tari¤ and behind-the-border policies.16 The nascent literature on
deeper integration currently splits new PTA issue areas into two categories. The …rst are “WTOplus” PTA provisions - i.e., those that also exist under the WTO, but where PTA members use
their agreement to take on commitments to go further. Tari¤s are the clearest example; e.g.,
WTO members make legally binding MFN tari¤ commitments, and PTAs involve partners lowering
at least some of those tari¤s toward each other even further. Other examples include services,
intellectual property rights, and product standards - each of which has at least some basic WTO
coverage. The second category for PTA provisions are “WTO-extra”areas, and these involve issues
that are not yet explicitly addressed by the WTO. Examples of WTO-extra areas include labor
standards, environmental standards, foreign direct investment provisions, movement of capital,
competition policy, data protection, and even potential cooperation over other domestic regulations
in order to help achieve improved levels of “regulatory coherence” across PTA member countries.
Horn, Mavroidis, and Sapir (2010) characterize the “depth”of PTA provisions by applying this
categorization to the many US and EU PTAs in existence as of 2008.17 The initial evidence was that
EU PTAs tend to have many more WTO-extra provisions but that the pattern is reversed when the
analysis conditions on the legal enforceability (under dispute settlement) of the provisions, as US
PTAs contain more legally enforceable WTO-extra provisions. In follow-up work, the WTO (2011,
Section D) extended this approach in order to characterize 14 di¤erent “WTO-plus”provisions and
38 di¤erent “WTO-extra” provisions for a wider sample of PTAs, including a number involving
only developing countries. Their work has established a new and rich set of databases for future
research to explore the heterogeneity in application of these provisions across di¤erent PTAs.
Dispute settlement under PTAs In contrast to the WTO, there is very little empirical record
of sustained and e¤ective dispute resolution taking place under the major PTAs. With the exception
of the EU, dispute settlement provisions in most PTAs have rarely been used, and when actually
15

A potentially important caveat to this last observation, however, is suggested by the results of Handley (2014)
and Handley and Limão (forthcoming) which we discuss further below: in the presence of policy uncertainty there
can be large di¤erences between the trade e¤ects of an applied MFN tari¤ of zero that is bound at a much higher
level in the WTO and a PTA tari¤ that is both applied and bound at zero. Such di¤erences are missed by a focus
on preference margins relating to applied tari¤s alone, and inferences about the degree of trade diversion caused
by existing PTAs which adopt this focus could be signi…cantly understated as a result. See also the discussion in
Bhagwati (2008) and the survey in Panagariya (2000).
16
Some of these non-tari¤ policies under negotiation are applied at the border. For example, policies like antidumping and safeguards are applied at the border but frequently as quotas or price undertakings. Other examples
of non-tari¤ barriers that arise at the border may include customs regulations, import valuation, etc.
17
Other recent contributions characterizing and assessing such PTA provisions include work by WTO Secretariat
legal sta¤ (Chase et al, 2013) and political scientists (Elsig and Allee, 2015). Note that the latter assess a larger coverage of dispute settlement provisions in preferential agreements in a publicly available “design of trade agreements’‘
(DESTA) database (Dür, Baccini, and Elsig, 2014). See also WTO (2011).

11

triggered, their record of resolving disputes is mixed at best.18 It is also not uncommon for the use
of PTA dispute settlement procedures to generate third-country spillovers and thus wider disputes
that are left for the WTO system to resolve, or for PTA members to simply ignore the existence
of their PTA’s dispute settlement provisions in order to take frictions directly to the WTO for
resolution. We illustrate with examples from two di¤erent PTAs.
Consider …rst the MERCOSUR customs union and its dispute settlement procedures. While
Tallberg and Smith (2014) report that very few (roughly 20) disputes were initiated under MERCOSUR between 1993 and 2005, one particularly high pro…le MERCOSUR dispute ended with
Brazil imposing a new import restriction on retreaded tires from non-MERCOSUR partners but
not on its MERCOSUR partners. This policy discrimination arose after a MERCOSUR legal ruling in 2002 that PTA partners must be exempted from application of such import restrictions.
Citing a similar MERCOSUR rule, in 1997 Argentina had imposed a new import restriction on
footwear from non-MERCOSUR partners but not on its MERCOSUR partners. Because MERCOSUR rules apparently required that imports from MERCOSUR partners be exempted from the
policies, Brazil’s and Argentina’s newly imposed import-restricting policies provided an additional
implicit preference to PTA partners relative to non-partners. In both instances, non-MERCOSUR
countries, including the EU and Indonesia, challenged the discriminatory treatment under formal
WTO dispute settlement procedures.19
Like MERCOSUR, NAFTA also has its own dispute settlement provisions, and they have also
rarely been triggered; e.g., fewer than 15 disputes were initiated under NAFTA between 1994
and 2010, and NAFTA dispute settlement largely fell into disuse after 2001 (Tallberg and Smith,
2014). Nevertheless, the small number of NAFTA disputes should not necessarily be interpreted as
evidence that its PTA partners are not experiencing bilateral trading frictions that require third
party mediation. The three NAFTA partners (US, Canada, and Mexico) have taken more than
twice as many disputes against one another to formal WTO dispute settlement since NAFTA’s
inception than they have taken to the NAFTA forum. And some of these bilateral frictions e.g., over US-Canada trade in softwood lumber; over US-Mexico trade in the related products
of sugar, corn, high-fructose corn syrup, and ultimately soft drinks - actually started as formal
NAFTA disputes but could not be resolved under the NAFTA forum. The disputes escalated and
ultimately spilled over to require resolution through formal WTO litigation.20
18

The EU has a di¤erent institutional design, including a supra-national framework that initiates disputes against
member states from within and thus does not rely exclusively on the “state-to-state”framework of dispute resolution
found in the WTO and many other PTAs. One result is that the EU’s dispute settlement provisions have led to
thousands of disputes. Tallberg and Smith (2014, p. 126) report that the supranational European Commission
initiated more than 30,000 cases over 1978-2009 against its member states. Furthermore, the Commission only
referred 11.5 percent of these initiated disputes to the European Court of Justice for a legal decision. On the other
hand, EU member states have initiated only a handful of disputes against one another. Finally, the EU’s free trade
agreement with Iceland, Liechtenstein, and Norway under EFTA contains a supranational Surveillance Authority
(SA) modeled similarly to the European Commission; Tallberg and Smith (2014, p. 138) report that the SA initiated
roughly 400 disputes against the three EFTA member states over 1994-2008 and that the member states …led zero
EFTA disputes against one another during this period.
19
These disputes are described in greater detail in Section 7.3 below. Bown and Trachtman (2009) provide a
discussion of the WTO dispute over Brazil - Retreaded Tyres.
20
Davey and Sapir (2009) discuss the evolution of the US-Mexico disputes over sweetners that ultimately culminated

12

2.3

Di¤erent Paths Forward

The WTO and PTAs are on di¤erent trajectories. The extent of their divergence to date may still
be modest, but the “mega-regional” PTAs currently under negotiation, such as the Transatlantic
Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) between the US and EU, or the Trans Paci…c Partnership
(TPP) between the US, Japan, and other Paci…c trading partners, could change this dramatically.
In short, globalization is looking increasingly di¤erent under these two sets of rules. Perhaps
nowhere is this better illustrated in current a¤airs than by the potential implications depending
on whether the US and the EU throw their weight behind the WTO and a re-energized Doha
Round, or rather put their e¤orts into negotiating new PTAs. Consider the likely di¤erences in
globalization’s outcomes depending on which of these strategies is pursued.
If the US and the EU were to put their full support behind the Doha Round, even the most
ambitious conclusion of the round would by all accounts entail relatively small cuts in average tari¤s
and more substantial but still modest reductions in the remaining tari¤ peaks (and agricultural export subsidies). And any nod to deep integration would likely be modest. Contrast this description
of a successful WTO Doha Round with what has been leaked about the TTIP and TPP initiatives.
Consider …rst the TTIP negotiations. The TTIP has adopted as its main focus the streamlining
of domestic standards across the Atlantic. The BBC puts it this way:
“Direct tari¤s on goods and services between the two are already low, but there
are other barriers such as regulatory and safety standards, inspection procedures, and
preferences for domestic business. Removing these could signi…cantly reduce the costs
for companies doing transatlantic business.” BBC News (7/8/2013)
Consider next the TPP negotiations. Here again the focus is on harmonizing domestic standards.
As Marketplace Morning Report (1/28/2014) put it, “The Trans-Paci…c Partnership has been called
NAFTA on steroids.” The New York Times continues:
“If successful, the TPP agreement would eliminate most remaining tari¤s on nearly
$2 trillion in goods and services exchanged between the United States, Australia, Brunei,
Canada, Chile, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore and Vietnam.
[But the TPP negotiations] “...would go far beyond lowering tari¤s, with provisions
requiring countries to maintain compatible regulatory regimes, facilitate corporate …nancial transactions, establish copyright and patent protections to govern intellectual
property rights and to safeguard foreign investors.” NYTimes (2/5/2014)
Evidently, the likely form of liberalization under mega-regional initiatives di¤ers substantially
from that which might be expected through re-energized multilateral negotiations in the WTO. It
is thus important to have a reasoned and informed general perspective about the relative merits of
in the WTO’s Mexico - Taxes on Soft Drinks case, and Bown and Sykes (2008) describe the …fth WTO dispute brought
by Canada over US - Softwood Lumber.

13

regional and multilateral liberalization initiatives. Toward this goal, in the next …ve sections, we
consider the implications of the theoretical and empirical literature on trade agreements. It is also
important in this context to consider possible means through which the WTO might be further
revitalized. We postpone discussion of this issue until the concluding section.

3

The Terms-of-Trade Theory of Trade Agreements

In this section we o¤er a brief review and empirical assessment of the essential predictions of the
terms-of-trade theory, and we use the theory as a lens through which to view the broad contours
of existing WTO policy commitments, o¤ering an initial consideration of the possibility that the
WTO membership might have already arrived at the international e¢ ciency frontier.

3.1

Theory

To present the essential predictions of the terms-of-trade theory, we develop a benchmark twocountry two-good perfectly competitive general equilibrium trade model. We …rst develop the model
under the assumption that governments have only tari¤s as instruments of policy intervention, and
consider the purpose of a trade agreement. We then extend the benchmark model to allow that
governments also have behind-the-border policy instruments at their disposal in order to consider
whether the purpose of a trade agreement is changed in this richer policy setting.
Trade model

We assume that readers are familiar with the two-country two-good perfectly

competitive general equilibrium trade model, and we focus here only on the essential notation and
equations.21 The two countries, home (no ) and foreign ( ), produce, consume and trade two
goods, x and y, under conditions of perfect competition, with home the natural importer of x
and foreign the natural importer of y. The relative price facing home producers and consumers in
their local market is p

px =py , while the relative price facing foreign producers and consumers in

their local market is p

px =py . With non-prohibitive home and foreign ad valorem tari¤s denoted

respectively by t and t , and with
implies p = pw

(1+t) and

p( ; pw ) and p = pw =

(1+t ), international goods-market arbitrage
p ( ; pw ), where pw

untaxed) relative price. The foreign terms of trade is

pw ,

px =py is the “world” (i.e.,

and the home terms of trade is 1=pw .

Production (as well as the distribution and level of factor incomes) is fully determined in each
country by the local relative price in that country, while each country’s consumption depends on
both the local relative price in that country and the terms of trade (with the latter, together
with the local price, determining the tari¤ revenue collected by the country and distributed to its
consumers). Each country’s trade is simply the di¤erence between its consumption and production.
Hence, for any local and world prices, home imports of x can be written as M (p; pw ) and home
exports of y can be written as E(p; pw ). The analogous functions for foreign are M (p ; pw ) and
21
A more complete description of the model appears in any undergraduate International Economics textbook (or see
Bagwell and Staiger, 2010a, for a recent development of the model in the context of the trade agreements literature).

14

E (p ; pw ). For any prices, the home and foreign national budget constraints are then given by the
respective trade balance equations
pw M (p; pw ) = E(p; pw ); and

(1)

M (p ; pw ) = pw E (p ; pw );

(2)

with the equilibrium world price pew ( ;

) then determined by the market clearing condition for x

M (p( ; pw ); pw ) = E (p ( ; pw ); pw );

(3)

and with Walras’ Law ensuring that the y-market clears as well. Finally, with market-clearing
local and world prices written as p = p( ; pew ), p = p ( ; pew ) and pew = pew ( ;

), we impose the

following standard price assumptions to rule out the Metzler and Lerner Paradoxes:
dp( ; pew ( ; ))
d
@ pew ( ; )
@

dp ( ; pew ( ;
d
@ pew ( ; )
< 0<
:
@
> 0>

))

(4)

According to (4), each country’s tari¤ is “protective” of its import-competing sector (i.e., the
imposition of a tari¤ raises the local price of the import good), and each country is “large”in world
markets and can improve its terms of trade with an increase in its tari¤.
Government preferences When it comes to the goals of trade policy, real-world governments
have diverse sets of preferences, in some cases adopting trade policies that would seem to promote
aggregate national income while in other cases adopting trade policies with a clear distributional
goal in mind. This diversity is re‡ected in the trade policy literature, where assumed government
preferences range from national income maximization (see Dixit, 1987, Johnson, 1953-54, Kennan
and Riezman, 1988 and Mayer, 1981 for important formalizations, and Kowalczyk and Riezman,
2011 for a recent survey) to those of a representative democracy as re‡ected in the preferences of the
median voter (see Mayer, 1984 for the initial formulation, and Dutt and Mitra, 2002 and Dhingra,
forthcoming for important follow-up work) to those of a government in‡uenced by lobbies (for early
formalizations, see Olson, 1965, Caves, 1976, Brock and Magee, 1978, Feenstra and Bhagwati, 1982,
Findlay and Wellisz, 1982, Hillman, 1982 and Baldwin, 1987; and see Grossman and Helpman, 1994
and 1995a, for the canonical treatment in the more recent literature).
The diversity of government preferences, both in the real world and in the formal trade policy
literature, raises the question whether these preference di¤erences across governments might translate into di¤erent purposes across the trade agreements that governments negotiate. To ensure that
our answers regarding the purpose of a trade agreement are not dependent on adopting a particular
formulation of government preferences from this diverse set, we follow Bagwell and Staiger (1999a,
2002) and adopt a “reduced form”approach to modeling government preferences, representing the

15

objectives of the home and foreign governments with the general functions W (p; pew ) and W (p ; pew ),

respectively. We thus represent welfare in terms of the prices that the tari¤s induce rather than
directly in terms of the tari¤s themselves. We place no restrictions on a government’s preferences
over its local prices. As local prices determine the level and distribution of factor incomes, this
allows us to incorporate all of the formal models of trade policy motives mentioned above. We do
impose one assumption on the government welfare functions, namely, that holding its local price
…xed, the welfare of a government increases when its terms of trade improve:
Wpew (p; pew ) < 0 < Wpew (p ; pew ):

(5)

This assumption, which amounts to a statement that each government would like more tari¤ revenue
if it could achieve this extra revenue without experiencing any change in its local price, is met by
each of the formal models of trade policy determination that we mentioned above.22
Nash tari¤s In the absence of a trade agreement, the two governments choose their tari¤s
unilaterally and non-cooperatively, and we assume that these choices are characterized by an interior
Nash equilibrium. The …rst-order conditions that de…ne the Nash tari¤ s are
dW (p; pew )
d
dW (p ; pew )
d

dp
@ pew
+ Wpew
= 0, and
d
@
@ pew
dp
= Wp
+ Wpew
= 0:
d
@
= Wp

(6)

The top equation of (6) de…nes the home government’s best-response tari¤, while the bottom
equation de…nes the foreign government’s best-response tari¤, with the Nash tari¤s de…ned where
both governments are on their respective reaction curves.
Notice that, as the top equation of (6) highlights, in the Nash equilibrium the home government
strikes a balance between the e¤ects on its welfare of the local-price and world-price movements
induced by its tari¤ choice. The welfare implications of the local-price movement are domestic in
nature, re‡ecting the trade-o¤ for the home government between the bene…ts of any distributional
changes (e.g., induced political support) and the costs of the induced economic distortions. By
contrast, the welfare implications of the world-price movement are international in nature, as they
re‡ect the bene…ts to the home government of shifting some of the costs of its policy choice onto
the foreign country. The cost shifting occurs because an improvement in the home country’s
terms of trade is necessarily a deterioration in the foreign country’s terms of trade. An analogous
interpretation holds for the foreign government, as the bottom equation of (6) highlights.
In the special case where governments maximize national income with their unilateral tari¤
choices, (6) de…nes the standard (Johnson, 1953-54) “optimal tari¤” for each country, which is
simply the inverse of the trading partner’s export supply elasticity. As Johnson demonstrated,
when governments seek to maximize national income, setting a tari¤ at this level is the optimal
22

We also assume su¢ cient concavity of W and W
problems that we consider below are satis…ed.

so that the second-order conditions for the optimization

16

way for a country to exploit its monopoly power on world markets. For this case, on the margin
the tari¤ creates costly distortions in the local market (the local-price movements in the …rst terms
in (6)) but some of these costs are borne by the trading partner (via the world-price movements in
the second terms in (6)). For the more general cases of government preferences included in (6), the
local-price movements carry additional welfare implications for the governments and this leads to
Nash tari¤s that will in general di¤er from the Johnson “optimal tari¤” formula, but the trade-o¤
faced by each government in setting its unilaterally optimal tari¤ is otherwise the same.
E¢ ciency frontier If a trade agreement is to be useful to governments, there must be an ine¢ ciency associated with the Nash tari¤ choices of the governments when evaluated with reference to
their objectives. A trade agreement can then provide value to both governments by correcting this
ine¢ ciency. Absent such an ine¢ ciency, it would not be possible for a trade agreement to yield
Pareto bene…ts for the governments involved. We therefore next characterize the e¢ ciency frontier.
The international e¢ ciency frontier is de…ned by the set of tari¤s that satisfy the familiar
tangency condition

d
d

jdW =0 =

d
d

23 Making use of the home and foreign
=0 .
; pew ), this tangency condition can be written as

jdW

welfare functions W (p; pew ) and W (p

w

[ Wp + Wpew ] @@pe

w

Wp ddp + Wpew @@pe

=

Wp

[

1

dp
d

government

w

+ Wpew @@pe

w

Wp + Wpew ] @@pe

:

(7)

The characterization of the e¢ ciency frontier provided by (7) is a generalization of the more familiar
Mayer (1981) locus of e¢ cient tari¤s for the case of national-income maximizing governments. As
is well-known, when governments maximize national income, reciprocal free trade ( = 1 =

)

is e¢ cient; yet as Mayer pointed out, this is but one point on the e¢ ciency frontier de…ned by
the locus of points

= 1=

which ensure equality of the home and foreign local prices p and p .

Under the assumption that governments maximize national income and with the particular forms
for W (p; pew ) and W (p ; pew ) that this implies, (7) reduces to the Mayer locus

= 1= .

With the e¢ ciency frontier de…ned, it is now a simple matter to use (6) and (7) to con…rm that

Nash policies are indeed ine¢ cient in this model. Hence, according to the terms-of-trade theory,
an ine¢ ciency exists when governments set their tari¤s non-cooperatively, and therefore there is a
role for a trade agreement to address this ine¢ ciency and improve the welfare of each government.
Interpreting the purpose of a trade agreement

The ine¢ ciency of Nash policies is not

surprising. After all, the cost-shifting motives that are embodied in the second term of each
reaction curve in (6) impose a negative externality on the trading partner, pointing to an obvious
source of ine¢ ciency. And in fact it can be con…rmed that Nash tari¤s are higher than e¢ cient
23

When international lump sum transfers are available at the negotiation stage, as is typically assumed in the
trade agreements literature when partial equilibrium models of trade are employed, internationally e¢ cient policies
maximize the joint government surplus, with the division of surplus then allocated across participating governments
via lump sum transfers. In later sections when we refer to e¢ cient policies in the context of partial equilibrium
models we will adopt this joint-government-surplus-maximizing perspective unless otherwise noted.

17

tari¤s.24 But recalling that our reduced form government preferences are speci…ed in a way that
is su¢ ciently general to capture all of the leading models of trade policy determination, it seems
reasonable to expect that additional sources of ine¢ ciency might also arise depending on which
model of trade policy determination is relevant; and in this light it would be surprising if the costshifting externality were the only source of ine¢ ciency that a trade agreement can correct in our
model. Yet this is what the terms-of-trade theory implies.
To see this, let us suppose that the home and foreign governments were replaced by hypothetical
governments that were not motivated by the terms-of-trade implications of their unilateral tradepolicy choices; that is, let us consider a hypothetical home government for which Wpew
hypothetical foreign government for which Wpew

0 and a

0. If these hypothetical governments were to

select their tari¤s non-cooperatively, then according to (6) their tari¤ choices would satisfy
Wp (p; pew ) = 0 = Wp (p ; pew ):

(8)

Following Bagwell and Staiger (1999a, 2002), we refer to tari¤s that satisfy (8) as politically optimal
tari¤ s. If politically optimal tari¤s are e¢ cient, where as in (7) e¢ ciency is evaluated relative to
actual home and foreign government preferences, then we may conclude that the terms-of-trade
externality is the sole rationale for a trade agreement in this model. But it is immediate that (7) is
satis…ed when evaluated at tari¤s that satisfy (8), and hence politically optimal tari¤s are e¢ cient.
Of course, as (7) suggests, there will in general be an entire locus of tari¤ combinations that
satisfy the condition for e¢ ciency, and the politically optimal tari¤s represent only one point on
this locus. The politically optimal tari¤s are arguably focal, however, as they remedy the terms-oftrade ine¢ ciency in a direct way. For example, in the case where governments maximize national
welfare, we have already observed that e¢ cient tari¤s lie on the locus de…ned by

= 1=

as

Mayer (1981) showed. The politically optimal tari¤s in this case correspond to the reciprocal free
trade point

=

= 1, which seems focal because it conforms to the trade policies that national

income maximizing governments would have adopted in the …rst place if they were not motivated
by terms-of-trade/“optimal tari¤” considerations.25
Having determined that the cost-shifting externality is the only source of ine¢ ciency of the Nash
policies according to the terms-of-trade theory, it is worth emphasizing now the role that the largecountry assumption plays in establishing a purpose for a trade agreement in this theory. In a world
of small countries where no country can impact its terms of trade with its tari¤ choices, no country
can engage in international cost-shifting and Nash policies are therefore e¢ cient. According to
the terms-of-trade theory, then, the ine¢ ciencies that a trade agreement can address are associated
with the policies of governments that exercise market power on world markets. This is of course the
24

See Bagwell and Staiger (1999a, 2002).
Our claim that politically optimal tari¤s are focal does not translate into a claim that a trade agreement necessarily
delivers the politically optimal tari¤s. That depends, in part, on whether politically optimal tari¤s lie on the contract
curve, which in turn requires that countries not be too asymmetric. For example, as is well known, in the case of
national income maximizing governments, a su¢ ciently big country can “win the tari¤ war,”meaning that it is better
o¤ in the Nash equilibrium than at reciprocal free trade (see Johnson, 1953-54, and Kennan and Reizman, 1988).
25

18

same conclusion that Johnson (1953-54) drew, but that is in fact the striking point: the introduction
of government preferences that can capture the wide diversity of government motives that we see
in the real world does not qualify, complicate or change this conclusion.
When it comes to the purpose of a trade agreement, therefore, the terms-of-trade theory embodies a very simple idea. A trade agreement can be valuable to governments, but only if in the absence
of an agreement governments would attempt to shift costs onto one another and as a consequence
adopt ine¢ cient unilateral policies. The terms-of-trade externality is simply the mechanism by
which this cost-shifting occurs. But while simple and intuitive at one level, the practical relevance
of this idea has traditionally met with deep skepticism among many economists. Some of this
skepticism re‡ects a lack of empirical evidence relating to the central tenets of the theory, such as
the degree and prevalence of market power that real-world governments can wield in international
markets and whether their unilateral tari¤ choices re‡ect this market power when they possess it,
and in Section 3.2 we survey the recent empirical work that is beginning to …ll this gap. But some
of the skepticism re‡ects a more visceral objection to the plausibility of the theory. Here we brie‡y
consider three of the main objections of this kind.
A …rst objection is that the terms-of-trade theory unrealistically posits that governments seek to
maximize national income with their tari¤ choices. But as we have just illustrated, while the termsof-trade theory was originally posed by Johnson (1953-54) under this assumption, it holds equally
well when governments have political motivations. A second objection is that there is a disconnect
between the theory and the way real-world governments think. This objection is often expressed
by the view that real-world governments almost never mention the “terms of trade”in their policy
discussions, and instead the language of real trade agreements and the negotiators who craft them
emphasizes “market access.” But this disconnect may be more apparent than real, because the
insights of the terms-of-trade theory can be easily translated into the language of market access.
Speci…cally, when a government raises its import tari¤, it shifts in its import demand curve, and
the resulting “price e¤ect” under which the home country enjoys a terms-of-trade improvement is
accompanied by a “volume e¤ect”under which the foreign country experiences a reduction in access
to the home market. Using this link between price and volume e¤ects, the terms-of-trade theory
can then be recast using the market-access language that trade-policy negotiators favor.26 A third
objection relates to the role played by tari¤ revenue in the theory’s account of the terms-of-trade
motives of governments, and the apparent unimportance of tari¤ revenue to real-world governments.
There are two main responses to this objection. First, as we describe in the next section, the costshifting motives at the center of the terms-of-trade theory do not hinge on government pursuit
of tari¤ revenue.27 Second, it is not clear that tari¤ revenue should be seen as unimportant to
real-world governments. For example, as Kim (2013) points out, the US collected $31 billion in
tari¤ revenue for FY 2012, an amount comparable to what the US spent in FY 2012 on foreign aid
($23 billion) and foreign military assistance ($14 billion) combined.
26

Bagwell and Staiger (2002) provide a formal de…nition of market accees and further develop the relationship
between the terms-of-trade theory and the language of market access.
27
See also the discussion of local-content requirements in Section 4.5.

19

Behind-the-border measures We now brie‡y discuss an extension of the benchmark model in
which governments also have behind-the-border policy instruments at their disposal, and consider
whether the purpose of a trade agreement is changed in this richer policy setting. Our extended
model broadly mirrors that of Bagwell and Staiger (2001b).
Speci…cally, we introduce into the trade model of the previous section a home standard, , and a
foreign standard,

. To …x ideas we interpret these standards as a labor regulation (e.g., maximum

legal work-hours per week) in each country that impacts that country’s production possibilities:
for a given local price in a country, we assume that changes in its standard shifts its production
of x and y, and hence its import demand and export supply functions and therefore the market
clearing world price. Proceeding to derive the market clearing world price as before, we therefore
now have pew = pew ( ;

; ;

). In addition to the assumed responses of pew to

and

contained

in (4) above, we now assume that each country can also improve its terms of trade with an increase
in its standard (i.e., we assume @ pew =@ < 0 and @ pew =@

> 0).

We assume that each government cares directly about its standard but does not care directly

about the standard imposed in the other country. Hence, the choice of standards can impose international pecuniary externalities (through pew ) but by assumption does not impose non-pecuniary
externalities at the international level. With this we can now express the government welfare functions in this extended model by W ( ; p; pew ) and W (

; p ; pew ). We continue to impose the struc-

ture in (5) on these extended government welfare functions, and we continue to leave unrestricted
how governments care about changes in their own local prices; and we also leave unrestricted how
governments care about changes in their own standards.
There are now four …rst-order conditions that de…ne the Nash tari¤ and standards choices:
dW ( ; p; pew )
d
dW ( ; p; pew )
d
dW ( ; p ; pew )
d
dW ( ; p ; pew )
d

dp
@ pew
+ Wpew
= 0,
d
@
@ pew
= W + [ Wp + Wpew ]
= 0,
@
@ pew
dp
= Wp
+ Wpew
= 0, and
d
@
1
@ pew
= W + [ Wp + Wpew ]
= 0:
@
= Wp

(9)

In addition to the two conditions de…ning the home and foreign best-response tari¤s, which are
unchanged from our earlier discussion and which therefore have the same interpretation, there is
an additional condition for each government in (9) that de…nes its best-response standard. Here
each government weighs the direct impact on its welfare of its standards choice against the impact
of this choice on its welfare that runs through the induced local- and world-price e¤ects.
Turning to the e¢ cient policies in this extended setting, there are now three tangency conditions

20

that must be satis…ed for e¢ ciency:
w

[ Wp + Wpew ] @@pe

w

Wp ddp + Wpew @@pe
W
@ pew =@
W
@ pew =@

=

Wp
[

1

w

+ Wpew @@pe

w

Wp + Wpew ] @@pe

,

(10)

Wp
, and
@ pew =@
Wp
p
:
@ pew =@

= pew
=

dp
d

The top condition in (10) is the same tangency condition as in (7) that de…ned the e¢ ciency frontier
in our benchmark model. This condition can be interpreted as ensuring that the home and foreign
tari¤s are set so that the volume of trade between the two countries is at an e¢ cient level.28 The
remaining two conditions can then be interpreted as ensuring that each country’s mix of border
and behind-the-border policies delivers in an e¢ cient way this e¢ cient level of trade volume.
Finally, we may again de…ne politically optimal policies and make use of these hypothetical
constructs to investigate the purpose of a trade agreement in this extended setting. We therefore
consider a hypothetical home government for which Wpew
for which Wpew

0 and a hypothetical foreign government

0. If these hypothetical governments were to select their tari¤s and standards

non-cooperatively, then according to (9) their tari¤ and standards choices would satisfy
Wp ( ; p; pew ) = 0 = W ( ; p; pew ), and

Wp (

; p ; pew ) = 0 = W (

(11)

; p ; pew ):

As before, if these politically optimal policies are e¢ cient, where as in (10) e¢ ciency is evaluated
with reference to actual home and foreign government preferences, then we may conclude that the
terms-of-trade externality remains the sole rationale for a trade agreement in this extended model.
But it is immediate that (10) is satis…ed when evaluated at tari¤s and standards that satisfy (11),
and hence politically optimal tari¤s and standards are indeed e¢ cient.
In fact, as is suggested by this result, regardless of the extent of behind-the-border measures
that governments may have at their disposal, according to the terms-of-trade theory the purpose
of a trade agreement remains the same. Governments use trade agreements to undo the policy
ine¢ ciencies that arise with unilateral policy choices when those choices can shift the costs of
intervention onto trading partners through movements in foreign exporter prices (terms of trade).
We may now emphasize a further insight o¤ered by the terms-of-trade theory that follows from
its stance on the purpose of a trade agreement. Speci…cally, as the only “problem” for a trade
agreement to “solve” is terms-of-trade manipulation, and as the tari¤ is the …rst-best policy for
terms-of-trade manipulation, the terms-of-trade theory implies that the tari¤ is the only policy
that is distorted in the Nash equilibrium: behind-the-border measures are set e¢ ciently under
Nash choices. This insight is lurking in the conditions presented above, and it can be con…rmed by
28

See Bagwell and Staiger (2001b) for elaboration on this interpretation and the remaining interpretations of the
e¢ ciency conditions that we describe in the text.

21

noting that the top two conditions of (9) imply the middle condition of (10) while the bottom two
conditions of (9) imply the bottom condition of (10). Hence, the only e¢ ciency condition that is
not met in the Nash equilibrium according to the terms-of-trade theory is the top condition of (10)
that determines the e¢ cient level of tari¤s (which are lower than their Nash levels) and the e¢ cient
level of trade volume (which is higher than the Nash level). In this sense, the terms-of-trade theory
provides a foundation for trade agreements that adopt a shallow approach to integration.29
Our formal discussion here has focused on a particular form of behind-the-border measure that is
best thought of as a production standard, such as a workplace regulation or a regulation on the use
of an open access resource in the production process. So it is important to note that the points we
have emphasized apply more broadly to behind-the-border measures of various kinds, including tax
and subsidy policies and various forms of standards beyond production standards.30 Of particular
relevance to the world trading system are product standards, such as minimum burn-through rates
for doors or prohibitions on lead additives to paint, that can raise the costs of supplying a market
but, unlike import tari¤s, do not raise revenue. In light of the prominent role played by tari¤
revenue in our account of the terms-of-trade motives of governments described above, it might be
thought that those motives do not apply to such standards. But our discussion applies equally well
to these kinds of behind-the-border measures, once it is understood that international cost-shifting
occurs when such product standards are imposed as long as foreign exporters do not pass the full
cost of meeting the product standards on to consumers in the country where the standard applies.31

3.2

Evidence

We now survey the evidence related to the central tenets of the terms-of-trade theory. We focus
on three basic questions. First, how signi…cant and widespread is the market power that countries
possess in world markets? Second, do the unilateral tari¤ choices of countries re‡ect the market
power that they possess? And third, does the pattern of negotiated tari¤ liberalization that we
observe correlate with the pattern of observed market power in the way that the theory suggests
it should? Answers to these questions seem central to all of the theory’s predictions, and so we
focus on them here, postponing until later points in our survey a discussion of the empirical work
relating to various other predictions of the terms-of-trade theory.
Market power Do countries routinely possess a degree of market power on world markets that
would allow them to manipulate their terms of trade? To answer this …rst question, we begin by
observing that there is a large body of indirect evidence that suggests an a¢ rmative answer. We
are referring here to the literature on exchange rate pass-through.
To establish the connection between the exchange rate pass-through literature and an answer to
our …rst question, we proceed in two steps. First, we note that Feenstra (1989) shows theoretically
29

More speci…cally and as we describe in more detail below, the terms-of-trade theory supports an approach to
behind-the-border measures that revolves around reliance on a “market access preservation” rule.
30
For an extension of these points to the case of domestic tax/subsidy policies, see Bagwell and Staiger (2006).
31
See Staiger and Sykes (2011) for a treatment of product standards in this context.

22

that the pass-through to domestic prices associated with exchange rate shocks can be thought of as
comparable in magnitude to the pass-through associated with tari¤ changes, and he o¤ers econometric evidence supporting this hypothesis of symmetric pass-through between tari¤s and exchange
rates in the data. Second, we note that, while we have adopted above a general equilibrium setting to present the terms-of-trade theory, the theory can also be developed in a partial-equilibrium
model, where cost shifting then occurs through changes in the terms of trade provided that foreign
exporters bear some of the incidence of the import tari¤ so that it is not fully passed through to
domestic prices.32 That is, incomplete pass-through of the tari¤ to domestic prices is synonymous
with cost-shifting and the exercise of importer market power. Hence, by the second step, the termsof-trade e¤ects of a tari¤ arise whenever the incidence of the tari¤ is not fully passed through to
domestic prices; and by the …rst step, we may look to the vast empirical literature on exchange
rate pass-through for indirect evidence about the degree of tari¤ pass-through.
What does the exchange rate pass-through literature imply for the answer to our …rst question?
First, in light of the conclusion from Goldberg and Knetter’s (1997) survey of this literature that
pass-through rates average about 60 percent, it would appear that the existence of countries that
possess substantial market power on world markets is routine. Second, after surveying this literature
in his Handbook chapter, Feenstra (1995, p. 1569) concludes that, while there is strong evidence
that pass-through is less than complete, the magnitude of pass-through di¤ers substantially across
industries and therefore “...we should not have any presumption about the extent of terms of trade
gain due to tari¤s, but must treat each industry on a case-by-case basis.”
Turning to the direct evidence on this …rst question, in a provocative paper Magee and Magee
(2008) construct measures of world market concentration and trade elasticities to argue that even
a “large” country like the US has little market power to exert on world markets, suggesting that
market power can safely be ignored when considering the e¤ects of tari¤s. But for the most part, the
literature has produced results which are consistent with the conclusions from the indirect evidence
emphasized above. For example, the studies of Kreinin (1961), Winters and Chang (2000), Chang
and Winters (2002), Anderson and Van Wincoop (2002), and Bown and Crowley (2006), among
others, all o¤er evidence that unilateral tari¤ changes can signi…cantly a¤ect a country’s terms of
trade. On the other hand, in their study of New Zealand’s unilateral trade liberalization of the
1980’s, Winkelmann and Winkelmann (1998) …nd only weak evidence of incomplete pass-through
of New Zealand tari¤s to prices in the New Zealand economy, and only in a few industries, and
conclude that New Zealand truly is an example of a small country in most products. Finally, using
high-frequency data on the price of raw sugar in New York City from 1890 to 1930, Irwin (2015)
…nds that about 60 percent of any US tari¤ increase was borne by foreign exporters with only 40
percent passed through to domestic consumer prices.33
These studies seem to con…rm the basic conclusion of Feenstra (1995), that there is abundant
32

See Bagwell and Staiger (2001a) for a development of the terms-of-trade theory of trade agreements in the context
of a partial equilibrium model.
33
Irwin (2015) also …nds a striking asymmetry between pass-through rates for tari¤ increases and tari¤ reductions,
with the latter passed through fully to consumers. He attributes this asymmetry to asymmetric demand responses.

23

evidence of substantial market power but its presence varies greatly from industry to industry and
country to country. This conclusion is further reinforced by the most comprehensive study to date
on the issue, that of Broda, Limão and Weinstein (2008). Focusing on the unilateral tari¤ choices
of 15 countries prior to their membership in the GATT/WTO, Broda et al. estimate the foreign
export supply elasticities faced by each of these countries, which as they note provides an inverse
measure of the market power that each was able to exert on the foreign export (world) prices.
With these estimates, they con…rm that most countries, even apparently “small” countries, have
signi…cant ability to alter their terms of trade on many imported products with their tari¤ choices.
Unilateral tari¤s We next turn to the second question raised above: Do the unilateral tari¤
choices of countries re‡ect the market power that they possess?
An early paper that provides evidence on this question is Olarreaga, Soloaga and Winters
(1999). Examining the determinants of the common external tari¤ adopted by MERCOSUR in
1996 (a period when the common external tari¤ of MERCOSUR was essentially unconstrained
by WTO commitments), they conclude that terms-of-trade e¤ects account for a substantial part
(between 6 and 28 percent) of the explained variation in the structure of MERCOSUR tari¤s,
despite the fact that during the period of their analysis MERCOSUR had only a 1 percent market
share of world trade.
This question is also addressed by the Broda, Limão and Weinstein (2008) paper discussed
above. Speci…cally, after estimating the foreign export supply elasticities faced by each of the
15 non-GATT/WTO member countries in their sample, Broda et al relate this measure of the
power to a¤ect world prices to the unilateral (i.e., prior to WTO accession) tari¤ choices that each
country made. They …nd that, prior to joining the WTO, these countries set tari¤s an average of
9 percentage points higher on imports for which they could exert large e¤ects on world prices as
compared to the tari¤s they set on imports where their ability to a¤ect world prices was limited, an
impact whose magnitude is roughly comparable to the size of the average tari¤s in these countries.
They also …nd that this terms-of-trade motive explains more of the cross-industry variation in tari¤s
than is explained by commonly used political-economy variables.
Hence, according to the Olarreaga et al. (1999) and Broda et al. (2008) …ndings, governments
who set their trade policies unilaterally and noncooperatively respond to terms-of-trade motives
and the market power that they possess strongly and in the way that the theory predicts. These
…ndings are reinforced by the recent paper of Dhingra (forthcoming). Dhingra shows that the
median-voter model of non-cooperative tari¤ determination is strongly rejected by the data in its
traditional small-country formulation, but that its central predictions receive strong cross-country
empirical support once it is cast in a large-country setting and the existence of market power and
terms-of-trade motives are taken into account when predicting the cross-country pattern of tari¤s.
Negotiated tari¤s Finally, we consider the third of our three questions: Does the pattern of
negotiated tari¤ liberalization that we observe correlate with the pattern of observed market power
in the way that the theory suggests it should? As with the literature that takes up this question, we
24

focus below on the pattern of negotiated tari¤ liberalization in the GATT/WTO rather than PTAs.
We consider the pattern of liberalization that has taken place within PTAs and its compatibility
with the terms-of-trade theory in the context of later discussions.
In light of the literature’s …nding surveyed just above that market power is a strong determinant
of unilateral tari¤ choices, one way to pose this third question is to ask whether the same can be
said for negotiated tari¤s. If market power is an equally strong determinant of negotiated tari¤s,
then this would indicate a lack of support for the view that trade agreements serve to limit the
exercise of market power by their member governments; on the other hand, if negotiated tari¤s
are unrelated to market power, then together with the …ndings reported in the literature that
unilateral tari¤s are strongly related to market power, this would suggest that trade agreements
do indeed limit the exercise of market power. This is the approach that Broda et al. (2008) take.
Focusing on the US, they …nd that US non-tari¤ barriers and so-called “statutory” tari¤ rates –
neither of which has been the subject of negotiations within the GATT/WTO – are signi…cantly
and positively related to the degree of market power which the US exerts on the world prices of
its import products, while the US MFN tari¤s –which have been subjected to the many rounds of
GATT/WTO negotiations –exhibit no such relationship.
A related approach is taken by Nicita, Olarreaga and Silva (2014). They focus on the nature of
the tari¤ commitments made by WTO member countries –commitments that as we have described
above take the form of bindings de…ning the maximum allowable level for the tari¤ –and exploit the
fact that countries di¤er in the degree to which their negotiated WTO tari¤ commitments constrain
their applied tari¤s (i.e., the tari¤ levels that they actually set). Nicita et al. observe that tari¤s
that are unconstrained by WTO bindings should exhibit a positive correlation with market power,
for the reasons associated with unilateral tari¤s that we describe above. But Nicita et al. also
derive a new prediction: they argue that tari¤s constrained by WTO bindings (the “cooperative
tari¤s”) should exhibit a negative correlation with market power. This prediction follows under
their assumptions that (a) exporters enjoy extra political economy weight in the objectives of their
governments and (b) their governments lack trade instruments of their own (e.g., export subsidies)
to shift surplus to these exporters. Under these assumptions, the only way for a government to
help its exporters is to negotiate a tari¤ cut in the foreign markets served by its exporters, and
the political payo¤ to the government from negotiating such tari¤ cuts will be higher the greater
is the importer market power in the foreign market where the negotiating e¤orts are focused (and
hence the greater the exporter-price e¤ect of the tari¤ cuts). On this basis, they predict that the
cooperative tari¤ levels will be negatively correlated with importer market power. Examining the
tari¤s of 101 WTO members, Nicita et al. …nd that the sign of the correlation between tari¤ levels
and market power indeed switches from positive to negative as the WTO tari¤ bindings vary from
levels that are well above applied tari¤ rates to levels that are at the applied tari¤ rates.34
34

Nicita, Olarreaga and Silva (2014) also report that the expected positive correlation between tari¤s and market
power emerges in their data only once the WTO tari¤ commitments are su¢ ciently above the applied tari¤ levels.
They view this as something of a puzzle, and suggest that it may re‡ect some form of implicit cooperation among
WTO member countries.

25

Beshkar, Bond and Rho (forthcoming) derive a related prediction in an extension of the basic
terms-of-trade model that emphasizes the trade-o¤ between commitments and ‡exibility. (We
discuss their paper further in Section 4.2.) Within this extended model, they show that applied
tari¤s are more likely to be set at their WTO-bound levels at any point in time the greater is the
market power for that product possessed by the importing government; and with a su¢ ciently high
level of import market power, applied tari¤s are always set at the level of the negotiated binding.
Beshkar et al. …nd strong evidence for these predicted relationships between negotiated tari¤
commitments and importer market power with data on the tari¤s of 109 WTO member countries.
A di¤erent approach to this question is taken by Bagwell and Staiger (2011). They use the
terms-of-trade theory to derive an expression for the component of the noncooperative tari¤ that
embodies the international cost-shifting motive. They then use this expression to derive the pattern
of negotiated tari¤ cuts that is implied by the terms-of-trade theory; intuitively, if the cost-shifting
component is big, then the negotiated tari¤ cut implied by the terms-of-trade theory should be
large. Working from this basic insight, Bagwell and Staiger show that the tari¤ cuts predicted by the
terms-of-trade theory can be expressed as a function of pre-negotiation import volumes and prices,
and measures of the power to a¤ect world prices. The predicted relationship is then confronted
with data from the accession negotiations of 16 countries that joined the WTO subsequent to its
creation in 1995, and strong and robust support for the predictions of the terms-of-trade theory
are found in the observed pattern of negotiated tari¤ concessions.
Ludema and Mayda (2013) advance the literature on this question by allowing that free-rider
issues associated with the MFN principle (which we discuss at length further below) might impede governments from fully addressing terms-of-trade manipulation in their GATT/WTO tari¤
negotiations. Augmenting the basic terms-of-trade model with a model of endogenous bargaining
participation, they show that negotiated tari¤s should be negatively related to the product of the
importer’s market power and exporter concentration. Intuitively, the lower is exporter concentration, the more severe will be the free-rider problem associated with MFN, and the less e¤ective
negotiations will be in ridding the tari¤ of its cost-shifting component; and the larger the market
power, the larger this cost-shifting component will be. Ludema and Mayda take this prediction to
the tari¤ data for 30 WTO-member countries and …nd strong support, concluding (p. 1837) that
“...the internalization of terms of trade e¤ects through WTO negotiations has lowered the average
tari¤ of these countries by 22% to 27% compared to its noncooperative level.”
Yet a di¤erent perspective on answering this question is provided by Bown and Crowley (2013a),
who investigate empirically some of the predictions of the terms-of-trade theory when that theory is
developed in a repeated-tari¤-game setting subject to stochastic trade volume shocks and where selfenforcement constraints are binding.35 A basic prediction of the terms-of-trade theory in this setting
is that, where the self-enforcement constraint is binding, cooperative tari¤s must rise somewhat
in the face of import surges in order to mitigate the increased temptation implied by the higher
35

Bagwell and Staiger (1990) develop this model, which we describe further along with further discussion of the
…ndings of Bown and Crowley (2013a) in Section 4.2.

26

import volume to shift costs onto foreign exporters with an even higher tari¤. Among the additional
predictions of the model highlighted by Bown and Crowley is that, for a given import surge,
a cooperative tari¤ increase is more likely on a product if the market power possessed by the
importing government on that product is higher. Utilizing data on the time-varying protective
measures (anti-dumping and safeguard actions) of the US over the period 1997-2006, the authors
con…rm these and other predictions of the terms-of-trade theory in this setting.
Summarizing, the empirical papers surveyed above provide a growing body of evidence consistent with the central tenets of the terms-of-trade theory of trade agreements. While we discuss
below evidence that lends some support as well to the other strands of the trade agreement literature, our review here suggests that, at a minimum, the terms-of-trade theory is central for
understanding actual trade agreements, and provides a reasonable basis from which to seek initial
answers to our survey’s motivating questions.

3.3

Has Globalization under the WTO Gone Far Enough?

With the broad features of the terms-of-trade theory of trade agreements described, we now pose
a …rst and basic question. Viewed from the lens of this theory, might it be possible to conclude
that globalization under the GATT/WTO has already allowed its member governments to reach
the international e¢ ciency frontier? This is a question that we must confront in the ensuing pages
in the process of answering the motivating questions of our survey. But we pause here to dispel
one natural misconception, namely, that an immediately plausible answer to this question might
be “No, as long as trade is not truly free.” The terms-of-trade theory requires a more nuanced
answer because, according to this theory, the purpose of a trade agreement is not to secure free
trade, but to remove the ine¢ cient cost-shifting component from the unilateral tari¤ choices of its
member governments. As we have observed, this outcome could be compatible with free trade, but
only under certain strong assumptions about the preferences of governments, assumptions which
seem unlikely to be met in the real world. Accordingly, the continued existence of tari¤s is not
by itself evidence of further work to be done. To know whether globalization under the WTO has
gone far enough requires, according to the terms-of-trade theory, a more nuanced assessment of the
theoretical and empirical issues addressed by the literature we survey below.
Much as the continued existence of tari¤s cannot by itself be interpreted as a sign of lingering ine¢ ciencies in the GATT/WTO system, neither can one interpret the lack of negotiated
GATT/WTO commitments on behind-the-border measures as a sure sign of GATT/WTO failings
according to the terms-of-trade theory. Indeed, as is suggested by our discussion of behind-theborder measures above and as we highlight further below, the GATT/WTO shallow-integration
approach is compatible with e¢ ciency in the presence of certain kinds of accompanying rules, rules
that we will suggest at a broad level …nd representation in the GATT/WTO. Again with regard to
behind-the-border measures, to know whether globalization under the WTO has gone far enough
requires, according to the terms-of-trade theory, a more nuanced assessment.
Finally, we emphasize two important points that are implicit in our discussion here and should
27

be kept in mind as we proceed through the survey. First, for the most part the terms-of-trade
theory of trade agreements treats government preferences as …xed and sovereign, much as consumer preferences are taken as sovereign in standard consumer theory, and seeks to understand
trade agreements as agreements that lead to Pareto improvements for the member governments
when gauged from the perspective of their own preferences. This is clearly not the only possible
assumption, and below we also discuss some papers in this strand of the literature that entertain
alternative assumptions. But the assumption does resonate well with the “member driven”nature
of real-world trade agreements, especially the GATT/WTO. As we later discuss, the commitment
theory strand of the trade agreements literature can be interpreted as adopting a major departure
from this assumption, and so we consider these alternatives in more depth when we survey that
strand of the literature.
A second point is that the terms-of-trade theory (and the other strands of the trade agreements
literature as well) takes the policy instruments that a government has at its disposal as …xed. Hence,
while it is well-known (Bhagwati and Ramaswami, 1963) that a tari¤ is a second-best instrument
for virtually every domestic policy goal that could be imagined, the trade agreements literature
starts from the view that there are often constraints (usually unmodeled) that prevent governments
from using the …rst-best instruments for their policy goals and lead them to use tari¤s to achieve
these goals instead. And given that these governments are constrained to use tari¤s for, e.g.,
distributional reasons, the trade agreements literature then explores the role of trade agreements
in eliminating ine¢ ciencies from their tari¤ choices.36 This feature is important to keep in mind,
as without it the notion that the use of tari¤s could ever be compatible with a position on the
e¢ ciency frontier (beyond tari¤s that reside on the Mayer locus) would seem strange.

4

Evaluating the GATT/WTO approach to trade liberalization

We now turn to an evaluation of the GATT/WTO approach to trade liberalization from the perspective of the terms-of-trade theory of trade agreements literature. This strand of the literature
seeks to evaluate the design and performance of the GATT/WTO as an institution that could
plausibly help governments in their attempts to solve the terms-of-trade externality problem that
we described in Section 3. We use our survey of this literature to ask: Is the GATT/WTO welldesigned at a fundamental level to help governments address the terms-of-trade problem? And can
the successes and failures of the GATT/WTO record be broadly understood to re‡ect the strengths
and weaknesses of these design features when interpreted within the context of the terms-of-trade
problem? If the answers to these questions are a¢ rmative, then we tentatively conclude that the
GATT/WTO is an institution worthy of the continued support of economists. This is not to say
that PTAs might not also be deserving of support - we take up that question in the next section but rather to say that the GATT/WTO appears fundamentally well-designed and thus worthy of
36

We discuss some partial exceptions in the literature at later points in our survey, such as Limão and Tovar (2011),
but even there the availability of …rst-best instruments are ruled out by assumption.

28

support when viewed from the perspective of the terms-of-trade theory.37
We organize our discussion into six parts. Section 4.1 considers the GATT pillars of reciprocity
and the most-favored nation (MFN) clause, and the general self-enforcing nature of GATT/WTO
commitments. Sections 4.2 through 4.5 survey the literature on more speci…c features of the
GATT/WTO approach that are central to identifying current challenges. Throughout we highlight
a number of signi…cant challenges facing the GATT/WTO approach. Section 4.6 summarizes by
o¤ering an initial terms-of-trade-theory-based perspective on how the GATT/WTO has worked,
its current woes and possible …xes.

4.1

Reciprocity, MFN and enforcement

In this section, we review research based on the terms-of-trade approach that examines the three
pillars of the GATT/WTO architecture: reciprocity, MFN and enforcement.
Reciprocity Governments reach agreements to lower tari¤s through GATT/WTO negotiation
rounds. It is often observed that these negotiations re‡ect a norm of reciprocity and entail a
“balance of concessions,” whereby each government makes the “concession” of lowering its import
tari¤s in exchange for receiving the bene…t of a similar concession from a trading partner. Such
a norm would be di¢ cult to interpret in a model with small countries. The reciprocity norm,
however, admits a straightforward interpretation when countries are large.
To develop this point, we return to the terms-of-trade model described in Section 3. Let us
suppose that the two governments start at the Nash tari¤s. We know from our earlier discussion
that these tari¤s are ine¢ ciently high, due to the terms-of-trade externality. Since each government
selects its best-response tari¤ at a Nash equilibrium, no government can gain from a unilateral tari¤
cut. This simple observation provides an immediate interpretation for why a government regards
its own tari¤ cut as a concession. Governments may enjoy mutual gains, however, if they jointly
reduce tari¤s. Indeed, as Bagwell and Staiger (1999a, 2002) show, when governments start at the
Nash tari¤s, (
tari¤s ( ;

N;

N ),

as de…ned by (6), they can mutually gain from moving to a new pair of

) only if they both o¤er strictly lower tari¤s, so that

<

N

and

<

N.

A general

form of reciprocity is thus necessary for mutual gains.
We may also interpret reciprocity at a more speci…c level. Following Bagwell and Staiger (1999a,
2002), let us associate the principle of reciprocity with mutual changes in trade policy that bring
about changes in the volume of each country’s imports that are of equal value to changes in the
volume of its exports. Formally, for given initial and subsequent tari¤ pairs, ( 0 ;
respectively, a set of tari¤ changes

1

0

37

and

1

0

0)

and ( 1 ;

1 ),

satis…es the principle of

Our discussion here presupposes that institutions matter for solving problems of international trade policy cooperation. As Maggi (2014) emphasizes, this assumption indicates the existence of underlying frictions, even though
these frictions are not often explicitly modeled. That instutitions matter in this context seems clear from the historical experience with international trade policy cooperation, and the many failed attempts at international cooperation
that preceded the creation of GATT. See Bagwell and Staiger (2010a) and the literature cited therein for further
discussion of the historical antecedents of GATT.

29

reciprocity if

where pew0

pew0 [M (p1 ; pew1 )

pew ( 0 ;

0 ); p
ew1

M (p0 ; pew0 )] = [E(p1 ; pew1 )

pew ( 1 ;

1 ); p0

E(p0 ; pew0 )];

(12)

= p( 0 ; pew0 ); p1 = p( 1 ; pew1 ) and trade-volume

changes are valued at the initial world price, pew0 . In this two-good model, as Bagwell and Staiger

establish, a set of tari¤ changes satis…es the principle of reciprocity if and only if the world price is
unchanged so that pew0 = pew1 : This …nding may be easily con…rmed by applying (1) to (12), where
(1) is applied at both the initial and subsequent tari¤ pairs.

Is liberalization according to the principle of reciprocity su¢ cient for mutual gains? To address

this question, we start at the Nash tari¤s as characterized in (6) and consider for simplicity the
preferences of the home government. Given (4) and (5), it is straightforward to see that Wp < 0
when tari¤s are at their Nash levels. Thus, at Nash tari¤s, the home government would prefer
more trade (a lower relative price of imports) if it could achieve a greater trade volume without
inducing a loss in the home country’s terms of trade. A unilateral tari¤ cut delivers greater trade
volume for the home country, but it does so at the cost of a deterioration in the home country’s
terms of trade. By contrast, mutual changes in trade policy that satisfy the principle of reciprocity
enable the home country (and similarly the foreign country) to enjoy greater trade volume without
su¤ering a terms-of-trade loss. Thus, and as Bagwell and Staiger (1999a, 2002) show, starting
at the Nash equilibrium, trade liberalization that satis…es the principle of reciprocity is sure to
raise each government’s welfare, at least initially.38 This …nding o¤ers an interpretation for the
reciprocity norm that guides trade-liberalization negotiations in GATT/WTO.
While more evidence is needed, recent empirical work o¤ers some support for the important
role played by reciprocity in GATT/WTO tari¤ negotiations. In an early e¤ort, Shirono (2004)
considers the Uruguay Round and …nds that the negotiated tari¤ reductions conform well with
the reciprocity norm. Limão (2006, 2007) considers US tari¤ cuts in the Uruguay Round and also
reports evidence consistent with the application of reciprocity. After constructing a measure of
market-access concessions and identifying instruments that address possible endogeneity concerns,
he presents evidence of reciprocity for US products that were not subject to non-tari¤ barriers.
Among such goods, US import tari¤ reductions embody a general form of reciprocity, being greater
for goods exported from countries whose own tari¤ cuts provided greater market access to US
exports. Karacaovali and Limão (2008) provide similar support for reciprocity in a related exercise
for the EU. Finally, we also note that evidence of reciprocity may be stronger in some product
groups than in others. Gulotty (2014) focuses on tari¤ liberalization by the US in the Uruguay
Round and reports evidence that sectors with high contract-intensive products, characteristic of
global production, do not exhibit reciprocity.
The principle of reciprocity is a key pillar of the GATT/WTO approach to trade liberalization.
38

In a symmetric setting, if governments were to liberalize according to the principle of reciprocity and move
thereby from the Nash equilibrium to the politically optimal tari¤s, then they would enjoy mutual gains all along
this path. In an asymmetric setting, if governments were to liberalize according to the principle of reciprocity, then
mutual bene…ts may disappear before the e¢ ciency frontier is reached. In both settings, mutual gains are enjoyed
provided that the liberalization does not go too far.

30

Our discussion to this point considers the principle of reciprocity as a bargaining norm that characterizes the manner in which tari¤s are reduced in GATT/WTO negotiations. The principle of
reciprocity, however, also explicitly arises in GATT/WTO rules that govern the manner in which
tari¤s may be raised as part of renegotiation or dispute resolution procedures.
Most-Favored Nation (MFN) treatment

A second pillar of the GATT/WTO architecture is

the principle of non-discrimination. For member countries, this principle requires that a country
apply the same tari¤ on a given import good, regardless of which country exports the good. This
principle is embodied in the most-favored nation (MFN) rule, under which no exporter of a given
good can be treated any less favorably than any other exporter.
To interpret and evaluate the principle of non-discrimination, we extend the model in a simple
fashion to allow for three countries. As before, the home country imports good x and exports good
y. We now assume, however, that there are two foreign countries. Foreign countries 1 and 2 each
trade with the home country, importing good y and exporting good x, and we assume for simplicity
that the two foreign countries do not trade with each other. The local price in the home country
is again represented as p

px =py , while the local price in foreign country i, where i = 1; 2, is given
i
i
by p
px =py . The world price for trade between the home country and foreign country i is
denoted as pwi pxi =py and represents the terms of trade for foreign country i: Let ti represent the
home-country ad valorem tari¤ applied to imports from foreign country i and let t i denote the ad
i

i

valorem tari¤ of foreign country i applied to imports from the home country. De…ning
i

and

1+t i , we then have from arbitrage conditions that p i = pwi =

i

1 pw1

and p =

1

From here, we see that if the home country adopts discriminatory tari¤s, de…ned by
di¤erent world prices,

pw1

6=

pw2 ,

1 + ti
2 pw2 .

=
2,

6=

then

obtain for its two foreign trading partners. The foreign country

that receives the lower import tari¤ enjoys a better terms of trade. If instead the home country
satis…es the principle of non-discrimination (i.e., the MFN rule), de…ned by
pw1

=

pw2

pw

1

2

=

follows, and so the two foreign countries enjoy the same terms of trade,

the MFN rule, the home country’s terms of trade are given as

, then
pw .

Under

1=pw .

Our next steps are to determine market-clearing prices and represent each government’s welfare
function. We begin with the simplest case, where the home country’s tari¤s satisfy the MFN rule.
In that case, as noted, a single world price obtains. The market-clearing world price, pew ( ;

1;

2 );

may then be determined similarly to how we do so above for the two-country model. With the
market-clearing local prices then given as p( ; pew ) = pew and p i (

resent the respective government welfare functions as

i; p
ew )

= pew =

W (p; pew ); W 1 (p 1 ; pew )

i;

we may rep-

and W 2 (p 2 ; pew ).

Following Bagwell and Staiger (1999a, 2002), we may now again impose two key assumptions: each
country can improve its terms of trade by raising its import tari¤ (i.e., @ pew ( ;
@ pew (

;

1;

2 )=@

1;

2 )=@

i

>0>

); and each government prefers an improvement in its terms of trade, holding

…xed its local price (i.e., Wpew (p; pew ) < 0 < Wpewi (p i ; pew )).

Analogous steps apply as well for the case in which the home country utilizes discriminatory

tari¤s, although in that case the home country’s terms of trade is more complex to de…ne. As

31

Bagwell and Staiger (1999a, 2002) discuss, when the home country’s tari¤s are discriminatory, the
home country’s multilateral terms of trade is de…ned as a weighted average of its bilateral terms
of trade, 1=pw1 and 1=pw2 , where the weights are export shares and thus depend on foreign local
prices. It follows that international externalities associated with foreign import tari¤s then travel
to home’s multilateral terms of trade via foreign local-price channels as well as bilateral terms-oftrade channels. Intuitively, when the home government employs discriminatory tari¤s, it cares not
just about the bilateral terms of trade but also about the share of exports that comes from each
partner, as it enjoys greater tari¤ revenue when a higher share of a given import volume comes
from the partner on which the import tari¤ is highest. The formal counterpart to this intuition is
that the home country enjoys an improved multilateral terms of trade when a greater share of its
imports comes from the partner on which it places the highest import tari¤.
With the three-country model described, we now consider the value of the principle of nondiscrimination.39 A simple observation is already at hand: when the MFN rule is used, international
externalities associated with tari¤ choices are channeled through the world price alone, just as in the
two-country model. A key implication is that the main …ndings presented above for the two-country
model carry over as well to the multi-country model when the MFN rule is imposed. Speci…cally, as
Bagwell and Staiger (1999a, 2002) show, if home-country tari¤s are non-discriminatory, then Nash
tari¤s are ine¢ cient, politically optimal tari¤s are e¢ cient, and a small liberalization between the
home country and a foreign trading partner that starts at the Nash tari¤s and that satis…es the
principle of reciprocity is sure to generate mutual gains for the two negotiating governments.40
The latter …nding suggests a broad complementarity between the principles of reciprocity and nondiscrimination: the latter principle ensures that international externalities travel through the world
price, which is a channel that the former principle is well-equipped to manage.
The multi-country model also allows consideration of sequential negotiations between trading
partners. The possibility of sequential negotiations is easily motivated in the trade-agreement
context. First, within a given negotiation round, some bilateral negotiations may precede others,
suggesting that strategic considerations associated with sequential negotiations may come into play.
Second, liberalization e¤orts in the GATT/WTO system have occurred over more than 65 years
in the context of eight di¤erent negotiation rounds, and so negotiations among a given set of
countries naturally occur through time across di¤erent negotiation rounds. Finally, accession dates
di¤er across GATT/WTO members, so that some countries participating in a given negotiation
round may not have participated in earlier rounds. To capture new insights associated with the
sequential nature of negotiations, we assume that the home government initially negotiates with
the government of foreign country 1 and subsequently negotiates with the government of foreign
country 2. A key question is whether the principle of non-discrimination may be interpreted as
39

For analyses of the MFN rule in other modeling frameworks, see Bagwell and Staiger (2001b), Choi (1995),
McCalman (2002) and Saggi (2004), for example. Bagwell and Staiger (2010a) and Horn and Mavroidis (2001) o¤er
further discussion of research on the legal and economic aspects of the non-discrimination principle.
40
By contrast, due to the presence of local-price externalities, politically optimal tari¤s are not e¢ cient when
discriminatory tari¤s are used.

32

having e¢ ciency-enhancing implications in this sequential context.
We begin by putting this question in broader context and highlighting potential ine¢ ciencies
that the MFN rule may introduce. As Caplin and Krishna (1988) emphasize, the MFN rule is a
restriction on the set of instruments and thus shifts in the bargaining frontier; hence, an e¢ ciencyenhancing role for non-discrimination is available only if the bargaining process in the absence of
the MFN rule delivers ine¢ cient outcomes. Furthermore, in the context of sequential negotiations,
it is commonly argued that the MFN rule may lead to a “free-rider” problem, whereby a country
refrains from o¤ering signi…cant concessions since it expects anyhow to enjoy MFN tari¤ cuts from
trading partners undertaking their own negotiations. As Caplin and Krishna argue, the MFN freerider concern suggests that bargaining under the MFN rule may fail to deliver e¢ cient outcomes
even relative to the MFN-constrained e¢ ciency frontier.41
We now consider sequential bargaining in the three-country model, where the …rst-stage bargain
between the governments of the home country and foreign country 1 determines ( 1 ,

1)

and the

second-stage bargain between the governments of the home country and foreign country 2 determines ( 2 ,

2 ).

Our …rst step is to identify a bargaining ine¢ ciency that arises in the absence of the

MFN rule. As Bagwell and Staiger (2005a) show, under a slight strengthening of the assumptions
given above, any proposed e¢ cient tari¤ vector is vulnerable to bilateral opportunism: by appropriately lowering the second-stage tari¤s that they apply to one another, the governments of the
home country and foreign country 2 can enjoy mutual welfare gains that come about at the expense
of the government of foreign country 1. Intuitively, such second-stage tari¤ reductions lead to a
terms-of-trade loss for foreign country 1; and for two reasons. First, the discriminatory tari¤ cut
that the home government o¤ers stimulates export supply in foreign country 2 and thus generates
downward pressure on the world price of foreign country 1’s export good. Second, the tari¤ cut
o¤ered by the government of foreign country 2 induces greater demand for the home export good
and thus generates upward pressure on the world price of foreign country 1’s import good.
In the absence of the MFN rule, bilateral opportunism in the second-stage bargain thus ensures
an ine¢ cient outcome. The prospect of second-stage bilateral opportunism may feed back and limit
the scope of the …rst-stage bargain as well. If the government of foreign country 1 were to foresee
that the value of any …rst-stage concession obtained from the home government might be eroded by
an even greater concession extended to foreign country 2, then the government of foreign country 1
might be cautious in extending its own …rst-stage concession. In light of the inevitable bargaining
ine¢ ciencies that arise in the absence of the MFN rule, we move now to the second step of our
discussion and examine whether the MFN rule addresses the bilateral opportunism problem and
thereby promotes e¢ ciency. As Schwartz and Sykes (1997) argue, it is natural to expect that the
MFN rule could be helpful in this regard. After all, the concession-erosion concern is addressed
41

Ludema (1991) shows, however, that an MFN-e¢ cient bargaining outcome is possible, if participating countries
have the option to reject an agreement and continue bargaining when another country free rides and refuses to cut its
own tari¤s. For bargaining within a given round, Ludema’s …nding suggests that the threat of delayed agreement may
be an important defense against free riding. His model, however, may be less well suited for bargaining that occurs
over time and across rounds, as then negotiations in one round may be undertaken with a view toward endogenously
a¤ecting the outside options for acceding countries in future rounds.

33

under the MFN rule, since foreign country 1 is then assured of receiving any home tari¤ cut that is
subsequently o¤ered to foreign country 2. In terms of our discussion in the preceding paragraph, the
MFN rule addresses the …rst reason for the terms-of-trade loss of foreign country 1. Unfortunately,
however, the MFN rule does not address the second reason. Even if the home tari¤ satis…es the
MFN rule, foreign country 1 may su¤er a terms-of-trade loss due to the tari¤ cut extended by foreign
country 2. Building on this point, Bagwell and Staiger (2005a) show that a subset of the tari¤s
that are e¢ cient within the MFN class are also vulnerable to bilateral opportunism, even when
the MFN rule is imposed. The principle of non-discrimination is thus helpful but not completely
e¤ective in eliminating the scope for bilateral opportunism.
Is there a simple rule which, in combination with the MFN rule, fully eliminates the scope
for bilateral opportunism? In fact, as Bagwell and Staiger (2005a) show, bilateral opportunism
is impossible if any bilateral negotiation must satisfy both the principle of non-discrimination
and the principle of reciprocity. As in the two-country model, under the principle of reciprocity, a
negotiation between the governments of the home country and foreign country 2 maintains the world
price between these countries. In addition, as argued above, the principle of non-discrimination
implies that foreign countries 1 and 2 have a common terms of trade, pew . It follows that a bilateral
negotiation between the governments of the home country and foreign country 2 that satis…es the
principles of non-discrimination and reciprocity leaves unaltered foreign country 1’s terms of trade.
Since foreign country 1’s tari¤ is not altered, foreign country 1’s local price, p

1

= pew =

1;

also

remains unchanged. We thus arrive at the following welfare-preservation result: if the governments
of the home country and foreign country 2 engage in a bilateral negotiation that satis…es the
principles of non-discrimination and reciprocity, then government welfare in foreign country 1,
W 1 (p 1 ; pew ), is preserved. This result implies as well that the MFN rule does not generate a

free-riding incentive, when bilateral negotiations also abide by the principle of reciprocity.42

To see the intuition behind the welfare-preservation result, let us suppose that the governments

of the home country and foreign country 2 enter into a bilateral negotiation in which they lower
their respective tari¤s. Under the MFN rule, exporters from foreign country 1 then face a lower
home import tari¤, which in isolation provides improved access to the home market. But the
impact of foreign country 2’s tari¤ cut also must be considered. In foreign country 2, this tari¤
cut lowers the local price of the import good relative to the export good, and thus both stimulates
consumption of the import good and production of the export good. For both of these reasons,
foreign country 2’s export volume increases. Hence, and as the Lerner symmetry theorem would
suggest, foreign country 2’s import tari¤ cut has the same e¤ect as would an export subsidy increase.
Thus, while exporters in foreign country 1 enjoy a lower home import tari¤, they also face, in e¤ect,
subsidized competing exporters from foreign country 2. Under the principles of reciprocity and nondiscrimination, these e¤ects exactly balance out, with the increase in home import demand exactly
ful…lled by the expanded export volume from foreign country 2. Exporters in foreign country 1
42

In recent work, Ossa (2014) argues that the presence of di¤erentiated products can interfere with the ability of
reciprocity and MFN to neutralized third-party e¤ects. An interesting direction for future research is to assess the
welfare-preservation result in other modeling frameworks.

34

thus ultimately do not gain additional access to the home market, which is to say that the bilateral
negotiation has no impact on foreign country 1’s terms of trade.
Bagwell and Staiger (2010b) provide further analysis of sequential bargaining in the threecountry model. They assume that the home government negotiates sequentially with the two foreign
governments, where the home government makes take-it-or-leave-it o¤ers and negotiations are over
MFN tari¤s as well as lump-sum international transfers. The assumption that such transfers are
feasible is extreme but ensures tractability. The MFN rule alone is then completely ine¤ective in
addressing bilateral opportunism: for any proposed MFN-e¢ cient outcome, the governments of the
home country and foreign country 2 can adjust the tari¤s and transfers under their control so as
to enjoy mutual gains that come at the expense of the government of foreign country 1.
In addition to this “backward-stealing problem,” they identify a “forward-manipulation problem”: the home government may keep its MFN tari¤ ine¢ ciently high in its initial negotiation,
and thus engage in “foot-dragging,” in order to endogenously generate a less attractive outside
option (i.e., disagreement point) for its subsequent negotiation partner. Hence, governments generally would be unable to achieve an e¢ cient outcome, even if the backward-stealing problem were
addressed.43 Bagwell and Staiger (2010b) argue, however, that e¢ cient outcomes may be reached
when the MFN rule is combined with other bargaining rules. The forward-manipulation problem,
in particular, may be addressed if the opportunities for renegotiation are so “sweeping” as to disconnect the initial negotiation outcome from the outside option in the subsequent negotiation. At
the same time, we note that other problems may arise if the renegotiation option is too readily
available, as then the signi…cance of any GATT/WTO tari¤ commitment would be put in question.
We turn now to the empirical evidence that concerns the non-discrimination principle. A …rst
form of evidence considers the trade-volume impacts associated with GATT/WTO membership
and relates these impacts to the theoretical implications developed above. Subramanian and Wei
(2007) …nd that GATT/WTO membership is associated with large and signi…cant trade-volume
impacts for developed countries but that the trade-volume impacts of membership are small or
nonexistent for most developing countries.44 Since developed countries have been the most active
participants in GATT/WTO rounds, one interpretation of this …nding draws from the welfarepreservation result presented above. In particular, if developed countries negotiate tari¤ reductions
that broadly adhere to the principles of reciprocity and non-discrimination, then the trade-volume
impacts on third-party countries should be limited. As Bagwell and Staiger (2014) discuss, an
implication of this interpretation of relevance for the Doha Round is that substantial trade-volume
gains for developing countries from negotiated tari¤ reductions may be achieved most e¤ectively
43
Limão (2007) explores a related forward-manipulation strategy. In his model, a government engages in foot
dragging in order to in‡uence a future bargain involving a preferential trade agreement with non-trade objectives.
We provide further discussion of preferential trade agreements in Section 5.
44
The uneven trade e¤ects of GATT/WTO membership found by Subramanian and Wei overturn the …ndings of
an earlier paper by Rose (2004) that constrained the trade e¤ects of GATT/WTO membership to be the same for
all countries and found no membership e¤ect at all. Evidence that the trade e¤ects of GATT/WTO membership are
restricted primarily to developed countries has subsequently been con…rmed by a number of papers (see, for example,
Chang and Lee, 2011, Eicher and Henn, 2011, and Dutt, Mihov and Van Zandt, 2013, though Eicher and Henn
attribute to PTAs most of the trade e¤ects that Subramanian and Wei attributed to WTO membership).

35

if, in markets where they are large, developing countries negotiate reciprocally with each other
and with developed countries. This implication runs counter to the non-reciprocal approach for
developing countries in the Doha Round, as codi…ed under “special and di¤erential treatment”
clauses. A second interpretation of the Subramanian-Wei …nding is that developed countries have
managed to circumvent the MFN rule and discriminate against non-participating GATT/WTO
members. Further empirical analysis of this interpretation is certainly warranted. We note, however,
that in the speci…c context of GATT/WTO bilateral dispute settlement negotiations, Bown (2004a)
…nds evidence that countries comply with the MFN rule.45
A second form of evidence relates GATT/WTO negotiated import tari¤ reductions to industry
and country characteristics. Ludema and Mayda (2009, 2013) relate negotiated bilateral tari¤
reductions to measures that capture foreign exporter concentration and importer market power. In
particular, Ludema and Mayda (2013) …nd evidence that the level of the importer’s tari¤ resulting
from negotiations is negatively related to the product of two terms: exporter concentration (as
measured by the Her…ndahl-Hirschman index) and the importer’s market power (as measured by
the inverse elasticity of export supply, on a product-by-product basis). The positive e¤ect of
market power on a country’s MFN tari¤ thus diminishes as exporter concentration increases, which
is consistent with the view that negotiations are especially e¤ective in “undoing” terms-of-tradedriven ine¢ ciencies when exporter concentration is large. The important role played by exporter
concentration supports the existence of an MFN free-rider e¤ect. They also provide evidence that
the free-rider e¤ect is quantitatively important: they estimate that between 12 and 25 percent of
potential liberalization on average goes unrealized, with most of this gap falling on the exports of
developing countries due to their low-concentration product mix. Their …ndings thus also suggest
a novel concentration-based interpretation of the Subramanian-Wei (2007) …nding.
Enforcement and repeated-game models Our preceding discussion assumes that a negotiated
trade agreement can be enforced. While this abstraction is helpful for interpreting and evaluating
the principles of reciprocity and non-discrimination, the manner in which a trade agreement is enforced is also essential to understand. According to the terms-of-trade theory of trade agreements,
the strategic environment confronting governments setting trade policy corresponds to a Prisoners’
Dilemma setting. In a symmetric, two-country and two-good model, for example, if governments
were to attempt to cooperate with a common tari¤ strictly below the Nash level, then each government would have an incentive to “cheat” by raising its tari¤ to the best-response level. What
deters governments from cheating? Since there is no GATT/WTO jail or other external enforcement device, a government cooperates in a trade agreement if and only if the government perceives
that such behavior is in its self interest. In other words, and as argued by McMillan (1986, 1989),
45
Subramanian and Wei (2007) report small and insigni…cant impacts of a developing country’s WTO membership
on its overall imports, which under balanced trade implies comparably small and insigni…cant impacts on its overall
exports. They also report that developing countries – whether or not they are WTO members – export more to
developed countries that are WTO members, and in their conclusion emphasize this as a possible source of gain
for developing countries associated with the WTO. Their …ndings on overall trade are the relevant …ndings for our
purposes, which is why we emphasize these …ndings in the text.

36

Dixit (1987) and Bagwell and Staiger (1990), the theory of repeated games suggests that a trade
agreement must be self-enforcing so that for each government the short-term gain from cheating is
smaller than the long-term discounted cost of any consequent breakdown in cooperation.
We highlight here three implications of this repeated-game perspective. First, this perspective
suggests an interpretation of the decision by initial GATT Contracting Parties to concentrate
protective measures, with certain exceptions, into tari¤s. As Bagwell and Sykes (2004) argue,
by “tari¤ying” quantitative restrictions such as quotas, governments facilitate mutually bene…cial
and reciprocal trade liberalization. Speci…cally, by imposing tari¤s rather than allocating quotas
across foreign exporters, governments make market-access gains easier to assess and thereby reduce
negotiation transactions costs, reduce the uncertainty facing perhaps risk-averse exporters and
thus enhance the value of market-access concessions, and increase the transparency of trade-policy
conduct so that cheating is less tempting. The latter point corresponds to the familiar notion
from repeated-game theory that cooperation is typically easier to achieve when players’actions are
publicly observable or transparent.46
As Maggi (1999) shows, a second and related implication of the repeated-game perspective is
that a trade agreement may facilitate self-enforcing cooperation by enhancing third-party transparency. Maggi distinguishes between bilateral and multilateral enforcement mechanisms. Under
a bilateral enforcement mechanism, if country A deviates with respect to the tari¤ that it applies
to country B, then countries A and B revert to a Nash trade war. Countries A and B continue to
cooperate with country C, however. By contrast, under a multilateral enforcement mechanism, if
country A deviates with respect to the tari¤ that it applies to country B, then country A reverts
to a Nash trade war with both countries B and C. Maggi shows that a multilateral enforcement
mechanism can achieve greater cooperation than is possible under bilateral enforcement mechanism. Correspondingly, when a trade institution ensures that any deviation would be observed by
all member countries, the future cost of cheating could be quite severe indeed, which in turn implies
that more e¢ cient tari¤s can be achieved without violating the self-enforcement constraint.
A third implication of the repeated-game perspective is that novel predictions may be generated
when the self-enforcement constraint binds and political or economic shocks occur.47 Intuitively,
when a change in the environment upsets the balance between the short-term incentive to cheat
and the long-term discounted value of cooperation, an adjustment in trade policy may be required
to bring the self-enforcement constraint back into balance. We develop this point further in Section
4.2 when we interpret GATT/WTO safeguard rules.
A …nal point is that our discussion here concerns retaliation that occurs o¤ the equilibrium path
in the repeated game. The role of such retaliation is to induce compliance; however, o¤-equilibriumpath retaliation is, by de…nition, not predicted by the model and thus should be distinguished from
46

An additional and important advantage that tari¤s have over quantitative restrictions on trade is that the latter
may be more di¢ cult to apply and enforce on a non-discriminatory basis. See, e.g., Curzon (1965, p. 130) for an
early discussion of this issue.
47
As Furusawa (1999) shows, the repeated-game approach also suggests that greater patience is not always bene…cial
for a country in trade-agreement negotiations, when the negotiation outcome also must be self-enforcing.

37

retaliation that actually appears in WTO rules and practice. At various points below, we note that
on-equilibrium-path retaliation consistent with WTO rules and practice emerges naturally in the
model once the repeated-game model is extended to include privately observed shocks.
Implications of basic WTO principles and rules

We summarize above research on reci-

procity, non-discrimination and enforcement, all from the perspective of the terms-of-trade theory.
Our discussion suggests that the principles of reciprocity and non-discrimination are well-designed
for addressing the ine¢ ciencies associated with the terms-of-trade externality. The theory also provides a natural means for interpreting the self-enforcing nature of trade agreements. At the same
time, our review directs attention to signi…cant challenges that confront the GATT/WTO approach.
The possibility of third-party externalities warrants particular attention, whether such externalities
are positive (and raise free-riding concerns) or negative (and raise bilateral-opportunism concerns).
The theory reviewed above suggests that third-party externalities are eliminated when tari¤ policies adhere to the principles of reciprocity and non-discrimination. The extent to which negotiated
tari¤ cuts satisfy the principle of reciprocity may di¤er somewhat across market settings, however,
and GATT/WTO rules allow for exceptions to the MFN rule, with the most important exception
being the provisions for preferential trading agreements. Addressing the potential for third-party
externalities thus remains an on-going challenge for the GATT/WTO.
Our review also encourages consideration of the interaction between potential free-rider bene…ts
and the bene…ts of GATT/WTO membership for developing countries. Recent empirical work
indicates that many developing countries have not experienced signi…cant trade-volume bene…ts
from GATT/WTO membership. The research reviewed above delivers two possible interpretations.
First, if free-rider bene…ts are signi…cant, then countries may perceive modest gains from pursuing
trade-liberalization negotiations in general but perhaps especially with developing countries whose
exporters often operate in unconcentrated industries. Second, if free-rider bene…ts are largely
eliminated, then developing countries may bene…t little from pursuing a non-reciprocal approach
to trade liberalization. Together, these interpretations suggest that the bene…ts of GATT/WTO
membership for developing countries may be enhanced if negotiated tari¤ reductions adhere closely
to the principles of reciprocity and non-discrimination and if, in markets where they are large,
developing countries negotiate reciprocally with each other and with developed countries.

4.2

Bindings, Binding Overhang and Safeguards/Contingent Protection

A fundamental design feature of the GATT/WTO is that governments negotiate “tari¤ bindings”
or “bound tari¤ levels” rather than exact tari¤ levels. For a given country and good, a bound
tari¤, which is also referred to as a “tari¤ cap,” identi…es the maximal import tari¤ that can be
applied. A tari¤ cap thus permits “downward ‡exibility,” in that a government can apply a tari¤
that is strictly below the tari¤ cap. In that event, “binding overhang” is said to occur.48 But
a tari¤ cap constrains “upward ‡exibility,” since under normal circumstances the applied tari¤
48

The phrase “water” or “water in the binding” is sometimes used interchangeably with “binding overhang.”

38

cannot exceed the cap. Some potential for upward ‡exibility does exist within the GATT/WTO
agreement, however, when certain contingencies arise. In this section, we review economic research
that interprets tari¤ caps, binding overhang, and contingent protection or “safeguards.”
We develop our discussion in the context of a standard partial-equilibrium model with two
symmetric countries and three goods.49 One of the goods is the import good for the home country,
while another good is the import good for the foreign country. The third good is a standard numeraire good, which is produced in both countries under constant returns to scale where labor is
the only factor in the model. For the two non-numeraire goods, production occurs in each country
under conditions of perfect competition and with diminishing marginal productivity. The resulting
supply functions are upward sloping. We assume further that the consumers in both countries
have a common utility function, which is additively separable and takes a quasi-linear form. The
consumption of the numeraire good exhibits constant marginal utility while the consumption of
each of the non-numeraire goods exhibits diminishing marginal utility. The latter property delivers downward sloping demand functions for the non-numeraire goods. Finally, each country has
available a tari¤ for its import good, and we assume that trade in the numeraire good is untaxed.
Tari¤ bindings and tari¤ caps With this standard model in mind, we now consider the interpretation of tari¤ caps. At the time of negotiation, we imagine that governments are in an “ex
ante” stage, with each government being uncertain about the importance that it will place in the
future on pro…ts in the import-competing sector relative to consumer welfare. After government
preference shocks are realized, tari¤s are applied in a manner consistent with the negotiated trade
agreement. In this “ex post” stage, a government’s optimal unilateral tari¤ and also the e¢ cient
tari¤ are higher when the government’s “type” (i.e., the welfare weight that the government attaches to import-competing pro…ts) is larger. Due to the terms-of-trade externality, the optimal
unilateral tari¤ is higher than the e¢ cient tari¤ for any government type, provided only that the
e¢ cient tari¤ does not prohibit all trade. In this context, the challenge is to design a trade agreement that permits some ‡exibility, so that applied tari¤s may respond to preference shocks and
thereby facilitate greater e¢ ciency, without opening the door to opportunistic tari¤ hikes.
To …x ideas, we begin with a couple of extreme scenarios in which governments can design a trade
agreement in the presence of preference shocks that achieves full e¢ ciency (i.e., an e¢ cient tari¤ in
each state). First, if governments’realized types were publicly observed and veri…able, and if there
were no contracting costs, then governments could write a “state-contingent”contract that delivers
full e¢ ciency. Second, even if each government’s type were privately observed, standard arguments
establish that governments could again achieve full e¢ ciency if a lump-sum contingent transfer
instrument were available.50 These scenarios are extreme, however. Governments are likely to have
some private (or at least unveri…able) information about their preferences, and explicit monetary
49

Symmetry here means that the two countries are “mirror images” of one another. This model is frequently used
in trade-policy research. See, for example, Bagwell and Staiger (2001a).
50
See Bagwell and Staiger (2005b) for details in the trade-agreement context.

39

transfers are not required in GATT/WTO rules and are rarely used in WTO dispute resolution.51
Motivated by these considerations, we therefore turn now to a scenario in which governments
negotiate a trade agreement under uncertainty, have private information about their respective
preferences at the time that tari¤s are applied, and do not have available an instrument with
which to e¤ect contingent transfers. Allowing for a continuum of possible government types that
are distributed uniformly, Bagwell and Staiger (2005b) consider this scenario in a linear-quadratic
model and compare two possible trade agreements.52 In the …rst agreement, governments adopt a
rigid tari¤ rule, under which each government commits to an exact tari¤ level for all types. Since a
government’s type enters its welfare function in a linear fashion, the most e¢ cient agreement of this
kind places the rigid tari¤ at the level that is e¢ cient for the average type.53 They then compare
this agreement with one in which each government adopts a weak-binding tari¤ rule, consistent with
GATT/WTO rules, under which it commits to a tari¤ cap. They …nd that the most e¢ cient weakbinding yields strictly higher expected joint welfare than does the most e¢ cient rigid tari¤, and
that the most e¢ cient weak binding is strictly higher than the most e¢ cient rigid tari¤. Intuitively,
under a weak binding, the applied tari¤ exhibits binding overhang when a government draws a low
type, and so the binding only constrains the applied tari¤ when the government’s type is high and
the e¢ cient tari¤ is thus also high.
Amador and Bagwell (2013) generalize this analysis in several directions. Allowing for more
general payo¤ and distribution functions, they derive conditions under which a trade agreement with
a tari¤ cap (i.e., a weak-binding tari¤ rule) maximizes expected joint welfare among all incentivecompatible trade agreements. They thus provide a …rst theoretical explanation for the use of tari¤
caps in an optimal trade agreement. Their approach is to represent the problem of …nding an
optimal trade agreement for the import good of the home country as a delegation problem, in
which the principal’s expected welfare corresponds to the associated expected joint welfare of the
two governments and the agent is the government of the home country.54 In this context, a trade
agreement identi…es a set of permissible tari¤s. In the ex ante stage of trade-agreement design,
the two governments thus choose the set of permissible tari¤s for the home-country import good
that maximizes ex ante joint welfare while satisfying the incentive-compatibility constraint that the
home government will choose its preferred tari¤ from this set after observing its type. The tari¤s
induced by rigid-tari¤ rules and weak-binding tari¤ rules are of course candidate solutions, but so,
too, are many discontinuous tari¤ functions. Amador and Bagwell further allow that the trade
agreement may specify that tari¤ choices are bundled with money-burning expenditures perhaps
corresponding to administrative procedures. They characterize a rich set of environments, which
51
Further, even monetary transfers may entail ine¢ ciencies, due to the distortions associated with raising funds
through taxation.
52
In a linear-quadratic model, economic agents have quadratic payo¤s and the corresponding demand and supply
functions are linear.
53
As discussed in note 23, under the assumption that governments have available at the negotiation stage an
instrument with which to make non-contingent, lump-sum transfers, e¢ cient policies for this partial equilibrium
model maximize expected joint government welfare.
54
A delegation game is a principal-agent game in which the agent has private information and transfers are infeasible.
The delegation game was …rst introduced and analyzed by Holmstrom (1977).

40

includes the linear-quadratic model with a uniform distribution as a special case, in which the
optimal trade agreement takes the simple form of a tari¤ cap. The optimal trade agreement then
also exhibits binding overhang and does not employ money burning.55
Beshkar, Bond and Rho (forthcoming) extend the linear-quadratic model to a setting with
asymmetric countries. They restrict attention to tari¤ caps and provide theoretical and empirical
support for the prediction that the optimal tari¤ cap is higher, and thus the likelihood of binding
overhang is greater, when importer market power is lower. To gain some intuition for their theoretical …ndings, it is helpful to consider the extreme case of a small country. Since the tari¤ policy
of a small country imposes no terms-of-trade externality on its trading partner, the optimal trade
agreement would permit such a country to impose its unilaterally optimal trade policy for whatever preference shock it experiences. A high (i.e., unrestrictive) tari¤ cap achieves this goal. More
generally, when a country has more market power in a sector, its tari¤ policy imposes a greater
externality on its trading partner, and so a lower tari¤ cap, with an associated reduced frequency of
binding overhang, is optimal. Using data on applied and bound tari¤s for WTO member countries,
they then provide strong empirical support for this prediction.56
Tari¤ caps and binding overhang have also received attention in other modeling frameworks. In
a model with contracting costs, Horn, Maggi and Staiger (2010) compare a weak binding rule and
a rigid tari¤ rule. The framework is di¤erent from that considered by Bagwell and Staiger (2005b)
but interestingly points to a related set of insights as regards bindings and overhang. Horn, Maggi
and Staiger (2010) show that a weak binding rule is preferred to a rigid tari¤ rule, since the former
permits e¢ ciency-enhancing downward ‡exibility, and they also note that the weak binding rule is
characterized by binding overhang. A di¤erent approach is pursued by Maggi and Rodriguez-Clare
(2007). As we also discuss in Section 6.1, they analyze a model in which trade agreements address
both commitment and terms-of-trade problems. In their model, binding overhang does not occur in
equilibrium; however, the potential to apply a tari¤ below the bound level induces ex post lobbying
that has the bene…cial e¤ect of diminishing an ex ante problem of excess investment.
The tari¤-cap theory described above establishes a rationale for tari¤ caps when governments
have private information and contingent transfers are infeasible. As we argue next, in addition to
providing an interpretation of tari¤ caps and binding overhang, this theory provides a foundation
from which to understand contingent protection. A key idea is that contingent protection potentially
may enhance e¢ ciency by “linking” tari¤ choices through time for a given government or across
governments, and creating thereby some scope for imperfect contingent transfers. More generally,
55
Related results arise in other settings as well. Amador and Bagwell (2013) move beyond the partial-equilibrium
model with perfect competition and use their main propositions to establish conditions under which a tari¤ cap is also
optimal for a monopolistic-competition model of trade with a …xed number of …rms. (Ossa, 2012, explores a similar
model while focusing on other issues.) Amador and Bagwell (2012) similarly employ these propositions to provide
conditions for the optimality of a tari¤ cap in a linear-quadratic model with a uniform distribution when private
information concerns the weight that tari¤ revenue receives in the government welfare function. Finally, the models
discussed here assume a continuum of possible types. As Bagwell (2009) con…rms, the optimal trade agreement does
not take the form of a tari¤ cap in the linear-quadratic model when government preferences concerning the relative
importance of import-competing …rms are drawn from two possible types.
56
See Bacchetta and Piermartini (2011) for additional empirical evidence regarding tari¤ caps and binding overhang.

41

contingent protection provides a form of upward ‡exibility that in some cases may enhance e¢ ciency
when certain shocks occur. At the same time, it also must be emphasized that tari¤ caps are a
valuable means of “stabilizing” tari¤ commitments and diminishing the potential for “unwinding”
tari¤ commitments.57 The optimal rules for contingent protection thus re‡ect a delicate balance
between maintaining reduced tari¤s in response to the terms-of-trade externality and providing
some upward ‡exibility in light of various shocks that may confront governments.
Contingent protection such as safeguards and antidumping

Bagwell and Staiger (2005b)

explore a role for contingent protection when governments experience preference shocks that are
privately observed. Formally, they consider a repeated-game model in which government’s privately
observed types are iid through time, and they show that expected joint government welfare may be
improved when the tari¤ choices of any given government are appropriately linked through time.58
Their analysis is motivated by the “escape clause” de…ned in the WTO Agreement on Safeguards.
This agreement describes contingencies under which a country can set a tari¤ above the tari¤ cap
and thus achieve some degree of upward ‡exibility.59 As Bagwell and Staiger note, an interesting feature of the WTO safeguards agreement is that it embodies a dynamic-use constraint: if a
government imposes escape-clause protection in an industry for X years, then it is not allowed to
reimpose escape-clause protection in that industry for the next X years. This constraint introduces
an opportunity cost to a government from selecting an escape-clause tari¤, so that incentive compatibility is achieved when only a government with a su¢ ciently high type in the current period
imposes an escape-clause tari¤. The dynamic-use constraint may thus promote further e¢ ciency by
facilitating more e¢ cient tari¤s when a government draws a su¢ ciently high type. The prospect of
improved e¢ ciency emerges because a government that goes above the cap today e¤ectively makes
a transfer to the other government in the form of an improved continuation value.
Martin and Vergote (2008) develop a related set of insights for a situation in which the tari¤
choices of one government are linked to those of the other government. They consider anti-dumping
duties as allowed under certain contingencies in the WTO Anti-dumping Agreement. Motivated by
empirical work by Blonigen and Bown (2003), Feinberg and Reynolds (2006) and Prusa and Skeath
(2002) that provides evidence of a retaliatory role for anti-dumping duties, Martin and Vergote
argue that such on-equilibrium-path retaliation may facilitate e¢ ciency gains by ensuring that the
home government protects its import-competing industry with an anti-dumping duty only when
the current importance of that industry to the home government is su¢ ciently great. In this case,
when the home government imposes an anti-dumping duty, a link is forged to a future retaliatory
anti-dumping duty of the foreign country; and upon raising its applied tari¤ via an anti-dumping
duty the home government thereby again makes a transfer to the foreign government in the form
57
For further discussion of the importance of tari¤ stabilization, see Curzon (1965, Chapter 4). Focusing on India,
Bown and Tovar (2011) provide empirical evidence that countries use antidumping and safeguard exceptions to
unwind commitments to lower tari¤s in the presence of domestic political-economic pressure.
58
Their work builds on a literature in game theory that associates continutation values with transfers. See Athey
and Bagwell (2001) and Fudenberg, Levine and Maskin (1994).
59
For an overview of the the WTO safeguards agreement, see Wauters (2010).

42

of an improved continuation value.
Our discussion of contingent trade-policies above focuses on the idea that the potential for
upward ‡exibility might improve e¢ ciency when governments are privately informed about their
preferences, if contingent transfers achieved through continuation values ensure that only governments with high types exercise this potential. The WTO Safeguards Agreement and also the WTO
Anti-dumping Agreement, however, explicitly indicate contingencies under which upward ‡exibility
can be exercised. For example, the WTO Agreement on Safeguards permits the application of a
safeguard tari¤ when the domestic industry is seriously injured as a result of increased imports.
If such contingencies are interpreted as de…ning veri…able market conditions, then an alternative modeling approach is suggested under which a government that seeks to impose a contingent
trade policy must incur the necessary costs to publicly verify that the relevant contingent state is
present.60 Bond and Beshkar (2012) o¤er a …rst example of this modeling approach. They analyze
a partial-equilibrium model with asymmetric country sizes that features costly state veri…cation,
in the speci…c sense that at a cost the importing government can publicly verify the welfare weight
that determines its type. A novel feature of their model is that both caps and escape clauses
are endogenously determined as part of an optimal trade agreement. Interestingly, they …nd that
circumstances under which the possibilities of overhang (downward ‡exibility) and escape (upward
‡exibility) co-exist are relatively rare. Intuitively, when higher types use the escape clause, the cap
can be set at a lower level; and this implies in turn that the likelihood of overhang is small.
An alternative theory of escape clauses dispenses with the possibility of private information and
focuses instead on the self-enforcement constraints that underlie any cooperative trade agreement.
Bagwell and Staiger (1990) o¤er a …rst paper of this kind. They consider a partial-equilibrium
model with two countries, in which publicly observed trade-volume shocks occur in an iid fashion
over time. When a country imports a large volume, it has an increased incentive to cheat on a
cooperative agreement and select its unilaterally optimal tari¤. The cost of such behavior is that it
may induce governments to abandon cooperation and revert to Nash trade policies in the future. If
governments maximize national income and are su¢ ciently patient, then they can enforce free-trade
policies for all possible trade-volume shocks. If governments have moderate patience, however, then
they can enforce free-trade policies only in periods with low trade volumes. When trade volumes
take higher values, the incentive to cheat is acute at free-trade policies and the gains from defection
overwhelm the discounted future cost of initiating a Nash trade war. Governments with moderate
patience can still cooperate in the presence of large trade volume shocks, but they do so by setting
positive (and below-Nash) tari¤s. Intuitively, by cooperating with a positive tari¤, governments
reduce the incentive to cheat and bring it back in line with the future discounted cost of Nash
reversion. The positive tari¤s that accompany high trade-volume shocks can be interpreted in
terms of an escape clause, and Bagwell and Staiger show that an escape clause of this kind is a
feature of an optimal self-enforcing trade agreement for governments with moderate patience.61
60

As Sykes (2003) discusses, however, the extent to which the WTO Agreement on Safeguard s and subsequent legal
cases serve to articulate a clear set of contingencies may be questioned.
61
Their work builds on methods developed by Rotemberg and Saloner (1986) for the study of collusion.

43

Bown and Crowley (2013a) provide a …rst empirical investigation of the cross-sectional and
intertemporal predictions of the Bagwell-Staiger (1990) model. As discussed, that model predicts
that an import tari¤ increase is more likely when the import volume increases. In addition, conditioning on a positive import surge, the model predicts that the probability of a tari¤ increase is
positively associated with less elastic import demand and export supply functions and also with
less variable import demand volumes. Since the escape clause featured in the Bagwell-Staiger
model could correspond to any instrument of special protection, such as a safeguard tari¤ or an
anti-dumping duty, Bown and Crowley analyze the model’s predictions using data on US import
tari¤ increases arising under the US antidumping and safeguard laws and …nd strong support for
the predictions of the Bagwell-Staiger model.
A special feature of the Bagwell-Staiger (1990) model is that trade-volume shocks are iid through
time. A trade-volume shock thus a¤ects the incentive to cheat in the current period but has no
direct impact on the discounted future value of cooperation. Bagwell and Staiger (2003) extend the
model to allow for both iid shocks to the trade-volume level and stochastic but persistent trends in
the growth rate for trade volume.62 At any given point in time, governments observe the current
shock to the trade-volume level and observe as well whether the trading relationship is in a fastor slow-growth phase, where the relationship moves between the two phases according to a Markov
process. They …nd that the most-cooperative trade agreement for governments with moderate
patience is countercyclical: all else equal, the most-cooperative tari¤s are lower in a fast-growth
phase. The key intuition is that governments have more to lose from initiating a trade war in a
(persistent) fast-growth phase; as a consequence, they can then withstand that heightened incentive
to cheat that a lower cooperative tari¤ implies.63 Bown and Crowley (2013b) provide an empirical
investigation of the macroeconomic determinants of time-varying trade policy. Using quarterly data
for the US, EU, Australia, Canada and South Korea, they …nd evidence of a countercyclical trade
policy response in the pre-Great Recession period (namely, the …rst quarter of 1988 through the
third quarter of 2008).64 Their …ndings are broadly consistent with the theoretical predictions in
Bagwell and Staiger (2003) as well as those in Crowley’s (2011) reciprocal dumping model, which
predicts an increase in import restrictions in response to macroeconomic weakness abroad.
A di¤erent perspective on safeguards is o¤ered by Sykes (1991, 2003). He observes that instruments of special protection are often applied to assist declining domestic industries. Firms in
such an industry retain a large share of the bene…ts of price-increasing protection, since temporary
protection is unlikely to encourage entry in a declining industry. Thus, …rms in a declining industry
may lobby hard for protection and, therefore, …gure prominently in the domestic government’s welfare function. Foreign exporters are naturally harmed by the domestic tari¤; however, if the foreign
62

Hochman and Segev (2010) extend the Bagwell-Staiger (1990) model in a di¤erent direction by allowing that
governments may imperfectly observe the trade-volume shock before applying tari¤s. Another interesting extension
is considered by Tabakis (2010), who examines the use of special protection when countries are transitioning into
preferential trading agreements.
63
This work builds on methods used by Bagwell and Staiger (1997c) to analyze collusion over the business cycle.
64
Bown and Crowley (2014) provide additional empirical support from a sample of 13 emerging economies and use
of annual data covering the period 1995-2010.

44

export industry is growing, then they may complain little about facing protection, since their pro…ts
eventually would be lost to entry anyhow. These …rms therefore may not …gure prominently in the
foreign government’s welfare function. Thus, governments in an ex ante state may be attracted to
a safeguard rule for declining industries, since the welfare bene…t to the government that uses the
safeguard may exceed the welfare cost to the government whose exporters face the safeguard.
Implications and new directions

Our survey highlights that tari¤ caps and binding overhang

occur in an optimal trade agreement when governments are privately informed about their preferences and contingent transfers are infeasible. With this foundation in place, we then consider
three complementary theories for the use of special instruments of protection. First, when governments experience privately observed preference shocks, upward ‡exibility might promote further
e¢ ciency, provided that higher tari¤s are only used by governments facing high political pressures.
This incentive compatibility constraint, in turn, can be met, when current tari¤s are linked to
future tari¤s so that contingent transfers can be achieved, at least to some degree, through changes
in continuation values. The incentive-compatibility constraint also can be met when costly state
veri…cation is feasible. Second, optimal cooperation when trade volumes are volatile entails a low
baseline tari¤ coupled with an escape clause that allows for higher tari¤s when trade-volume shocks
are high. Safeguards emerge in an optimal trade agreement in this setting and indeed complement
tari¤ liberalization, as the baseline tari¤ would be higher were safeguards not allowed. Finally,
safeguards may enable governments to achieve greater welfare by rewarding (penalizing) industries
that …gure more (less) prominently in governments’welfare functions. This theory associates the
use of safeguards with declining industries. While more empirical work is needed, we also identify
studies that provide empirical support for themes emerging from the theoretical analyses.
We conclude this section by mentioning a new literature that assesses the value of tari¤ bindings,
as distinct from reductions in applied tari¤s, in the presence of policy uncertainty.65 Handley
(2014) and Handley and Limão (forthcoming) focus on the implications of policy uncertainty when
exporters face sunk market entry costs. They observe that tari¤ bindings reduce policy uncertainty
by constraining the range of possible tari¤s, limiting losses in the worst-case scenario and thereby
stimulating entry into export markets. Formalizing this insight, they use their models to empirically
quantify the trade e¤ects of WTO bindings (for Australia, in Handley, 2014) and of PTA bindings
(for Portugal joining the EU, in Handley and Limão, forthcoming), reporting large trade e¤ects
for each case. The study of tari¤ caps and policy uncertainty represents an especially promising
direction for new research.

4.3

Subsidies

The appropriate treatment of subsidies in a trade agreement is subtle. On the one hand, a domestic
production subsidy can be a “…rst-best” instrument with which to address a market failure that
65

In addition to the Handley (2014) and Handley and Limão (forthcoming) papers we discuss in the text, other
recent papers in this emerging literature include Limão and Maggi (forthcoming) and Pierce and Schott (2015).

45

results in an ine¢ ciently low level of output. A production subsidy may also be an attractive
instrument for a government with political-economic objectives that wishes to redistribute surplus
to producers in a given industry. On the other hand, some restrictions on the use of domestic
production subsidies are necessary, since otherwise a government could always use a domestic
production subsidy to an import-competing industry so as to undermine the bene…ts o¤ered to
other countries through negotiated tari¤ cuts. The appropriate treatment of export subsidies is
also subtle. An export subsidy lowers the world price for the export good and thus generates a
terms-of-trade gain for importing countries, but it may also displace exports from other countries
and alter entry and exit patterns across countries. In this section, we review the GATT/WTO legal
treatment of subsidies and discuss economic research that interprets and evaluates this treatment.66
Subsidy rules under the GATT versus WTO The treatment of subsidies in GATT was
relatively tolerant: a foreign trading partner could respond to the subsidies of the domestic country
through two possible means.67 First, the foreign government could unilaterally impose a countervailing duty (CVD) if its import-competing industry experienced material injury as a consequence
of an export subsidy given to producers in the domestic country. Second, the foreign government
could …le a non-violation complaint if it had previously negotiated a tari¤ reduction from the domestic government on a given product and the domestic government later o¤ered a subsidy to its
import-competing producers of that product. To succeed, the foreign government would have to
show that a new or increased domestic subsidy program emerged that had the e¤ect of nullifying
or impairing the market-access bene…ts that the foreign government had reasonably expected at
the time of the tari¤ negotiation.68 In this case, the domestic government would not be required
to remove the subsidy; however, it would be expected to make policy adjustments that restored
the foreign country’s negotiated market access. In addition, as part of GATT negotiations, several
countries agreed to restrict the use of export subsidies, especially for non-agricultural goods.
The treatment of subsidies in the WTO’s Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures
(the SCM Agreement) is much more restrictive. First, except as allowed for in the Agreement on
Agriculture, export subsidies (and also local-content subsidies) are prohibited. Second, “speci…c”
subsidies that have “adverse e¤ects” on other members are actionable, where adverse e¤ects could
take the form of an injury to an industry in another member country, the nulli…cation or impairment
of bene…ts expected by another WTO Member, and “serious prejudice”to the interests of another
WTO Member. The …rst two forms of adverse e¤ects are broadly re‡ected in the GATT treatment
of subsidies and may be associated with the use of CVDs and non-violation complaints by the
adversely impacted member country. The more novel ingredient is serious prejudice, which may
occur if the e¤ect of a subsidy o¤ered by the domestic country is to cause a loss of exports by a WTO
member into the domestic market or a third-country market. Importantly, a domestic production
66

For closely related discussions, see also Bagwell (2008) and Bagwell, Staiger and Sykes (2013).
Sykes (2005a) o¤ers a detailed discussion of the evolution of subsidy rules under GATT and the WTO.
68
See Petersmann (1997, pp. 151-4) for discussion of the conditions under which a subsidy could be determined to
upset market-access expectations.
67

46

subsidy can be actionable under the SCM Agreement independently of whether the subsidy nulli…es
or impairs the market-access expectations associated with an earlier tari¤ negotiation.69
WTO rules thus treat subsidies in a fairly severe manner. In contrast to import tari¤s, for
which caps are negotiated, exports subsidies are banned. As well, under WTO rules, a country
that uses a domestic production subsidy must withdraw it, or remove its adverse e¤ects, even if the
subsidy itself does not upset any negotiated market-access expectation. We consider next research
that interprets and evaluates the WTO’s treatment of subsidies.
Production subsidies We begin with the treatment of domestic production subsidies. On the
one hand, and as mentioned above, a domestic production subsidy is a …rst-best instrument with
which to address a market failure that leads to an ine¢ ciently low level of production.70 A domestic
production subsidy also may be an attractive instrument for a government with political-economic
preferences that seeks to redistribute surplus to the import-competing industry. On the other hand,
if the use of domestic production subsidies were completely unregulated, then governments would
be unable to achieve e¢ cient outcomes through reciprocal tari¤ negotiations alone. Intuitively, in
the absence of any restrictions on the use of such subsidies, a government that exchanged reciprocal
tari¤ cuts with a trading partner could subsequently “undo”the market-access consequences of its
own tari¤ cut by providing a production subsidy to its domestic import-competing industry. This
discussion suggests that domestic production subsidies have a potential e¢ ciency-enhancing role
to play but that their use must be regulated in some manner. Given these considerations, we may
ask: how should domestic production subsidies be treated in a trade agreement?
The described trade-o¤s suggest a potential answer to this question: grant each government
‡exibility over its domestic policies, provided that the overall e¤ect of its chosen domestic policies
does not erode the market-access commitments made through its preceding tari¤ negotiations.
Under this approach, after tari¤s are negotiated, a government would be allowed to adjust its
domestic policies in any way, so long as the overall e¤ect does not result in a terms-of-trade loss for
its trading partner. To analyze this approach, Bagwell and Staiger (2006) augment the two-country,
general-equilibrium model of trade considered above to include domestic policies. Assuming that
the set of domestic instruments available to governments is su¢ ciently rich to create a degree of
policy redundancy, they …nd that GATT rules enable governments to achieve an e¢ cient outcome
using tari¤ negotiations.71 A key feature of GATT rules in this context is that a government can
…le a non-violation complaint if it su¤ers a terms-of-trade loss as a consequence of a change in the
69

As regards countermeasures, if the domestic government refuses to remove an export subsidy, then the complaining Member government may take “appropriate countermeasures.” For an actionable subsidy, in the absence
of an agreement on compensation, and if steps to remove the adverse e¤ects are not undertaken or if the subsidy
itself is not withdrawn, then the complaining Member may be granted authority to impose countermeasures that are
“commensurate” with the adverse e¤ects attributable to the subsidy. See Lawrence (2003, pp. 54-60), Mavroidis
(2000), Spamann (2006), and Bown and Ruta (2010) for further discussion.
70
An import tari¤ is another instrument that might be used to expand domestic production levels; however, an
import tari¤ is a second-best instrument. An import tari¤ is equivalent to a consumption tax and a production
subsidy, and thus a¤ects both consumer and producer margins.
71
Su¢ cient policy redundancy is satis…ed if each government has available an import tax, a domestic production
subsidy and a domestic consumption tax.

47

domestic policies of its trading partner. The WTO’s SCM Agreement places further restrictions
on the use of domestic production subsidies. These restrictions limit policy redundancy and may
thereby prevent governments from achieving e¢ cient outcomes through tari¤ negotiations.
Bagwell and Staiger (2006) also consider a setting with limited instruments. In this setting,
GATT rules are no longer su¢ cient for achieving e¢ ciency through tari¤ negotiations. Intuitively,
in a limited-instrument setting, a government may be unable to reposition its subsidy to an ef…cient level without imposing a terms-of-trade loss on its trading partner. Indeed, when the set
of instruments is limited, the SCM Agreement could represent an improvement over GATT rules.
For example, if governments respectively maximize national income and no market failure exists
that creates a corrective role for domestic production subsidies, then the use of subsidies would be
ine¢ cient. More broadly, though, market failures and/or redistributive goals suggest a potential
role for domestic production subsidies in an e¢ cient outcome. As Bagwell and Staiger argue, tight
restrictions on subsidies could then have a “chilling e¤ect” on tari¤ negotiations.72 To the extent
that the SCM Agreement imposes tight restrictions on the use of domestic production subsidies,
GATT rules on subsidies are then preferred to those in the WTO.
GATT non-violation rules on domestic policies identify an attractive approach in granting ‡exibility to governments up to the point where an externality is imposed on trading partners. At a
practical level, however, it also must be acknowledged that non-violation rules have their own limitations.73 As two illustrations, we mention that it may not be obvious what a government should
reasonably expect at the time of negotiation, and it also may not be clear where to draw the line in
terms of which sorts of domestic policy changes are appropriately disciplined using non-violation
nulli…cation-and-impairment complaints.
Export subsidies in two-country models We turn now to the treatment of export subsidies.
We begin with a basic observation: in the simple two-country, two-good general equilibrium model
described above, an increase in the domestic country’s export subsidy would have the same e¤ect
on prices and thus government welfare functions as would a decrease in its import tari¤. This
observation, known as the Lerner symmetry theorem, follows since either policy change would
lower (raise) the relative price of the domestic import good in the domestic (world) market. One
implication is that both policy changes would generate a terms-of-trade loss (gain) for the domestic
(foreign) country. Since each government’s welfare is expressed as a function of the relative price in
its country and its country’s terms of trade, it follows that the two policy changes a¤ect government
welfare functions in the same fashion as well. Hence, our arguments above carry over immediately
when governments select export instead of import policies. In particular, Nash export policies are
ine¢ cient and result in too little trade, and governments can mutually gain from an agreement on
export policies only if they agree to make reciprocal adjustments that lead to greater trade volume.
72
The idea is that governments may be hesitant to negotiate tari¤ bindings if subsidies are disciplined heavily, since
tari¤s may then be the best remaining means of providing assistance to domestic import-competing industries.
73
Another important caveat is that a market-access-preservation rule may fail to be optimal in settings with private
information, as Lee (2014) argues. We discuss his and related papers in greater detail in Section 5.

48

This result is familiar when governments respectively maximize national income. In that case,
free trade is e¢ cient, but each government’s optimal unilateral policy is an export tari¤. The key
intuition is that a government can use an export tari¤ to induce its competitive export industry to
restrict output as would a monopolist, where monopoly rents are now retained in the form of tari¤
revenue. In the resulting Nash equilibrium, both governments impose export tari¤s, and the trade
volume is ine¢ ciently low. More generally, the sign of a government’s unilaterally optimal export
policy depends on the government’s speci…c preferences. The Nash export policy is an export
subsidy for a government that gives su¢ cient welfare weight to the interests of its export sector.74
The fundamental point, though, is the governments’noncooperative export policies, whatever their
sign, induce too little trade from the governments’joint perspective.
A trade agreement can thus generate mutual gains for governments only if it facilitates reciprocal
increases in export subsidies (or reciprocal decreases in export tari¤s) relative to noncooperative
levels. Intuitively, an increase in a country’s export subsidy generates a positive terms-of-trade
externality for its trading partner, whose consumers now enjoy a lower price on their import good.
While this argument makes sense within the context of the terms-of-trade approach to trade agreements, it runs completely counter to the treatment of export subsidies in the WTO. There are thus
two possibilities: either the WTO’s prohibition on export subsidies is misguided, or the simple twocountry, competitive-markets version of terms-of-trade theory is missing something important. To
explore the latter possibility, we discuss next a sequence of enriched terms-of-trade models within
which to further explore the treatment of export subsidies.
Export subsidies in third-market models One potential cost of export subsidies not featured
in the above discussion is that an export subsidy o¤ered in one country lowers the world price and
thereby imposes a negative terms-of-trade externality on other exporting countries. To explore this
issue, we follow the “strategic-trade” literature and construct a “third-market” model.75 Speci…cally, we illustrate our points using a simple partial-equilibrium model with a single good, where
all …rms are located in Countries 1 and 2 and all consumers are located in Country 3. Firms in
Countries 1 and 2 then compete for sales to consumers in Country 3. We ask two questions. First,
when would a government have a unilateral incentive to o¤er an export subsidy? Second, when if
at all should an international trade agreement discipline the use of export subsidies?
Following the pioneering model of Brander and Spencer (1985), we focus on a setting in which
a …xed number of …rms engage in Cournot competition for sales in Country 3. The key issues
involved can be illustrated in a simple third-market model with two …rms, wherein Firm 1 is located
74

See, for example, Bagwell and Staiger (2001a) and Grossman and Helpman (1995a).
As we discuss in Section 6.2, some recent research evaluates whether the strategic-trade and “delocation”theories
of export subsidies can be interpreted as providing a rationale for trade agreements that is distinct from that provided
by the terms-of-trade externality. Bagwell and Staiger (2012a, 2015) argue, however, that the problem for a trade
agreement to solve in the pro…t-shifting and delocation settings can be given a terms-of-trade intepretation, provided
that both import and export policies are available. In particular, they show that politically optimal policies remain
e¢ cient in these settings when a full set of trade policies is available. We thus include some discussion of these
theories here, as part of our discussion of the implications of the terms-of-trade approach for the treatment of export
subsidies, while postponing further discussion of the rationale of trade agreements in these settings until Section 6.2.
75

49

in Country 1, Firm 2 is located in Country 2 and all consumers are located in Country 3. In the
absence of any subsidy, Firms 1 and 2 have the same constant marginal cost. The governments
of Countries 1 and 2 respectively maximize national income. The game has two stages. The
governments simultaneously select their respective speci…c (i.e., per unit) export subsidies, and
after observing these selections Firms 1 and 2 simultaneously select their respective output levels.
A key …nding is that, starting at free trade, a government that maximizes national income now
has a unilateral incentive to o¤er an export subsidy. As is now well known, an export subsidy lowers
the cost of the exporting …rm and thus shifts out this …rm’s output reaction curve. The strategic
advantage of such a shift is that the other exporting …rm responds by reducing its own output.
An export subsidy thus “shifts pro…ts” to the subsidizing country. The overall e¤ect of a strategic
export subsidy is to expand aggregate output and thus induce a fall in the world price. Hence, as
in the competitive model, an export subsidy generates a positive terms-of-trade externality for the
importing country. A new feature of the third-market model is that an export subsidy generates
as well a negative terms-of-trade externality for the other exporting country.
Of course, the other exporting country has a similar incentive to subsidize exports, and the
resulting subgame perfect Nash equilibrium involves export subsidies from both exporting countries.
The two exporting countries end up worse o¤ when export subsidies are legal, since their strategic
e¤orts o¤set and simply result in a lower world price. Consumer and global economic welfares,
however, are higher when subsidies are allowed than would be the case were subsidies banned. The
described model therefore provides an interpretation for why exporting countries would seek a ban
on export subsidies as a means to keep the price high, but it suggests that an international trade
agreement designed to maximize the combined welfare of all countries in fact should encourage even
greater use of export subsidies than occurs in the noncooperative equilibrium.76
This simple third-market model has been extended in many directions to allow for alternative forms of imperfect competition, multiple exporting …rms in exporting countries, consumers
in exporting countries, endogenous cost technologies and other considerations.77 Such extensions
provide important quali…cations about the sign of the unilaterally optimal export policy, but a
robust feature of models with a …xed number of …rms is that a more expansionary export policy
provides a positive terms-of-trade externality to importing consumers.
Returning now to the two questions identi…ed above, we note that the simple third-market
model described here provides an interpretation for the unilateral appeal of export subsidies, but
it also suggests that export subsidies may be under-supplied. The model thus does not provide a
foundation from which to understand a cap on export subsidies, much less the WTO’s prohibition
on export subsidies. The model also fails to provide an interpretation for the fact that the WTO
76

The market is initially distorted with too little production as a consequence of oligopolistic competition. The
equilibrium with strategic export subsidies expands output closer to the competitive level, and a trade agreement
could further improve global welfare by increasing subsidy levels so that the competitive level of output is produced.
77
Eaton and Grossman (1986) and Maggi (1996) provide the key studies examining the dependence of the sign
of optimal export policies on the form of imperfect competition in the product market. Bagwell and Staiger (1994)
argue that the sign of the optimal strategic R&D policy is less sensitive to the form of imperfect competition. See
Brander (1995) for a review of the strategic-trade literature.

50

treats export subsidies more severely than import tari¤s.78 In short, we conclude that the simple
third-market model fails to rationalize the treatment of export subsidies in the WTO.79
Export subsidies and industrial policy The models described so far do not focus on the longrun implications of export policies for industrial structure. To explore this issue, we now follow
Venables (1985) and consider the “delocation” e¤ects of trade policies in a two-country partial
equilibrium model with two-way trade in a homogeneous good. The game has three stages. In the
…rst stage, governments simultaneously select (speci…c) import and export tari¤s. Each government
seeks to maximize national income in its country. In the second stage, after observing trade policies,
potential entrants decide whether to locate in the domestic or foreign market, where entry entails
a positive …xed cost. In any country, entry occurs until expected pro…ts (including the …xed cost)
are driven to zero. Finally, in the third stage, after observing trade policies and the numbers of
…rms located in each of the two countries, the entering …rms simultaneously choose Cournot output
levels, where an individual …rm selects both an output level for the market in which it is located
as well as a separate output level for exportation into the other market. The two markets are
segmented, and a positive (per-unit) transport cost must be incurred for exported units.
A key feature of this model is that it exhibits a Metzler paradox: if a government raises its
import tari¤ (or raises its export subsidy), the price of the good within its country falls. To see the
intuition, suppose that we start at global free trade with levels of entry in each country that generate
zero pro…t for each …rm, and suppose that the domestic government then imposes a slight import
tari¤ (or a slight export subsidy). Holding …xed the numbers of …rms in each country, domestic
…rms would then enjoy positive pro…ts while foreign …rms would experience negative pro…ts. Some
adjustment in the patterns of entry across the two countries is thus necessary to restore zero pro…ts.
Due to positive transport costs, each …rm sells greater output in its local market than in its export
market; hence, the only way to reduce the pro…t of a domestic …rm while increasing the pro…t of
a foreign …rm is to adjust entry patterns until the domestic price falls and the foreign price rises.
Consequently, the domestic policy change must induce (reduce) entry into the domestic (foreign)
market to such an extent that the domestic price falls (foreign price rises). In this sense, when a
government imposes a higher import tari¤ (or export subsidy), it “delocates”…rms from the other
country to its own country.
As Venables (1985) shows, if all policies are initially set at free trade, then the domestic government can gain by imposing a small import tari¤. Producer surplus is una¤ected by the change,
since free-entry conditions ensure that …rms earn zero pro…t. But a small import tari¤ generates
positive tari¤ revenue and also leads to a lower price and higher consumer surplus in the domestic
78

We develop these conclusions for a model with imperfect competition. As Bagwell and Staiger (2001c) show, if
governments have political-economic objectives that give su¢ cient weight to export interests, then similar conclusions
hold in a third-market model with perfect competition when marginal cost is increasing.
79
The simple third-market model described here neglects many potential welfare costs associated with export
subsidies. Export subsidies may generate distortions in production and encourage rent-seeking behavior, for example.
We do not intend to minimize the importance of such considerations; however, we also point out that similar welfare
costs are associated with import tari¤s. For further discussion of these and other neglected welfare costs associated
with export subsidies, see Bagwell, Staiger and Sykes (2013, pp. 186-9).

51

country, due to the Metzler paradox. A small export subsidy likewise leads to a lower price and
higher consumer surplus in the domestic country; however, the small export subsidy imposes a cost
in the form of subsidy expenses. Venables shows that, when demand and costs are linear, a small
export subsidy also generates a net gain for the domestic government. Both policy changes result
in a higher foreign price, lower foreign consumer surplus and lower foreign government welfare.
Starting at free trade, therefore, Venables’ analysis shows that export subsidies are unilaterally
attractive and impose a negative terms-of-trade externality on the trading partner.
Bagwell and Staiger (2012b) generalize the analysis of the linear Cournot delocation model.
They show that the Nash policies for governments in fact are characterized by the use of import
tari¤s and export tari¤s. Thus, while an export subsidy is unilaterally attractive for a government
when its import policy is free trade, the government prefers an export tari¤ when its import tari¤
is optimally set at a positive level. Intuitively, when a positive import tari¤ is in place, an export
tari¤ generates additional tari¤ revenue on imports by encouraging foreign entry and thus exports.
They also …nd that free trade in import and export policies is e¢ cient.
Together, these …ndings suggest a possible interpretation of the treatment of export subsidies
in GATT/WTO. The linear Cournot delocation model suggests that governments would perceive
a unilateral gain from using export subsidies only once import tari¤s were negotiated to levels
su¢ ciently close to free trade. From this perspective, it is not surprising that GATT rules did not
impose strong restrictions on the use of export subsidies. Over time, however, as import tari¤s were
negotiated through GATT rounds to lower levels, governments may have perceived a unilateral gain
from imposing export subsidies. Furthermore, since free trade is an e¢ cient outcome in the linear
Cournot delocation model, governments could achieve mutual gains given low import tari¤s if they
were to cap or even prohibit export subsidies. In this way, the model o¤ers a potential e¢ ciencyenhancing interpretation of the prohibition of export subsidies in the WTO SCM Agreement.
Among the models reviewed above, the linear Cournot delocation model o¤ers the most successful interpretation of the treatment of export subsidies in the WTO. At the same time, we note
that the model is not completely successful. The linear Cournot delocation model also predicts
that governments would bene…t from a prohibition of import tari¤s, and so it does not deliver an
interpretation for why export subsidies are treated more severely in the WTO than are import
tari¤s. We also note that the model rests on a speci…c structure (Cournot competition, segmented
markets) and applies only for governments that focus on the long-run implications of trade policy.80
The strategic “pro…t-shifting”models described above may be more appropriate if governments are
focused on trade-policy implications that manifest over the short run.
80
Bagwell and Lee (2015) examine trade policies in the alternative long-run model of Melitz and Ottaviano (2008),
wherein …rms have heterogeneous costs and engage in monopolistic competition. They show that, starting at global
free trade, a country gains when it introduces a small import tari¤ or a small export subsidy, provided in the latter
case that transportation costs are low and productivity dispersion is high. These interventions, however, lower the
welfare of the trading partner. Other work examines optimal export policy when relative wage e¤ects are induced
through general equilibrium channels. For example, in Ricardian settings, Itoh and Kiyono (1987) characterize a
welfare-enhancing role for targeted export subsidies, and Costinot, et al. (2015) o¤er a full characterization of
optimal trade policies. Relatedly, Demidova (2015) considers a general equilibrium version of the Melitz-Ottaviano
model and shows that the Metzler Paradox then no longer obtains.

52

Implications for subsidy rules under the WTO In sum, the appropriate treatment of subsidies in a trade agreement is a subtle issue. Our review of the literature in this section focuses
on models for which trade policies generate terms-of-trade externalities for trade partners. The
review reinforces the subtle implications of subsidies: domestic productive subsidies can play both
e¢ ciency-enhancing and opportunistic roles, export subsidies generate positive externalities to foreign consumers and negative externalities to foreign …rms in models with …xed industrial structures,
and export subsidies may generate negative externalities to foreign consumers in long-run settings
with endogenous entry and exit. On the whole, our review does not provide strong support for
the speci…c treatment of subsidies in the WTO. We describe work suggesting that WTO rules
on domestic production subsidies may be a step backwards relative to GATT rules, and we also
summarize a range of models under which export subsidies are actually under-supplied relative to
the e¢ cient level for governments. While the linear Cournot delocation model provides a potential
interpretation for an agreement to limit or even prohibit the use of export subsidies, the existing
formal models that we review do not identify a reason for treating export subsidies more severely
than import tari¤s.

4.4

Non-Violation Complaints, Shallow Integration and National Treatment

The central implication of the terms-of-trade theory of trade agreements is that governments set
unilateral tari¤s at levels that are ine¢ ciently high, since they fail to internalize the terms-of-trade
implications of their tari¤ policies for each other. A trade agreement can “undo” this ine¢ ciency
by facilitating mutually advantageous and reciprocal tari¤ reductions that expand the volume of
trade to more e¢ cient levels. Tari¤s are not the only instruments, however, that impact the terms
of trade. For large countries, domestic taxes, subsidies and standards may also a¤ect the terms
of trade and lead thereby to possible ine¢ ciencies. At the same time, domestic policies may have
legitimate and even …rst-best roles to play as instruments with which to address market failures
or distributional concerns within a country. Attempts to regulate domestic policies through a
trade agreement therefore must balance the possible opportunistic use of such policies against the
e¢ ciency-enhancing roles that such policies may play. We thus arrive at the following question:
how should domestic policies be treated in a trade agreement? In this section, we describe research
that responds to this question while utilizing the terms-of-trade approach to trade agreements.
In fact, we have already encountered this question above in the speci…c context of our discussion
of the treatment of domestic production subsidies. As we note there, a natural answer to this question is that a trade agreement should grant each government ‡exibility when choosing its policies,
provided that the overall e¤ect of any policy changes does not erode the market-access commitments
achieved through its preceding tari¤ negotiations. Bagwell and Staiger (2001b) formally explore
this answer in a two-good general equilibrium model of trade in which governments have available
domestic policies (e.g., labor or environmental standards) as well as tari¤ policies. Working with
a model in which all international externalities ‡ow through the terms of trade, their main …nding
is that e¢ ciency can be achieved through tari¤ negotiations alone, provided that each government
53

is free to make subsequent adjustments in its domestic and trade policies that leave its negotiated
market access commitment (i.e., the terms of trade) unaltered. As discussed in Section 4.3, Bagwell
and Staiger (2006) obtain a related …nding in the speci…c context of domestic production subsidies.
As noted in Section 3.1, a key assumption of the Bagwell-Staiger (2001b) model is that each
government only has a direct interest in the domestic policy adopted by its country, where this
interest in turn may re‡ect various national considerations that impact the government’s welfare
(e.g., a government may have a direct interest in the health and safety of its citizens, or in the
environmental quality within its country’s borders). The lack of any direct interest by any one
government in the domestic policy selected by another government indicates that the model does
not allow for non-pecuniary international externalities (e.g., global pollution). For this family of
models, the domestic policy choices of one government therefore impact the welfare of another
government only indirectly, through the terms of trade. Notice, though, that “race to the bottom”
concerns are about the pecuniary international externalities (trade e¤ects) associated with a choice
of weak standards, and so this family of models is capable of capturing those concerns.
When international externalities travel only through the terms of trade, the main …nding of
Bagwell and Staiger (2001b) suggests that a “shallow integration” approach to trade agreements
may su¢ ce. Governments need not negotiate directly over domestic policies; instead, they may
negotiate over tari¤s alone, provided that the market-access gains so achieved are secure. The
important task for an international agreement in this context is then to ensure that negotiated
market-access concessions are secure against opportunistic policy adjustments. Bagwell and Staiger
(2001b) and Bagwell, Mavroidis and Staiger (2002) argue that current GATT/WTO rules, which
focus on market access, can with some strengthening strike the right balance, so that governments
can set e¢ cient domestic policies while pursuing international negotiations over tari¤s alone.
Non-violation complaints and the preservation of market access

In particular, GATT

rules that permit non-violation complaints are a potentially attractive means of securing marketaccess concessions. A government may …le a non-violation complaint when a trading partner undertakes a policy change that nulli…es or impairs the market access gains that a government reasonably
expected as part of an earlier negotiation. For example, following a tari¤ negotiation, the possibility
of facing a non-violation complaint might deter a government from an opportunistic (terms-of-trade
improving) relaxation in the production standards that it requires for an import-competing industry.
Existing rules are insu¢ cient, however, to enable a government to adjust its policy mix following
a tari¤ negotiation by raising its standards in the import-competing industry while also raising its
import tari¤ so as to maintain its negotiated market-access commitment. Bagwell, Mavroidis and
Staiger (2002) propose that a modi…cation to GATT rules of renegotiation, whereby a government
could use a higher standard in an import-competing industry as compensation for a higher import
tari¤, could in principle provide the needed ‡exibility.
Ederington (2001) explores related themes in a model in which all international externalities
travel through the terms of trade and any agreement on tari¤s and domestic policies must be self-

54

enforcing. In his model, each government has two instruments – an import tari¤ and a domestic
production tax –and the latter instrument has a legitimate role since domestic production generates
a non-pecuniary externality that resides entirely within the country in which production occurs.
Both policies a¤ect the terms of trade, and the challenge is to ensure that the e¢ cient policy mix
is selected. In Ederington’s model, the e¢ cient domestic policy is a Pigouvian tax that o¤sets the
domestic distortion, and the e¢ cient level of the domestic tax in fact is independent of the import
tari¤ and thus the level of market access. Consistent with the themes developed above, Ederington
shows that the most-cooperative solution is achieved when domestic policies are set at the e¢ cient
(Pigouvian) level and import tari¤s are lowered so as to expand market access to the level that is as
close to e¢ cient as possible before the self-enforcement constraint of the repeated game binds. The
key intuition is that an e¢ cient domestic policy raises the discounted future value of cooperation,
which in turn enables governments to enforce lower tari¤ levels.81
The principle of national treatment

Our discussion of the terms-of-trade implications of do-

mestic policies to this point emphasizes the bene…t that the domestic country may enjoy when
domestic production standards in an import-competing industry are relaxed in an opportunistic
manner. As Staiger and Sykes (2011) argue, however, the bulk of WTO disputes concern instead
cases in which foreign suppliers complain about standards that apply to their own products. Following a similar line of reasoning, we may anticipate a potential incentive for the domestic government
to set standards on foreign products in an opportunistic fashion that could undermine the security
of negotiated market-access gains for the foreign exporters. A key design feature of GATT/WTO
rules that guards against such opportunism is the “national treatment” principle. This principle, which is embodied in GATT Article III, the WTO Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade
(TBT), and the WTO Agreement on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS), restricts the
ability of member governments to impose regulations on foreign suppliers that are more stringent
than those imposed on domestic suppliers.
To formally explore the e¤ectiveness of the national treatment principle, Staiger and Sykes
(2011) adapt and extend the general insights of Bagwell and Staiger (2001b) to a product-standards
setting. In the Staiger-Sykes model, the domestic government chooses trade policy as well as domestic tax and regulatory policy with respect to a product that is domestically produced and also
imported. Regulatory policy has a legitimate role to play in their model, since domestic consumption generates a negative and non-pecuniary consumption externality that resides entirely within the
domestic country. Staiger and Sykes show that governments of large countries indeed have incentive
to impose discriminatory tax and regulatory policies against foreign imported products once import
tari¤s are bound. The model thus provides an interpretation of the national treatment principle as
a guard against such opportunistic behavior. Moreover, when product-speci…c consumption taxes
81
Lee (2007) considers a related model but with the important di¤erence that each government is privately informed
about the magnitude of the domestic production externality in its country. As Lee shows, in this case it may be
optimal to distort the tari¤ in order to limit the potential for disguised protectionism, which occurs when a government
misrepresents its information by selecting a low production tax even though the externality cost is high.

55

are infeasible, they further show that the domestic government has an incentive to impose ine¢ ciently stringent non-discriminatory product standards even in the presence of a national treatment
clause, since foreign exporters bear some of the cost of achieving higher product standards that
bene…t domestic consumers. In light of their …ndings, they conclude that the national treatment
principle can play an important role in preventing tax and regulatory discrimination but leaves
a potentially important role for the non-violation clause to address nondiscriminatory regulations
that are excessively stringent.82
The national treatment principle has been interpreted and evaluated in other studies as well.
Horn (2006) and Horn, Maggi and Staiger (2010) examine the national treatment principle with a
focus on domestic taxes rather than regulatory standards. Grossman, Horn and Mavroidis (2013)
also provide an extensive study of the GATT national treatment provision and argue that case law,
economic theory and the negotiation record all suggest that the purpose of the national treatment
provision is to outlaw protectionist use of domestic policies.83
Moving beyond shallow integration?

The case for shallow integration described above rests

on the assumption that all international externalities are pecuniary and travel through the terms
of trade. This case can be weakened, however, when governments possess private information, a
point we discuss in Section 5.3. And as Antràs and Staiger (2012a, 2012b) argue, more complex
forms of integration may be required in the presence of o¤shoring, which alters how prices are
determined and complicates the nature of international pecuniary externalities. We discuss their
work in Section 6.3. Similarly, “deeper”forms of integration may be needed if the trade agreement
is created with the goal of also addressing non-pecuniary international externalities (e.g., global
pollution).84 Limão’s (2005) model, which we discuss next, o¤ers one illustration of this point.
Limão (2005) explores a model of self-enforcing cooperation among governments, with the new
feature that production in the import-competing sector generates a negative non-pecuniary externality that travels (at least to some degree) across national borders. Each government selects an
import tari¤ and a domestic production tax, and both policies a¤ect the terms of trade. In Limão’s
model, therefore, international externalities travel through the terms of trade as well as through
a non-pecuniary channel. His …ndings illustrate that a form of “deep integration” is attractive
to governments in such a setting as a means of relaxing enforcement constraints, where deep integration in this context refers to a policy linkage whereby the potential for retaliation in both
policies deters deviations in any one policy alone.85 In particular, Limão …nds that governments
82

Staiger and Sykes (2011) also observe that one of the …ndings reported by Broda, Limao and Weinstein (2008)
and that we discussed in Section 3.2 above – that US non-tari¤ barriers are positively related to US market power
over world prices –may re‡ect limitations of the GATT/WTO national treatment and non-violation clauses to police
terms-of-trade manipulation through behind-the-border measures. See also Staiger and Sykes (2013, 2015).
83
Other related studies include Battigalli and Maggi (2003), Copeland (1990) and Costinot (2008).
84
For discussion of the extent to which GATT/WTO rules can be used to address non-pecuniary international
externalities, see, e.g., Bagwell, Mavroidis and Staiger (2002) and Trebilcock, Howse and Eliason (2013, Chapters 17
and 18) and the references cited therein.
85
Retaliation in Limão’s (2005) repeated-game model occurs o¤ the equilibrium path and thus carries the interpretation of a breakdown in cooperation with respect to the relevant policies.

56

can achieve higher welfare in a self-enforcing agreement when the policies are linked; however, there
is no guarantee that linkage raises the level of cooperation in each policy.86
In total, our survey of research in this section provides support for the shallow integration
approach of the GATT/WTO when externalities are pecuniary and travel through the terms of
trade. GATT/WTO rules concerning non-violation complaints and national treatment can be
interpreted from this perspective and rest on a solid economic foundation. Anticipating discussion in
later sections, we also note that the case for shallow integration can be weakened when governments
possess private information, and arguments for deeper integration may also emerge in settings where
international externalities travel through other channels.

4.5

Investment and Services

The creation of the WTO in 1995 includes new agreements related to investment and services. In
this section, we consider these new agreements and discuss economic research utilizing the termsof-trade theory that interprets and evaluates the provisions contained therein.
Foreign direct investment, local content, and international cross-ownership

We start

with the treatment of investment in the GATT/WTO, with an initial focus on foreign direct investment (FDI). The past two decades have witnessed a signi…cant growth in FDI activity.87 This
growth encourages consideration of the investment measures that host governments may impose
and the appropriate treatment of those measures in the GATT/WTO. Investment measures interact with GATT rules when they have direct e¤ects on trade; in particular, local content, export
and trade-balancing requirements may distort investment decisions and generate tension with basic
GATT rules concerning national treatment and quantitative restrictions.88 As Trebilcock, Howse
and Eliason (2013, Chapter 15) discuss, the WTO Trade-Related Investment Measures Agreement
(TRIMs) builds on GATT rules to subject some measures with direct e¤ects on trade, such as local
content requirements and quantitative restrictions, to explicit scrutiny under GATT norms. The
appeal of additional restrictions on investment measures, however, is controversial, with some countries expressing concerns about the broader implications of extensive investor-protection provisions
in trade agreements. Investment has been removed as a topic for further discussion in the WTO
86

See also Spagnola (1999a,b), who develops related themes for a distinct class of interdependent payo¤s.
FDI may be attractive to …rms for a variety of reasons. For example, FDI may provide access to cheap inputs,
reduce trade costs and facilitate “tari¤ jumping.” FDI also may be advantageous relative to outsourcing as a means
of maintaining tighter control over technology. At the same time, …rms considering FDI confront a variety of possible
costs, including the possibility of rent expropriation via government policy changes after sunk costs are incurred. For
a survey of research on multinational …rms, see Antràs and Yeaple (2014).
88
Local content requirements concern measures that require foreign-owned …rms to discriminate between domestic
and imported goods that are used as inputs for production in the host country; export requirements concern measures
that require exportation of a certain percentage of the foreign-owned …rm’s output; and trade-balancing requirements
concern measures that impose a relationship between what the foreign-owned …rm is allowed to import into the host
country and the value of its exports. In some situations, trade-balancing requirements may be defended under GATT
rules if they are necessary to address a balance-of-payment crisis. See Trebilcock, Howse and Eliason (2013, Chapter
15) for further discussion of the implications of GATT rules for the treatment of investment measures.
87

57

Doha Round. A number of investment agreements have arisen, however, via Bilateral Investment
Treaties (BITs) and as part of investor-protection provisions in PTAs.
The purpose of restrictions on investment measures in a trade agreement can be developed at
several levels. We mention two here.89 First, in the absence of a trade agreement that imposes
restrictions on investment measures, a government might be tempted to impose measures favoring
local input suppliers as a means of generating advantageous price changes for its country. Second,
a trade agreement that appropriately restricts investment measures may also encourage e¢ ciencyenhancing FDI when the host government is otherwise unable to commit not to expropriate foreign
rents once the foreign …rm has sunk costs. We brie‡y discuss the …rst purpose next and note that
the second purpose is more directly associated with the “commitment theory”of trade agreements
developed in Section 6.
Bagwell and Sykes (2005) examine conditions under which a local content requirement generates
advantageous price changes for the domestic (i.e. host) country. As they emphasize, a local content
requirement is logically distinct from import tari¤s and quotas, since a local content requirement
does not generate government revenue. They consider a simple two-country partial-equilibrium
model in which a single homogenous input supplied in both the domestic and foreign country is
used by foreign-owned …rms to manufacture a …nal good for sale in the domestic market. When
markets are competitive and the domestic country is small in that its local content requirement
does not a¤ect the world (i.e., foreign) input price, a domestic local content requirement raises
the domestic input price, and thus redistributes domestic surplus and creates deadweight loss, but
does not generate an international externality.90 If instead a foreign monopolist supplies the …nal
good, then a domestic local content policy may redistribute surplus from the foreign monopolist
to domestic input suppliers.91 Such a policy becomes more appealing to the domestic government
when the foreign monopolist does not respond by signi…cantly reducing output. In turn, a signi…cant
output reduction is less likely if the domestic country has market power (i.e., is large) so that its
local content policy induces a fall in the foreign input price that o¤sets to some degree the rise in
the domestic input price. The end result is that, for settings in which market power is present,
local content policies may be unilaterally appealing to the domestic government and harmful to the
foreign trading partner. From this perspective, restrictions on the use of local content requirements
rest upon a solid economic foundation when market power is present.
89

Another possible consideration is that restrictions on investment measures may play an e¢ ciency-enhancing
role in managing unilateral policies designed to enhance technology spillover. A full analysis of the international
externalities associated with such policies requires a comparison of the market-access bene…ts that …rms may enjoy
via FDI with the technological knowledge that they may provide.
90
Bagwell and Sykes (2005) assume that the local input supply function is upward sloping and that the …nal-good
production technology exhibits constant returns to scale. In the case of a small domestic country and a competitive
…nal-good market, a domestic local content requirement raises the domestic input price but has no impact on the
foreign input price. Pro…t in the …nal-good sector is then likewise una¤ected, being zero in any case. The absence
of an international externality in this setting implies that there is no obvious role for an international agreement on
local content requirements. See Corden (1971), Grossman (1981) and Vousden (1990, Chapter 2) for further analyses
of local content requirements in models with competitive markets and small countries.
91
See Brander and Spencer (1981) for analysis of a related model, in which an import tari¤ is used to extract
surplus from a foreign monopolist.

58

Blanchard (2010) explores a di¤erent aspect of the relationship between foreign investment
and trade agreements. She does not focus on investment measures and rules that restrict such
measures; instead, she considers the broad implications of general cross-border equity holdings for
optimal tari¤s and the role of the GATT/WTO. Augmenting the two-country, two-good general
equilibrium model of trade described above to include exogenous international cross-ownership,
she identi…es the channels through which cross-border ownership impacts the optimal tari¤. The
internal e¤ect is that a country has less incentive to maintain a high tari¤ in the presence of a
larger degree of foreign ownership in the local import-competing industry, and the external e¤ect
is that a government likewise has less incentive to raise its tari¤ for a terms-of-trade gain when its
constituents hold a greater stake in the foreign export industry.92 Finally, the compositional e¤ect
is that industry bias in ownership patterns may encourage a government to manipulate local prices
to bene…t industries with a relatively higher proportion of national ownership.
As Blanchard (2010) argues, consideration of cross-border ownership leads to interesting policy
implications. An implication of the external e¤ect is that a country may welcome foreign investment into its export sector as a means of encouraging a unilateral tari¤ reduction from its trading
partner.93 Similarly, the internal e¤ect implies that foreign investment into an import-competing
sector may encourage the host country to lower its import tari¤ as a means of extracting rent from
foreign investors. Perhaps the most provocative implication of her analysis is that international
ownership, by encouraging governments to liberalize their tari¤s unilaterally, may substitute partially (or even in some cases completely) for negotiated tari¤ reductions.94 Indeed, with a su¢ cient
degree of international cross-border ownership, unilateral tari¤s are lower than e¢ cient, and the
role of an international agreement is then to facilitate reciprocal and e¢ ciency-enhancing restrictions in market access.95 Finally, Blanchard argues that the principle of reciprocity continues to
serve as an important guide to e¢ cient outcomes, once the de…nition of market access re‡ects ownership positions. More generally, the implications of cross-border ownership for the optimal design
of GATT/WTO rules is an important subject that warrants further attention.
Services We brie‡y consider next the treatment of services in GATT/WTO. A variety of evidence
con…rms that services play an increasingly important role in modern economies.96 In a survey of
research on services trade and policy, Francois and Hoekman (2010) indicate that the theoretical
92

As Blanchard (2010) notes, her analysis of optimal tari¤s under exogenous international cross-ownership generalizes and combines themes from previous theoretical work.
93
See also Blanchard (2007) and Krishna and Mitra (2005). Blanchard and Matschke (forthcoming) provide some
evidence to this e¤ect through an assessment of the impact of US multinational …rms’a¢ liate o¤shoring behavior on
US tari¤ preferences.
94
While international ownership may lead in this way to lower tari¤s, Gulotty (2014) argues that greater international ownership does not similarly lead to reductions in regulatory barriers. He argues that regulatory barriers raise
…xed costs, and that the associated reduction in entry may lead to net gains for e¢ cient, globalized …rms. See also
Ethier (1998) for a di¤erent perspective under which regional agreements and associated foreign direct investment
activity arise endogenously in response to multilateral liberalization.
95
In relation to the Bagwell-Staiger (1999a, 2002) model described above, a key di¤erence here is that international
ownership operates via the external e¤ect to diminish the absolute value of Wpew and Wpew and may even reverse the
sign of these terms.
96
For further discussion, see Francois and Hoekman (2010) and Jensen (2011).

59

literature on services trade highlights the complementarity between international services trade and
FDI, the implications of di¤erent market structures and national regulatory policies for services
trade, and the way in which international service …rms are organized. They also describe increasing
evidence that services liberalization is a major potential source of economic performance gains.
Government policies that a¤ect international service …rms are disciplined in the WTO General
Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS). As Trebilcock, Howse and Eliason (2013, Chapter 13,
p. 480) indicate, the GATS is a “highly complex accord.” This agreement recognizes that services
may be supplied through various modes and provides a framework for market-access negotiations
across these modes. While GATS contains a general MFN provision (subject to some exceptions),
national treatment and market access commitments apply only where WTO members make speci…c
commitments to such coverage in their schedules. The impact of GATS on services reform is
challenging to estimate. Francois and Hoekman (2010, p. 678) review the evidence to date and
conclude that “the available, limited, evidence suggests that, with the exception of the EU, most
services policy reform has been unilateral. The contribution of the GATS to services reform has
been negligible.”97
Given the signi…cant potential gains from services liberalization, it is natural to ask why the
reciprocity mechanism that underlies trade agreements has not played a greater role in achieving
policy reforms in services. Francois and Hoekman (2010) review the literature relating to this
question and identify a number of potential factors. Among these factors, we mention here one that
is related to our discussion above: given that FDI is a signi…cant mode for supplying non-tradable
services, Blanchard’s (2007, 2010) arguments imply that unilateral liberalization initiatives may
substitute to some degree for reciprocal trade liberalization through trade-agreement negotiations.
More generally, as Antràs and Staiger (2012a, 2012b) argue, the rise of o¤shoring may have changed
the nature of the international externality that a trade agreement must address, which suggests
in turn that trade agreements may require additional restrictions for services policies that are
associated with o¤shoring. The purpose and design of trade agreements for market settings with
o¤shoring is an important direction for research, which we discuss in further detail in Section 6.3.
Investment and services are of increasing importance in the international economy. The WTO
includes agreements that place restrictions on measures that a¤ect investment and services, but
the appropriate nature of such restrictions is controversial. Drawing on research that employs
the terms-of-trade approach to trade agreements, we argue that restrictions on the use of local
content requirements rest upon a solid economic foundation when market power is present. We
also summarize research that indicates that international ownership may substitute to some degree
for negotiated tari¤ reductions. Finally, as we note, recent research suggests a signi…cant potential
for gains from services policy liberalization, even though the liberalization achieved to date through
multilateral negotiations appears modest. To our minds, all of this points to a valuable role for
future research directed toward understanding the impact of trade-related investment measures and
97

As Francois and Hoekman (2010, p. 678) note, countries that acceded to the WTO after 1995 tended to make
more GATS commitments and represent a further exception, although care is required in assuming that GATS
commitments are actually implemented. See also Eschenbach and Hoekman (2006) and Hoekman (2008).

60

services policies and, correspondingly, the appropriate design of WTO restrictions in this context.

4.6

The story line thus far...

As interpreted through the lens of the terms-of-trade theory, the original 1947 GATT was created to
solve the central economic problem of the day: the US Smoot-Hawley tari¤s of 1930 and the international retaliatory response that followed had led to a terms-of-trade driven Prisoners’Dilemma
with excessively high trade barriers. The task confronting governments was to set up an institution that could work well to internalize the international (terms-of-trade) externality at the root
of the high-tari¤ problem, and thereby induce governments to make the tari¤ choices they would
have made had they not succumbed to the temptation of international cost-shifting (terms-of-trade
manipulation) in the …rst place. If successful, GATT would lead necessarily to lower tari¤s and expanded market access from those countries and in those industries where signi…cant market power
was present. But with signi…cant market power not universal in all countries and all industries,
GATT would not lead to lower tari¤s from all countries and in all industries; and with the evident
desire of governments to use trade policy for goals beyond that of national income maximization,
GATT would also not be expected to lead to universal free trade. Finally, while some constraints
on domestic policies would be needed to ensure that subsequent adjustments in those policies did
not undo market-access commitments achieved via tari¤ restraints, GATT’s lack of any deeper
integration beyond such constraints would not imply a weakness of the GATT system.
The literature we have surveyed thus far lends broad support to the view that, at a fundamental
level, governments succeeded with the GATT/WTO in creating an institution that is well-designed
to solve the terms-of-trade problem. Many of the GATT/WTO’s core features appear sensible
when interpreted in the context of this problem, and many of the outcomes negotiated within the
GATT/WTO are broadly consistent with what might be expected from such an institution.
The literature does, however, point out some potential di¢ culties with the GATT/WTO approach, and these di¢ culties may account for some of the central challenges that the WTO confronts
today. The evolution in the treatment of subsidies from GATT to the WTO is especially puzzling
from the perspective of the terms-of-trade theory, both with regard to domestic subsidies and even
more so with regard to the relatively severe treatment of export subsidies.
Beyond the puzzling GATT/WTO treatment of subsidies, the literature emphasizes the possibility of a serious free-rider problem under the MFN principle, and there is some evidence that
this problem is signi…cant. To the extent that the principles of MFN and reciprocity together
allow countries that negotiate reciprocal tari¤ cuts to appropriate the gains from their bargains
and thereby keep free-riding to a minimum, the exemption from reciprocity granted to developing
countries may ironically have kept these countries from enjoying to their full potential the bene…ts
of GATT/WTO membership, again something that the evidence seems to bear out. This feature
may in turn be contributing to a signi…cant “latecomer”problem for the Doha Round, as the Round
grapples with how to better integrate developing and emerging economies into the world trading
system when the major developed countries have already negotiated low average MFN tari¤s.
61

Moreover, where there are signi…cant deviations from the MFN principle, such as can arise
with the formation of PTAs, the literature points to these deviations as complicating international
externalities beyond the simple terms-of-trade problem that the GATT/WTO seems well-designed
to solve, suggesting in turn that the rise of PTAs could be creating di¢ culties for the GATT/WTO
approach. Finally, while services trade and international investment ‡ows are of increasing importance to the global economy, the literature has developed only a nascent understanding of the
international externalities associated with them, and so the ability of the GATT/WTO approach
to function well in their presence is still an open question.

5

Evaluating the PTA Approach to Trade Liberalization

We have described in the previous section how the GATT/WTO approach to liberalization derives
broad support from the theoretical and empirical terms-of-trade literature. Does the terms-oftrade theory also support the view that PTA-driven liberalization can be seen as contributing to
a solution to the terms-of-trade problem? In this section we review the relevant theoretical and
empirical literature that speaks to this question.

5.1

PTAs, External Tari¤s and Multilateral Bargaining

We begin with a focus on the impact of PTAs on the external (MFN) tari¤s of PTA-member
countries, and ask: Might PTAs be seen to work in tandem with the tari¤ liberalization e¤orts of
the GATT/WTO, or should PTAs be seen rather to work against these e¤orts? According to the
terms-of-trade theory, non-cooperative Nash tari¤s are set ine¢ ciently high on products where the
countries possess market power; hence, one way to shed light on this question is to assess the impact
of PTAs on the non-cooperative external MFN tari¤s of the member countries on such products. If
the formation of PTAs lowers these tari¤s, then it could be argued that PTAs work in tandem with
the GATT/WTO’s own e¤orts to reduce these tari¤s, and that PTAs are hence building blocks
for the needed multilateral liberalization that the GATT/WTO is also orchestrating. On the other
hand, if the formation of PTAs raises these tari¤s, then PTAs would appear to increase the degree
of multilateral tari¤ liberalization that is needed to reach the e¢ ciency frontier, and it could be
argued that PTAs pose stumbling blocks to multilateral liberalization in this case.
There is a large literature that evaluates the impact of PTA formation on the external noncooperative MFN tari¤s of member countries. This literature has identi…ed several e¤ects of PTAs
on external tari¤s, where PTAs may take the form of free-trade agreements (FTAs) or customs
unions (CUs), with the key di¤erence being that, in addition to eliminating tari¤s on intra-union
trade, CU members adopt a common external tari¤ policy toward the trade of nonmembers.
Two of the e¤ects identi…ed by this literature operate to reduce the external tari¤s of PTA
members: a “tari¤ complementarity e¤ect”that can take two forms and applies to FTAs and CUs,
and a “rent destruction e¤ect” that applies to FTAs. Richardson (1995) identi…es a …rst tari¤
complementarity e¤ect: when an FTA is formed between countries that are competing importers
62

of a common product from third countries, each FTA partner has an incentive to lower its external
tari¤ on this product slightly below that of its FTA partners so as to increase its share of the
tari¤ revenue collected on imports from outside the FTA, and this competition for tari¤ revenue
between FTA partners can lead to a downward spiral in their external tari¤s. Bagwell and Staiger
(1999b) identify a second tari¤ complementarity e¤ect: in a competing-exporter world where each
FTA or CU member competes with non-members for exports to other members, when FTA or CU
members reduce their tari¤s to zero on imports from one another, the resulting trade diversion
(i.e., the reduction in imports by members from non-members) encourages members to lower the
tari¤s that they apply on imports from non-members.98 The rent-destruction e¤ect is highlighted
by Ornelas (2005a,b,c 2008) and is also a force for lower external tari¤s among FTA members. In a
setting where special interest lobbies push for tari¤ protection, Ornelas shows that the rents from
the external tari¤s of one FTA member country spill over to producers in FTA partner countries,
creating a free-rider problem for national lobbies within the FTA which interferes with their ability
to obtain high external tari¤s from their governments.
Two further e¤ects operate to increase the external tari¤s of PTA members, but operate only
for CUs. A “market power e¤ect” (see Kennan and Reizman, 1990, Krugman, 1991, Bond and
Syropolous, 1996a,b, Bagwell and Staiger, 1997b and 1999b, and Cadot et al, 1999) arises when
CU members are competing importers of a common product, and can collectively exert more
market power on the world price of that product with their common external tari¤ than they
could individually. A separate “coordination e¤ect” (see Kennan and Reizman, 1990) operates to
raise the external tari¤s of CU members even when countries are competing exporters: when one
CU member raises its external tari¤ on a product that it imports from third countries, other CU
members that export that product to the …rst CU member gain as they receive higher prices for
their exports to the …rst CU member, and this is a positive externality of higher external tari¤s
that can be internalized among CU members when they set their common external tari¤ policy.
Of course, while the impact of PTA formation on non-cooperative Nash external MFN tari¤s
is suggestive of the nature of the relationship between PTAs and the GATT/WTO, it provides at
best an incomplete picture of this relationship. First, it is not clear that the impact of PTAs on
non-cooperative MFN tari¤s translates – even with the same sign – to the impact on cooperative
MFN tari¤s. For example, Limão (2007) shows that an FTA that pursues non-trade objectives can
result in higher cooperative MFN tari¤s, in circumstances where FTA partners agree to provide
non-trade concessions to a country in exchange for preferential market access rents created and
maintained by the high external tari¤s of the country. In e¤ect, Limão demonstrates that the FTA
partners can become a force pushing against negotiated reductions in the country’s external MFN
tari¤s (and hence their rents). And Bagwell and Staiger (1997a, 1997b, 1999b) show that when
self-enforcement constraints bind in a multilateral agreement over external tari¤s, the formation
of FTAs and CUs can have impacts on the most-cooperative MFN tari¤s achievable that are the
98

Other papers featuring a tari¤ complementarity e¤ect in various settings include Bond, Riezman and Syropoulos
(2004), Bond, Syropoulos and Winters (2001), Freund (2000a), Syropoulos (1999) and Yi (1996).

63

opposite of the impacts on the Nash external tari¤s, and that vary through time if the PTAs are
implemented in stages.99 Second, recall that the terms-of-trade theory directs attention to the
question whether PTAs reduce the degree of ine¢ cient terms-of-trade manipulation embodied in
the external tari¤s of PTA partners, and the results surveyed above are not always presented with
this question in mind.100 Finally, while a reduction in the external MFN tari¤s of PTA members
triggered by the formation of the PTA might be viewed as partially solving the terms-of-trade
problem and thereby making the remaining task easier for the GATT/WTO, Bagwell and Staiger
(1999a, 2001a) show that the introduction of PTAs and the violation of MFN that this implies
can change (does change for FTAs, can but need not change for CUs) the nature of the problem
that a trade agreement must solve, from a simple terms-of-trade problem to a more complicated
problem in which international externalities also travel through local prices. Bagwell and Staiger
thus argue that PTAs are inherently at odds with the GATT/WTO’s approach to multilateral
trade liberalization, which seems best-suited to address simple terms-of-trade problems.
In any case, with these various e¤ects identi…ed and pointing in di¤erent directions, it is clear
that theory alone cannot resolve the issue of the impact of PTA formation on the external MFN
tari¤s of member countries.101 We therefore turn to the empirical literature on this question.
What is the impact of PTA tari¤ liberalization on subsequent e¤orts toward multilateral tari¤
liberalization?102 Limão (2006) provides a …rst product-level investigation into whether PTAs
are stumbling blocks or building blocks for multilateral liberalization. His approach involves a
comparison of two di¤erent types of products – those for which a country has positive imports
from PTA partners and those for which it only imports from PTA non-partners. An examination
of subsequent US multilateral tari¤ changes made as a result of the Uruguay Round provides
evidence that the US granted smaller MFN tari¤ reductions in products with positive US imports
from PTA partners. The evidence applies not only to products imported from large PTA partners,
such as the countries in NAFTA, but also to imports from smaller PTA partners. Given that
even those smaller US PTA partners export in nearly 15 percent of product lines, and that these
products also have positive levels of imports from non-PTA partners, a further implication is that
even small US PTAs were a stumbling block to the multilateral liberalization taking place under
the Uruguay Round (consistent with the model of FTAs with non-trade objectives in Limão, 2007).
In addition to the US, another important environment to conduct such an exercise is the EU.
Karacaovali and Limão (2008) …rst con…rm the evidence found for the US by showing that the EU
cut MFN tari¤s on products not imported from PTA partners by nearly twice as much as it cut
99
Other work that considers the e¤ects of exogenous PTAs on self-enforcing multilateral tari¤ cooperation includes
Bond and Syropolous (1996b) and Saggi (2006). In additional related work, Levy (1997) and Krishna (1998) argue
that FTAs can erode the political support for further agreements to reduce MFN external tari¤s and thereby act as
stumbling blocks to multilateral trade liberalization. A literature also exists that examines the impact of multilateral
liberalization on the formation of PTAs. Using di¤erent frameworks, Ethier (1998) and Freund (2000a) argue that
PTAs may be a response to successful multilateral liberalization.
100
For example, the rent destruction e¤ect identi…ed by Ornelas (2005a,b,c 2008) does not have a clear prediction
related to this question.
101
Bagwell and Staiger (1998) and Freund and Ornelas (2010) reach a similar conclusion.
102
See Freund and Ornelas (2010) for a more extensive survey of this empirical literature.

64

tari¤s on products imported from partners during the Uruguay Round. Furthermore, the size of
the EU stumbling block e¤ect is larger for the products that are exported by more PTA partners.
Second, they exploit additional margins of the data on the EU PTAs by grouping PTA partners
based on whether they eventually acceded to the EU between the ends of the Tokyo Round and
Uruguay Round of negotiations. They …nd evidence consistent with theoretical predictions that
accession countries should not trigger stumbling block e¤ects,103 and that the stumbling block e¤ect
is only associated with products from countries with which the EU had PTAs in place at that time.
Changes to multilateral tari¤s need not only take place in the context of GATT/WTO negotiating rounds. It is natural, however, to analyze tari¤ changes achieved through negotiation rounds
when considering the US and EU during the recent period in which detailed tari¤ data are available. This is true for two reasons. First, for most products, US and EU applied MFN tari¤s are
relatively close to their legal tari¤ bindings so that the tari¤s cannot be increased without violating
multilateral commitments. Second, US and EU tari¤s were relatively low to begin with during this
period, and so there is also not much scope for downward variation in the form of additional unilateral reductions. However, these two conditions do not apply to a number of developing countries
in the international trading system which had both i) su¢ ciently high applied MFN tari¤s at the
time of PTA implementation to allow for the possibility of meaningful unilateral reductions, and
ii) legal binding commitments su¢ ciently above their applied MFN rates to allow applied rates to
legally increase as well without violating these commitments.
Estevadeordal, Freund and Ornelas (2008) exploit these features of the data for 10 Latin America countries over 1991-2000. They assess patterns of applied MFN tari¤ changes following the
implementation of PTA tari¤ reductions, under agreements like MERCOSUR, the Andean Community, and other intra-Latin American PTAs formed in the decade. These countries exhibit, on
average, a positive relationship between changes in preferential tari¤s and subsequent changes to
applied MFN tari¤s –evidence that Latin America’s preferential agreements worked as a building
block toward unilateral MFN liberalization during this period. Higher shares of intra-PTA imports
are also associated with reductions in applied MFN tari¤s even for relatively small preference margins. However, the results are limited to the free trade areas and do not hold for Latin America’s
trade agreements that were formulated as customs unions during that period, such as MERCOSUR.
In a related approach, Calvo-Pardo, Freund, and Ornelas (2011) assess multilateral tari¤ changes
following the preferential tari¤ reductions associated with the creation of the ASEAN Free Trade
Area in 1992. ASEAN is another setting in which preferential liberalization led to applied MFN
tari¤ cuts, with MFN tari¤ cuts found to be larger in products with larger preference margins and
thus a greater scope for trade diversion.104
103

According to the theoretical model of Karacaovali and Limão (2008), EU accession countries would be eligible to
receive a transfer or revenue collected under the common external tari¤ which o¤sets the potential loss in intra-PTA
trade that they would su¤er as a result of additional multilateral tari¤ reduction.
104
Tovar (2012) also studies how developing countries make unilateral changes to applied MFN tari¤s after the
formation of a PTA. She examines four countries after the formation of the CAFTA-DR in 2004. The results for
CAFTA-DR are di¤erent than the earlier studies as they suggest at least an initial stumbling block e¤ect. Countries
increased (or decreased by less) MFN tari¤s on products that had previously been subject to larger preferential tari¤

65

What are the potential explanations for the di¤erences across settings? One potential contributor is government policy responsiveness to the threat of trade diversion. The Estevadeordal, Freund
and Ornelas (2008) and Calvo-Pardo, Freund, and Ornelas (2011) settings resulted in original PTA
liberalization that led to large preference margins (relative to pre-PTA applied MFN rates). Consistent with the tari¤ complementarity e¤ect, economically costly trade diversion could have arisen
if governments did not subsequently also lower their applied MFN tari¤s. The US and EU environments, on the other hand, subject to the Limão (2006) and Karacaovali and Limão (2008)
studies, resulted in preference margins that were much smaller with potentially less scope for trade
diversion. Second, the US and EU preferences were more unilateral in nature. The theory in Limão
(2007) emphasizes the non-reciprocal nature of US and EU preferences and that they were o¤ered
as compensation for countries that took up non-trade obligations in areas such as environmental or
labor standards, intellectual property rights protection, and supporting the war on drugs. An open
question for research is whether building block e¤ects may be more likely to dominate in reciprocal
PTAs.105 The rising importance of “WTO-extra”provisions in PTAs (Horn, Mavroidis, and Sapir,
2010) suggests that this should be a priority area for additional research.
Preferential tari¤s and MFN tari¤s are certainly not the end of the line when it comes to trade
policy, as there are a number of other potential non-tari¤ barriers to trade. The GATT/WTO
provides several exceptions that countries can invoke to implement higher levels of protection for
legitimate environmental, health, or other public safety concerns, for example under Article XX.
Furthermore, most of the same major economies involved in multilateral and preferential trade liberalization since the late 1980s are also major users of antidumping and safeguards (Bown, 2011a),
another major category of GATT/WTO exceptions allowing countries to temporarily implement
higher levels of import protection under certain conditions.106 While the general relationship between PTA liberalization and non-tari¤ barriers use is not yet well understood, here we highlight
a recent paper that initiated the investigation of this relationship.
Antidumping is the most frequently applied TTB (temporary trade barrier) policy in use across
countries and over time since the 1980s. Prusa and Teh (2010) use a cross-country sample involving
80 PTAs and antidumping use dating back to 1980. While there is only a modest impact of PTA
formation on the overall use of antidumping, after controlling for other aggregate-level determinants,
there is evidence of important di¤erences in policy treatment between PTA partners and nonpartners. PTA implementation is associated with both a reduction in antidumping actions against
new PTA partners and an increase against non-partners. Prusa and Teh attribute some of this
reductions in the …rst two years after PTA implementation, and this is somewhat o¤set in the subsequent two year
period during which the countries reduced their MFN tari¤s. An interesting feature of this evolving e¤ect is that it
is consistent with the pattern expected under an FTA according to the model of Bagwell and Staiger (1997a).
105
Recent work by Mai and Stoyanov (forthcoming) provides initial evidence on this topic. They examine the e¤ect
of CUSFTA on Canadian trade policy. Consistent with the tari¤ complementarity e¤ect, they …nd that the CUSFTA
led to declines in Canadian external tari¤s. But they also …nd that Canadian external tari¤s declined more slowly
in industries that generated more revenue for US exporters to Canada. This latter e¤ect suggests an attempt by
Canada to limit preference erosion in industries of particular importance to its PTA partner (i.e., the US).
106
Bown, Karacaovali, and Tovar (2015) provide a more general survey on the relationships between PTAs and the
use of temporary trade barriers such as antidumping and safeguards actions.

66

post-PTA change in behavior to PTA variation in the legal provisions a¤ecting antidumping use i.e., the sort of “WTO-plus”provisions described in more detail in Section 2.2. In any event, these
…ndings suggest that reorientation of TTBs toward the imports of non-PTA partners could be an
important avenue by which PTAs lead to rising external tari¤s.
Finally, in addition to the literature we survey above, an active literature models the choice
countries face between PTA formation and multilateral trade bargaining.107 That literature is
concerned with the question whether global free trade is more or less likely to be achieved when
PTAs are available as an alternative to multilateral tari¤ negotiations. Guided by the terms-oftrade theory, our focus here is on a related but distinct question, namely, whether PTAs contribute
to (building blocks) or interfere with (stumbling blocks) the ability of multilateral negotiations to
achieve (globally) e¢ cient policy outcomes when judged against the governments’own preferences.
With regard to this statement of the stumbling block/building block question, the …ndings of this
related literature can be summarized as follows. First, when there are no bargaining frictions,
as is assumed by most of the literature, e¢ ciency would always be achieved under multilateral
negotiations if PTAs were banned, and so PTAs can’t possibly be building blocks in the sense we
are interested in here. In this case PTAs can facilitate the attainment of global free trade, but
only when global free trade does not mark a Pareto improvement over the outcome that would be
delivered if PTAs were banned (see, e.g., Aghion, Antràs and Helpman, 2007, and Saggi and Yildiz,
2010).108 Nevertheless, in this no-bargaining-frictions case, PTAs can be stumbling blocks to Pareto
e¢ cient outcomes under certain conditions (see, e.g., Aghion et al., 2007, Seidman, 2009, and Saggi,
Yildiz and Woodland, 2013). Second, when there are bargaining frictions (as in McCalman, 2002,
and McLaren, 2002) so that a building block role for PTAs is possible, no such building block role
has been found, but a stumbling block role has again been shown to be possible. Hence, while
these papers show that PTAs can serve as a building block for the attainment of global free trade,
if anything this branch of the literature reinforces the view that PTAs should be viewed with some
caution from the perspective of e¢ ciency when judged against the governments’own preferences.

5.2

PTAs and Third-Country Externalities

According to the terms-of-trade theory, the purpose of a trade agreement is not to secure free trade,
but to allow governments to internalize the terms-of-trade externalities associated with their tari¤
107

Other related research considers the endogenous network of stable PTAs when multilateral liberalization is not
included as an option. See Goyal and Joshi (2006), Furusawa and Konishi (2007), Mrázová, Vines and Zissimos
(2013) and Yi (1996). Another related strand of the literature considers endogenous formation of CUs using the core
as the solution concept. See, for example, Riezman (1995, 1999) and the survey by Kowalczyk and Riezman (2011).
108
This is a point also made by Maggi (2014). The attainment of global free trade does not lead to a Pareto
improvement in Aghion et al. (2007) because governments are assumed to maximize something other than real
national income in the relevant case; and in Saggi and Yildiz (2010) this is so because international lump sum
transfers are assumed to be unavailable. We note, however, two quali…cations. First, as Freund (2000b) argues in an
oligopoly context, the path by which global free trade is achieved may matter. In her model, world welfare is higher
when global free trade is achieved through expanding preferential agreements rather than through multilateralism.
Second, and as we discuss brie‡y in the next section (see note 122), a possible commitment theory interpretation of
these …ndings could suggest that PTAs enhance e¢ ciency when viewed from an ex-ante perspective.

67

choices. As we discuss in Section 4.1, the GATT/WTO appears well-equipped to help governments
internalize terms-of-trade externalities, in part through its norms of reciprocity and MFN which can
help to keep the terms-of-trade consequences for third countries to a minimum when subsets of countries negotiate tari¤ cuts. PTAs, by de…nition, deviate from the MFN norm, raising the possibility
that, rather than contributing to a solution to the terms-of-trade problem, PTAs are a surviving
vehicle for imposing terms-of-trade externalities on third countries within the GATT/WTO system. Under this possibility, some PTAs may be viable, in the sense that their member governments
support their formation, only because they have been able to use discriminatory tari¤ cuts between them to impose negative terms-of-trade externalities on third countries and convert those
third-country losses into their own gains.109 This possibility is emphasized by Bagwell and Staiger
(2005a), and it provides one reason according to the terms-of-trade theory why the proliferation of
PTAs could re‡ect a development which is ine¢ cient from a global perspective.
A necessary feature for PTAs to impose negative terms-of-trade externalities on third countries
is that the discriminatory market access granted to PTA partners diverts trade volumes that would
otherwise have occurred between PTA member countries and third countries. This trade diversion
e¤ect of a PTA is the trade volume reduction that can lead to changes in trade prices with third
countries, and hence to third-country terms-of-trade impacts. A number of papers have emphasized
the likelihood that PTAs rely on substantial trade diversion in order to keep them viable (see,
for example, Grossman and Helpman, 1995b, and Krishna, 1998; and see Ornelas, 2005a,b,c for
quali…cations to this claim). The possibility described above is a particular version of this claim, in
which the third-country terms-of-trade externality associated with trade diversion is the mechanism
by which an otherwise nonviable PTA is kept viable.
What is the evidence regarding the importance of third-country externalities imposed by PTAs?
The evidence is mixed, with some studies …nding substantial trade diversion and terms-of-trade
impacts of PTA formation on third countries and other studies …nding only insigni…cant e¤ects.
Chang and Winters (2002) take up the international externality question by investigating the
experience of third-country export prices to Brazil in light of MERCOSUR. Relying on productlevel unit values data to proxy for export prices, they …nd that intra-PTA tari¤ reductions are
empirically associated with the price declines of third-country (Chile, Korea, Japan, US) exports
to Brazil, relative to the prices of these third-country’s exports of the same products to the rest of
the world.110 Furthermore, welfare calculations arising from the model’s estimates indicate PTA
non-partner countries such as the US and Germany experienced sizeable welfare losses due to the
price declines, even after taking into account the e¤ects of Brazil’s subsequent MFN tari¤ reductions
in many of the same products. Winters and Chang (2000) present a similar approach by examining
the impact of Spain’s 1986 EC accession on US and Japanese exports to Spain. They argue that
these earlier results are not as strong due to methodological and data issues, including the reliance
109

Note that a PTA can generate a negative terms-of-trade externality for third countries even when a (modest)
tari¤ complementarity e¤ect is present, since third countries receive smaller tari¤ cuts than do member countries.
110
In related work, Schi¤ and Chang (2003) …nd that even the threat of duty-free exports from Argentina into Brazil
resulted in price declines for US exports into Brazil.

68

on data at higher levels of aggregation. Nevertheless, results from this study are consistent with
the Chang and Winters (2002) evidence from MERCOSUR. In particular they …nd that each 1
percent preferential Spanish tari¤ cut toward new PTA members is associated with roughly a 0.5
percent export price decline for Japanese and US exporters to Spain, relative to these new PTA
partners’(France, Germany, Italy, UK) export prices of the same good.
That important negative terms-of-trade externalities arise after PTA formation is consistent
with some, though certainly not all, of the evidence arising from other studies. Romalis (2007), for
example, found that the EU’s trade with the US, Canada, and Mexico was negatively impacted by
the implementation of NAFTA, con…rming signi…cant trade diversion e¤ects, but found little in the
way of third-country price impacts associated with these trade volume reductions. Both Romalis
(2007) and Clausing (2001) found only insigni…cant trade diversion e¤ects from the Canada-US
FTA, a result consistent with the analysis of Tre‡er (2004), who found that Canada’s trade creation
associated with CUSFTA dominated the welfare e¤ects of any trade diversion. Using data on
the manufacturing trade and FTAs for 64 countries over the period 1990-2002, Dai, Yotov and
Zylkin (2014) report large trade diversion impacts of FTA formation, with the largest third-country
impacts su¤ered by existing FTA members when a country joins a new FTA from which its other
FTA partners are excluded. On the other hand, Frazer and Van Biesebroeck (2010) found no
evidence that US preferences under the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) drew African
exports in those products away from the EU in ways that may have a¤ected EU consumer prices.111
A potential limitation of this literature is suggested by the results of Handley (2014) and Handley
and Limão (forthcoming) which we have discussed at various points in the survey. They show that
in the presence of policy uncertainty there can be large di¤erences between the trade e¤ects of, on
the one hand, an applied MFN tari¤ of zero that is bound at a much higher level in the WTO, and
on the other hand a PTA tari¤ that is both applied and bound at zero. Such di¤erences are likely to
be missed in studies such as those above that attempt to relate trade e¤ects of PTAs to preference
margins on applied tari¤s alone. Also relevant is the paper by Prusa and Teh (2010) discussed
previously: their …nding that PTA formation is associated with both a reduction in antidumping
actions against PTA partners and an increase against non-partners suggests a form of third-country
externality that may be di¢ cult for typical studies of the trade impacts of PTAs to measure.
Finally, in recent work, Spearot (2015) develops a general equilibrium version of the Melitz
and Ottaviano (2008) model which allows for di¤erences in …rm productivity distributions across
supplying countries, and shows how the model can be structurally estimated with product level
bilateral trade and tari¤ data and used for counterfactual experiments. Of particular interest to
our discussion here is Spearot’s counterfactual calculations of the impacts of a country unilaterally
eliminating all of its (post-2000) remaining tari¤s. As Spearot notes, if existing PTA-induced tari¤
111

Furthermore, there is also mixed evidence on international externalities associated with the application of other
discriminatory trade policy, such as antidumping. Bown and Crowley (2006, 2007) …nd international externalities
associated with US antidumping imposed on Japanese exports via the trade volume (“trade de‡ection”) and price
(third-market terms-of-trade) e¤ects on its exports of those products to third markets. However, Bown and Crowley
(2010) investigate similar trade restrictions imposed on a developing country exporter (China, during 1992-2001) and
do not …nd evidence of trade de‡ection to third countries in that setting.

69

discrimination causes su¢ cient trade diversion, even a large country such as the US with low MFN
tari¤s could gain in terms of real national income by eliminating its remaining MFN tari¤s. And
this is exactly what Spearot …nds for the US (and others including India, Japan and Korea).
Relatedly, Caliendo and Parro (2015) and Tintelnot (2014) build on the Eaton and Kortum
(2002) framework to quantify the trade impacts of NAFTA (Caliendo and Parro) and the trade
and production impacts of the proposed Canada-EU trade and investment agreement (Tintelnot).
Caliendo and Parro …nd small price and quantity impacts of NAFTA on the rest of the world,
while Tintelnot …nds larger potential third-country impacts of the proposed Canada-EU agreement.
Tintelnot’s …ndings are especially relevant for assessing the potential of recent PTAs to impose thirdcountry externalities, as he focuses on the deep-integration features of the proposed agreement and
their impacts on the location of multinational production facilities for export platform purposes.
Taken together, we interpret the literature as indicating that the potential for PTAs to impose
important third-country externalities is real and has at times probably been exercised, but that
it does not appear to be a pronounced and consistent feature of existing PTAs. It is possible
that PTAs have mostly not imposed signi…cant third-country e¤ects at least in part because of
the role of the GATT/WTO dispute procedures in policing such e¤ects, a possibility that is given
some credence by the literature we survey in Section 7.3. In any event, the literature surveyed
above establishes that the potential for third-country externalities is there, and suggests that the
problem could become more substantial with the increasing focus of new PTAs on deep integration.
Maintaining a cautious view of PTAs in light of this potential seems warranted.

5.3

PTAs and Deep Integration

We consider now the growth in deep-integration PTAs. Does the terms-of-trade theory provide
support for this development? We describe above how the theory can provide support for shallow
integration; this is the basic message of Bagwell and Staiger (2001b)’s claim that a well-working
market-access-preservation rule can allow countries to achieve e¢ cient outcomes through tari¤ negotiations without directly negotiating over domestic policies. This message survives a variety of
generalizations of the original model in which it was made, but requires quali…cation when governments possess private information.112 In Bajona and Ederington (2011), the private information
takes a “hidden-action” form and is over the degree of a government’s intervention with domestic
policies. The case for shallow integration then survives largely intact, albeit with some modi…cation: an e¢ cient self-enforcing agreement generally takes the form of a minimum market-access
level combined with a binding tari¤ cap. But, as Lee (2014) shows, if private information takes a
“hidden-information” form and concerns a government’s type (e.g., the magnitude of a domestic
112
Sauré (2014) argues that quali…cations to the case for shallow integration also arise when the agreement must
be self-enforcing and there exist inter-temporal linkages that can a¤ect the deviation payo¤, so that the extent to
which an agreement is self-enforcing may vary with policies, even among policies that generate the same market
access. Sauré shows that the freedom over domestic policies provided under shallow integration then might induce a
government to adjust its policies in a manner that ultimately changes its own gains from deviation in an unanticipated
way and renders the new policies unsustainable. It is an open question whether such adjustments would be exercised
in related models were governments to anticipate the consequences for their own self-enforcement constraint.

70

distortion associated with an externality), and if the type is uncertain at the time the agreement is
written, then a simple market-access-preservation rule leads to excessive protection for some types
and is not optimal. Furthermore, while a state-contingent market-access-preservation rule could
implement the …rst-best allocation were the state observable, such an allocation is not incentive
compatible when information is hidden. In the hidden-information setting, Lee shows that a form
of deep integration is needed to construct the optimal agreement.
Hence, the terms-of-trade literature suggests that the case for shallow integration can be weakened to the extent that private (and perhaps especially hidden) information is important in trade
negotiations. While more research is clearly needed, the possibility is thus raised that governments
might achieve e¢ ciency gains in trade agreements that include some deep integration rules. But
granting this possibility, what form would such rules take? Could they be provided via modest
adjustments to WTO rules, or are deeper forms of integration required? And, if the latter, do
PTAs represent the best path forward? Or, might instead deep integration initiatives in PTAs
generate third-party externalities and be ine¢ cient from a multilateral perspective?
To date, the terms-of-trade literature has not gone far enough to sort through these possibilities
and provide answers. But there is suggestive evidence from a small empirical literature focusing on
the trade e¤ects of regional integration of TBT and SPS measures that does point to the potential
for important trade-diverting e¤ects of these kinds of agreements, with particular harm to the
exports of developing countries not party to the agreements (see, in particular, WTO, 2012, p.
152).113 We therefore see providing answers to these questions as an important area for future
research. At this point, given the broad a¢ nity between the GATT/WTO design and solutions
to the terms-of-trade problem, we view the current terms-of-trade strand of the trade-agreement
literature as suggesting a presumption that any deep integration that would be required to achieve
e¢ ciency (say, due to the presence of private information) is likely better provided within the
GATT/WTO than by PTAs.114 But we also see signi…cant value in further research that explores
whether certain forms of deep integration might exist that are achieved most easily among smaller
groups of countries at similar developmental stages and that impose little or no costs on third
countries. As Maggi (2014) also emphasizes, future research of this kind might explicitly include
bargaining frictions, which may be higher for negotiations that involve many countries and complex
issues. For such forms of deep integration, the corresponding agreement might be well placed in a
PTA or, alternatively, in a plurilateral or critical-mass agreement within the WTO.115
113

See, for example, Disdier, Fontagne and Cadot (2015), who …nd evidence that regional agreements between
developed and developing countries that focus on harmonizing standards tend to reduce the exports of the developing
country members to third countries, and Chen and Mattoo (2008), who …nd that regional agreements to harmonize
standards can reduce developing country exports from outside the region. The …ndings of these studies complement
the …ndings of Tintelnot (2014) that we discuss above regarding the potential for deep integration PTAs to impose
third-country externalities.
114
Even in the private-information models, the underlying problem is still the terms-of-trade problem, and so Nash
domestic policies are set e¢ ciently, with the ine¢ ciency amounting simply to a level of market access that is too low.
From this perspective, it is not obvious why PTAs would be better than the WTO at providing the degree of deep
integration necessary to achieve e¢ cient market access levels in the presence of private information.
115
We discuss plurilateral and critical mass agreements further in the concluding section, where we consider potential
approaches for strengthening the WTO.

71

5.4

The story line continued...

As WTO liberalization e¤orts seem to have stalled, PTA liberalization has taken o¤. Has the
explosion of PTAs interfered with the WTO’s ability to deliver countries to the global e¢ ciency
frontier? Or are PTAs carrying countries to the global e¢ ciency frontier in ways that the WTO
could not? Or, are PTAs succeeding where the WTO could not because PTAs can impose costs on
third countries that WTO rules successfully internalize, in which case PTAs are likely moving the
world away from the global e¢ ciency frontier?
Our survey of the terms-of-trade literature suggests a cautious interpretation of the bene…ts of
PTAs to the world trading system. As we have emphasized, this literature provides broad support
for the view that the GATT/WTO is fundamentally well-designed to minimize the in‡uence of
terms-of-trade externalities on the policy choices of member governments and thereby solve the
terms-of-trade problem. The literature provides a more mixed view of PTAs in this regard, with
theory pointing out many avenues through which PTAs could permit terms-of-trade externalities to
re-enter the calculus of trade-policy making, and empirical evidence providing only partial assurance
that these avenues have not been exercised. In this sense, the terms-of-trade literature supports a
cautious view of the wisdom of entrusting PTAs with the rules of globalization. The literature also
provides ample reasons for caution concerning the position that PTAs are complementary to the
GATT/WTO. Both the theory and evidence are mixed; hence, as a general matter, whether PTAs
are stumbling blocks or building blocks for multilateral liberalization remains ambiguous.

6

Beyond the Terms-of-Trade Theory

We now survey the literature on the commitment, delocation/pro…t-shifting and o¤shoring theories
of trade agreements. Our purpose is to identify insights that would qualify the answers given by
the terms-of-trade theory to the questions that motivate our survey.

6.1

The Commitment Theory

The most established alternative to the terms-of-trade theory of trade agreements is the commitment theory. According to this theory, governments value trade agreements as a way to tie their
hands against their own lobbies and citizens. Of course there is no reason why trade agreements
couldn’t serve multiple purposes, which is to say the commitment and terms-of-trade theories need
not be mutually exclusive. The question for us here is whether the commitment theory o¤ers a
more supportive interpretation of PTAs relative to the GATT/WTO than does the terms-of-trade
theory and, if so, whether there is su¢ cient empirical support for the commitment theory more
generally to qualify or alter the initial conclusions we have drawn concerning the relative merits of
PTAs and the GATT/WTO from our survey of the terms-of-trade theory literature.
While expressions of the commitment theory of trade agreements can be found in a variety
of early papers (see, for example, Carmichael, 1987, Staiger and Tabellini, 1987, Lapan, 1988,
Matsuyama, 1990, Tornell, 1991 and Brainard, 1994), a particularly elegant treatment that has
72

become the workhorse model of this idea is provided by Maggi and Rodriguez-Clare (1998). Their
model is one of a small open economy, where the terms-of-trade argument for trade agreements is
absent. The focus of the model is on the idea that an anticipated trade-policy-lobbying relationship
between a government and producers in some sector is likely to distort the equilibrium allocation
of resources in the economy toward that sector, and on the possibility that the lobby might then
not fully compensate the government for this distortion. To formalize this possibility, Maggi and
Rodriguez-Clare extend the lobbying model of Grossman and Helpman (1994) to include a prior
stage in which resources in the economy are allocated across sectors. They con…rm that the government is compensated by the lobby for the ex-post distortions its trade-policy choice imposes
on the economy given the sectoral allocation of the economy’s resources that are sunk at the time
the trade policy choice is made; this …nding is the same as in the original Grossman and Helpman
model. But Maggi and Rodriguez-Clare establish that the lobby does not compensate the government for the ex-ante distortions in the sectoral allocation of resources created by the anticipation
of the government’s relationship with the lobby. This second …nding is novel, and as Maggi and
Rodriguez-Clare show, it provides a reason that the government might (under certain conditions
which they explore) wish to tie its hands ex ante against in‡uence by the lobby ex post. And in
this way, a possible commitment role for a trade agreement is thereby identi…ed.116
The commitment theory has been used to o¤er interpretations of some of the features of the
GATT/WTO which appear puzzling when viewed through the lens of the terms-of-trade theory.
One example is Potipiti (2012), who uses the commitment theory to explain why, in the WTO, tari¤s
are the subject of negotiated limits while export subsidies are banned outright. From the perspective
of the standard terms-of-trade model, and as discussed in Section 4.3, this feature is puzzling at two
levels: the standard theory suggests that, if anything, export subsidies should be encouraged, and it
also does not rationalize treating export subsidies more severely than import tari¤s. Potipiti shows
that these puzzles can be resolved in the context of the commitment theory, once an asymmetry
between the rents earned by import-competing and exporting interests is introduced.
Potipiti (2012) builds on the small-open economy model of Maggi and Rodriguez-Clare (1998).
In Potipiti’s version of this model, a government can join an agreement that bans tari¤s and/or
an agreement that bans export subsidies, and doing so eliminates the anticipation of protection by
the private sector and the associated ex ante investment distortion, and thereby generates a social
welfare gain. Commitment to such an agreement, however, also requires the government to forfeit
the political contributions it would otherwise collect for the protection it o¤ers. The government
thus faces a trade-o¤, and it commits to a trade agreement covering a particular policy only if the
social welfare gain from banning the use of that policy is greater than the government’s valuation
of the associated loss in political contributions. Applied to export policies, the underlying Maggi
and Rodriguez-Clare model can therefore account for an agreement that discourages (bans) export
116

See also Mitra (2002), for a similar commitment story where the avoidance of wasteful lobbying resources rather
than distorted sectoral allocations is the driving factor that motivates governments to use trade agreements as a
commitment device. As Bagwell and Staiger (2002) and Maggi (2014) observe, commitment arguments can also serve
as reasons against joining a trade agreement, as the papers by McLaren (1997, 2002) elegantly illustrate.

73

subsidies. But how can the asymmetry in treatment across import tari¤s and export subsidies
be understood? Potipiti argues that this asymmetric treatment can arise from an underlying
asymmetry in growth prospects of the two sectors that he shows occurs when trade costs are
decreasing through time, and from the di¤erences in the rent-generating capacity of protection in
(expanding) export and (declining) import-competing sectors that this implies. Due to the relative
inability for protection to create rents in expanding as opposed to contracting sectors, he …nds that
it is sometimes optimal for a government to agree to a ban on export subsidies and thereby give
up the (smaller) political rents in favor of the social welfare gain, while also not banning import
tari¤s and instead opting to retain the (larger) political rents that their use generates.117
The commitment theory may also be used to interpret the evolution of rules on domestic subsidies from GATT to the WTO, an evolution that as discussed in Section 4.3 does not …nd easy
support under the terms-of-trade theory. Here the relevant paper is Brou and Ruta (2013), who
augment the Maggi and Rodriguez-Clare (1998) model by allowing the domestic government to use
both a production subsidy and an import tari¤ in its relationship with the lobby in an importcompeting sector.118 Taxation to raise revenue is assumed to be distortionary, so that a production
subsidy does not dominate a tari¤ for redistributive purposes; rather, as Brou and Ruta show, in
this setting optimal intervention will typically include a mix of tari¤s and production subsidies.
In the Brou-Ruta (2013) model, the fundamental reason for signing a trade agreement that
commits a government to free trade is the same as that in Maggi and Rodriguez-Clare (1998) and
Potipiti (2012). But Brou and Ruta add two novel twists. First, the lobby’s anticipation of both a
tari¤ and a domestic subsidy creates ex-ante distortions that the government is not compensated
for ex post, and so the government may have a direct reason to sign agreements which constrain
both tari¤s and domestic subsidies. Second, if a government does sign an agreement that constrains
its tari¤ only, this commitment induces the government to turn more intensively to production
subsidies in its political relationship with the import-competing lobby –what Brou and Ruta term
“the policy substitution problem” –and the resulting distortions are themselves welfare-reducing.
What Brou and Ruta show is that in the presence of a tari¤-only commitment the new subsidies
associated with the policy substitution problem can be handled with a “nulli…cation-or-impairment”
rule, o¤ering support for the GATT shallow-integration approach to domestic subsidies in much the
same way that the terms-of-trade theory supports GATT’s approach to domestic subsidies. But
Brou and Ruta show as well that there is a remaining distortion associated with the original subsidy
117

Potipiti’s (2012) model can explain why export subsidies might be banned while import tari¤s are not banned, but
it doesn’t explain why some limits on tari¤s might still be negotiated. However, it is not hard to see that introducing
a small amount of terms-of-trade motive into the model (by relaxing slightly the small country assumption) could
provide a reason for negotiating tari¤ bindings while not altering the other results of the model.
118
Limão and Tovar (2011) also study the role of trade agreements as a commitment device when governments
can use both tari¤s and behind-the-border policies to redistribute to favored groups. But the focus of Limão and
Tovar is on whether a government might wish to constrain its use of a more e¢ cient instrument (in their model the
tari¤) knowing that this would result in more reliance on a less e¢ cient instrument (in their model behind-the-border
non-tari¤ barriers). As they show, a government might …nd such a commitment desirable despite the associated
e¢ ciency costs because the commitment can improve its bargaining power relative to the lobby. Limão and Tovar do
not consider the possibility that international commitments might be extended to cover behind-the-border non-tari¤
barriers, so unlike Brou and Ruta their model does not yield insights about the desirability of deep integration.

74

level that a tari¤-only agreement in combination with the GATT nulli…cation-or-impairment rule
cannot address. It is with this second …nding that Brou and Ruta demonstrate that the commitment
theory can provide support for the WTO’s new disciplines imposed directly on domestic subsidies,
and in this sense provides support for deep integration.119
Finally, Ethier (1998) employs the commitment theory to address whether the emergence of
PTAs following a period of multilateral liberalization might be viewed as a positive development
for the world trading system. Actually, like Maggi and Rodriguez-Clare (2007), Either combines
two reasons for a trade agreement into one model. One of these reasons can be interpreted as
the commitment motive, and in Ethier’s model this is the motive that best describes why governments might be interested in PTAs (see especially Ethier’s discussion on pp. 1240-41). The second
reason is an international externality, but it is not the terms-of-trade externality; rather, it is a
(Marshallian) scale economy that operates at the world-wide level and creates a positive international (non-pecuniary) externality associated with greater investment. This form of international
externality is what underpins the purpose of a multilateral trade agreement in Ethier’s model.
Ethier’s (1998) model is meant to capture the forces behind the growth in numbers of PTAs
beginning in the 1990s that involved large developed countries forming PTAs with small reforming
developing countries. In Ethier’s model, foreign investment from the developed world is by assumption necessary for successful reform in a developing country, and PTAs are ways in which developing
countries compete among themselves for the required foreign investment. In essence, a PTA with
a large developed country can enable the developing country to credibly “lock in”its reforms with
commitments to deep integration: these deep integration commitments attract foreign investors to
sink capital in the developing country which in turn, by creating natural interests that will push
the foreign government to enforce the developing country’s commitments, ensures the success of the
reform. As Ethier argues, once multilateral liberalization among developed countries has occurred
and makes entry into the global economy attractive for developing countries, the commitment role
of the PTAs can lead to a greater level of reform and investment world-wide than would otherwise
occur. The international scale economy externality then implies that the greater investment in and
scale of the successfully reformed developing countries leads to gains for everyone.120
Viewed together, these papers support the potential appeal of deep integration in trade agreements as a way to solve commitment problems. Three key issues remain. First, from the perspective
119

Maggi and Rodriguez-Clare (2007) show that in a large-country dynamic version of the Maggi and Rodriguez-Clare
(1998) model which combines the commitment and terms-of-trade theories, it is optimal for governments to implement
liberalization in two phases, a …rst (and in their model instantaneous) phase in which liberalization re‡ecting the
elimination of terms-of-trade motives occurs, and then a second (and in their model gradual) phase in which further
liberalization to handle the domestic commitment motive occurs. When Brou and Ruta’s (2013) …nding is viewed
alongside these results it is tempting to conjecture that, if behind-the-border policies such as domestic subsidies were
added to the Maggi-Rodriquez-Clare (2007) model, the resulting model might yield predictions that could support,
as an optimal development, the gradual spread of deep integration, but only after terms-of-trade considerations had
been removed from tari¤ choices. We leave this conjecture as a potential topic for future research.
120
We have con…ned our discussion here to the economic bene…ts that commitments via a trade agreement may
provide, but there may also be important political bene…ts, as the recent paper by Liu and Ornelas (2014) suggests.
Liu and Ornelas show that PTAs can serve as commitment devices for future governments that lower the probability
of democracy failure, and they show as well that unstable democracies are more likely to join PTAs as a result.

75

of the commitment theory, are there good reasons to think that the required deep integration is best
carried out in PTAs rather than in the WTO? Second, when it comes to tari¤ commitments, what
does the commitment theory say about the appeal of preferential tari¤ cuts? And third, is there
evidence that commitment motives are important for understanding real-world trade agreements?
Regarding the …rst question, the WTO treatment of domestic subsidies illustrates that deep
integration is possible in the WTO. But the failure of the WTO’s Doha Round to gain traction on the
deep integration components of the so-called Singapore issues points to severe limits to how far deep
integration is likely to proceed in the WTO. So to put the …rst question slightly di¤erently: Does
the commitment theory literature provide reasons to believe that the WTO cannot generate enough
deep integration and that PTAs should be called upon to shoulder the load? Here the literature
does not provide a direct answer, but there are suggestions of a partial answer: the WTO may
be ine¤ective at helping small countries make commitments, and the preferential nature of PTAs
may allow PTAs to be more e¤ective for small countries in serving this role. The reason is that,
as Bown and Hoekman (2008) argue, a small country is likely to face challenges in getting trading
partners to utilize the WTO dispute settlement system when it violates a trade-policy commitment;
however, a small country may become “large”to foreign exporters who enjoy preferential access to
its market, and those foreign exporters then have an incentive to push even a small PTA partnercountry to follow through on its commitments.121 This suggests in turn that, at least when it
comes to PTAs between large developed countries and small developing countries (small because of
the small-country enforcement issues associated with the WTO, developing because commitment
issues are arguably most germane for developing countries), the commitment theory could provide
a reason to look more favorably on PTAs than does the terms-of-trade theory.122
Regarding the second question raised above, we have just pointed out one possible reason that
the commitment theory could lend support to the preferential tari¤ cuts that de…ne PTAs, namely to
aid in the enforcement of commitments for small countries. But beyond this, the commitment theory
of trade agreements does not display any particular a¢ nity to PTAs over the GATT/WTO. To the
contrary, as can be seen with reference to the Maggi and Rodriguez-Clare (1998) workhorse model,
121

This reasoning is not without caveats, however. For example, the rents created for the foreign exporters of a large
country by preferential access to a small PTA partner market may only exist in the short run, and be dissipated by
supply responses as the foreign exporter prices return to their long run MFN world-price levels. Notice also that if
Ethier’s (1998) position – that it is sunk foreign investment rather than preferential trade access per se that creates
the natural interests to make sure the foreign government enforces the deep integration commitments of its PTA
partner – is correct, then it is not obvious why the preferential nature of a PTA should matter for enforcement, and
therefore not clear why a PTA would be more e¤ective than the WTO in this capacity.
122
A second suggestive possibility comes from a particular interpretation of the …ndings of Aghion, Antràs and
Helpman (2007). They identify circumstances under which global free trade may not be achievable via multilateral
negotiations but could be achievable if FTAs are permitted; however, this possibility arises only when governments do
not maximize welfare (so that global free trade is not e¢ cient relative to governments’own objectives). If we make a
distinction between governments’ex ante and ex post preferences and evaluate the institution relative to the former,
then this result suggests a possible commitment story that could support the creation of an institution that permits
PTAs. The interpretation is that governments seek to maximize overall welfare at the ex ante stage but anticipate
that they may be captured by lobbies in the ex post stage. To maximize their ex ante objectives, governments then
might set up an institution that permits FTAs as a potential bulwark against ex post political motivations. We regard
this interpretation as leading only to a suggestive possibility, however, since Aghion et al. also identify circumstances
under which politically motivated governments could achieve global free trade only when PTAs are banned.

76

a preferential tari¤ cut could be completely ine¤ective in reducing the ex-ante distortions that the
domestic government is seeking to address with its commitment to (in the model, multilateral) free
trade.123 More generally, the domestic distortions that the government is attempting to reduce
with commitments under a trade agreement are related to local prices in the domestic economy,
and any set of local prices that can be achieved via preferential tari¤ cuts can be achieved as well
with appropriate MFN tari¤s.
Finally, we turn to the third question: Is there evidence that commitment motives are important for understanding real-world trade agreements? Here the evidence is thin but supportive.
Staiger and Tabellini (1999) o¤er early empirical support for the commitment theory. They look
for evidence that governments make di¤erent tari¤ choices across GATT environments that are
distinguished by the degree of commitment that GATT rules provide for those choices. Focusing
on US tari¤ choices made under the GATT Escape Clause (where GATT should not have helped
provide commitment) and made in the Tokyo Round of GATT negotiations (where GATT rules
could have helped provide commitment), Staiger and Tabellini …nd that US tari¤ decisions were
more responsive to the production distorting impacts of the tari¤s in the latter decisions as compared to the former decisions, in line with what their commitment model would predict. Tang and
Wei (2009) adopt a di¤erent approach. They consider the di¤erences in the growth performance
of developing countries that joined the GATT/WTO under two di¤erent kinds of accession rules,
rules that applied in GATT prior to the creation of the WTO and that did not require acceding
countries to undertake extensive policy commitments, and rules that applied subsequent to the
creation of the WTO in 1995 and that typically required substantial policy commitments by the
acceding government. Tang and Wei …nd that the post-accession growth performance of the developing countries that acceded to the GATT/WTO under the latter set of rules was signi…cantly
better than that of non-acceding countries and countries that acceded to GATT under the former
rules, and they attribute this di¤erence to the domestic commitment role played by the WTO.
Further evidence lending some support to the commitment theory of trade agreements is provided
by Limão and Tovar (2011), Liu and Ornelas (2014) and Bown and Crowley (2014).124
Summarizing, we conclude from our survey of the commitment theory strand of the literature
that this theory provides some reason to be more supportive of PTAs than our survey of the termsof-trade theory alone would suggest, though it provides no reason to be less supportive of the WTO.
We thus see the commitment theory as moving the answer to the motivating question of our survey
123

This would be the case as long as the domestic-country imports from non-PTA countries were not driven to
zero in the presence of the preferential tari¤ cut (because then the unchanged MFN tari¤ of the domestic country
together with its small size in world markets and the arbitrage condition would ensure that the local-market prices
in the domestic economy are una¤ected by its tari¤ preferences and so the sectoral allocation of domestic productive
resources would be una¤ected as well).
124
Limão and Tovar (2011) (see note 118) employ data on Turkish tari¤s and non-tari¤ barriers and …nd evidence
in line with their theory that Turkey was more likely to bind its tari¤s in the WTO and to bind them more tightly in
industries where it had low bargaining power relative to the lobbies it faced. Liu and Ornelas (2014) (see note 120)
…nd evidence supporting the two key predictions of their model that PTAs are more likely to be formed by unstable
democracies and participation in PTAs helps to stabilize these democracies. Finally, in their cross-country study of
emerging economies, Bown and Crowley (2014) provide evidence that these countries changed how they conduct their
trade policy (through antidumping and safeguards) by taking on tari¤ binding commitments when joining the WTO.

77

toward a view that PTAs and the WTO may be complementary, but in light of the relatively thin
empirical support to date on the widespread importance of the commitment theory’s role in actual
trade agreements, probably not as yet moving the answer very far in this direction.

6.2

The Delocation/Pro…t-Shifting Theory

Another alternative to the terms-of-trade theory can be found in a growing body of literature
emphasizing …rm delocation and pro…t-shifting as sources of international externalities that might
give rise to and shape the design of trade agreements. This strand of the literature shares with
the terms-of-trade theory a focus on the internalization of international policy externalities as the
primary task of trade agreements; but the delocation/pro…t-shifting theories reject the implication
of the terms-of-trade theory that terms-of-trade externalities are the only – or even the most
important – cause of the ine¢ ciency that a trade agreement can correct. Instead, according to
these theories, non-cooperative trade policy choices are ine¢ cient because, when left on their own,
governments use trade protection to ine¢ ciently “delocate” …rms or shift …rm-pro…ts from foreign
locations to the domestic market.
The delocation/pro…t-shifting theories build on the unilateral incentives for trade policy intervention that arise when the assumption of perfect competition is relaxed, incentives that were …rst
identi…ed by Brander and Spencer (1984, 1985), Spencer and Brander (1983) and Venables (1985,
1987). Brander and Spencer argued that trade policy intervention could be used to shift …rm profits toward the intervening country when …rms possess market power and use their market power
in the presence of entry barriers to earn pro…ts in equilibrium. Venables showed that in a world
where pro…ts are dissipated by free entry it is still possible to gain unilaterally with trade policy
intervention as long as there are international transport costs, due to the delocation/entry-exit
e¤ect of this intervention on foreign and domestic …rms.125 Ossa (2011) was the …rst to explore
the consequences of the delocation e¤ect for the purpose and design of trade agreements, while
Mrázová (2011) develops the pro…t shifting rationale for trade agreements.126
Ossa (2011) considers a monopolistically competitive setting in which …rms producing di¤erentiated products compete for sales in both the home and foreign markets under conditions of free
entry, and where exporting the product abroad involves shipping costs. Venables (1987) establishes
that a …rm-delocation motive for trade policy arises in such an environment: if the home country
o¤ers protection to its importers or a subsidy to its exporters, foreign …rms can be “delocated” to
the home market and home consumers save on trade costs and enjoy a lower overall price index
as a result. This home gain, however, comes at the expense of foreign consumers, whose price
index rises. Hence, the …rm-delocation e¤ect represents a negative international policy externality.
What Ossa demonstrates is that in his model the transmission of the …rm-delocation e¤ect from the
125

As we discuss in note 75, the problem for a trade agreement to solve in models featuring pro…t shifting or
delocation e¤ects can be given a terms-of-trade interpretation under certain conditions. But the papers we next
discuss impose conditions so that this interpretation is not valid, which is why we discuss these papers here rather
than in the context of our earlier discussion of the terms-of-trade theory. We return to this point further below.
126
Brander and Spencer (1984) o¤er an early analysis of the bene…ts of a trade agreement in a pro…t-shifting model.

78

home to the foreign country can be interpreted as traveling through local prices, not the terms of
trade. Intuitively, in Ossa’s model each country is impacted directly by the local price in the other
country’s market, because each country could enjoy the savings in transport costs if it could have
more of the world’s …rms (and the production of their individual varieties) located locally rather
than abroad; and the equilibrium pattern of …rm location across countries depends on local prices
in both countries via the free-entry condition.
A main thrust of Ossa (2011) is therefore that one does not have to believe that terms-oftrade e¤ects of trade policy are important in order to understand the purpose of trade agreements.
In fact, Ossa argues that a number of the prominent design features of the GATT/WTO (e.g.,
reciprocity and MFN) can be equally interpreted as sensible if governments are instead attempting
to internalize delocation externalities with their trade agreements.127 Accordingly, and based on
Ossa’s results, if anything the delocation theory of trade agreements could be said to strengthen
support for the GATT/WTO as a well-designed institution, as it broadens the interpretation of the
problem that the GATT/WTO is well-designed to solve.
Still, while the delocation theory does not appear to undercut support for the GATT/WTO in
some fundamental way, might it nevertheless swing support from shallow to deep integration, in
which case like the commitment theory the delocation theory might be interpreted as supporting the
need for PTAs to complement the GATT/WTO? This is still an open question in the literature, but
the results of DeRemer (2013a) suggest that the answer to this question may be a quali…ed “No.”
DeRemer demonstrates that shallow integration can work in a delocation model where governments
have both tari¤s and wage subsidies at their disposal, but DeRemer also shows that the particular
form of the “market access preservation rule” that makes shallow integration work in his model
bears little relationship to any of the closest analogies in the GATT/WTO. Together with Ossa’s
(2011) …ndings, DeRemer’s results therefore suggest that the GATT/WTO is probably less-well
designed to solve problems associated with international delocation externalities than it is to solve
the terms-of-trade problem, but with some selective …xes there is no reason in principle that it
could not be optimized in this direction, and thus no particular reason to believe that PTAs are
needed to help shoulder the load.
Similarly, Mrázová (2011) develops a model of trade agreements based on the notion that such
agreements help to internalize an international pro…t-shifting externality, and uses this model to
explain the WTO ban on export subsidies that is puzzling from the perspective of the terms-of-trade
theory. Mrázová’s argument is based on self-enforcement considerations: she shows that it can be
easier to enforce commitments in a repeated game model of trade agreements when import tari¤s
are the only trade policy instrument allowed under the agreement. O¤ering a di¤erent perspective,
DeRemer (2013b) abstracts from self-enforcement issues but employs a pro…t-shifting model of trade
agreements to argue that the evolution of GATT/WTO domestic and export subsidy rules can be
better understood from the perspective of pro…t-shifting models of trade agreements than from
127

This is not to say that the predictions of the terms-of-trade theory and the delocation theory are the same. For
example, as Ossa (2011) demonstrates, the particular de…nition of reciprocity that is suggested by his model di¤ers
from that suggested by the terms-of-trade theory.

79

the perspective of the terms-of-trade theory. To generate his domestic subsidy result, DeRemer
assumes that governments wield a particular form of entry subsidy, and it is an open question
whether the result would hold for more general forms of domestic subsidy (or for domestic policy
instruments more generally).128 But at a minimum DeRemer’s result illustrates that pro…t-shifting
externalities can be usefully employed to help interpret the evolution of GATT/WTO subsidy rules.
And …nally, Ossa (2014) assesses the importance of pro…t-shifting and terms-of-trade externalities
in a calibrated quantitative model of trade agreements, and …nds that together these externalities
are sizable enough to account broadly for the observed magnitude of multilateral tari¤ liberalization
under the GATT/WTO.
Like the delocation theory, the results from the pro…t-shifting theory seem to provide further
support for the GATT/WTO approach to liberalization. And at least to date, the pro…t-shifting
theory has not generated results that would indicate speci…c support for PTAs. These conclusions
are further supported from the perspective of the …ndings of Bagwell and Staiger (2012a, 2015). According to their …ndings, as long as governments have both import tari¤s and export tax/subsidies
at their disposal, the underlying problem for a trade agreement to solve in the delocation and
pro…t-shifting models can still be given a terms-of-trade externality interpretation, though novel
local-price externalities do arise when export policies are not available to governments. This means
that we should expect key results across these theories to be similar, at least when the use of
export policies is not ruled out, and Bagwell and Staiger con…rm this for a number of the standard
predictions of the terms-of-trade theory.129
We conclude from our survey of the delocation/pro…t-shifting theories of trade agreements
that this strand of the literature, if anything, bolsters the case for the GATT/WTO approach to
liberalization, as it provides a broader base from which to interpret as sensible many of the core
design features of the GATT/WTO; and while more work is needed to tease out the implications
of these theories for the desirability of PTAs as a form of liberalization, at present these theories
provide no speci…c reasons to think that PTAs o¤er an attractive alternative or complement to the
GATT/WTO approach. Combined with the fact that, with the notable exception of Ossa’s (2014)
calibration exercise, there is to date no evidence on the empirical importance of these theories, we do
not view the delocation/pro…t-shifting strand of the trade agreement literature as providing further
quali…cations to our conclusions concerning the relative merits of PTAs and the GATT/WTO.
128
It is for this reason that we interpret Deremer’s (2013b) domestic subsidy result somewhat more narrowly as
applying to certain subsidies but probably not to domestic policies more generally, while we view the analogous
results of Brou and Ruta (2013) concerning domestic subsidies as suggesting (from the perspective of the commitment
theory) broader implications for deep integration.
129
To be clear, the delocation and pro…t-shifting models do o¤er important new insights. First, to the extent
that they are successful, the GATT/WTO attempts to limit export subsidies make analyses of these models without
export policies an empirically relevant case to consider. Second, even when export policies are available and a standard
terms-of-trade interpretation can be given to the problem, the deviation from perfect competition that is featured in
the delocation and pro…t-shifting models can yield novel predictions, as discussed in Section 4.3. And as Ossa (2014)
shows in the context of a pro…t-shifting model, the existence of product di¤erentiation can interfere with the ability
of MFN and reciprocity to neutralize third-party spillovers in bilateral tari¤ negotiations.

80

6.3

The O¤shoring Theory

It is by now well-documented that trade in intermediate inputs dominates modern trade ‡ows,
that many of these inputs appear to be highly specialized to their intended use, and that this
has not always been so (see Johnson and Noguera, 2014, as well as the discussion in Antràs and
Staiger, 2012b, and Baldwin, 2014). This rise in the importance of “o¤shoring”raises the question
whether the rules and norms of the GATT/WTO, conceived at a time when the nature of trade
was quite di¤erent, are still relevant today. There are two issues that have been addressed in
the literature. First, the rise in o¤shoring has been accompanied by a signi…cant rise in foreign
investment. Adopting the perspective of the terms-of-trade theory of trade agreements, Blanchard
(2007, 2010) argues that this investment might naturally reduce the magnitude of the terms-of-trade
externality problem, and in this way o¤shoring may act to reduce the need for a GATT/WTO-type
institution. We discuss Blanchard’s work in Section 4.5 in the context of our survey of the termsof-trade literature. In this section, we focus on a second issue associated with the rise in o¤shoring:
its potential to alter the mechanism of international price determination. This issue is emphasized
by Antràs and Staiger (2012a, 2012b), who argue that the rise of o¤shoring may have changed the
way that international prices are determined and thereby the nature of the international externality
that a trade agreement must address, with implications for the design of e¤ective trade agreements.
Antràs and Staiger (2012a, 2012b) distinguish between international prices that are determined
by standard market clearing conditions and prices that are determined by bilateral bargaining
between foreign suppliers and domestic buyers. The former mechanism is featured in the termsof-trade theory, and it underpins a property that is key for the terms-of-trade theory’s a¢ nity
with shallow integration: the tari¤ is the …rst-best policy for terms-of-trade manipulation and the
international cost-shifting that is implied. This is a key property because, as we discuss earlier in
our survey, according to the terms-of-trade theory the only “problem” for a trade agreement to
“solve” is terms-of-trade manipulation, and as the tari¤ is the …rst-best policy for terms-of-trade
manipulation it then follows that the tari¤ is in fact the only policy that is distorted in the Nash
equilibrium: behind-the-border measures are set e¢ ciently under Nash choices.
But when international prices are determined by bilateral bargains between buyers and sellers
located in di¤erent countries and these bargains are undisciplined by market clearing conditions,
as Antràs and Staiger (2012a, 2012b) argue is increasingly the case with the rise in o¤shoring, the
tari¤ is no longer the …rst-best policy for cost-shifting, and governments typically …nd it unilaterally
optimal to distort many of their policy choices – border but also behind-the-border – in an e¤ort
to manipulate international prices and shift costs onto their trading partners. This leads to Antràs
and Staiger’s …rst claim: through its implications for international price determination, the rise in
o¤shoring is likely to erode the e¤ectiveness of the GATT/WTO shallow integration approach. As
Antràs and Staiger show, a second claim follows when governments have political economy motives:
in the presence of o¤shoring, and in stark contrast to the predictions of the terms-of-trade theory,
these motives introduce additional policy ine¢ ciencies that a trade agreement can address. Taken
together the implication of Antràs and Staiger’s …ndings is that the rise of o¤shoring may usher in
81

a new world in which a collection of individualized deep-integration agreements is needed to guide
governments to e¢ cient policy choices. Strikingly, that sounds a lot like the recent wave of PTAs.
Evidently, the o¤shoring theory of trade agreements has strong implications for the relative merits of PTAs and the GATT/WTO, both diminishing the appeal of the GATT/WTO and elevating
the appeal of PTAs. In comparison to the other theories reviewed in this section, the o¤shoring
theory seems more fundamentally at odds with the terms-of-trade theory and the implied support
for the GATT/WTO approach to liberalization. A key question for our survey is thus whether
there is empirical support for the o¤shoring theory. In fact we are unaware of any direct empirical
evidence relating to this theory, and only a few pieces of indirect evidence, which are supportive
and suggestive, but hardly de…nitive.130 Hence, while the o¤shoring theory of trade agreements
has the potential to substantially alter our conclusions about the relative merits of PTAs and the
GATT/WTO, in light of the lack of empirical evidence to date on the relevance of the theory
it would be premature to place much weight on its implications at this time. Clearly, however,
empirical research in this area is warranted.

6.4

Summing Up Thus Far

Having surveyed the three additional strands of the trade agreement literature, we are therefore
left with the following view: while quali…ed along some important dimensions, the terms-of-trade
theory’s implication, that strong support for the GATT/WTO is warranted while a cautious view of
PTAs seems appropriate, survives largely intact. The commitment theory serves to elevate support
for PTAs in certain circumstances beyond what the terms-of-trade theory would suggest, while
the delocation/pro…t-shifting theory seems to reinforce the terms-of-trade theory’s support for the
GATT/WTO. The o¤shoring theory could potentially overturn the implications of the terms-oftrade theory in this regard, but there is to date insu¢ cient evidence to justify a change in position
based on the predictions of this theory.
The view that we put forth here re‡ects our assessment of research to date, and as we note
further research is required in many areas. Research on deep integration, in particular, is at an
early stage. The potential coordination bene…ts of regulatory harmonization, as well as the potential
third-party costs, represent an important direction for future research, for example. As we also
note in Section 5.3, another important direction is to include bargaining frictions and explore the
potential bene…ts that such frictions suggest for negotiations among smaller groups of countries as
PTA members or in WTO plurilateral or critical-mass agreements.
130

We are aware of two pieces of evidence that o¤er some indirect support for this theory. A …rst is presented
in Antràs and Staiger (2012b), and relates to apparent di¢ culties in achieving negotiated reductions of tari¤s on
imported di¤erentiated inputs for a set of countries acceding to the WTO. And a second is contained in Ore…ce and
Rocha (2014), who …nd evidence that an important predictor of whether two countries sign a deep-integration PTA
is the share of their bilateral trade that is comprised of parts and components.

82

7

Dispute Settlement

Such is the apparent success of WTO dispute settlement that it is often referred to as the “crown
jewel” of the multilateral trading system. Over a relatively short period, economists, political
scientists, and legal scholars have developed a range of positive and normative approaches to explore
important research questions in this area.131 For example, legal scholars now parse the language
of each newly-arriving WTO legal decision – so as to draw potential precedent implications for
international and domestic law, as well as for public policy –with the same voracity as the American
bar devours fresh Supreme Court rulings or Europeans tackle judgments from the European Court
of Justice. Furthermore, legal and economic scholars have already teamed for more than a decade
to annually publish joint inter-disciplinary assessments of each year’s new WTO jurisprudence.132
We begin this section by describing how the WTO dispute settlement system has been used
to date. We then survey the theory on the role of the WTO dispute settlement system before
examining the relationship between PTA implementation and WTO dispute settlement activity. We
also describe recent PTA disputes associated with the enforcement of non-trade policies. Finally,
we conclude with thoughts on the relative merits of a multilateral dispute settlement system.

7.1

WTO Dispute Settlement: Patterns in Use

WTO disputes involve state-to-state level interaction. Here we characterize some of the data on
the nearly 500 formal disputes initiated between 1995 and 2014 in order to …rst clarify what the
disputes tend to be about, who they tend to be between, how the process works, and the typical
outcomes that arise. Due to a number of potential issues related to sample selection, a central
argument of the literature described below is that dispute settlement cannot be appreciated or
evaluated based solely on an appeal to information regarding the disputes that are observed –i.e.,
the procedures also have important “o¤ equilibrium” implications that do not necessarily arise
through formal disputes. Nevertheless, evidence that the WTO members are putting trust in the
system by frequently triggering its use over important policies or signi…cant amounts of trade is
potentially supportive of the idea that dispute settlement is playing a signi…cant role.133
7.1.1

WTO disputes are most frequently allegations of excessive import protection

We begin by appealing to an assessment drawn from a database of WTO dispute settlement information compiled and made publicly available by Horn and Mavroidis (2011). Of the formal disputes
131

Examples of seminal legal scholarship over GATT law begin with Dam (1970), Jackson (1969) and Hudec (1990).
The WTO’s legal process is explained in more detail by Palmeter and Mavroidis (2004). Davis (2012) provides a
recent overview of political science research on WTO dispute settlement.
132
Beginning in 2001, Horn and Mavroidis (2003) initiated a series of annual assessments with the backing of the
American Law Institute, subsequently extended by Bown and Mavroidis (2013), which pairs legal scholars with
economists to jointly analyze each of the formal WTO Appellate Body (and non-appealed Panel) decisions that arise.
Cumulatively these legal-economic assessments have covered nearly 100 di¤erent individual dispute decisions to date.
133
Put di¤erently, at this moment in time, the WTO members do not seem to be avoiding use of the system or
clamoring to develop an alternative system. The GATT experience of the 1980s in particular suggests that that is
not necessarily always the case (Bhagwati and Hudec, 1990).

83

that have arisen to date, the typical topic concerns a plainti¤ (“complainant”) member alleging
that the defendant (“respondent”) country has imposed an excessive level of import protection.
Horn, Johannesson, and Mavroidis (2011) examine disputes taking place between 1995 and 2010
and report that nearly 95 percent of all WTO disputes concern trade in goods, with the remainder
concerning services trade or intellectual property rights protection. The most frequently invoked
legal agreements in these disputes include the baseline 1947 GATT, followed by the separate 1995
WTO Agreements on Antidumping, Subsidies and Countervailing Measures, Agriculture, TBT,
Safeguards, and SPS Measures.
China, which acceded to the WTO in 2001, is an illustrative case study. China’s accession terms
required it to take on signi…cant commitments to domestic (economic) and trade policy reform. And
because China is such a large importer and exporter, and has so many trading partners, there were
expectations that it would become signi…cantly involved in WTO litigation (Bown, 2010). Within a
relatively short period of time, China has become an important WTO litigant; more than 40 percent
of disputes initiated between 2007 and 2011, for example, featured China as either a respondent or
complainant, with an almost 2 to 1 ratio of respondent to complainant.
China’s WTO disputes are also quite diverse. Some disputes …led against China …t the “typical”
mold –i.e., they feature an allegation of excessive import protection in a politically sensitive sector
such as autos, steel, or agriculture, and address a commonly-challenged policy such as antidumping.
However, China has also faced a number of disputes in relatively new issue areas. These include
trading partners using the WTO to legally challenge China’s export restrictions over various raw
materials and “rare earth” metals that are especially important in electronic goods. There have
been protests over China’s tax and subsidy policies and its allegedly lax protection of intellectual
property rights. Finally, trading partners have objected to China’s import restrictions on foreign
services providers; examples include …nancial information services (e.g., Bloomberg, Dow Jones,
Thomson-Reuters), electronic payment services (e.g., Visa, MasterCard, American Express), and
audio-visual services (e.g., movie studios, media and publishers, software providers).
More generally, WTO disputes are rarely as simple as one country challenging another country’s
increase of an applied MFN tari¤ above its legal binding. Instead, the complainant country’s typical
allegation is that the respondent has implemented excessive import protection through some nontari¤ policy. At least in part, the dispute can be understood to arise because of a disagreement in
interpretation of whether the respondent’s policy was implemented in order to achieve some other
(non-trade) objective that may nevertheless be justi…able under the rules or exceptions of the WTO
agreement. The appearance –if not reality –of two countries having di¤erent interpretations of the
WTO raises the possibility that dispute settlement may be doing more than simply enforcing the
agreement, but it may also address the incompleteness of the GATT/WTO contract. Section 7.2.2
describes advances in this particular area of research.
An early dispute settlement literature was motivated by recognition that most disputes initiated
immediately in the aftermath of implementation of the Uruguay Round commitments (e.g., 19951998) seemed to involve the trading interests of only high income countries. The policy concern

84

was that the newly arising legal and institutional costs of engaging dispute settlement –given the
increased “legalization”of the dispute settlement process under the WTO relative to its immediate
GATT predecessor –might be too burdensome for developing country members with limited legal
capacity to enforce their market access interests.134
Beginning with Horn, Mavroidis and Nordstrom (2005), the evidence indicates strong correlations between dispute settlement use, the level of country’s exports, and the diversity of its trading
partners. The more a country traded and the more bilateral trading relationships that it had, the
greater the scope for potential frictions to arise that would result in a formal dispute. Subsequent
research on disputes from the early WTO period that also explored the potential role of other
factors - such as legal and retaliatory capacities - that might a¤ect dispute initiation tended to
con…rm the central importance of the result that high levels of trade were positively correlated
with the triggering of disputes.135
Nevertheless, Bown and Reynolds (2015) characterize the bilateral trade in disputed products
for a sample of disputes making up more than 70 percent of the WTO caseload between 1995 and
2011 and …nd evidence of vast heterogeneity in the levels of market access at stake. Roughly 14
percent of WTO disputes involve bilateral trade in disputed products of tiny amounts – e.g., less
than $1 million per year - and yet 15 percent of disputes involve bilateral trade in products over
more than $1 billion per year. The heterogeneity in trade stakes across the dispute data raises
research questions regarding determinants of dispute settlement use. Some of the new theoretical
advances described below may improve our understanding of these forces.
The Bown and Reynolds (2015) evidence also suggests that WTO member countries in the
aggregate have entrusted the dispute settlement system to assess policies that cover signi…cant
amounts of trade. Over 1995-2011, WTO dispute settlement investigations collectively scrutinized
nearly $1 trillion in goods imports, an average of $55 billion per year, or roughly 0.5 percent of
world imports in 2011.136 These are arguably signi…cant amounts of trade for dispute settlement to
address, without even yet considering the impact of the potential precedent arising through WTO
jurisprudence, as well as the “o¤-equilibrium” impacts of the system.
134

Bown (2009) provides a more comprehensive and in depth treatment of these and related issues confronting
developing country access to WTO dispute settlement.
135
Bown (2005a), for example, provides evidence linking higher import penetration ratios to US antidumping duties
in the …rst stage, and higher levels of bilateral trade a¤ected by those US duties subsequently positively associated
with the trading partners decision of whether to formally challenge them through GATT/WTO dispute settlement in
a second stage. In a separate study examining a cross-country sample of WTO disputes that concern policies imposed
on a national treatment basis –in which the policy negatively a¤ected all trading partners –Bown (2005b) …nds that
higher pre-policy levels of bilateral exports of the disputed products are positively associated with potential litigants’
decision of whether to formally engage in the dispute settlement process.
136
These are conservative statistics because they do not include roughly 30 percent of the WTO caseload of disputes
that are either tied to export policies, services policies, TRIPS, or policies that a¤ect all imports and are not linked
to speci…c product codes. The overall level of trade directly a¤ected by WTO disputes is likely to be much higher.

85

7.1.2

The WTO legal process and outcomes

If the mandatory consultations with the respondent resulting from the initiation of a formal dispute
fails to resolve the issue, the complainant country can trigger a formal legal process whereby the
legal representatives of the two sides make arguments and present evidence to a WTO dispute
settlement Panel. Nearly 200 of the roughly 500 WTO disputes initiated to date have resulted
in formal legal rulings through Panel Reports. Of these, more than half have subsequently been
appealed and received rulings from the WTO’s standing Appellate Body.
Each WTO dispute can contain numerous “claims” made by the complainant against the respondent; the data also reveal substantial variation across disputes as to the total number of claims
…led. There is a “pro-trade bias” in WTO legal rulings, in the sense that the Panel or Appellate
Body …nds that the respondent has done something wrong in almost every dispute that receives a
formal ruling. Nevertheless, there are also selection issues associated with this interpretation that
the theory that we introduce below has begun to tackle.137
Horn, Johannesson, and Mavroidis (2011) also provide information on the average time that
disputes take to work their way through the sequential steps of the WTO dispute settlement process.
On average, the process takes almost three years between the initiation of the dispute, the issuances
of the Panel report and Appellate Body report, and …nally the outcome whereby the respondent
country is required to bring itself into compliance with legal rulings or face authorized retaliation.138
Finally, the default form of compensation in WTO disputes in the event of noncompliance
is tari¤ retaliation by the complainant subject to limits determined by WTO arbitrators; and
authorized retaliation can only begin after the legal process described above is exhausted. Overall,
and despite the increased frequency of disputes arising during the WTO period, retaliation has
rarely been an equilibrium outcome. Fewer than 15 disputes have resulted in the WTO judges even
having to articulate the permissible level for formal retaliation by the complainant in the event of
noncompliance. Many fewer cases have resulted in the complainant country actually implementing
the WTO’s authorized retaliation.139 Some high pro…le exceptions notwithstanding, there are very
few examples of egregious non-compliance with rulings of the sort that result in the explicit WTO
authorization of retaliation.140 Nevertheless, some of these exceptions identify limits to the system
137

Furthermore, at the level of legal rulings over particular claims made, Horn, Johannesson, and Mavroidis (2011)
report that the complainant “wins” only 57 percent of the claims over which the Panel ultimately rules. There are
also often many claims in these disputes over which Panel declines to rule for reasons of judicial economy.
138
On average, disputing countries remain in consultations for nearly 6 months, and then another 15 months elapse
before the WTO’s …rst Panel ruling. While the cases that are appealed receive an Appellate Body report relatively
quickly (3 months) thereafter, another 9-11 months typically elapse before expiration of the reasonable period of time
necessary for the respondent to bring its disputed policy into compliance with rulings and before the potential for
discussion of compensation due to noncompliance can occur.
139
Bown and Ruta (2010) describe the calculation of economic retaliation levels for the roughly 10 disputes that
had made it all the way through the WTO dispute settlement process between 1995 and 2008 whereby arbitrators
determined the upper limits to the level of permissible retaliation. The Bown and Pauwelyn (2010) volume provides
a broader set of research contributions on the retaliation-setting experiences under the WTO from other perspectives
in law, political science, and economics, as well as from policymakers.
140
The EC –Beef Hormones dispute involved a sustained period of retaliation by the US, as did EC-Banana Regime
dispute between the EU, US and Latin American banana exporting countries before it was eventually resolved. US
– Upland Cotton has not resulted in compliance but in a payo¤ (…nancial transfer) from US to Brazil. US – Internet

86

and have become subject of areas of formal research.
7.1.3

Dispute use and retaliatory capacity

The terms-of-trade theory suggests that trade agreements are designed to facilitate an escape
from a terms-of-trade driven Prisoners’ Dilemma. Cooperation in trade policies is achieved in a
repeated game, where observed deviations may lead to a severe o¤-equilibrium-path punishment
such as Nash reversion that corresponds to an unraveling of the agreement. A di¤erent kind of
retaliation is featured in the WTO dispute settlement system, as authorized retaliation in this
context is arguably both on the equilibrium path (i.e., something that is part of the agreement
and occurs in practice) and commensurate in nature.141 The terms-of-trade theory thus suggests
that governments’ decisions to impose certain trade policies along the equilibrium path may be
in‡uenced by their perceptions of the retaliatory capacities of their a¤ected trading partners. We
next discuss empirical approaches providing evidence broadly supportive of this perspective.
Bown (2002, 2004b) provides theoretical and empirical approaches, respectively, to explore the
potential enforcement implications of the terms-of-trade theory in the setting of dispute settlement.
The theory exploits di¤erences across the GATT/WTO-mandated limits to the compensatory retaliation response under di¤erent legal provisions and their implications in an environment characterized by trading partners with di¤erent capacity constraints on retaliation. The empirical
application examines a cross-country sample of policies imposed between 1973 and 1994 and a
framework in which governments are given the choice between GATT-consistent and inconsistent
policies of import protection, the latter which would subsequently result in a formal dispute. Conditional on choosing to impose additional import protection, the evidence suggests that heightened
retaliation capacity by a¤ected trading partners makes the policy-imposing country more likely to
implement policy changes in a way that conforms to the rules of trade agreements.142
Blonigen and Bown (2003) present a related empirical analysis that focuses on US antidumping
policy and provides further evidence that an enforcement system based on retaliation capacity is
likely to endogenously a¤ect the structure of policies that countries impose in the …rst place. That
study examines US policies implemented during the GATT and early WTO period (1980-1998) and
…nds that bilateral retaliation capacity in‡uenced how new US import restrictions were implemented
along two di¤erent dimensions. First, US industries were less likely to request antidumping import
Gambling, discussed by Irwin and Weiler (2008), has not resulted in compliance or implemented retaliation by the
tiny island nations of Antigua and Barbuda against the US. Finally, Bown and Prusa (2011) describe the repeated
challenges - 15 di¤erent disputes over 10 years - brought by a number of di¤erent WTO members to the US use of
“zeroing” in antidumping investigations.
141
For discussion of interpretations of retaliation in GATT/WTO, see Bagwell and Staiger (2002, Chapter 6). In
addition, as discussed in Section 4.2, commensurate retaliation may occur along the equilibrium path in less formal
ways, as for example when a privately informed government imposes an anti-dumping duty while recognizing that
doing so increases the likelihood that its exporters will face a similar duty in the future.
142
Bown (2004c) presents related evidence on retaliation capacity impacting the outcomes of trade disputes as well,
which is consistent with the notion that such incentives are likely to a¤ect policy choices ex ante. See also Bown
(2004a) for evidence that the outcomes of such bilateral disputes are extended to third country exporters in a manner
consistent with successful application of the MFN rule.

87

restrictions be imposed against trading partners for which they have industry-level export exposure
to retaliation; this likely a¤ects the potential policy actions that a government is ultimately asked to
consider implementing. Second, conditional on receipt of a request for additional import protection,
the US government was less likely to impose duties on trading partners for which overall US exports
would subsequently be exposed to bilateral retaliation under a potential WTO dispute.

7.2

WTO Dispute Settlement: Theoretical Perspectives

The terms-of-trade theory suggests that the WTO represents a codi…cation of a set of cooperative strategies for governments engaged in the repeated play of a terms-of-trade driven Prisoners’
Dilemma game. Cooperation in such a setting is possible only if governments understand that
o¤-equilibrium-path deviations may lead to a breakdown in the agreement and a corresponding
reduction in cooperation. In this general context, what, then, is the role of the WTO dispute settlement system? This is an important and under-studied question. Here we highlight two theoretical
perspectives on this question: the system may enhance cooperation by increasing transparency (i.e.,
by generating and disseminating information) or by helping to “complete”the WTO contract. We
also discuss research concerning possible reforms of the dispute settlement system.
7.2.1

Transparency and Information

Cooperation is easier to achieve in Prisoners’ Dilemma settings when behavior is transparent or
public.143 The decision of GATT Contracting Parties to concentrate protection mainly into tari¤s (rather than quotas) can be understood in this light. Nevertheless, governments may face
monitoring impediments and may not be perfectly informed about the full range of trade-policy
conduct of other governments. Consequently, WTO rules that generate and disseminate public
information about trade-policy conduct may facilitate greater cooperation. The WTO Trade Policy Review Mechanism (TPRM), under which the WTO Secretariat conducts periodic reviews of
the trade policies of member governments, may be evaluated in this context. We now brie‡y describe research in which the WTO dispute settlement system likewise may facilitate cooperation
by generating and disseminating information.
Consider again Maggi (1999), which provides a model where cooperation can be achieved under
a multilateral enforcement mechanism in which third-party transparency is present and third countries stand ready to retaliate. If a trade agreement is designed to ensure that any deviation would
be observed by all member governments, then the resulting o¤-equilibrium-path punishment could
take an immediate multilateral form and thus be more severe. A dispute settlement body that
publicly identi…es an o¤-equilibrium-path deviation could play a role in facilitating cooperation by
ensuring that all member governments would be aware of the transgression. Even when “bilateral”
deviations would be made observable at a multilateral level, governments may be able to achieve
more cooperative tari¤s along the equilibrium path as part of a self-enforcing agreement.
143

See again the discussion of these and related insights for the models surveyed in Section 4.2.

88

Park (2011) develops a two-country model to explore a related information role dispute settlement. Each government has a publicly observed trade policy (e.g., a tari¤) and a “hidden”
trade policy (e.g., a non-tari¤ barrier) that is imperfectly observed by the other government, and
each government privately observes a signal of the other’s hidden trade policy. Governments attempt to cooperate in this “private monitoring”setting even in the absence of a dispute settlement
system, and a key feature of optimal cooperation is that, after observing a suspicious signal, a
government increases its publicly observed trade policy, which publicly initiates a trade-war phase.
The prospect of a trade-war phase discourages opportunistic behavior with respect to the hidden
policy; however, suspicious signals are sometimes observed even when the hidden trade policy is
set at cooperative levels, and so the trade-war episodes are a feature of optimal cooperation in the
absence of a dispute settlement system. Relative to this benchmark, a dispute settlement system
can facilitate greater cooperation by changing the information structure of the game through its
provision of a public signal and enriching the forms of feasible punishment.
Empirically, a potentially useful environment to examine implications of the WTO’s informationdissemination role may turn out to be the Great Recession of 2008-2009. For despite the highly
synchronized and sudden global collapse in economic activity and trade ‡ows, it is now well understood that a global surge in new trade protection of the scale of even earlier recessions, let alone
the Great Depression of the 1930s, did not occur (Bown and Crowley, 2013b). Given the relatively
moderate trade policy response, it is unsurprising that the WTO has also not been ‡ooded with a
subsequent onslaught of newly initiated disputes. However, one contributing explanation may be
the sharp increase starting in 2009 of the multilateral monitoring e¤orts to improve information
dissemination on trade policy changes, including by the WTO Secretariat (through its Trade Policy
Review Body), the World Bank, and establishment of the independent Global Trade Alert.144
7.2.2

Contract completion

Disputes sometimes arise as a result of disagreement about whether particular legal conditions are
met. Legal scholars especially stress the view that countries invoke dispute settlement to address
instances in which the original terms of the agreement were vague or incomplete, perhaps because
it was too costly to write all possible contingencies into the original agreement. Dispute settlement
may present a forum to address legitimate di¤erences of opinion about what behavior the contract
was intended to induce. We brie‡y describe here research that adopts this perspective.145
Maggi and Staiger (2011) provide a …rst analysis of roles that dispute settlement might play in
a trade agreement modeled as an incomplete contract. Trade takes place between two countries
144

Bown (2011b) provides a more complete discussion of these three enhanced initiatives for additional trade policy
monitoring and surveillance that arose during the Great Recession, with emphasis on motivations underlying the
World Bank’s TTBs information dissemination activities in particular.
145
There is also a growing literature that explores the role of dispute settlement procedures in facilitating ex-post
renegotiation of trade agreements where commitments may be viewed as either property rules or liability rules. See
Maggi and Staiger (forthcoming) where there are no disputes in equilibrium and Beshkar (2010, 2013) and Maggi and
Staiger (2013) where disputes arise in equilibrium. See also Bagwell (2008), Lawrence (2003) and the legal discussion
of Schwartz and Sykes (2002).

89

in a single industry. The importing country has the policy option of free trade or protection, and
makes its choice after both countries and the “court”(i.e., the dispute settlement process) observe
realization of state variables that a¤ect welfare levels. However, it is too costly to describe the
states in an ex-ante contract, and the court does not observe the joint payo¤ to the two countries
under the realization of the state variables. The two countries thus cannot write a complete statecontingent agreement. Maggi and Staiger focus on three forms of contract incompleteness: the
contract may leave gaps, it may be overly rigid, or it may use vague language which leaves the
obligations under the contract ambiguous in some states. The theory explores ways in which the
agreement might articulate various roles for the court, including its degree of “activism,” such as
limiting the court to enforce clearly stated obligations, interpreting ambiguous obligations, …lling
gaps, and modifying clearly stated obligations. The model assumes the court is costly to use and
makes errors in decisions, and the contract and the court mandate are chosen together as part of
the optimal design of the institution. A two-period extended model is also considered to explore
implications of allowing the court to establish precedent.
Maggi and Staiger (2011) derive a number of results assessing di¤erent degrees of court activism.
First, it is never optimal to allow the court to modify obligations that are clearly stated in the contract. Second, as court decisions become more accurate, its mandate changes from non-involvement
(beyond a pure enforcement role) to a more activist role, such as interpreting vague clauses and
even …lling in the contract where it is silent. Third, while precedent can improve e¢ ciency by
reducing expected future litigation costs on issues that would have been litigated in any event,
o¤setting negative e¤ects include the costly increase of additional disputes arising over issues that
would not otherwise have been litigated. Overall, the bene…ts of precedent outweigh the costs when
governments are impatient and when the court is more likely to make mistakes.
Finally, this model can also be used to describe other important features of the disputes that
arise, especially in relation to the characteristics of the court. First, there is a tendency of the court
to exhibit a pro-trade bias in its legal rulings if the litigation costs to the complainant (exporter) are
high relative to the respondent. However, this pattern arises due to selection e¤ects associated with
the importing country being more likely to actually have been at fault in the …rst place. Second, and
following the same intuition as arises in the enforcement literature, the o¤-equilibrium in‡uences of
the court are what generate its bene…cial impacts. Third, and also in parallel with the enforcement
literature, the frequency with which countries trigger disputes provides little information on the
performance of the court or the value of the dispute settlement process to the overall agreement,
a result that occurs in the model because of the interaction between the optimal choice of the
contract and the optimal mandate of the court.
7.2.3

Dispute Settlement Reform Proposals

Despite the apparent success of WTO dispute settlement, there have been a number of proposals for
reform. Here we consider the literature that has evaluated some of these proposals. For the purpose
of evaluation, it is also important to consider why such reforms may be desirable. One concern is
90

that tari¤ retaliation, when implemented, may generate e¢ ciency losses. A second concern may be
the “equity”properties of dispute settlement that arise for countries with bilateral trade imbalances
that may not have a su¢ ciently credible enforcement threat to induce policy compliance.
A …rst proposal is to replace the current system of trade retaliation with a system of …nancial
compensation; this could also be motivated by the realization that …nancial transfers have emerged
in a couple of instances as part of voluntary settlements in actual WTO disputes.146 To explore this
proposal, Limão and Saggi (2008)147 analyze the potential role of “…nes” (…nancial transfers) in a
self-enforcing, repeated-game framework. In order for …nes to support low cooperative tari¤s, they
must be backed by an additional policy instrument that is not controlled by the deviating country.
The natural instrument to consider is a tari¤, and thus tari¤ retaliation remains the central backstop
of the system. Accordingly, Limão and Saggi …nd that a system in which retaliatory tari¤s enforce
the payment of …nes yields no more cooperation than a system that relies directly on retaliatory
tari¤s. While the two systems are equivalent in the absence of disputes, Limão and Saggi argue
that a system with …nes o¤ers an advantage when shocks occur that lead to disputes. The intuition
is simply that …nes are a more e¢ cient transfer instrument.148
Mexico introduced a separate reform proposal based on the idea that countries could be allowed
to trade their right to retaliate to other trading partners in lieu of implementing retaliation themselves (WTO, 2002). This option may be of special interest to smaller countries which perceive
less bene…t from retaliating on their own. Bagwell, Mavroidis and Staiger (2007) consider di¤erent
auction formats to analyze tradeable retaliation rights in a trade agreement setting.149 They begin
with a basic auction, in which two competing importers of the product on which retaliation can take
place bid for the right to retaliate. The basic auction has positive externalities: the losing country
prefers that the other bidding country win and impose a retaliatory tari¤ in comparison to the
scenario in which no retaliation occurs.150 Intuitively, the retaliatory tari¤ imposed by the winning
country lowers the world price of the common import good and thereby generates a terms-of-trade
gain for the losing country. Due to this positive externality, free-riding is a potential concern, and
auction failures (where neither country bids) and misallocations of retaliation rights (due to pooling
at the reserve price) can occur. They then consider an extended auction, in which the respondent
country is allowed to bid and potentially retire the right of retaliation against it. Both positive
and negative externalities can arise in the extended auction, the respondent country always wins,
and the retaliation right is always retired thus without the realization of the ine¢ ciencies. The
extended auction thus suggests a potential means through which monetary compensation might be
146
As a settlement in the US –Upland Cotton dispute, the US agreed to transfer $147.3 million annually as a form of
technical assistance and capacity building to the government of Brazil (USTR, 2010). In the US – Section 110(5) of
the US Copyright Act dispute, the US payed European copyright holders 1.3 million euros annually in compensation.
See Bronckers and van den Broek (2005), which also provides a more complete legal articulation of the proposal.
147
See also Bagwell and Staiger (2005b). Extensions include Limão and Saggi (2013).
148
Limão and Saggi (2008) develop this point in by considering the possibility of unanticipated shocks. Bagwell and
Staiger (2005b) also explore the bene…ts of monetary transfers in a repeated game model, although in their model
(preference) shocks are anticipated and privately observed along the equilibrium path.
149
See also Chen and Potipiti (2010), who derive the optimal auction design for this setting.
150
Bagwell, Mavroidis and Staiger’s (2007) formal analysis is closely related to that of Jehiel and Moldovanu (2000).

91

extended from a large (respondent) country to a small (complainant) country.
Drawing normative inference from these di¤erent auctions requires further thinking about the
underlying motivation of the reform to the enforcement mechanism –e.g., is it to ensure compensation, to encourage respondent compliance with rulings, or to enhance e¢ ciency? The results
suggest that the basic auction generates lower expected revenue for the complainant than the extended auction in which the respondent country is also allowed to participate. On the other hand,
the compliance and e¢ ciency criteria favor the basic auction under some circumstances.

7.3

WTO Dispute Settlement and PTAs

The stumbling-block/building-block literature reviewed in Section 5 indicates that PTA formation
can impact the extent to which multilateral tari¤ cooperation can be achieved in a self-enforcing
agreement. A related but distinct question concerns the relationship between PTA implementation and WTO dispute settlement activity. While there is little formal econometric work assessing
implications of repeated-game models for disputes, there are many examples of actual PTA implementation resulting in policy changes that lead PTA non-members to formally challenge those
policy changes through GATT or WTO disputes. These examples highlight this as a likely area
of continued con‡ict and thus an important area for additional research, especially in light of the
proliferation of “WTO-extra” provisions arising under the new wave of PTAs.
The GATT period was replete with disputes arising after countries took on new PTA commitments involving tari¤s and trade-related policies that led to adjustments of the PTA members’
external trade policy commitments toward non-members. The European Economic Community in
particular faced formal GATT disputes in 1973 after the accession of UK, Ireland and Denmark,
in 1982 after the accession of Greece, and in 1987 after the accession of Spain and Portugal, where
the three disputes were respectively initiated by Canada, the US and Argentina.151
Other and more recent examples of disputes involve new PTA members allegedly adjusting their
non-tari¤ policies toward non-members, both immediately as well as long after implementation of
the PTA, in the latter case due to PTA rules constraining the conduct of policy toward members in
particular. The MERCOSUR tari¤ cuts and customs union between Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay
and Uruguay in the early 1990s provide two case studies.
Argentina’s preferential tari¤ cuts in footwear under MERCOSUR led to an import surge from
Brazil and was the precipitating event behind one important WTO dispute. Argentina’s response to
the preferential import surge was to subsequently impose a safeguard on footwear beginning in 1997.
However, because of a MERCOSUR legal requirement that safeguards cannot be applied against
other PTA members, Argentina exempted imports from Brazil from the policy. Not surprisingly,
the policy failed to stem the import surge from Brazil - though it was e¤ective against imports from
non-members - and the result was that the EU and Indonesia …led a formal WTO dispute against
Argentina. The WTO rulings in the dispute were some of the …rst WTO jurisprudence establishing
151
Hudec (1993) provides an expanded discussion of Canada’s dispute over cereals exports (pp. 460-61), US’s dispute
over fruit exports (pp. 496-498), and Argentina’s dispute over corn and sorghum exports (p. 550).

92

additional conditions under which countries could viably apply safeguard measures.152
A second example escalated from Brazil’s ban on retreaded tire imports in 2000; Brazil later
claimed a public policy motive based on environmental and human health protection. Uruguay
challenged Brazil’s ban under MERCOSUR’s dispute settlement provisions, and the legal ruling required Brazil to remove the ban’s application on retreaded tire imports from MERCOSUR partners.
Brazil’s imports from some of the newly exempted MERCOSUR partners subsequently increased,
and the EU - another exporter of retreaded tires still subject to the Brazilian import ban - …led
a WTO dispute. This dispute also resulted in important WTO jurisprudence – this time for the
overlap of trade and environmental policy (Bown and Trachtman, 2009).

7.4

PTA Dispute Settlement and Deep Integration

While the GATT approach emphasizes shallow integration, many PTAs pursue deep integration
linkages between domestic and trade policies. As we discuss in Section 4.4, these linkages may have
implications for the most-cooperative tari¤s that can be enforced; in particular, Limão’s (2005) work
raises the possibility that optimal cooperation in a linked setting with non-pecuniary international
spillovers could entail a reduction in trade-policy cooperation, if the linked agreement “borrows”
enforcement power from trade policy to achieve non-trade objectives.153 In this section, we focus on
a related but distinct theme and consider PTA disputes that are associated with the enforcement
of non-trade policies. We regard this area as an especially promising area for future research.
Our discussion is motivated by recent developments. For the …rst time, countries are now using
trade policy to explicitly enforce some of the new, non-trade policy commitments that countries
have undertaken bilaterally, outside of the WTO, in other agreements. Some of these examples
stem directly from the “trade and...” provisions - such as environmental or labor standards - that
were introduced into the public lexicon and came to prominence in the 1990s when NAFTA was
…rst under consideration (Bhagwati and Hudec, 1996). We describe three recent examples here.
In 2010, the US initiated its …rst formal dispute for a trading partner’s failure to implement suf…ciently high labor standards that it had committed to uphold as part of the PTA. As background,
the CAFTA-DR that the US signed in 2004 included a number of “WTO-extra” provisions of the
kind described by Horn, Mavroidis, and Sapir (2010) - including labor standards, environmental
standards, and foreign direct investment provisions - that would subsequently be enforceable under
the PTA’s own dispute settlement procedures. When Guatemala allegedly failed to enforce its own
labor laws, the US initiated a formal CAFTA-DR dispute (USTR, 2011). Such a dispute has the
152

Bown, Karacaovali and Tovar (2015, pp. 449-452) discuss the Argentina – Footwear dispute, which is also noteworthy as its legal decisions resulted in the important WTO jurisprudence establishing the principle of “parallelism”
whereby safeguard-imposing countries became required to only impose safeguard measures against trading partners
whose imports they had actually included in the safeguard’s injury investigation. We note that there are also important examples of countries facing WTO disputes brought by PTA partners after they have imposed a safeguard in a
way that increased the level of import protection against PTA partners relative to non-partners. An example is the
Dominican Republic - Safeguard Measures dispute; for an analysis see Bown and Wu (2014).
153
There are many high-pro…le examples of countries “borrowing” enforcement through trade retaliation to achieve
other objectives, including countries implementing trade sanctions for allegedly political or national security purposes
(Hufbauer et al., 2009) – e.g., those imposed recently on North Korea, Iran, and Russia.

93

potential to escalate to tari¤ retaliation.
The second example stems from Mexico …ling, winning, and retaliating after a NAFTA dispute
over the US failure to liberalize its market for commercial trucking services due to alleged public
safety concerns. As background, when NAFTA was implemented in 1994, the US agreed to remove
restrictions on commercial truck and cargo shipping services provided by Mexican …rms. However,
the US announced in 1995 that it would not remove the restrictions out of alleged safety concerns
that the Mexican trucks posed for the US public. Mexico initiated a formal dispute under NAFTA
and in 2001 a NAFTA Panel found against the US restrictions. After eight years of the US
failing to implement the Panel recommendations, Mexico announced it would seek compensation by
implementing NAFTA-authorized tari¤ retaliation over more than $2 billion of imports. Ultimately
this retaliation on US exporters galvanized su¢ cient political pressure within the US to allow for
policy reform in 2011 whereby Mexican trucks were allowed to service the US market and Mexico
ended its period of retaliation (Department of Commerce, 2011).
The third example involves the US implementing trade sanctions in 2012 against Argentina by
removing the lower tari¤ preferences the US had previously o¤ered under the Generalized System of
Preference (GSP) program. The US does not have a PTA with Argentina, and the trade retaliation
did not follow from a formal dispute, and it was not authorized by any particular dispute settlement
process. The source of friction between the two countries is not even a trade matter; instead, it
stems from a dispute over an alleged expropriation of US investments in Argentina, and as such
is covered by a bilateral investment treaty between the two countries. The investment dispute
was litigated under the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID), which
determined that Argentina should compensate US investors for damages with a …nancial transfer.
The implementation of US trade retaliation beginning in 2012 was an attempt to enforce Argentina’s
foreign direct investment commitments and was due to Argentina’s failure to pay roughly $300
million that it owed US investors since 2005-6 (USTR, 2012).
The Guatemala (labor standards), US-Mexico (trucking services and safety standards), and
Argentina (foreign direct investment) examples highlight the need for further research to evaluate
the dispute settlement implications of existing “deeper integration”trade agreements. This is particularly evident if these three recent examples also signal a tendency for such agreements to move
over time beyond “soft” law and toward “hard” law, where deep integration policy commitments
could then expose highly sensitive behind-the-border measures not only to litigation under formal
dispute settlement, but also to enforcement through tari¤ retaliation.

7.5

Summary

Our review highlights central features of the WTO dispute settlement system, the theoretical frameworks that attempt to identify a speci…c role for dispute settlement procedures, the complicated
relationship between WTO dispute settlement and PTA implementation, and some aspects of PTA
dispute settlement in the context of deeper-integration initiatives. In this concluding section, we
brie‡y re‡ect on some of the relative merits of the WTO’s multilateral dispute settlement system.
94

While WTO dispute settlement is widely praised, it is challenging to determine a solid benchmark against which to measure its success. Certainly the willingness of member governments to
utilize WTO dispute settlement procedures to examine disputed policies is suggestive that these
procedures play an important role. Furthermore, it is also the case that for many bilateral trading
relationships, the WTO’s multilateral system may be the only game in town. Indeed, one half to
two thirds of world trade occurs between countries that are not in a common PTA and thus between
countries without an obvious alternative forum under which to resolve their potential disputes.154
One possible relevant benchmark is to compare the current WTO dispute settlement system to
its most immediate predecessor, i.e., the multilateral dispute settlement system under the GATT
in the late 1980s. The GATT system, which was relatively toothless and based more on diplomacy
than law, spurred the rogue path of unilateralism that the US undertook through its Section 301
actions during the period (Bhagwati and Hudec, 1990). US unilateralism was a signal of its strong
displeasure with the old system and at least partially served to illustrate what a world without
binding multilateral disciplines could look like. Ultimately these events contributed to ushering in
the WTO’s new dispute settlement system in 1995, and the evolving system has arguably performed
well in comparison to the GATT system.
A second possible benchmark is to compare the WTO dispute settlement system to systems
emerging in PTAs. In principle, PTA systems might be customized to better address the deepintegration initiatives that these agreements increasingly pursue. However, it is far from clear that
dispute settlement in PTAs can handle the job on its own. First, there are a number of cases
in which purely bilateral issues arising between partners in PTAs with relatively well-functioning
dispute settlement systems (e.g., NAFTA) could not be resolved internally and ultimately spilled
over into WTO dispute settlement anyway. Second, there are other examples (e.g., MERCOSUR),
in which PTA dispute settlement decisions pushed PTA members to make policy choices that
imposed externalities on non-members, thus leading those non-members to initiate WTO disputes.
While the empirical record of PTA dispute settlement use is scant, such examples at least suggest
that PTA dispute settlement may cause as many problems as they help resolve.
More research is required to better understand the tradeo¤s, incentives, and forces also at work
at the particular intersection of preferential and multilateral commitments. Such research may be
of special value now, since it is unlikely that a single overarching rule - such as, ‘wherever there
might be a con‡ict in commitments or obligations, WTO law dominates PTA law’- can be relied
upon. Indeed, some of the major proponents of new obligations arising under PTAs - such as the
US and EU - are also some of the most signi…cant litigants and contributors to WTO jurisprudence.
As a thought experiment, consider once again the US-Guatemala dispute over labor standards or
the US-Argentina retaliation over investment provisions and compensation. When would it make
sense for Guatemala or Argentina to use the WTO to challenge potential US trade sanctions as a
violation of its WTO commitments, since there are no explicit WTO provisions authorizing the US
154

The WTO (2011, p. 64) reports that 65 percent (49 percent) of world trade in 2008 was extra-PTA trade
excluding (including) the EU. The trade included in the construction of these ratios does include some trade between
non-WTO members, so not all of it would therefore be subject to WTO dispute settlement.

95

to raise its tari¤s for such reasons in the …rst place?
Together these considerations lend support to the WTO dispute settlement system, but it is clear
that much more research is needed.155 The relative merits of multilateral and preferential dispute
settlement systems is thus an important subject for further theoretical and empirical analysis.

8

Conclusion

The world trading system seems to be at a crossroads. The emphasis of international cooperation
has apparently experienced a momentum shift away from the multilateral and nondiscriminatory
framework of the GATT/WTO in favor of discriminatory arenas under new PTAs, and away from
negotiations emphasizing shallow integration and toward negotiations stressing increasingly deep
integration. Understanding the implications of these shifts is important. What is on the line is a
choice over which international institutions will set the future rules of globalization and shape the
trade-o¤s we face in a globalized world economy.
The best path forward may depend on how we have arrived at this particular crossroads. In
broad terms, there are two possibilities suggested by the trade agreements literature.
One possibility is that fundamental changes in the global economy, such as the rise in global
supply chains and o¤shoring and the emergence of BRICS, have somehow a¤ected the kinds of
rules needed for international economic cooperation. According to this possibility, countries must
now negotiate deeper constraints in what traditionally was considered the realm of domestic policy
making; and as a consequence, greater restrictions on national sovereignty are now an inevitable
feature of globalization, with PTAs the most e¢ cacious institution for carrying out the task.
The second possibility is that changes in the global economy have created new challenges for
the WTO, but the rules needed for international economic cooperation are still fundamentally the
same. Under this possibility, the GATT/WTO approach to shallow integration may be in trouble,
but its problems are …xable provided that the WTO is supported and its approach strengthened.
On balance, our review of the literature to date favors the second possibility. The WTO is
not passé. Subject to some caveats, as an institution the WTO appears to be structured in a
way that is likely to encourage policy outcomes that are viewed as e¢ ciency enhancing by WTO
member governments. This position is only strengthened when also taking into consideration the
WTO’s relatively successful track record of resolving bilateral frictions through its system of dispute
settlement. At the same time, our review also suggests some weaknesses in the WTO approach
that could be related to some of the current challenges that it faces. It is likely that the task of
shallow integration is not yet completed and important work remains to be done, especially for
some of the major emerging economies and less developed countries. However, creative adaptations
155

An additional area in which research is needed is investor-state dispute settlement (ISDS), whereby private …rms
in one country have direct access to a separate court system to defend their foreign direct investment from potential
government expropriation. One example of a dispute in which ISDS procedures were triggered is the case that
US investors took against Argentina under the ICSID described above. Sykes (2005b) provides an introduction to
bilateral investment treaties (BITs), the distinctive form of dispute settlement arising under such agreements, and
how this di¤ers from the system typically arising under trade agreements.

96

to the GATT/WTO’s historically successful principles of reciprocity and nondiscrimination could
seemingly be re-deployed - albeit in a more guided and targeted way - to address these challenges.
While our review of the literature to date broadly supports the GATT/WTO shallow integration
approach, we also highlight research that raises important caveats. As we discuss, the presence of
non-pecuniary international externalities may motivate deeper forms of integration, and it is possible that governments can enforce greater overall cooperation in an agreement that links trade and
domestic policies.156 We also describe research indicating that the presence of private information
or commitment problems may provide rationales for certain forms of deep integration. As well,
some recent research indicates that the e¤ectiveness of the GATT/WTO shallow integration approach may be undermined by o¤shoring and its implications for international price determination.
These research areas are at early stages, however, and their full implications are uncertain. As
such, they represent especially important areas for future research.
Our review also highlights some important considerations that have received relatively little
attention in the formal trade agreements literature. First, actual negotiations may entail bargaining
frictions, which are plausibly higher for negotiations that involve many countries and complex
issues. Second, gains from international economic cooperation in certain policies may take the
form of coordination gains.157 Further work on these topics may o¤er new insights about deep
integration initiatives and the possible bene…ts of negotiations among smaller groups of countries.
Finally, the e¤ect of deep integration initiatives on third-party countries, and especially developing
countries, is an important and under-explored direction for additional research.158
We close our review with a brief discussion of one potential approach to strengthening the
WTO in response to these challenges that has received recent attention in the literature, namely,
the possibility of pursuing critical mass agreements (CMAs) or plurilateral agreements (PAs). Such
agreements can be thought of as a hybrid between the preferential trade agreements and what has
otherwise been the WTO’s “Single Undertaking”approach.159 A CMA is de…ned as an agreement
156

Indeed, the WTO TRIPS agreement is a deep integration agreement and a possible example of this sort of linkage
within the WTO. As we discuss in footnote 1, we do not include in our survey the literature that investigates the
purpose and design of the TRIPS agreement, as it is not a market access agreement. Recent work adopting TRIPS as
the focus includes Maskus (2000), Grossman and Lai (2004), Scotchmer (2004) and Geng and Saggi (2014). Similarly,
we do not address the possible role of trade agreements with regard to other non-pecuniary international externalities,
such as global warming, human rights, and geopolitics and global security.
157
See, e.g., Hoekman (2014) on possible coordination gains in the context of the Trade Facilitation Agreement.
158
We mention here two further important issues for future research. The …rst issue concerns the extent to which
power asymmetries between developed and developing countries impact deep integration negotiations among participating countries more readily in PTAs than in the WTO. The second issue is whether deep integration PTAs
facilitate or hinder deeper integration at the multilateral level. Deep integration PTAs might o¤er laboratories in
which to discover e¤ective disciplines and thereby facilitate multilateral e¤orts, but they might also generate incompatible standards across PTAs that “lock in” members and thereby inhibit multilateral harmonization. For further
discussion of these and related issues, see Bhagwati, Krishna and Panagariya (2014), Trebilcock (2014) and WTO
(2011, p. 182).
159
Plurilateral agreements were a common outcome of GATT rounds prior to the Uruguay Round. For example, the
conclusion of the Tokyo Round in 1979 led to a number of plurilateral agreements adopted mainly by industrialized
countries, in issue areas such as subsidies and countervailing measures, technical barriers to trade (standards), import
licensing procedures, government procurement, customs valuation, antidumping, bovine meat, dairy, and trade in civil
aircraft. The Kennedy Round of negotiations in the 1960s also brought forward a plurilateral code on antidumping.

97

in a WTO-covered area between a subset of WTO member countries whereby, because WTO
disciplines apply, the bene…ts the members o¤ered to one another under the CMA must be extended
to all other WTO members on an MFN basis. In order to prevent free riding, CMAs therefore may
be only likely to occur between major subsets of large countries. The main example of a successfully
concluded CMA occurring under the WTO is the 1997 Information Technology Agreement which cut
tari¤s to zero in products covered under the agreement, and for which the original negotiations were
concluded between only 29 WTO members, though this has subsequently grown to more than 70. A
PA, on the other hand, is an agreement between a subset of WTO member countries in an area where
either WTO disciplines are not applied (“WTO-extra”) or where they are extended (“WTO-plus”),
and to which therefore the bene…ts o¤ered to one another would not need to be extended to other
WTO members. Examples under the WTO include the Agreement on Government Procurement
and the Agreement on Civil Aviation.160
As Hoekman and Mavroidis (2013, 2014) point out, PAs and PTAs have important similarities and di¤erences.161 Similarities include that both can be applied on a non-MFN basis without
violating WTO rules and both seem to be going beyond the shallow integration approach of traditional GATT/WTO disciplines and into deep integration. On the other hand, important di¤erences
may make PAs more appealing than PTAs from the perspective of the multilateral system. First,
PAs are “open” in that other WTO members should (in principle) be allowed an explicit path to
accede to the PA in the future, whereas PTAs do not typically have an open accession process
for potentially interested trading partners. Second, attempts to bring PAs into the WTO system
would potentially make the content of these agreements much more transparent, which may be
especially important for non-signatory countries. Third, problems arising between PA signatories
would be addressed through litigation taking place under the WTO, thus more likely completing
the contract in a coherent way, as opposed to the potential fragmentation of international jurisprudence that might otherwise arise under PTA dispute settlement provisions. Combined, Hoekman
and Mavroidis suggest these features of PAs could make them less likely to impose externalities
on third countries than PTAs. Nevertheless, the full theoretical implications of such alternative
approaches have yet to be fully explored by the literature, and thus further analysis along these
lines is a ripe area for additional research.

9

References

Aghion, Philippe, Pol Antràs, and Elhanan Helpman. 2007. “Negotiating free trade.” Journal of International Economics 73(1): 1-30.
160

Negotiations using CMA/PA approaches in new issue areas include attempts to liberalize trade in environmental
goods and additional liberalization in services under a proposed TiSA (Trade in Services Agreement). Negotiations
outside of the WTO among a small subset of mostly high-income countries have taken place for additional intellectual
property rights protection and resulted in the anti-counterfeiting agreement (ACTA).
161
For additional discussions of plurilateral agreements, or what is sometimes referred to as potential “variable
geometry” under the WTO, see also Lawrence (2006), Levy (2006) and Trebilcock (2014).

98

Agur, Itai. 2008. “The U.S. trade de…cit, the decline of the WTO and the rise of regionalism.” Global
Economy Journal 8(3): 1-34.
Allee, Todd and Manfred Elsig. 2015. “Dispute Settlement Provisions in PTAs: New Data and New
Concepts”In Trade Cooperation: The Purpose, Design and E¤ ects of Preferential Trade Agreements,
edited by Andreas Dür and Manfred Elsig, 319-352. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Amador, Manuel and Kyle Bagwell. 2012. “Tari¤ revenue and tari¤ caps.” American Economic Review:
Papers and Proceedings 102(3): 459-65.
Amador, Manuel and Kyle Bagwell. 2013. “The theory of optimal delegation with an application to tari¤
caps.” Econometrica 81(4): 1541-99.
Anderson, James E. and Eric van Wincoop. 2002. “Borders, trade and welfare.”In Brookings Trade Forum
2001, edited by Dani Rodrik and Susan M. Collins, 207-44. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
Anderson, Kym, Gordon Rausser, and Johan Swinnen. 2013. “Political Economy of Public Policies:
Insights from Distortions to Agricultural and Food Markets.” Journal of Economic Literature 51(2):
423-477.
Antràs, Pol and Robert W. Staiger. 2012a. “Trade agreements and the nature of price determination.”
American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 102(3): 470-6.
Antràs, Pol and Robert W. Staiger. 2012b. “O¤shoring and the role of trade agreements.” American
Economic Review 102(7): 3140-3183
Antràs, Pol and Stephen R. Yeaple. 2014. “Multinational …rms and the structure of international trade.”
In Handbook of International Economics, edited by Gita Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman, and Kenneth
Rogo¤, Volume 4. Amsterdam, NL: Elsevier.
Athey, Susan and Kyle Bagwell. 2001. “Optimal collusion with private information.” Rand Journal of
Economics 32(3): 428-465.
Bacchetta, Marc and Roberta Piermartini. 2011. “The value of bindings.” Sta¤ Working Paper ERSD2011-13, World Trade Organization.
Bagwell, Kyle. 2008. “Remedies in the WTO: an economic perspective.” In The WTO: Governance,
Dispute Settlement & Developing Countries, edited by Merit E. Janow, Victoria J. Donaldson and
Alan Yanovich, 733-770. Huntington, New York: Juris Publishing.
Bagwell, Kyle. 2009. “Self-enforcing trade agreements and private information.” NBER Working Paper
No. 14812.
Bagwell, Kyle and Seung Hoon Lee. 2015. “Trade policy under monopolistic competition with …rm selection.” Mimeogr., Stanford University.

99

Bagwell Kyle, Petros C. Mavroidis, and Robert W. Staiger. 2002. “It’s a question of market access.”
American Journal of International Law 96(1): 56-76.
Bagwell, Kyle, Petros C. Mavroidis, and Robert W. Staiger. 2007. “Auctioning countermeasures in the
WTO.” Journal of International Economics 73(2): 309-32.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 1990. “A Theory of Managed Trade.” American Economic Review
80(4): 779-95.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 1994. “The sensitivity of strategic and corrective R&D policy in
oligopolistic industries.” Journal of International Economics 36(1-2): 133-50.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 1997a. “Multilateral tari¤ cooperation during the formation of free
trade areas.” International Economic Review 38(2): 291-319.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 1997b. “Multilateral tari¤ cooperation during the formation of
customs unions.” Journal of International Economics 42(1-2): 91-123.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 1997c. “Collusion over the business cycle.” Rand Journal of Economics 28(1): 82-106.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 1998. “Will preferential agreements undermine the multilateral
trading system?” Economic Journal 108(449): 1162-82.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 1999a. “An Economic Theory of GATT.” American Economic
Review 89(1): 215-48.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 1999b. “Regionalism and Multilateral Tari¤ Cooperation.” In
International Trade Policy and the Paci…c Rim, edited by John Piggott and Alan Woodland, 157-85.
London: MacMillan.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2001a. “Reciprocity, non-discrimination and preferential agreements
in the multilateral trading system.” European Journal of Political Economy 17(2): 281-325.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2001b. “Domestic policies, national sovereignty and international
economic institutions.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(2): 519-62.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2001c. “Strategic Trade, Competitive Industries and Agricultural
Trade Disputes.” Economics and Politics 13(2): 113-28.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2002. The Economics of the World Trading System. Cambridge,
MA: The MIT Press.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2003. “Protection and the Business Cycle.” Advances in Economic
Analysis & Policy 3(1): Article 3 (available at http://www.bepress.com/bejeap/advances/vol3/iss1/art3/)

100

Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2005a. “Multilateral Trade Negotiations, Bilateral Opportunism
and the Rules of GATT/WTO.” Journal of International Economics 67(2): 268-94.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2005b. “Enforcement, Private Political Pressure and the GATT/WTO
Escape Clause.” Journal of Legal Studies 34(2): 471-513.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2006. “Will International Rules on Subsidies Disrupt the World
Trading System?” American Economic Review 96(3): 877-95.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2010a. “The WTO: Theory and Practice.” Annual Review of
Economics 2: 223-56.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2010b. “Backward Stealing and Forward Manipulation in the
WTO.” Journal of International Economics 82(1): 49-62.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2011. “What do trade negotiators negotiate about? Empirical
evidence from the World Trade Organization.” American Economic Review 101(4): 1238-73.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2012a. “Pro…t Shifting and Trade Agreements in Imperfectly
Competitive Markets.” International Economic Review 53(4): 1067-1104.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2012b. “The economics of trade agreements in the linear cournot
delocation model.” Journal of International Economics 88(1): 32-46.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2014. “Can the Doha Round be a Development Round? Setting
a Place at the Table.” In Globalization in an Age of Crisis: Multilateral Economic Cooperation in
the Twenty-First Century, edited by Robert C. Feenstra and Alan M. Taylor, 91-124. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press for the NBER.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2015. “Delocation and trade agreements in imperfectly competitive
markets.” Research in Economics 69(2): 132-56.
Bagwell, Kyle, Robert W. Staiger and Alan O. Sykes. 2013. “Border Instruments.”In Legal and Economic
Principles of World Trade Law, edited by Henrik Horn and Petros C. Mavroidis, 68-204. New York:
Cambridge University Press for the American Law Institute.
Bagwell, Kyle and Alan O. Sykes. 2004. “Chile - Price Band System and Safeguard Measures Relating to
Certain Agriculture Products.” World Trade Review 3(3): 507-28.
Bagwell, Kyle and Alan O. Sykes. 2005. “India - measures a¤ecting the automotive sector.” In The WTO
Case Law of 2002: The American Law Institute Reporters’Studies, edited by Henrik Horn and Petros
C. Mavroidis, 158-178. New York: Cambridge University Press for the American Law Institute.
Bajona, Claustre and Josh Ederington. 2011. “Domestic Policies, Hidden Protection and the GATT/WTO.”
Mimeogr., Ryerson University.

101

Baldwin, Richard. 1987. “Politically realistic objective functions and trade policy PROFs and tari¤s.”
Economics Letters 24(3): 287-290.
Baldwin, Richard. 2014. “WTO 2.0: governance of 21st century trade.” The Review of International
Organizations 9(2): 261-283.
Battigalli, Pierpaolo and Giovanni Maggi. 2003. “International agreements on product standards: an
incomplete contracting theory.” NBER Working Paper No. 9533.
Beshkar, Mostafa. 2010. “Trade skirmishes and safeguards: a theory of the WTO dispute settlement
process.” Journal of International Economics 82(1): 35-48.
Beshkar, Mostafa. 2013. “Arbitration and renegotiation in trade agreements.” Mimeogr., Indiana.
Beshkar, Mostafa and Eric W. Bond. 2014. “Cap and escape in trade agreements.”Mimeogr., Vanderbilt.
Beshkar, Mostafa, Eric W. Bond, and Youngwoo Rho. Forthcoming. “Tari¤ binding and overhang: theory
and evidence.” Journal of International Economics.
Bhagwati, Jagdish. 2008. Termites in the Trading System: How Preferential Agreements Undermine Free
Trade. Oxford University Press.
Bhagwati, Jagdish and Robert E. Hudec, Eds. 1990. Aggressive Unilateralism: America’s 301 Trade Policy
and the World Trading System. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Bhagwati, Jagdish and Robert E. Hudec, Eds. 1996. Fair Trade and Harmonization: Prerequisites for Free
Trade?

Volumes I and II. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

Bhagwati, Jagdish, Pravin Krishna and Arvind Panagariya. 2014. “The World Trade System: Trends and
Challenges.” Mimeogr., Columbia.
Bhagwati, Jagdish and V. K. Ramaswami. 1963. “Domestic distortions, tari¤s and the theory of optimum
subsidy.” Journal of Political Economy 71(1): 44-50.
Blanchard, Emily J. 2007. “Foreign direct investment, endogenous tari¤s, and preferential trade agreements.” BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 7.
Blanchard, Emily J. 2010. “Reevaluating the role of trade agreements: Does investment globalization make
the WTO obsolete?” Journal of International Economics 82(1): 63-72.
Blanchard, Emily J. and Xenia Matschke. forthcoming. “US multinationals and preferential market access.”
Review of Economics and Statistics.
Blonigen, Bruce A. and Chad P. Bown. 2003. “Antidumping and retaliation threats.” Journal of International Economics 60(2): 249-73.

102

Blonigen, Bruce A. and Thomas J. Prusa. 2003. “Antidumping.” In Handbook of International Trade,
edited by E. Kwan Choi and James Harrigan, 251-284. Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishers.
Bond. Eric W., Raymond G. Riezman and Constantinos Syropoulos. 2004. “A strategic and welfare
theoretic analysis of free trade areas.” Journal of International Economics 64: 1-27.
Bond, Eric W. and Constantinos Syropoulos. 1996a. “The size of trading blocs: Market power and world
welfare e¤ects.” Journal of International Economics 40(3-4): 411-37.
Bond, Eric W. and Constantinos Syropoulos. 1996b. “Trading Blocs and the Sustainability of InterRegional Cooperation.” In The New Transatlantic Economy, edited by Matthew Canzoneri, Wilfred
Ethier, and Vittorio Grilli, 118-141. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Bond, Eric. W., Constantinos Syropoulos and L. Alan Winters. 2001. “Deepening of regional integration
and multilateral trade agreements.” Journal of International Economics 53(2): 335-61.
Bown, Chad P. 2002. “The Economics of Trade Disputes, the GATT’s Article XXIII and the WTO’s
Dispute Settlement Understanding.” Economics and Politics 14(3): 283-323.
Bown, Chad P. 2004a. “Trade policy under the GATT/WTO: empirical evidence of the equal treatment
rule.” Canadian Journal of Economics 37(3): 678-720.
Bown, Chad P. 2004b. “Trade Disputes and the Implementation of Protection under the GATT: An
Empirical Assessment.” Journal of International Economics 62(2): 263-294.
Bown, Chad P. 2004c. “On the Economic Success of GATT/WTO Dispute Settlement.” Review of Economics and Statistics 86(3): 811-823.
Bown, Chad P. 2005a. “Trade remedies and World Trade Organization dispute settlement: why are so few
challenged?” Journal of Legal Studies 34(2): 515-555.
Bown, Chad P. 2005b. “Participation in WTO dispute settlement: complainants, interested parties and
free riders.” World Bank Economic Review 19(2): 287-310.
Bown, Chad P. 2009. Self-Enforcing Trade: Developing Countries and WTO Dispute Settlement. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Bown, Chad P. 2010. “China’s WTO Entry: Antidumping, Safeguards, and Dispute Settlement.” In
China’s Growing Role in World Trade, edited by Robert C. Feenstra and Shang-Jin Wei, 281-337.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press for the NBER.
Bown, Chad P. 2011a. “Taking Stock of Antidumping, Safeguards and Countervailing Duties, 1990-2009.”
The World Economy 34(12): 1955-1998.
Bown, Chad P. 2011b. “Introduction.” In The Great Recession and Import Protection: The Role of
Temporary Trade Barriers, edited by Chad P. Bown, 1-51. London, UK: CEPR and World Bank.

103

Bown, Chad P. 2014.

Temporary Trade Barriers Database. The World Bank. Available at http:/econ.

worldbank.org/ttbd/, last accessed July 25, 2014.
Bown, Chad P. and Meredith A. Crowley. 2006. “Policy externalities: how U.S. antidumping a¤ects
Japanese exports to the EU.” European Journal of Political Economy 22(3): 696-714.
Bown, Chad P. and Meredith A. Crowley. 2007. “Trade de‡ection and trade depression.” Journal of
International Economics 72(1): 176-201.
Bown, Chad P. and Meredith A. Crowley. 2010. “China’s Export Growth and the China Safeguard:
Threats to the World Trading System?” Canadian Journal of Economics 43(4): 1353-1388.
Bown, Chad P. and Meredith A. Crowley. 2013a. “Self-Enforcing Trade Agreements: Evidence from
Time-Varying Trade Policy.” American Economic Review 103(2): 1071-1090.
Bown, Chad P. and Meredith A. Crowley. 2013b. “Import Protection, Business Cycles, and Exchange
Rates: Evidence From the Great Recession.” Journal of International Economics 90(1): 50-64.
Bown, Chad P. and Meredith A. Crowley. 2014. “Emerging Economies, Trade Policy, and Macroeconomic
Shocks.” Journal of Development Economics 111: 261-273.
Bown, Chad P. and Bernard M. Hoekman. 2008. “Developing Countries and Enforcement of Trade Agreements: Why Dispute Settlement Is Not Enough.” Journal of World Trade 42(1): 177-203.
Bown, Chad P., Baybars Karacaovali, and Patricia Tovar. 2015. “What Do We Know About Preferential
Trade Agreements and Temporary Trade Barriers?” In Trade Cooperation: The Purpose, Design
and E¤ ects of Preferential Trade Agreements, edited by Andreas Dür and Manfred Elsig, 433-462.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Bown, Chad P. and Petros C. Mavroidis, Eds. 2013.

The WTO Case Law of 2011. Cambridge, UK:

Cambridge University Press.
Bown, Chad P. and Joost Pauwelyn, Eds. 2010. The Law, Economics and Politics of Retaliation in WTO
Dispute Settlement. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Bown, Chad P. and Thomas J. Prusa. 2011. “U.S. Antidumping: Much Ado About Zeroing.”In Un…nished
Business? The WTO’s Doha Agenda, edited by William J. Martin and Aaditya Mattoo, 355-392.
London, UK: CEPR and World Bank.
Bown, Chad P. and Kara M. Reynolds. 2015. “Trade Flows and Trade Disputes.” Review of International
Organizations 10(2): 145-177.
Bown, Chad P. and Michele Ruta. 2010. “The Economics of Permissible WTO Retaliation.”In The Law,
Economics and Politics of Retaliation in WTO Dispute Settlement, edited by Chad P. Bown and Joost
Pauwelyn, 149-193. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

104

Bown, Chad P. and Alan O. Sykes. 2008. “The Zeroing Issue: A Critical Analysis of Softwood V.” World
Trade Review 7(1): 121-142.
Bown, Chad P. and Patricia Tovar. 2011. “Trade Liberalization, Antidumping, and Safeguards: Evidence
from India’s Tari¤ Reform.” Journal of Development Economics 96(1): 115-125.
Bown, Chad P. and Joel P. Trachtman. 2009. “Brazil – Measures A¤ ecting Imports of Retreaded Tyres: A
Balancing Act.” World Trade Review 8(1): 85-135.
Bown, Chad P. and Mark Wu. 2014. “Safeguards and the Perils of Preferential Trade Agreements: Dominican Republic - Safeguard Measures.” World Trade Review 13(2): 179-227.
Brainard, Lael. 1994. “Last one out wins: trade policy in an international exit game.” International
Economic Review 35(1): 151-72.
Brander, James A. 1995. “Strategic trade policy.”In Handbook of International Economics, edited by Gene
M. Grossman and Kenneth Rogo¤, 3: 1395-1455. Amsterdam, NL: North-Holland.
Brander, James A. and Barbara Spencer. 1981. “Tari¤s and the extraction of foreign monopoly rents under
potential entry.” Canadian Journal of Economics 14(3): 371-89.
Brander, James A. and Barbara Spencer. 1984. “Tari¤ Protection and Imperfect Competition.”In Monopolistic Competition and Product Di¤ erentiation and International Trade, edited by Henryk Kierzkowski,
194-206. New York: Oxford Economic Press.
Brander, James A. and Barbara Spencer. 1985. “Export subsidies and market share rivalry.” Journal of
International Economics 18(1-2): 83-100.
Brock, William A. and Stephen P. Magee. 1978. “The Economics of Special Interest Politics.” American
Economic Review 68(2): 246-250.
Broda, Christian, Nuno Limão, and David E. Weinstein. 2008. “Optimal tari¤s and market power: the
evidence.” American Economic Review 98(5): 2032-65.
Bronckers, Marco and Naboth van den Broek. 2005. “Financial Compensation in the WTO: Improving
the Remedies of WTO Dispute Settlement.” Journal of International Economic Law 8(1): 101-126.
Brou, Daniel and Michele Ruta. 2013. “A commitment theory of subsidy agreements.” BE Journal of
Economic Analysis & Policy 13(1): 239-270.
Cadot, Olivier, Jaime de Melo and Marcelo Olarreaga. 1999. “Regional integration and lobbying for tari¤s
against non-members.” International Economic Review 40(3): 635-57
Caliendo, Lorenzo and Fernando Parro. 2015. “Estimates of the trade and welfare e¤ects of NAFTA.”
Review of Economic Studies 82(1): 1-44.

105

Calvo-Pardo, Hector, Caroline Freund, and Emanuel Ornelas. 2011. “The ASEAN Free Trade Agreement:
Impact on Trade Flows and External Trade Barriers.” In Costs and Bene…ts of Economic Integration
in Asia, edited by Robert J. Barro and Jong-Wha Lee, 157-186. Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press.
Caplin, Andrew and Kala Krishna. 1988. “Tari¤s and the most-favored-nation clause: A game-theoretic
approach.” Seoul Journal of Economics 1(3): 267-89.
Carmichael, Calum M. 1987. “The control of export credit subsidies and its welfare consequences.”Journal
of International Economics 23(1-2): 1-19.
Caves, Richard E. 1976. “Economic models of political choice: Canada’s tari¤ structure.”Canadian Journal
of Economics 9(2): 278-300.
Chang, Pao-Li and Myoung-Jae Lee. 2011. “The WTO Trade E¤ect.”Journal of International Economics.
85(1): 53-71.
Chang, Won and L. Alan Winters. 2002. “How regional blocs a¤ect excluded countries: the price e¤ects
of MERCOSUR.” American Economic Review 92(4): 889-904.
Chase, Claude, Alan Yanovich, Jo-Ann Crawford, and Pamela Ugaz. 2013. “Mapping of Dispute Settlement
Mechanisms in Regional Trade Agreements: Innovative or Variations on a Theme?” WTO Sta¤
Working Paper, No. ERSD-2013-07.
Chen, Bo and Tanapong Potipiti. 2010. “Optimal selling mechanisms with countervailing positive externalities and an application to tradable retaliation in the WTO.” Journal of Mathematical Economics
46(5): 825-43.
Chen, Maggie X. and Aaditya Mattoo. 2008. “Regionalism in standards: good or bad for trade?”Canadian
Journal of Economics 41(3): 838-63.
Choi, Jay Pil. 1995. “Optimal Tari¤s and the Choice of Technology: Discriminatory Tari¤s vs. the Most
Favored Nation Clause.” Journal of International Economics 38(1-2): 143-60.
Clausing, Kimberly A.. “Trade creation and trade diversion in the Canada-United States Free Trade
Agreement.” Canadian Journal of Economics 34(3): 678-96.
Copeland, Brian R. 1990. “Strategic interaction among nations: negotiable and non-negotiable trade
barriers.” Canadian Journal of Economics 23(1): 84-108.
Corden, W. Max. 1971. The Theory of Protection. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Costinot, Arnaud. 2008. “A comparative institutional analysis of agreements on product standards.”
Journal of International Economics 75(1): 197-213.
Costinot, Arnaud, Dave Donaldson, Jonathan Vogel and Iván Werning. 2015. “Comparative advantage
and optimal trade policy.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 130(2): 659-702.

106

Crowley, Meredith A. 2011. “Cyclical dumping and US antidumping protection: 1980-2001.” Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago Working Paper : WP-2007-21.
Curzon, Gerard. 1965. Multilateral Commercial Diplomacy: The General Agreement on Tari¤ s and Trade
and Its Impact on National Commercial Policies and Techniques. London, U.K.: Michael Joseph.
Dai, Mian, Yotov, Yoto V., and Thomas Zylkin. 2013. “On the trade diversion e¤ects of Free Trade
Agreements.” Economics Letters 122(2): 321-325.
Dam, Kenneth W. 1970.

The GATT: Law and International Economic Organization.

Chicago, IL:

University of Chicago Press.
Damuri, Yose Rizal. 2012. “How Preferential are Preferential Trade Agreements?: Analysis of Product
Exclusions in PTAs.” CTEI Working Paper No. CTEI-2012-3, Geneva.
Davey, William J. and André Sapir. 2009. “The Soft Drinks Case: The WTO and Regional Agreements.”
World Trade Review 8(1): 5-23.
Davis, Christina. 2012. Why Adjudicate? Enforcing Trade Rules in the WTO. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Demidova, Svetlana. 2015. “Trade Policies, Firm Heterogeneity, and Variable Markups.” Mimeogr. McMaster.
Department of Commerce. 2011. “Foreign Retaliations.” International Trade Administration. Available
at http://www.trade.gov/mas/ian/tradedisputes-enforcement/retaliations/tg_ian_002094.asp , last
accessed July 25, 2014.
DeRemer, David R. 2013a. “Domestic Policy Coordination in Imperfectly Markets.” ECARES Working
Paper 2013-46.
DeRemer, David R. 2013b. “The Evolution of International Subsidy Rules.” ECARES Working Paper
2013-45.
Dhingra, Swati. forthcoming. “Reconciling Observed Tari¤s and the Median Voter Model.”Economics and
Politics.
Disdier, Anne-Celia, Lionel Fontagne, and Olivier Cadot. 2015. “North-South standards harmonization
and international trade.” World Bank Economic Review 29(2): 1-26.
Dixit, Avinash. 1987. “Strategic Aspects of Trade Policy.” In Advances in Economic Theory: Fifth World
Congress, edited by Truman F. Bewley, 329-62. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Dür, Andreas, Leonardo Baccini, and Manfred Elsig. 2014. “The Design of International Trade Agreements:
Introducing a New Database.” Review of International Organizations 9(3): 353-375.

107

Dutt, Pushan, Ilian Mihov and Timothy Van Zandt. 2013. “The e¤ect of WTO on the extensive and the
intensive margins of trade.” Journal of International Economics 91(2): 204-219.
Dutt, Pushan and Devashish Mitra. 2002. “Endogenous trade policy through majority voting: an empirical
investigation.” Journal of International Economics 58(1): 107-133.
Eaton, Jonathan and Gene M. Grossman. 1986. “Optimal Trade and Industrial Policy under Oligopoly.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 101(2): 383-406.
Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum. 2002. “Technology, geography, and trade.” Econometrica 70(5):
1741-79.
Ederington, Josh. 2001. “International coordination of trade and domestic policies.” American Economic
Review 91(5): 1580-93.
Eicher, Theo S. and Christian Henn. 2011. “In search of WTO trade e¤ects: Preferential trade agreements
promote trade strongly, but unevenly.” Journal of International Economics 83(2): 137-53.
Eschenbach, Felix, and Bernard Hoekman. 2006. “Services policies in transition economies: on the EU and
WTO as commitment mechanisms.” World Trade Review 5(3): 415-43.
Estevadeordal, Antoni, Caroline Freund, Emanuel Ornelas. 2008. “Does regionalism a¤ect trade liberalization toward nonmembers?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(4): 1531-75.
Ethier, Wilfred J. 1998. “Regionalism in a multilateral world.”Journal of Political Economy 106(6): 12141245.
Feenstra, Robert C. 1989. “Symmetric pass-through of tari¤s and exchange rates under imperfect competition: An empirical test.” Journal of International Economics 27(1-2): 25-45.
Feenstra, Robert C. 1995. “Estimating the e¤ects of trade policy.”In Handbook of International Economics,
edited by Gene M. Grossman and Kenneth Rogo¤, 3: 1553-1595. Amsterdam: North Holland.
Feenstra, Robert C. and Jagdish N. Bhagwati. 1982. “Tari¤ Seeking and the E¢ cient Tari¤.” In: Import
Competition and Response, edited by Jagdish N. Bhagwati, 245-262. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press for the NBER.
Feinberg, Robert M. and Kara M. Reynolds. 2006. “The spread of antidumping regimes and the role of
retaliation in …lings.” Southern Economic Journal 72(4): 877-890.
Findlay, Ronald and Stanislaw Wellisz. 1982. “Endogenous Tari¤s, the Political Economy of Trade Restrictions, and Welfare.” In: Import Competition and Response, edited by Jagdish N. Bhagwati, 223-244.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press for the NBER.
Francois, Joseph and Bernard Hoekman. 2010. “Services trade and policy.”Journal of Economic Literature
48(3): 642-92.

108

Frazer, Garth and Johannes Van Biesebroeck. 2010. “Trade Growth under the African Growth and
Opportunity Act.” Review of Economics and Statistics 92(1): 128-144.
Freund, Caroline. 2000a. “Multilateralism and the endogenous formation of free trade agreements.”Journal
of International Economics 52(2): 359-76.
Freund, Caroline. 2000b. “Di¤erent Paths To Free Trade: The Gains From Regionalism.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 115(4): 1317-1341.
Freund, Caroline and Emanuel Ornelas. 2010. “Regional trade agreements.” Annual Review of Economics
2(1): 139-166.
Fudenberg, Drew, David Levine and Eric Maskin. 1994. “The folk theorem with imperfect public information.” Econometrica 62(5): 997-1039.
Furusawa, Taiji. 1999. “The Negotiation of Sustainable Tari¤s.”Journal of International Economics 48(2):
321-45.
Furusawa, Taiji and Hideo Konishi. 2007. “Free trade networks.” Journal of International Economics
72(2): 310-35.
Geng, Difei and Kamal Saggi. 2014. “The case for non-discrimination in the international protection of
intellectual property.” Mimeogr., Vanderbilt.
Goyal, Sanjeev and Sumit Joshi. 2006. “Bilateralism and free trade.” International Economic Review
47(3): 749-78.
Grossman, Gene M. 1981. “The theory of domestic content protection and content preference.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 96(4): 583-603.
Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman. 1994. “Protection for sale.”American Economic Review 84(4):
833-50.
Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman. 1995a. “Trade wars and trade talks.” Journal of Political
Economy 103(4): 675-708.
Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman. 1995b. “The politics of free-trade agreements.” American
Economic Review 85(4): 667-90.
Grossman, Gene M., Henrik Horn and Petros C. Mavroidis. 2013. “National treatment.” In Legal and
Economic Principles of World Trade Law, edited by Henrik Horn and Petros C. Mavroidis, 205-345.
New York: Cambridge University Press for the American Law Institute.
Grossman, Gene M. and Edwin Lai. 2004. “International protection of intellectual property.” American
Economic Review 94(5): 1635-53.

109

Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou and Michael M. Knetter. 1997. “Goods Prices and Exchange Rates: What
Have We Learned?” Journal of Economic Literature 35(3): 1243-1272.
Gulotty, Robert. 2014 “Governing Trade Beyond Tari¤s: The Politics of Multinational Production and Its
Implications for International Cooperation.” Mimeogr., Stanford University.
Handley, Kyle. 2014. “Exporting under Trade Policy Uncertainty: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of
International Economics 94(1): 50–66.
Handley, Kyle and Nuno Limão. forthcoming. “Trade and Investment under Policy Uncertainty: Theory
and Firm Evidence,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.
Hillman, Arye L. 1982. “Declining Industries and Political-Support Protectionist Motives.” American
Economic Review 72(5): 1180-87.
Hochman, Gal and Ella Segev. 2010. “Managed trade with imperfect information.”International Economic
Review 51(1): 187-211.
Hoekman, Bernard M. 2008. “The General Agreement on Trade in Services: doomed to fail? Does it
matter?” Journal of Industry, Competition and Trade 8(3-4): 295-318.
Hoekman, Bernard M. 2014. “The Bali Trade Facilitation Agreement and Rulemaking in the WTO:
Milestone, Mistake or Mirage?” EUI Working Paper No. RSCAS 2014/102.
Hoekman, Bernard M. and Petros C. Mavroidis. 2013. “WTO ‘à la carte’ or WTO ‘menu du jour’?
Assessing the case for Plurilateral Agreements.” EUI Working Paper No. RSCAS 2013/58.
Hoekman, Bernard M. and Petros C. Mavroidis. 2014. “Embracing Diversity: Plurilateral Agreements and
the Trading System.” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 10204.
Hoekman, Bernard M. and Caglar Ozden. 2007. “Introduction.” In Trade Preferences and Di¤ erential
Treatment of Developing Countries, edited by Bernard M. Hoekman and Caglar Ozden, xi-xlii. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Holmstrom, Bengt. 1977. “On incentives and control in organizations.” PhD dissertation, Stanford University.
Horn, Henrik. 2006. “National treatment in the GATT.” American Economic Review 96(1): 394-404.
Horn, Henrik, Louise Johannesson, and Petros C. Mavroidis. 2011. “The WTO Dispute Settlement System:
1995–2010: Some Descriptive Statistics.” Journal of World Trade 45(6): 1107-1138
Horn, Henrik, Giovanni Maggi, and Robert W. Staiger. 2010. “Trade agreements as endogenously incomplete contracts.” American Economic Review 100(1): 394-419.
Horn, Henrik and Petros C. Mavroidis. 2001. “Economic and Legal Aspects of the Most-Favored Nation
Clause.” European Journal of Political Economy 17(2): 233-79.

110

Horn, Henrik and Petros C. Mavroidis, Eds. 2003.

The WTO Case Law of 2001. Cambridge, UK:

Cambridge University Press.
Horn, Henrik and Petros C. Mavroidis. 2011. “WTO Dispute Settlement Database.” The World Bank.
Available at http://www.worldbank.org/trade/wtodisputes, last accessed July 25, 2014.
Horn, Henrik, Petros C. Mavroidis, and Hakan Nordstrom. 2005. “Is the Use of the WTO Dispute
Settlement System Biased?” In The WTO and International Trade Law/Dispute Settlement, edited
by Petros C. Mavroidis and Alan O. Sykes. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Horn, Henrik, Petros C. Mavroidis, and André Sapir. 2010. “Beyond the WTO? An Anatomy of EU and
US Preferential Trade Agreements.” The World Economy 33(11): 1565-1588.
Hudec, Robert E. 1990. The GATT Legal System and World Trade Diplomacy, 2nd edition. New Hampshire: Butterworth Legal Publishers.
Hudec, Robert E. 1993. Enforcing International Trade Law: The Evolution of the Modern GATT Legal
System. Salem, NH: Butterworth Legal Publishers.
Hufbauer, Gary C. Je¤rey J. Schott , Kimberly Ann Elliott, and Barbara Oegg. 2009. Economic Sanctions
Reconsidered, 3rd Edition. Washington, DC: Peterson Institute for International Economics.
Irwin, Douglas A. 1995. “The GATT’s Contribution to Economic Recovery in Post-War Europe.” In
Europe’s Postwar Recovery, edited by Barry Eichengreen, 127-150. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Irwin, Douglas A. 2011. Peddling Protectionsim: Smoot-Hawley and the Great Depression. Princeton and
Oxford: Princeton University Press.
Irwin, Douglas A. 2012. Trade Policy Disaster: Lessons from the 1930s. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Irwin, Douglas A. 2015. “Tari¤ Incidence: Evidence from U.S. Sugar Duties, 1890-1930.” NBER Working
Paper No. 20635.
Irwin, Douglas A., Petros C. Mavroidis, and Alan O. Sykes 2008. The Genesis of the GATT. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Irwin, Douglas A. and Joseph Weiler. 2008. “Measures A¤ecting the Cross-Border Supply of Gambling
and Betting Services (DS 285).” World Trade Review 7(1): 71-113.
Itoh, Motoshige and Kazuharu Kiyono. 1987. “Welfare-enhancing export subsidies.” Journal of Political
Economy 95(1): 115-137.
Jackson, John H. 1969. World Trade and the Law of GATT. New York: Bobbs-Merrill.
Jehiel, Philippe and Benny Moldovanu. 2000. “Auctions with downstream interaction among buyers.”
Rand Journal of Economics 31(4): 768-92.

111

Jensen, J. Bradford. 2011. Global trade in services: fear, facts and o¤ shoring. Washington D.C.: Petersen
Institute for International Economics.
Johnson, Harry G. 1953-4. “Optimum Tari¤s and Retaliation.”Review of Economic Studies 21(2): 142–53.
Johnson, Robert C. and Guillermo Noguera. 2014. “A Portrait of Trade in Value Added over Four Decades.”
Mimeogr., Dartmouth College.
Karacaovali, Baybars and Nuno Limão. 2008. “The Clash of Liberalizations: Preferential vs. Multilateral
Trade Liberalization in the European Union.” Journal of International Economics 74(2): 299-327.
Keck, Alexander and Andreas Lendle. 2014. “New Evidence on Preference Utilization.” Mimeogr., WTO.
Kennan, John and Raymond Riezman. 1988. “Do Big Countries Win Tari¤ Wars?”International Economic
Review 29(1): 81-85.
Kennan, John and Raymond Riezman. 1990. “Optimal tari¤ equilibria with customs unions.” Canadian
Journal of Economics 23(1): 70-83.
Kim, In Song. 2013. “Political cleavages within industry: …rm level lobbying for trade liberalization.”
Mimeogr., MIT.
Kowalczyk, Carsten and Raymond Riezman. 2011. “Trade agreements” in Palgrave Handbook of International Trade, edited by Daniel Bernhofen, Rod Falvey, David Greenaway and Udo Kreickemeier.
Macmillan, U.K.
Kreinin, Mordechai. 1961. “E¤ect of tari¤ changes on the prices and volume of imports.” American
Economic Review 51(3): 310-24.
Krishna, Pravin. 1998. “Regionalism and multilateralism: a political economy approach.”Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(1): 227-51.
Krishna, Pravin and Devashish Mitra. 2005. “Reciprocated unilateralism in trade policy.” Journal of
International Economics 65(2): 461-87.
Krugman, Paul R. 1991. “Is bilateralism bad?”In International Trade and Trade Policy, edited by Elhanan
Helpman and Assaf Razin, 9-23. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Lapan, Harvey E. 1988. “The optimal tari¤, production lags, and time consistency.” American Economic
Review 78(3): 395-401.
Lawrence, Robert Z. 2003. Crimes and Punishments? Retaliation under the WTO. Washington, DC:
Institute for International Economics.
Lawrence, Robert Z. 2006. “Rulemaking Amidst Growing Diversity: A ‘club of clubs’approach to WTO
reform and new issue selection.” Journal of International Economic Law 9(4): 823-35.

112

Lee, Gea M. 2007. “Trade agreements with domestic policies as disguised protection.” Journal of International Economics 71(1): 241-59.
Lee, Gea M. 2014. “Optimal International Agreement and Restriction on Domestic E¢ ciency.” Mimeogr.,
Singapore Management University.
Levy, Philip I. 1997. “A political-economic analysis of free-trade agreements.”American Economic Review
87(4): 506-19.
Levy, Philip I. 2006. “Do We Need an Undertaker for the Single Undertaking? Angles of Variable Geometry.” In Economic Development and Multilateral Trade Cooperation, edited by Simon Evenett and
Bernard Hoekman, 417-437. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Limão, Nuno. 2005. “Trade policy, cross-border externalities and lobbies: do linked agreements enforce
more cooperative outcomes?” Journal of International Economics 67(1): 175-99.
Limão, Nuno. 2006. “Preferential Trade Agreements as Stumbling Blocks for Multilateral Trade Liberalization: Evidence for the U.S.” American Economic Review 96(3): 896-914.
Limão, Nuno 2007. “Are Preferential Trade Agreements with Non-Trade Objectives a Stumbling Block for
Multilateral Liberalization?” Review of Economic Studies 74(3): 821-55.
Limão, Nuno and Giovanni Maggi. forthcoming. “Uncertainty and Trade Agreements.”American Economic
Journal: Microeconomics.
Limão, Nuno and Kamal Saggi. 2008. “Tari¤ retaliation versus …nancial compensation in the enforcement
of international trade agreements.” Journal of International Economics 76(1): 48-60.
Limão, Nuno and Kamal Saggi. 2013. “Size inequality, coordination externalities and international trade
agreements.” European Economic Review 63(C): 10-27.
Limão, Nuno and Patricia Tovar. 2011. “Policy Choice: Theory and Evidence from Commitment via
International Trade Agreements.” Journal of International Economics 85(2): 186-205.
Liu, Xuepeng and Emanuel Ornelas. 2014. “Free Trade Agreements and the Consolidation of Democracy.”
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 6(2): 29-70.
Ludema, Rodney D. 1991. “International Trade Bargaining and the Most-Favored Nation Clause.” Economics and Politics 3(1): 1-20.
Ludema, Rodney D. and Anna Maria Mayda. 2009. “Do Countries Free Ride on MFN?” Journal of
International Economics 77(2): 137-50.
Ludema, Rodney D. and Anna Maria Mayda. 2013. “Do Terms-of Trade E¤ects Matter for Trade Agreements? Theory and Evidence from WTO Countries.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(4): 183793.

113

Magee, Christopher and Stephen Magee. 2008. “The United States is a Small Country in World Trade.”
Review of International Economics 16(5): 990-1004.
Maggi, Giovanni. 1996. “Strategic trade policies with endogenous mode of competition.” American Economic Review 86(1): 237-58.
Maggi, Giovanni. 1999. “The Role of Multilateral Institutions in International Trade Cooperation.”American Economic Review 89(1): 190-214.
Maggi, Giovanni. 2014. “International trade agreements.”In Handbook of International Economics, edited
by Gita Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman, and Kenneth Rogo¤, Volume 4: 317-90. Amsterdam, NL:
Elsevier.
Maggi, Giovanni and Andres Rodriguez-Clare. 1998. “The value of trade agreements in the presence of
political pressures.” Journal of Political Economy 106(3): 574-601.
Maggi, Giovanni and Andres Rodriguez-Clare. 2007. “A political-economy theory of trade agreements.”
American Economic Review 97(4): 1374-1406.
Maggi, Giovanni and Robert W. Staiger. 2011. “The Role of Dispute Settlement Procedures in International
Trade Agreements.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(1): 475-515.
Maggi, Giovanni and Robert W. Staiger. 2013. “Trade disputes and settlement.” Mimeogr., University of
Wisconsin.
Maggi, Giovanni and Robert W. Staiger. forthcoming. “Optimal Design of Trade Agreements in the
Presence of Renegotiation.” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics.
Mai, Joseph and Andrey Stoyanov. forthcoming. “The e¤ect of the Canada-US free trade agreement on
Canadian multilateral trade liberalization.” Canadian Journal of Economics.
Martin, Alberto and Wouter Vergote. 2008. “On the role of retaliation in trade agreements.” Journal of
International Economics 76(1): 61-77.
Maskus, Keith E. 2000. Intellectual Property Rights in the Global Economy. Washington DC: Institute for
International Economics.
Matsuyama, Kiminori. 1990. “Perfect equilibria in a trade liberalization game.” American Economic
Review 80(3): 480-92.
Mavroidis, Petros C. 2000. “Remedies in the WTO Legal System: Between a Rock and a Hard Place.”
European Journal of International Law 11(4): 763-814.
Mayer, Wolfgang. 1980. “Theoretical Considerations on Negotiated Tari¤ Adjustments.”Oxford Economic
Papers 33(1): 135-153.
Mayer, Wolfgang. 1984. “Endogenous Tari¤ Formation.” American Economic Review 74(5): 970-85.

114

McCalman, Phillip. 2002. “Multi-lateral Trade Negotiations and the Most-Favored Nation Clause.”Journal
of International Economics 57(1): 151-76.
McLaren, John. 1997. “Size, sunk costs, and Judge Bowker’s objection to free trade.”American Economic
Review 87(3): 400-20.
McLaren, John. 2002. “A theory of insidious regionalism.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(2): 571608.
McMillan, John. 1986. Game Theory in International Economics. New York: Harwood.
McMillan, John. 1989. “A Game-Theoretic View of International Trade Negotiations: Implications for Developing Countries.”In Developing Countries and the Global Trading System, edited by John Whalley,
1. London, UK: MacMillan.
Melitz, Marc and Gianmarco Ottaviano. 2008. “Market size, trade, and productivity,” The Review of
Economic Studies 75(1): 295-316.
Mitra, Devashish. 1999. “Endogenous lobby formation and endogenous protection: a long-run model of
trade policy determination.” American Economic Review 89(5): 1116-34.
Mitra, Devashish. 2002. “Endogenous political organization and the value of trade agreements.” Journal
of International Economics 57(2): 473-85.
Mrázová, Monika, David Vines and Ben Zissimos. 2013. “Is the GATT/WTO’s Article XXIV bad?”
Journal of International Economics 89: 216-32.
Mrázová, Monika. 2011. “Trade agreements when pro…ts matter.”Mimeogr., London School of Economics.
Nicita, Alessandro, Marcelo Olarreaga, and Peri Silva. 2014. “Cooperation in WTO’s Tari¤ Waters.”
Mimeogr., University of Geneva.
Olarreaga, Marcelo, Isidro Soloaga, and L. Alan Winters. 1999. “What’s Behind Mercosur’s CET?”CEPR
Discussion Paper No. 2310.
Olson, Mancur. 1965. The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of Groups. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Ore…ce, Gianluca and Nadia Rocha. 2014. “Deep integration and production networks: an empirical
analysis.” The World Economy 37(1): 106-136.
Ornelas, Emanuel. 2005a. “Trade creating free trade areas and the undermining of multilateralism.”
European Economic Review 49(7): 1717-35.
Ornelas, Emanuel. 2005b. “Rent destruction and the political viability of free trade agreements.”Quarterly
Journal of Economics 120(4): 1475-1506.

115

Ornelas, Emanuel. 2005c. “Endogenous free trade agreements and the multilateral trading system.”Journal
of International Economics 67(2): 471-97.
Ornelas, Emanuel. 2008. “Feasible multilateralism and the e¤ects of regionalism.”Journal of International
Economics 74(1): 202-24.
Ossa, Ralph. 2011. “A ‘new-trade’ theory of GATT/WTO negotiations.” Journal of Political Economy
119(1): 122-52.
Ossa, Ralph. 2012. “Pro…ts in the “new trade” approach to trade negotiations.” American Economic
Review: Papers and Proceedings 102(2): 466-69.
Ossa, Ralph. 2014. “Trade Wars and Trade Talks with Data.” American Economic Review 104(12):
4104-46.
Palmeter, David and Petros C. Mavroidis. 2004. Dispute Settlement in the World Trade Organization:
Practice and Procedure. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Panagariya, Arvind. 2000. “Preferential Trade Liberalization: The Traditional Theory and New Developments.” Journal of Economic Literature 38(2): 287-331.
Park, Jee-Hyeong. 2011. “Enforcing International Trade Agreements with Imperfect Private Monitoring.”
Review of Economic Studies 78(3): 1102-34.
Petersmann, Ernst-Ulrich. 1997. The GATT/WTO Dispute Settlement System: International Law, International Organization and Dispute Settlement. London: Kluwer Law International.
Pierce, Justin and Peter K. Schott. 2015. “The Surprisingly Swift Decline of U.S. Manufacturing Employment.” Mimeogr., Yale University.
Potipiti, Tanapong. 2012. “Import tari¤s and export subsidies in the WTO: a small country approach.”
Mimeogr., Chulalongkorn Univ.
Prusa, Thomas J. and Susan Skeath. 2002. The economic and strategic motives for antidumping …lings.”
Weltwirtschaftliches Archive 138(3): 389-413.
Prusa, Thomas J. and Robert Teh. 2010. “Protection reduction and diversion: PTAs and the incidence of
antidumping disputes.” NBER Working Paper No. 16276.
Richardson, Martin. 1993. “Endogenous protection and trade diversion.” Journal of International Economics 34: 309-24.
Richardson, Martin. 1995. “Tari¤ revenue competition in a free-trade area.” European Economic Review
39(7): 1429-37.
Riezman, Raymond. 1985. “Customs unions and the core.” Journal of International Economics 19 (3-4):
335-65.

116

Riezman, Raymond. 1999. “Can bilateral trade agreements help to induce free trade?” Canadian Journal
of Economics 32(3): 751-66
Romalis, John. 2007. “NAFTA’s and CUSFTA’s impact on international trade.”Review of Economics and
Statistics 89(3): 416-43.
Rose, Andrew. 2004. “Do we really know that the WTO increases trade?” American Economic Review
94(1): 98-114.
Rotemberg Julio J. and Garth Saloner. 1986. “A supergame-theoretic model of price wars during booms.”
American Economic Review 76(3): 390-407.
Saggi, Kamal. 2004. “Tari¤s and the Most Favored Nation Clause.” Journal of International Economics
63(2): 341-68.
Saggi, Kamal. 2006. “Preferential trade agreements and multilateral tari¤ cooperation.” International
Economic Review 47: 29-57.
Saggi, Kamal, Alan Woodland, and Halis Murat Yildiz. 2013. “On the relationship between preferential and multilateral trade liberalization: the case of customs unions.” American Economic Journal:
Microeconomics 5(1): 63-99.
Saggi, Kamal and Halis Murat Yildiz. 2010. “Bilateralism, multilateralism, and the quest for global free
trade.” Journal of International Economics 81(1): 26-37.
Sauré, Philip. 2014. “Domestic policies in self-enforcing trade agreements.” European Economic Review
68: 19-30.
Schi¤, Maurice and Won Chang. 2003. “Market presence, contestability, and the terms-of-trade e¤ects of
regional integration.” Journal of International Economics 60(1): 161-75.
Schwartz, Warren F. and Alan O. Sykes. 1997. “The Economics of the Most Favored Nation Clause.”
In Economic Dimensions in International Law: Comparative and Empirical Perspectives, edited by
Jagdeep S. Bhandari and Alan O. Sykes, 43-79. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Schwartz, Warren F. and Alan O. Sykes. 2002. “The economic structure of renegotiation and dispute
resolution in the World Trade Organization.” Journal of Legal Studies 31(1): S179-204.
Scotchmer, Suzanne. 2004. “The political economy of intellectual property treaties.” Journal of Law,
Economics and Organization 20(2): 415-37.
Seidman, Daniel J. 2009. “Preferential trading agreements as strategic positioning.” Journal of International Economics 79(1): 143-59.
Shirono, Kazuko. 2004. “Are WTO Tari¤ Negotiations Reciprocal? An Analysis of Tari¤ Liberalization.”
Mimeogr., Columbia University.

117

Spagnola, Giancarlo. 1999a. “On interdependent supergames: multimarket contact, concavity and collusion.” Journal of Economic Theory 89(1): 127-39.
Spagnola, Giancarlo. 1999b. “Issue linkage, delegation and international policy coordination.” Mimeogr.
Stockholm School of International Economics.
Spamman, Holger. 2006. “The myth of ‘re-balancing’ retaliation in WTO dispute settlement practice.”
Journal of International Economic Law 9(1): 31-79.
Spearot, Alan. 2015. “Unpacking the Long Run E¤ects of Tari¤ Shocks: New Structural Implications from
Firm Heterogeneity Models.” Mimeogr., UC Santa Cruz.
Spencer, Barbara and James A. Brander. 1983. “International r&d rivalry and industrial strategy.”Review
of Economic Studies 50(163): 707-22.
Staiger, Robert W. 1995. “International rules and institutions for trade policy.” In Handbook of International Economics, edited by Gene M. Grossman and Kenneth Rogo¤, 3: 1495-1551. Amsterdam:
North Holland.
Staiger, Robert W. and Alan O. Sykes. 2011. “International trade, national treatment, and domestic
regulation.” Journal of Legal Studies 40(1): 149-203.
Staiger, Robert W. and Alan O. Sykes. 2013. “Non-Violations.” Journal of International Economic Law
16(4): 741-775.
Staiger, Robert W. and Alan O. Sykes. 2015. “How important can the non-violation clause be for the
GATT/WTO?.” Mimeogr., Dartmouth College.
Staiger, Robert W. and Guido Tabellini. 1987. “Discretionary trade policy and excessive protection.”
American Economic Review 77(5): 823-37.
Staiger, Robert W. and Guido Tabellini. 1999. “Do GATT rules help governments make domestic commitments?” Economics and Politics 11(2): 109-44.
Subramanian, Arvind and Shang-Jin Wei. 2007. “The WTO Promotes Trade, Strongly But Unevenly.”
Journal of International Economics 72(1): 151–175.
Sykes, Alan O. 1991. “‘Protectionism’as a safeguard: a positive analysis of the GATT ‘escape clause’with
normative speculations.” University of Chicago Law Review 58(1): 255-305.
Sykes, Alan O. 2003. “The Safeguards Mess: A Critique of WTO Jurisprudence.” World Trade Review
2(3): 261-295.
Sykes, Alan O. 2005a. “The economics of WTO rules on subsidies and countervailing measures.” In The
World Trade Organization: Legal, Economic and Political Analysis, edited by Arthur E. Appleton,
Patrick F. J. Macrory, and Michael G. Plummer, 2. Springer-Verlag.

118

Sykes, Alan O. 2005b. “Public versus Private Enforcement of International Economic Law: Standing and
Remedy.” Journal of Legal Studies 34(2): 631-666.
Syropoulos, Constantinos. 1999. “Customs unions and comparative advantage.” Oxford Economic Papers
51: 239-56.
Tabakis, Chrysostomos. 2010. “Customs unions and special protection.”BE Journal of Economic Analysis
& Policy 10(1).
Tallberg, Jonas and James McCall Smith. 2014. “Dispute Settlement in World Politics: States, Supranational Prosecutors, and Compliance.” European Journal of International Relations 20(1): 118-144.
Tang, Man-Keung and Shang-Jin Wei. 2009. “The value of making commitments externally: evidence from
WTO accessions.” Journal of International Economics 78(2): 216-29.
Tornell, Aaron. 1991. “On the ine¤ectiveness of made-to-measure protectionist programs.”In International
Trade and Trade Policy, edited by Elhanan Helpman and Assaf Razin, 66-79. Cambridge: The MIT
Press.
Tintlenot, Felix. 2014. “Global production with export platforms.” Mimeogr., University of Chicago.
Tovar, Patricia. 2012. “Preferential Trade Agreements and Unilateral Liberalization: Evidence from
CAFTA.” World Trade Review 11(4): 591-619.
Trebilcock, Michael. 2014. “Between theories of trade and development: the future of the world trading
system.” Mimeogr. University of Toronto Law.
Trebilcock, Michael, Robert Howse and Antonia Eliason. 2013. The Regulation of International Trade, 4th
edition. Routledge.
Tre‡er, Daniel. 2004. “The long and short of the Canada-U.S. free trade agreement.”American Economic
Review 94(4): 870-95.
USTR. 2010.

“U.S., Brazil Agree on Memorandum of Understanding As Part of Path Forward To-

ward Resolution of Cotton Dispute.” Available at http://www.ustr.gov/about-us/press-o¢ ce/pressreleases/2010/april/us-brazil-agree-memorandum-understanding-part-path-f, accessed July 25, 2014.
USTR. 2011. “USTR Kirk Seeks Enforcement of Labor Laws in Guatemala.”Available at http://www.ustr.gov/
about-us/press-o¢ ce/press-releases/2011/may/ustr-kirk-seeks-enforcement-labor-laws-guatemala, accessed July 25, 2014.
USTR. 2012. “U.S. Trade Representative Ron Kirk Comments on Presidential Actions Related to the
Generalized System of Preferences.” Available at http://www.ustr.gov/about-us/press-o¢ ce/pressreleases/2012/march/us-trade-representative-ron-kirk-comments-presidenti, accessed July 25, 2014.
Venables, Anthony J. 1985. “Trade and trade policy with imperfect competition: The case of identical
products and free entry.” Journal of International Economics 19(1-2): 1-19.

119

Venables, Anthony J. 1987. “Trade and Trade Policy with Di¤erentiated Products: A ChamberlinianRicardian Model.” Economic Journal 97(387): 700-717.
Viner, Jacob. 1950. The Customs Union Issue. New York: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
Vousden, Neil. 1990. The Economics of Trade Protection. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wauters, Jasper M. 2010. “The safeguards agreement - an overview.”In Law and Economics of Contingent
Protection in International Trade, edited by Kyle W. Bagwell, George A. Bermann, and Petros C.
Mavroidis, 334-366. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Winkelmann, Liliana and Rainer Winkelmann. 1998. “Tari¤s, quotas and terms-of-trade: The case of New
Zealand.” Journal of International Economics 46(2): 313-332.
Winters, L. Alan and Won Chang. 2000. “Regional integration and the prices of imports: an empirical
investigation.” Journal of International Economics 51(2): 363-77.
WTO. 2002. “Dispute Settlement Body — Special Session — Negotiations on Improvements and Clari…cations of the Dispute Settlement Understanding — Proposal by Mexico.” November 4, catalogue
record TN/DS/W/23.
WTO. 2007. World Trade Report 2007: Six Decades of Multilateral Trade Cooperation: What Have We
Learnt? Geneva: WTO.
WTO. 2011. World Trade Report 2011: The WTO and Preferential Trade Agreements: From Co-Existence
to Coherence. Geneva: WTO.
WTO. 2012. World Trade Report 2012: Trade and Public Policies: A Closer Look at Non-Tari¤ Measures
in the 21st Century. Geneva, WTO.
WTO. 2014a. “Regional Trade Agreements.”Available at http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/region_e/
region_e.htm, last accessed July 25, 2014.
WTO. 2014b. “Current Situation of Schedules of WTO Members.”Available at http://www.wto.org/english/
tratop_e/schedules_e/goods_schedules_table_e.htm, last accessed July 25, 2014.
WTO, ITC and UNCTAD. 2013. World Tari¤ Pro…les 2013. Geneva: WTO, ITC and UNCTAD.
Yi, Sang-Seung. 1996. “Endogenous formation of customs unions under imperfect competition: open
regionalism is good.” Journal of International Economics 41(1-2): 153-77.

120

Table 1: GATT/WTO - 60 Years of Tari¤ Reductions
Implementation
period
1948
1950
1952
1956-58
1962-64
1968-72
1980-87
1995-99

Round
covered

Weighted tari¤
reduction

Geneva (1947)
Annecy (1949)
Torquay (1950-51)
Geneva (1955-56)
Dillon Round (1961-62)
Kennedy Round (1964-67)
Tokyo Round (1973-79)
Uruguay Round (1986-94)

-26
-3
-4
-3
-4
-38
-33
-38

Weights based on
MFN imports
(year)
1939
1947
1949
1954
1960
1964
1977 (or 1976)
1988 (or 1989)

Source: WTO (2007), Table 5. Notes: MFN tari¤ reduction of industrial countries for industrial products,
excluding petroleum. Tari¤ reductions for the …rst …ve rounds refer to the United States only. The calculation
of average rates of reductions are weighted by MFN import values.

Table 2: Applied tari¤ rates of selected GATT/WTO Members, 1952 and 2005
Economy
Austria
Benelux
Denmark
France
Germany
Italy
Sweden
United Kingdom
European Union (EU-25)
Canada
United States

1952
17
9
5
19
16
24
6
17
11
16

2005
4.2
4.2
4.2
4.2
4.2
4.2
4.2
4.2
4.2
3.8
3.7

Source: WTO (2007), Appendix Table 7. Notes: computed as simple average of 52 products in 1952 and of
all tari¤ lines in 2005.

121

Table 3: Trade Policy under the WTO for Selected Economies, 2012
WTO member economy

MFN
applied
rate,
simple
average

Binding
rate,
simple
average

Binding
coverage

Coverage
of applied
duties
> 15
percent

Maximum
applied
rate

MFN
applied
rate,
agriculture only

TTB
coverage

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

G20 High-income
Australia
Canada
European Union
Japan
Saudi Arabia
South Korea
United States

2.7
4.3
5.5
4.6
5.1
13.3
3.4

10.0
6.9
5.2
5.2
11.3
16.6
3.5

97.1
99.7
100.0
99.7
100.0
94.6
100.0

0.1
6.9
5.1
3.8
0.4
10.4
2.7

28.0
551.0
605.0
692.0
427.0
887.0
350.0

1.2
16.2
13.2
16.6
6.2
52.7
4.7

1.0
1.2
3.0
<0.1
NA
0.5
6.8

G20 Emerging
Argentina
Brazil
China (2011)
India
Indonesia
Mexico
Russia
South Africa
Turkey

12.5
13.5
9.6
13.7
7.0
7.8
10.0
7.6
9.6

31.9
31.4
10.0
48.6
37.1
36.1
7.8
19.0
28.6

100.0
100.0
100.0
73.8
96.6
100.0
100.0
96.4
50.3

36.0
36.2
14.6
19.6
1.6
13.8
11.7
20.6
10.8

35.0
55.0
65.0
150.0
150.0
254.0
292.0
>1000
225.0

10.5
10.1
15.6
33.5
7.9
21.2
13.3
8.4
41.2

3.2
1.9
1.3
6.5
1.7
1.1
NA
0.6
4.9

Developing, other*
Bangladesh (2011)
Burma
DR of the Congo
Egypt
Ethiopiay (observer only)
Irany (observer only, 2011)
Nigeria (2011)
Pakistan
Philippines
Thailand
Vietnam

14.4
5.6
NA
16.8
17.3
26.6
11.7
13.5
6.2
9.8
9.5

169.2
83.4
96.2
36.7
**
**
119.1
59.9
25.7
27.8
11.4

15.5
17.6
100.0
99.4
**
**
19.1
98.7
67.0
75.0
100.0

40.1
5.0
NA
19.2
50.8
45.7
39.0
36.1
3.1
22.6
24.7

25.0
40.0
NA
>1000
35.0
400.0
35.0
100.0
65.0
142.0
135.0

17.2
8.6
NA
66.7
22.4
30.4
15.5
15.5
9.8
21.8
16.1

**
**
**
NA
**
**
**
0.3
0.1
0.7
NA

Source: tari¤ data taken from WTO, ITC, and UNCTAD (2013) and temporary trade barrier (TTB) data taken
from Bown (2014). Notes: parentheses indicate data availability for year other than 2012. *selected other developing
countries chosen as those with 2012 populations greater than 50 million. **indicates non-user (or un-reported user)
of the policy instrument. NA = not available. G20=Group of 20. y indicates WTO non-member. Columns (1), (2),
(5) and (6) are ad valorem rates, and columns (3), (4), and (7) are shares of import products.

122

