                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                BEYOND STATISTICS:
                        THE ECONOMIC CONTENT OF RISK SCORES

                                            Liran Einav
                                          Amy Finkelstein
                                         Raymond Kluender
                                           Paul Schrimpf

                                        Working Paper 21304
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21304


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2015




We thank Randy Ellis, Jonathan Gruber, Nathan Hendren, Ilyana Kuziemko, Robin Lee, Tom McGuire,
Adam Sacarny, Julie Shi, and Jonathan Skinner for helpful comments. We gratefully acknowledge
support from the NIA (R01 AG032449). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21304.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, Raymond Kluender, and Paul Schrimpf. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Beyond Statistics: The Economic Content of Risk Scores
Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, Raymond Kluender, and Paul Schrimpf
NBER Working Paper No. 21304
June 2015, Revised July 2015
JEL No. D12,G22,I11,I13

                                              ABSTRACT

In recent years, the increased use of “big data” and statistical techniques to score potential transactions
has transformed the operation of insurance and credit markets. In this paper, we observe that these
widely-used scores are statistical objects that constitute a one-dimensional summary of a potentially
much richer heterogeneity, some of which may be endogenous to the specific context in which they
are applied. We demonstrate this point empirically using rich data from the Medicare Part D prescription
drug insurance program. We show that the “risk scores,” which are designed to predict an individuals
drug spending and are used by Medicare to customize reimbursement rates to private insurers, do not
distinguish between two different sources of spending: underlying health, and responsiveness of drug
spending to the insurance contract. Naturally, however, these two determinants of spending have very
different implications when trying to predict counterfactual spending under alternative contracts. As
a result, we illustrate that once we enrich the theoretical framework to allow individuals to have
heterogeneousbehavioral responses to the contract, strategic incentives for cream skimming still
exist, even in thepresence of “perfect” risk scoring under a given contract.


Liran Einav                                          Raymond Kluender
Stanford University                                  Department of Economics
Department of Economics                              Massachusetts Institute of Technology
579 Serra Mall                                       kluender@mit.edu
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER                                             Paul Schrimpf
leinav@stanford.edu                                  Vancouver School of Economics
                                                     University of British Columbia
Amy Finkelstein                                      997 - 1873 East Mall
Department of Economics, E17-228                     Vancouver, BC V6T1Z1
MIT                                                  schrimpf@mail.ubc.ca
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
afink@mit.edu
     Over the last two decades, many markets have been transformed by the increased use of infor-
mation technology, “big data,” and statistical techniques. Credit and insurance markets are two
leading examples (Edelberg 1996; Brown et al. 2014; Einav, Jenkins, and Levin 2013b). Nowadays,
it is almost impossible to obtain credit or insurance without providing a long list of personalized
information, which private lenders and insurance providers use to provide individually-customized
prices or contracts. The government also actively uses such “risk scores”to regulate and reimburse
private providers. In credit markets, for example, the government uses FICO scores –designed to
predict an individual’s default risk – to regulate the availability and terms of private mortgages.
In the context of health insurance, the government uses health spending risk scores – designed to
predict an individual’s medical spending – to set Medicare reimbursement rates for private insur-
ers. The state Health Insurance Exchanges created by the 2010 A¤ordable Care Act have increased
interest in how best to design and use health spending risk scores in regulating government reim-
bursement of private insurance o¤ered on the exchanges.
     These types of scoring algorithms predominantly rely on widely available predictive modeling
techniques, which are commonly used in statistics and computer science. Typically one begins
with a large individual-level data set that contains a key outcome one is trying to predict (such as
medical spending or default on a loan) and a long and rich list of potential regressors; the creators
of the algorithm then deploy state-of-the-art predictive models to select regressors and obtain the
“best” predictive model.
     Our paper is motivated by the observation that the outcomes that risk scores are designed to
predict, such as loan default or medical spending, are, naturally, economic as well as statistical
objects. While these outcomes may depend on certain individual characteristics that are invariant
to the contract an individual chooses, they may also be a¤ected by individual behavior. This
behavior may well be endogenous to the context. Crucially, the behavioral response to the context
may itself be heterogeneous across individuals.
     The unidimensional risk score, however, is not designed to distinguish di¤erences across in-
dividuals in their contract-invariant individual characteristics from di¤erences in their behavioral
response to another contract. Therefore, public reimbursement based on existing risk scores can
give private providers incentives to cream-skim customers whose behavior under the contract is
likely to make them lower cost than the risk score would predict. This suggests that risk scoring
should be treated as a partially economic, rather than purely statistical, object, with properties
that may need to be customized to a particular context and objective.
     While this point is quite general, we develop and illustrate it in the particular context of the
health spending risk scores that Medicare assigns to Medicare bene…ciaries. These risk scores
predict Medicare spending in traditional fee for service Medicare as a function of the bene…ciaries’
demographics and medical diagnoses in the previous year. They are used, among other things, to set
reimbursement rates to private providers of di¤erent Medicare Part D prescription drug insurance
plans, and to private providers of Medicare Advantage (MA) plans, privately run managed care
plans that nowadays enroll almost a third of Medicare bene…ciaries.
     Risk scoring is a natural way for the government to try to prevent - or at least reduce - cherry

                                                 1
picking of low cost individuals by private …rms (Newhouse 1996). By adjusting reimbursement
based on observable individual characteristics that correlate with the individual’s cost to the private
…rm, the government can try to reduce these cream-skimming incentives. The key point of departure
of this paper is to consider the possibility that an individual’s cost to the provider partly re‡ects
the individual’s behavioral response to the provider’s contract, and that this behavioral response
may di¤er across individuals – just as the standard, statistical, cost-related characteristics of the
individual may di¤er –but will not be captured by current risk scoring practices.
    We illustrate these points empirically in the speci…c context of the Medicare Part D prescription
drug program. The introduction of prescription drug coverage in 2006, which constituted the
largest expansion of bene…ts in Medicare’s half-century of existence, accounts for about 11% of
total Medicare spending (Kaiser Family Foundation 2012a, 2012b). Medicare Part D enrollees can
choose among di¤erent prescription drug plans o¤ered by private insurers. Medicare reimburses
private plans as a function of the “Part D risk scores”for their enrollees; these predict a bene…ciary’s
prescription drug spending as a function of demographics and prior medical diagnoses.
    We describe the data and the empirical strategy in Section I. Our research design exploits the
famous “donut hole,”or “gap,”in Part D coverage, within which insurance becomes discontinuously
much less generous at the margin. We previously used this research design, together with detailed
micro data on prescription drug claims of Medicare Part D bene…ciaries from 2007 to 2009, to
help identify the behavioral response of drug utilization to cost-sharing (Einav, Finkelstein, and
Schrimpf 2015). Here, in Section II, we use the same machinery to provide graphical evidence on
two distinct, new results which are the focus of the current paper.
    First, we show that two dimensions of heterogeneity are present and visible in the data. Unre-
markably, we document heterogeneity in health; there are clear and expected relationships between
annual drug spending and various individual characteristics, such as age or the presence of speci…c
chronic conditions. More interestingly, we also document heterogeneity in the individual’s utiliza-
tion response to the contract. Speci…cally, we …nd that those who reduce their drug spending on
the margin in response to the kink in the budget set created by the donut hole are more likely
to be male, younger, and healthier, presumably re‡ecting their greater ‡exibility to forego drug
purchases when the price increases.
    Our second key empirical …nding is that current risk scores do not capture this second dimension
of heterogeneity. Risk scores increase smoothly with annual spending, but without exhibiting any
noticeable pattern around the kink. This illustrates that the current risk scores do not capture
di¤erences across individuals in their behavioral response to consumer cost-sharing. This is by
design; the creation of risk scores is currently treated as a statistical exercise, designed to generate
the best predictor of an individual’s costs under the observed environment, rather than an economic
model of what their costs might be under an alternative contract.
    In Section III we consider theoretically some of the potential implications of these empirical
…ndings. In particular, we show that when individuals are heterogeneous not only in their underlying
health but also in their utilization response to a health insurance contract, risk scores that are
“perfect” in the statistical sense of capturing all residual heterogeneity under a given contract can

                                                   2
still create cream-skimming incentives for private providers. We stop short of the more ambitious
undertaking of estimating an equilibrium model of supply and demand for di¤erent health insurance
contracts that would allow us to provide a empirical assessment of the implications of observed and
alternative risk scoring for equilibrium cream-skimming. This is a natural direction for further
work.
     Our paper contributes to a large literature on risk adjustment in health insurance markets, which
was reviewed in Van de Ven and Ellis (2000) and Ellis (2008). Much of this literature has focused on
predictive (statistical) modeling. A recent focus has been on the fact that risk adjustment relies on
diagnoses recorded in clinical and administrative records, which may re‡ect di¤erences in diagnostic
and treatment practices across insurers and providers, in addition to underlying health (Song et al.
2010). There has also been attention to the incentives for cream-skimming and “gaming”that such
risk scores provide. However, the focus of the existing analysis of cream-skimming is that in the
presence of imperfect prediction of individual risk, private insurers have an incentive to try to attract
(“cream skim”) individuals who, given their predicted risk, have (imperfectly priced) characteristics
that (in expectation) generate lower realized risk.1 Glazer and McGuire (2000) provide the classic
theoretical framework for this type of strategic cream-skimming; they show that in the presence of
imperfect risk adjustment, the relationship between reimbursement and predicted risk should be
ampli…ed in order to minimize cream-skimming incentives. Empirically, two recent papers –Brown
et al. (2014) and Newhouse et al. (2012) –use a similar framework to examine providers’strategic
response to imperfect risk scoring in the context of Medicare Advantage.
     The key distinction between the current paper and this existing risk-adjustment literature is
that the latter is focused on the problem of imperfect risk adjustment in an environment with
unidimensional heterogeneity. In this setting, a “perfect” (in a statistical sense) risk prediction
model would eliminate cream-skimming incentives, and the market would operate like any tradi-
tional product market. Although the assumption of imperfect risk adjustment is a natural one,
the cream skimming incentives considered by the existing literature could, at least in principle, be
eliminated with rich enough data and sophisticated enough statistical modeling, thus obviating the
need for economic models. In contrast, our focus is on a di¤erent challenge in using risk scores, a
challenge that cannot – even in principle – be solved with rich enough data and perfect scoring.
Our key observation is that the outcome the risk score attempts to predict is partially determined
by individuals’behavioral choices, and these may vary with the contract. Therefore, even perfect
prediction of the outcome under a given contract (“perfect” risk adjustment in the sense of the
prior literature) would not su¢ ce, and an economic model of behavior is needed to think about
optimal reimbursement policy when coverage contracts di¤er.
     Our paper also relates to a large “moral hazard”literature in health economics on the impact of
insurance contracts on medical care use in general, and more speci…cally to a smaller “moral hazard”
   1
       In addition, another branch of the literature notes that insurers also have an incentive to “upcode”the individual
components that enter into the risk adjustment formula to increase a given individual’s reimbursement (Dafny 2005;
Geruso and Layton 2014).



                                                             3
literature in the context of Medicare Part D (Duggan and Scott Morton 2010; Einav, Finkelstein,
and Schrimpf 2015). In contrast to most of this literature, which has focused on average behavioral
responses, our focus here is on the potential individual heterogeneity in the behavioral response
and its implications (in this case, for risk scoring). In this sense, our paper relates to previous work
analyzing the role of heterogeneity in the behavioral response in contributing to adverse selection
in an employer-provided health insurance setting (Einav et al. 2013a; Shepard 2015).


I. Data and Empirical Strategy
The central premise behind our analysis of risk scoring is that an individual’s medical spending is
determined by both underlying health and economic choices, both of which are potentially hetero-
geneous across individuals. We demonstrate this simply and visually, using data from Medicare
Part D, the prescription drug coverage component of Medicare that was added in 2006. As of
November 2012, 32 million people (about 60% of Medicare bene…ciaries) were enrolled in Part D,
with expenditures projected to be $60 billion in 2013, or about 11% of total Medicare spending
(Kaiser Family Foundation 2012a, 2012b). Unlike Medicare Parts A and B for hospital and doctor
coverage, which provide a uniform public insurance package for all enrollees (except those who se-
lect into the managed care option, Medicare Advantage), private insurance companies o¤er various
Medicare Part D contracts, and are reimbursed by Medicare as a function of their enrollees’ risk
scores.
    While the exact features of the plans o¤ered vary, they are all based around a standard design,
shown in Figure 1. The discontinuous increase in the out-of-pocket price individuals face when they
cross into the “donut hole” (or “gap”; see Figure 1) provides the research design that enables us
to detect the responsiveness of individuals to the out-of-pocket price. As discussed in more detail
in our earlier work (Einav, Finkelstein, and Schrimpf 2015), standard price theory suggests that
individuals’annual spending will “bunch”around the convex kink in the budget set created by the
gap. Importantly, the extent of bunching should be greater and more noticeable for individuals who
are associated with greater price sensitivity.

A. Data We use data on a 20% random sample of all Medicare part D bene…ciaries over the years
2007-2009. The data include basic demographic information (such as age and gender) and detailed
information on the cost-sharing characteristics of each bene…ciary’s prescription drug plan. We
also observe detailed, claim-level information on our bene…ciaries’Medicare utilization from 2006-
2010. This includes both prescription drug purchases (covered under Medicare Part D), as well as
inpatient, emergency room, and outpatient (non emergency) use (covered under Medicare Part A
and B). Finally, we observe mortality through 2010.
    We use the same sample that we used in Einav, Finkelstein, and Schrimpf (2015) with the
additional restriction that bene…ciaries were enrolled in Medicare in the previous year. It excludes
various groups of bene…ciaries for whom the empirical strategy is not applicable, such as individuals



                                                   4
in Medicare Advantage and certain low income individuals for whom the basic bene…t design we
are studying does not apply. We also limit the analysis to individuals aged 65 and over. See Einav,
Finkelstein, and Schrimpf (2015) for a complete discussion and details of the sample.
    Our analysis sample consists of 3.7 million bene…ciary-years (1.6 million unique bene…ciaries)
during the years 2007-2009. The average age in our sample is 76, and about two thirds of the
individuals are females. Average annual, per-bene…ciary drug spending is just over $1,900 dollars;
on average, approximately $800 are paid out of pocket. Spending is very right skewed: about 5
percent of bene…ciaries have no annual drug spending, median spending is about $1,400, and the
90th percentile is about $4,000.
    As noted, there is variation in the insurance contract design, including the extent of any coverage
in the gap. On average, a bene…ciary in our sample faces a 60 cent increase in out-of-pocket spending
for every dollar spent, as his annual spending hits the kink. Speci…cally, we estimate that average
out-of-pocket cost sharing in our sample is 34 cents on the dollar below the kink and 93 cents on
the dollar in the gap. The exact location of the kink, as a function of total drug spending, also
varies across observations in our sample depending on the year, but on average it hits at roughly
the 75th percentile of the drug spending distribution.
    We use the Centers of Medicare and Medicaid’s Services’(CMS) 2012 RxHCC risk adjustment
model which is designed to predict a bene…ciary’s prescription drug spending in year  as a function
of their inpatient and outpatient diagnosis data from year  ¬ 1, as well as demographic information
(including gender, age, and the original reason for entitlement to Medicare). The model takes more
than 14,000 disease (ICD-9) codes and aggregates them into 167 “condition categories.”The model
imposes a hierarchy on the condition categories in order to group them together into clinically
meaningful diagnoses which predict costs. These …nal “hierarchical condition categories” (HCCs)
are the level of diagnoses used to specify the risk score model, out of which the model selects those
HCCs that are found to be most predictive of drug spending.
    The …nal version of the risk adjustment model uses an additively separable predictive model,
which relies on risk-score coe¢ cients that are associated with 78 selected HCCs from year  ¬ 1,
a gender dummy variable, dummy variables for each …ve-year age bin, and a dummy variable
associated with the original reason for Medicare entitlement. Predicted year- drug spending is
then computed by simply adding up all the risk-score coe¢ cients that are associated with those
dummy variables that are “turned on” for a given bene…ciary. For an individual’s …rst year in
Medicare (typically when he turns 65), when diagnosis information from the previous year is not
available, a new-enrollee risk score is generated solely on the basis of the demographic information.
All predictions are normalized by the prediction for a representative Part D bene…ciary, who is
assigned a risk score of 1.2
    Private insurers submit annual bids to CMS for their projected costs of covering a Medicare
   2
       CMS’ risk adjustment models for Medicare Advantage operate in a similar way, except that they are designed
to predict overall Medicare spending (not just drug spending), and include variables for Medicaid eligibility and a
di¤erent selection of HCCs.



                                                         5
Part D bene…ciary with a risk score of 1 (excluding catastrophic coverage provided by CMS). CMS
calculates the market’s average bid and multiplies it by an individual’s risk score to determine the
direct subsidy paid to the private insurer. A similar methodology is used to reimburse private
insurers providing Medicare Advantage coverage. Our sample average Part D risk score is 0.88,
indicating that they are 12 percent less expensive to cover than the representative Part D bene…ciary.

B. Empirical strategy We use simple graphical illustrations of the average characteristics of
individuals as a function of total annual drug spending to illustrate the two dimensions of hetero-
geneity that are our focus: heterogeneity in health and heterogeneity in the behavioral response to
the contract. Monotonic patterns of individual average demographic characteristics and diagnoses
as a function of total drug spending show the heterogeneity in health that is the focus of current
risk scoring. Sharp deviations from these monotonic patterns around the kink in the budget set
illustrate heterogeneity in the behavioral response to the contract.
    Our strategy for detecting heterogeneity in the behavioral response to the contract builds on our
prior work detecting the average behavioral response to the contract from the fact that individuals
bunch at the kink. Figure 2 replicates this prior bunching analysis from Einav, Finkelstein, and
Schrimpf (2015). Because the kink location has changed from year to year (from $2,400 in 2007,
to $2,510 in 2008, and $2,700 in 2009), in all our …gures we normalize annual spending by the kink
location. We plot the distribution of (normalized) annual spending (in $20 bins) for individuals
whose spending is within $2,000 of the kink (on either side). This constitutes 66% of our sample.
The presence of signi…cant “excess mass,” or “bunching” of annual spending levels around the
convex kink in the budget set (that is created by the gap) indicates the presence of a behavioral
response to the increased consumer cost-sharing at the kink. The response to the kink is apparent:
there is a noticeable spike in the distribution of annual spending around the kink. In Einav,
Finkelstein, and Schrimpf (2015) we presented this result in greater detail, showing how the location
of the spike moves as the kink location changes from year to year and analyzing the types of drugs
that individuals appear to stop purchasing when they slow down their drug utilization and “bunch”
at the kink.
    In this paper, we focus instead on heterogeneity in the responsiveness across di¤erent groups
of individuals, interpreting greater bunching around the kink for di¤erent populations as re‡ecting
greater demand sensitivity to out-of-pocket price. We identify heterogeneity in this behavioral
response by documenting sharp changes in the presence of speci…c individual characteristics around
the kink. An individual characteristic (such as being male or having a particular health condition)
that is over-represented among individuals around the kink indicates that individuals with this
characteristic have a greater behavioral response to the kink (and are therefore over-represented
around the kink). Conversely, a characteristic which is under-represented among individuals whose
spending is around the kink suggests that individuals with this characteristic are less responsive to
the contract.




                                                  6
II. Results
A. Evidence of two-dimensional heterogeneity In Figure 3 we present several summary
statistics on the bene…ciaries, by their spending bin. Summary statistics are mostly monotone in
annual spending in expected ways: individuals who spend more are older and sicker. This illustrates
the heterogeneity in underlying health that current risk scoring is designed to capture.
    The novel observation in Figure 3, however, is not the monotone pattern, but rather the no-
ticeable non-monotone pattern around the kink for some of the individual attributes. Recall that
bene…ciaries bunch around the kink (see Figure 2). Therefore, the distinct demographics around
the kink location capture the distinct demographics of those bene…ciaries who are more likely to
bunch around the kink, or in other words, the more price sensitive individuals.
    Figure 3(a) shows the patterns of various demographics: age (top panel) and gender (bottom
panel). Average age is generally monotonically increasing in annual spending, but there is a sharp
dip in average age at the kink. Likewise, there is a sharp dip in the probability of being female
right around the kink. That is, we …nd that younger males are more likely to bunch around the
kink, which we interpret as evidence that they are more price elastic.
    Figure 3(b) examines the frequency of a handful of selected health conditions (HCCs) that enter
the risk adjustment formula. The frequency of each condition is generally increasing monotonically
in annual spending, re‡ecting the fact that individuals with a given condition spend, on average,
more. However, for some of the conditions there appear to be some noticeable non-monotone
patterns around the kink. In particular, the probability of depression and congestive heart failure
appear to dip slightly around the kink, suggesting that these conditions are associated with a lower
drug use response to price. By contrast, some other health conditions – such as coronary artery
disease or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and asthma – are not associated with
any noticeable pattern around the kink, suggesting that these conditions are not associated with a
price response.
    Finally, Figure 3(c) examines mortality and non-drug healthcare utilization in the subsequent
calendar year (year  + 1) as a function of annual drug spending in the current year (year ).
Speci…cally we look at mortality for the full year ( + 1) and emergency room (ER) visits, inpatient
admissions, and (non-ER) outpatient visits during January to June of  + 1. Again, there is a
natural monotone pattern: individuals who spend more on drugs in year  are presumably sicker,
and are therefore associated with greater non-drug healthcare utilization and greater mortality in
the subsequent year. However, once again, there are distinct non-monotonicities around the kink.
The probability of death in year  + 1 drops sharply for those who are around the kink. The …gure
also shows some evidence that individuals who are approaching the kink in year  are less likely
to use other medical care (emergency room, non-emergency outpatient care, or inpatient care) in
the …rst six months of year  + 1. The e¤ect on the use of other medical care is weaker, as it is
not based on a non-monotone pattern around the kink, but only relies on the local change in slope
around the kink.
    The interpretation of Figure 3(c) is a little more subtle. We interpret it as additional evidence


                                                 7
that the individuals who are more price sensitive and therefore bunch at the kink are also healthier,
as measured by their subsequent (non-drug) healthcare use and mortality rate.3 Of course, since
subsequent health and healthcare use are potentially directly a¤ected by current drug utilization
decisions, it is possible that these results re‡ect a causal treatment e¤ect of drug utilization (which
varies across individuals depending on their price sensitivity) on health.

B. Risk scores do not capture both dimensions Figure 4 illustrates the other key point of
the paper: the current risk scores do not capture heterogeneity across individuals in their behavioral
response to the contract. Figure 4(a) presents a similar analysis to those shown in Figure 3, except
that we now summarize the risk scores that Medicare Part D assigns these individuals.
    It shows an overall smooth, monotone pattern of average Part D risk score, re‡ecting (by
design) that individuals with higher average spending have higher risk scores. Strikingly, however,
the individuals around the kink (i.e. those who are more likely to be “bunchers”) appear to follow
the increasing pattern of health spending risk scores, without any visible pattern around the kink.
That is, the health spending risk score predicts well spending under the observed contract –as it is
designed to do –without capturing (by design) the fact that some of this spending re‡ects a price
response, which is endogenous to the coverage contract.
    There are two di¤erent possible ways to reconcile the evidence in Figure 3 that healthier in-
dividuals are more likely to bunch at the kink, with the evidence in Figure 4(a) that the Part D
risk scores do not re‡ect any lower predicted spending for individuals at the kink. One is that the
demographics that change sharply around the kink in Figure 3 are not quantitatively important in
generating risk scores, and thus do not a¤ect much the average risk scores in Figure 4. The other
is that there are other components of the risk score that move in the opposite direction around
the kink, thus o¤setting the patterns presented in Figure 3. The interpretation does not a¤ect our
main point, which is that the current risk scores do not capture di¤erences in spending that arise
from di¤erences in the behavioral response to the contract.
    Our analysis suggests that the monotone pattern of risk scores through the kink in Figure 4(a)
in fact re‡ects o¤setting e¤ects: the characteristics that exhibit greater propensity around the kink
have a noticeable e¤ect on risk scores, but they are o¤set by other characteristics that display the
opposite pattern at the kink. To determine this, we generated a prediction of the value of each
component of the risk score around the kink, using its values below the kink. That is, for each
component of the risk score (age category, gender, and each speci…c HCC), we ran a linear regression
based on the relationship between spending and that component of the risk score in the (-$2,000,-
$200) range and then, using the estimated regression, generated predictions for that component
in the (-$200,+$200) range. We then split the individual components into those that exhibited
excess bunching around the kink (that is, those whose actual values in the (-$200,+$200) range
   3
       Interpreting these patterns as re‡ecting heterogeneity in underlying health (rather than an e¤ect of drug spending
on subsequent health) is also consistent with a related …nding by Joyce, Zissimopoulos, and Goldman (2013), that the
decline in drug purchases for diabetics who entered the gap is not associated with increased use of medical services.



                                                             8
was on average higher than the corresponding prediction in this range) and those that exhibited a
dip around the kink (that is, those whose actual values in the (-$200,+$200) range was on average
lower than the corresponding prediction in this range). We then produced two di¤erent versions
of “predicted” overall risk scores. In one, we used the predicted values for those components that
exhibit bunching around the kink and the actual values for the rest. In the other, we used the
predicted values for those components that exhibit dips around the kink, and the actual values for
the rest. If the components that exhibit bunching and dipping around the kink do not do so in
a manner that is quantitatively important for the risk score, we would expect these two di¤erent
versions of the predicted risk scores to lie very close to each other (and to the actual risk score)
around the kink. Figure 4(b) shows that, in fact, the two di¤erent versions of the predicted risk
scores lie apart from each other on either side of the actual risk score. This suggests that the
patterns for individual components around the kink are quantitatively important, but o¤set each
other. Table 1 shows the underlying components that are most important in a¤ecting the positive
and negative shifts in risk scores around the kink.

C. A quantitative assessment of heterogeneity in the behavioral response These …ndings
document that there is heterogeneity in the behavioral response to cost-sharing that is not captured
by the risk score. A natural question is whether this has quantitatively important implications,
not only at the kink (which is the focus of our research design) but more generally throughout the
non-linear budget set created by the contract. To answer this, one needs to develop and estimate
a behavioral model of healthcare spending under di¤erent contract designs, and investigate the
extent to which an individual’s ranking in the spending distribution is the same under alternative
contracts.
    As we discuss in the next section, given that insurers could apply any non-linear transformation
to a given set of risk scores, the key role of a risk scoring system is in its ordinal ranking of
individuals in term of their expected risk. Thus, one way to assess the quantitative importance
of the heterogeneity in the behavioral response to the contract design is to quantify the extent to
which individuals’position in the population’s expected risk distribution (that is, in the contract-
speci…c risk score distribution) gets reshu- ed as they move across contracts. If heterogeneity in
the behavioral response to the contract is not quantitatively important, individuals’ranking would
remain relatively stable across contracts.
    The research design we have used thus far is not su¢ cient for such an exercise, as it doesn’t
attempt to model health utilization behavior under alternative contract designs. However, we can
shed some light on this question by using the model of healthcare utilization that we developed and
estimated in our earlier, related work (Einav, Finkelstein, and Schrimpf 2015). There we develop
a complete, dynamic behavioral model of the individual’s drug purchasing decisions under non-
linear coverage contract, allowing for heterogeneity across individuals in both health risk and in
the spending response to coverage. In our prior paper, we estimated the model’s parameters using
the same data set as in the current paper; the “bunching at the kink” we have examined here is
one of the elements used for identi…cation in estimating that model. In Appendix Table A1, we


                                                 9
use the model estimates to predict spending under the standard contract shown in Figure 1, and
then predict spending (for the same set of individuals and associated sequences of health shocks)
for two alternative, counterfactual contracts. One is a “…lled gap”contract that eliminates the gap
by providing pre-gap cost sharing up to the catastrophic coverage limit; the A¤ordable Care Act
aims to make this type of contract become the standard contract by 2020. A second contract is
actuarially equivalent to the standard contract shown in Figure 1, but it eliminates the deductible
in the standard contract, and instead o¤ers higher cost-sharing (of 38.9 cents for each dollar, instead
of 25 cents) for spending below the gap.
    Appendix Table A1 shows the extent to which individuals’ ranking in the spending distribu-
tion changes under alternative contracts, relative to their spending percentile under the standard
contract presented in Figure 1. We split individuals into ventiles of spending under the standard
contract, and report (for each ventile) the share of the individuals who are expected to stay within
the same ventile, and the share that moves to other spending ventiles (up or down) under the
alternative contract. Of course, expected spending is primarily driven by expected health, so the
vast majority of individuals remain within the same spending ventile. Yet, as Appendix Table A1
shows, a non-negligible share of individuals get reshu- ed in their ranking, especially in the region
where the price changes. For example, Panel A shows that “…lling”the coverage gap leads to a fair
amount of “reshu- ing” in the expected spending of high spenders, who are those who are most
a¤ected by the change in coverage in the gap. Panel B shows that eliminating the deductible leads
to a fair amount of “reshu- ing”in the expected spending of low spenders, who are those are likely
to be a¤ected the most by the deductible.
    This exercise illustrates the perils of using predicted spending under one contract to generate
predicted spending (i.e. risk scores) under alternative contracts. The results in Appendix Table A1
show that if one generated a risk score based on spending under the standard contract and used it
to predict spending under alternative contracts, the generated risk scores would be highly imprecise
for those regions of spending that are most a¤ected by the alternative contract.
    A natural follow-up question is how important this imprecision of risk scores would be for
equilibrium cream skimming and market outcomes. Answering this question empirically would
require not only a model of demand (that is, of health care utilization), but also a model of
competition and pricing, which is beyond the scope of the current paper. Instead, in the next
section we brie‡y explore theoretically some potential implications for cream skimming incentives
and optimal risk adjustment.


III. Implications
The evidence in the preceding section established that Medicare’s risk scores re‡ect expected med-
ical spending under the existing bene…t design, and that this one-dimensional score hides a richer
heterogeneity that determines medical spending. The multi-dimensional heterogeneity that deter-
mines medical spending re‡ects heterogenous price sensitivity as well as heterogeneous health. In


                                                  10
this …nal section, we illustrate theoretically how reimbursement based on the (unidimensional) risk
score can create incentives for private providers to cream-skim customers whose behavior under
their private contract is likely to make them lower cost than the risk score would predict (as it is
based on behavior under an alternative contract). Importantly, this incentive for cream-skimming
cannot be combatted by richer statistical modeling of utilization behavior under a given contract.
    Cream-skimming by providers of individuals who are lower cost than their risk score would
suggest is the classic problem analyzed by theoretical and empirical work on risk scoring (Glazer
and McGuire 2000; Newhouse et al. 2012; Brown et al. 2014). In these existing analyses, if the risk
scoring is “perfect” in a statistical sense (i.e. conditional on the risk score, there are no residual
characteristics of the individual that predict spending under a given contract) the cream-skimming
problem goes away.4
    However, once we enrich the model to allow individuals to have heterogeneous behavioral re-
sponses to the coverage contract, strategic incentives for cream skimming can still exist, even in
the presence of “perfect” risk scoring under a given contract. This is because individuals of the
same risk score (and hence same predicted medical spending in one particular contract) may have
di¤erent predicted medical spending under a di¤erent contract, due to their di¤erential behavioral
responses. Providers therefore can have an incentive to try to design contracts to attract those
whose behavioral response to an alternative contract makes them lower expected cost than their
risk score would predict.

A. A stylized framework We start with a stylized model of healthcare utilization that empha-
sizes two forms of individual heterogeneity. The model is drawn from our earlier work (Einav et al.
2013a), which used a similar framework to examine a related question in a di¤erent setting.
    An individual in the model is de…ned by a two-dimensional type, ( ; ). In this de…nition,
     0 denotes the individual’s underlying health and  0 denotes his price sensitivity of demand
for medical care, or how responsive healthcare utilization choices are to insurance coverage. We
focus on these two di¤erent dimensions that determine healthcare utilization.5 We assume, in the
spirit of the empirical results in the last section, that they cannot be separately distinguished by a
unidimensional risk score.
    For illustrative purposes, we consider individuals with a linear insurance coverage with a price
of healthcare of  2 [0 1]. That is, for every dollar of spending on healthcare, the individual pays
 and the insurance provider pays 1 ¬ .
    Individuals make their healthcare utilization decision to maximize a tradeo¤ between health
and money (residual income). Health depends on one’s underlying health but is increasing in his
   4
       Interestingly, Brown et al. (2014) have recently highlighted that improvements in risk scoring that do not make
the score “perfect” may, perversely, exacerbate cream-skimming.
   5
       For concreteness, we model heterogeneity in the behavioral response to price, since this is what we document in
the empirical results. In principle, one could derive similar analyses with behavioral heterogeneity in the response to
other aspects of the contract, such as coverage of “star” hospitals, as in Shepard (2015).



                                                           11
monetized healthcare use (or medical spending) given by  0 Residual income () is decreasing
in  at a rate that depends on the health insurance contract’s . More speci…cally, individual utility
is given by
                                                  1
                       (; ; ) = ( ¬ ) ¬         ( ¬ )2 + ( ¬  )                           (1)
                                                 2
The …rst component (in square brackets) captures the individual’s health, which can be improved
by greater utilization . The second component captures residual income, which is given by the
individual’s income  net of his out-of-pocket spending  .
    Optimal medical spending  is chosen to maximize utility, that is by solving max 0 (; ; ).
This yields the …rst order condition

                                      ( ; ) =    +  (1 ¬ )                                   (2)

Optimal medical spending depends on the individual’s underlying health ( ), the out-of-pocket
price of medical care (), and the responsiveness of spending to that price (). Individual utility,
given optimal medical spending, is then given by
                                                                   1
                        ( ; ) = ( ( ; ); ; ) =  ¬      +     (1 ¬ )2                   (3)
                                                                   2
    To facilitate intuition of the model, consider the case of full coverage ( = 0) and no insurance
( = 1). In these cases, equation (2) indicates that the individual would spend =1 = with
no insurance and =0 = +  with full insurance. Thus, individual medical spending depends
on both a “level” term and a “slope” term . The individual has a level spending no matter
what coverage he faces, but he then spends an additional  when he has full coverage and does
not need to pay for this additional utilization out of pocket. It is natural to view as related to
the individual health, re‡ecting health conditions that need to get treated regardless of insurance
coverage.
    This  term is typically referred to as “moral hazard”in the health economics literature (Pauly
1968). The structural interpretation of  is not obvious. It likely re‡ects a combination of indi-
vidual preferences over health and income as well as the nature of his health conditions and the
extent to which treatment or type of treatment is optional or discretionary. Fortunately, the exact
interpretation of  is not crucial for the main point we try to advance in this paper, although our
empirical work shed some light on the individual characteristics that correlate with . Rather, the
key point is that two di¤erent economic objects – health and behavioral response to insurance
contract  –determine medical spending .

B. Relation to empirical work The empirical results shown in Figure 3 provided a simple
illustration of one of the two key points of the paper: a one-dimensional summary measure is
unlikely to be su¢ cient in describing individual types. The combination of generally monotone
patterns in average individual characteristics as a function of annual drug spending and systematic
non-monotonicity around the kink suggests that individuals vary not only in the health ( ) but also
in their responsiveness to contract features like price (). Our results also indicate which types of

                                                  12
individuals exhibit greater price sensitivity: those who “bunch”at the kink are younger, more likely
to be male, and appear healthier on many – but not all – measures of health conditions. These
individuals appear to have greater ‡exibility regarding prescription …lling. The results therefore
suggest that in our setting, at least for individuals around the kink, underlying health and price
sensitivity  are negatively correlated. The fact that the greater price responsiveness is more
pronounced for some health measures but not for others underscores the richness of the potential
underlying heterogeneity; our summary health measure itself likely encodes a richer heterogeneity,
although in the context of our simple model a two-dimensional description of individuals would be
su¢ cient.
    This visual evidence of multi-dimensional heterogeneity complements our previous work where
we estimated multi-dimensional heterogeneity in the context of a speci…c structural model of in-
surance demand, and explored its implications for consumer selection of insurance coverage with
di¤erent levels of cost-sharing (Einav et al. 2013a). Here, the empirical evidence of heterogeneity
along two dimensions – moral hazard type as well as health type – is relatively model-free (and
arguably more compelling), coming directly from the data and the research design provided by
the kink in the budget set. Our substantive focus here is also di¤erent. We examine whether
this multi-dimensional heterogeneity is captured by current risk scoring models, and the resultant
implications.
    Figure 4 illustrated the other key empirical point in the paper: current risk score methods do
not capture the behavioral responsiveness () dimension of individual heterogeneity. This is by
design, not only in the Medicare context but in most other risk adjustment models around the
world (Ellis 2008). The Medicare risk scores attempt to predict  under a particular contract;
they are constructed by employing a statistical predictive approach that attempts to …nd the best
predictor of observed cost under Medicare Fee for Service. They therefore do not attempt to model
how costs might vary across individuals under some other insurance contract in which individual
behavior might di¤er from what is observed under Medicare Fee for Service, and which there might
be heterogeneity across individuals in this behavioral response. Without an economic model of how
costs under one contract may di¤er from those under another due to individual choices (and the
potential heterogeneity in this di¤erence across individuals), or a separate observed outcome that
would allow the risk adjustment to observe or proxy for this second dimension of heterogeneity, it
would be di¢ cult to capture a second dimension of heterogeneity.

C. Cream-skimming incentives We brie‡y explore some of the theoretical implications of the
fact that current risk scores do not attempt to capture cost heterogeneity arising from heterogeneity
in behavioral responses to a contract. The appendix provides a highly stylized theoretical example
that illustrates how cream-skimming incentives can still exist in the presence of a “perfect” risk
score under a given contract when individuals are heterogeneous in their behavioral responses to
contracts. In the context of our model, a statistically “perfect” risk score means that there are
no residual characteristics that predict an individual’s  +   conditional on their risk score. We
brie‡y summarize the example and …ndings here.


                                                 13
    We assume that the government o¤ers a default contract, and consider a private (monopolist)
insurer who o¤ers a contract that competes to attract bene…ciaries from the default contract.6 We
assume the default public coverage provides full insurance (i.e.  = 0), while the private plan has
a technology to completely eliminate -related medical spending. Thus, in our stylized framework
–see especially equations (2) and (3) –bene…ciary  chooses medical spending level  +   under
the public option, but only spends  if enrolled by the private plan. The government reimburses
the private insurer based on the risk scores of the bene…ciaries it attracts. Because the government
can only observe medical spending under its own, public contract, it can only set risk scores for
bene…ciaries and reimburse the private provider based on enrollees’ medical spending under the
public contract (  +   ). As Figures 3 and 4 illustrated empirically, this risk score does not
distinguish between bene…ciary costs arising from or from .
    Under these assumptions, the socially e¢ cient allocation is for everyone to be covered by the
private plan, which eliminates ine¢ cient, -related medical utilization. However, enrollees obtain
greater utility in the less restrictive, public coverage, forcing the government to provide subsidies
(potentially as a function of the risk score) to the private plan in order for it to have incentives to
attract enrollees through lower premiums. This creates a tradeo¤ for government policy: greater
subsidies create a more e¢ cient allocation, but at the cost of higher public expenditures, and thus
a greater social cost of public funds.
    We analyze equilibrium selection into the private plan for a given government subsidy policy;
a subsidy policy de…nes the government subsidy amount provided to the private plan for enrolling
an individual with a given risk score. For a given subsidy policy, there are two con‡icting selection
pressures. On the one hand, higher- individuals are the most pro…table for the private insurer to
enroll and therefore the private insurer has an incentive to try to attract these individuals. On the
other hand, higher- individuals are also the ones with the greatest incentive to remain under the
public coverage.
    The appendix presents a standard mechanism design solution to this con‡ict of incentives.
It shows that, in equilibrium, the highest- individuals enroll in the private plan. These are
the individuals for whom the e¢ ciency bene…ts of the private plan are highest. However, the
socially e¢ cient outcome of having everyone enrolled in the private plan may not be the constrained
optimum given the social cost of the public funds required to achieve it.
    We can in fact solve for the optimal subsidy by the government as a function of the equilibrium
solution to a given subsidy level. The optimal subsidy problem resembles a standard optimal
pricing problem. Our discussion in the appendix highlights some of the key economic objects that
determine the optimal subsidy, and which would need to be estimated in any particular application
designed to analyze optimal risk adjustment in this environment.
   6
       One loose, real-world analog might be the Medicare Advantage plans o¤ered by private insurers who compete to
attract bene…ciaries from traditional fee-for-service-Medicare (Newhouse et al. 2012). Of course, for simplicity we
have considered a monopolist competing against a (passive) public option, whereas oligopoly is presumably a more
sensible assumption for the real-world Medicare Advantage plans.



                                                         14
IV. Conclusions
Our objective in this paper was to highlight the fact that risk scores that are commonly used in
credit and insurance markets are not merely statistical objects, as they are generated by economic
behavior. We illustrated this point empirically in the speci…c context of Medicare Part D, the
public prescription drug insurance program that covers over 30 million individuals, and explored
their implications theoretically. We exploited the famous “donut hole” where insurance becomes
discontinuously much less generous at the margin.
    Using this research design, we empirically illustrated two conceptual points. First, analyzing
the average demographic and health characteristics of individuals as a function of annual drug
spending, we showed that spending di¤erences across individuals re‡ect not only heterogeneity in
underlying health but also heterogeneity in the underlying behavioral response to the insurance
contract. Second, we show that the current (statistical) risk scores –which are designed to predict
spending under a given contract –do not capture this second dimension of heterogeneity.
    In the second part of the paper, we use a highly stylized theoretical example to explore some of
the potential implications of these …ndings for the standard use of risk scores, which is to predict
outcomes out of sample under other contracts and use these predictions to set reimbursement
rates. We showed that standard risk scoring can create incentives for private insurers to cream-
skim individuals whose (unpriced) behavioral response to the contract they o¤er will make them
lower cost than what is predicted by the risk score that was generated under a di¤erent contract.
A key point is that, when there is heterogeneity in the behavioral response to the contract, these
cream-skimming incentives can still exist even in the presence of “perfect”risk scoring under a given
contract. While we thus illustrated, in the context of a speci…c theoretical example, the possibility
of equilibrium selection on the behavioral response to di¤erent contracts, we did not establish its
empirical existence or importance in a speci…c context. This would be a natural area for future
work.
    One potential response to the multi-dimensional heterogeneity we document is to move beyond
a one-dimensional risk score and customize the risk score formula to the speci…c contracts to which
it is applied. Risk scoring is currently conducted as a statistical prediction exercise of behavior
under a given contract without any such adjustment, while our paper suggests the need to consider
economic as well as statistical forces in designing risk scoring that is applied to other contracts. In
practice, to do so would require empirical estimates of the heterogeneity in the behavioral response
to alternative counterfactual contracts –perhaps of the ‡avor of those shown in Section II. Given
the increased reliance on various models of risk scoring in many important markets, we view such
analysis of optimal risk scoring in the presence of multi-dimensional heterogeneity in speci…c credit
and insurance contexts to be an interesting –and potentially important –area for future work.




                                                  15
References
Brown, Jason, Mark Duggan, Ilyana Kuziemko, and William Woolston. 2014. “How
does Risk Selection Respond to Risk Adjustment? New Evidence from the Medicare Advantage
Program.” American Economic Review 104 (10): 3335-64.
    Dafny, Leemore. 2005. “How Do Hospitals Respond to Price Changes?”American Economic
Review 95 (5): 1525-47.
    Duggan, Mark, and Fiona Scott Morton. 2010. “The E¤ect of Medicare Part D on
Pharmaceutical Prices and Utilization.” American Economic Review 100 (1): 590-607.
    Edelberg, Wendy. 2006. “Risk-Based Pricing of Interest Rates for Consumer Loans.”Journal
of Monetary Economics 53 (8): 2283-98.
    Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, Stephen Ryan, Paul Schrimpf, and Mark Cullen.
2013a. “Selection on Moral Hazard in Health Insurance.” American Economic Review 103 (1):
178-219.
    Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Paul Schrimpf. 2015. “The Response of Drug
Expenditure to Non-Linear Contract Design: Evidence from Medicare Part D.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 130 (2): 841-99.
    Einav, Liran, Mark Jenkins, and Jonathan Levin. 2013b. “The Impact of Credit Scoring
on Consumer Lending.” RAND Journal of Economics 44 (2): 249-74.
    Ellis, Randall P. 2008. “Risk Adjustment in Health Care Markets: Concepts and Applica-
tions.” In M. Lu and E Jonsson (eds.), Financing Health Care: New Ideas for a Changing Society,
Chapter 8. Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., Weinheim, Germany.
    Geruso, Michael, and Timothy Layton. 2014. “Risk Selection, Risk adjustment, and
Manipulable Medical Coding: Evidence from Medicare.” Mimeo, UT Austin.
    Glazer, Jacob, and Thomas G. McGuire. 2000. “Optimal Risk Adjustment in Markets
with Adverse Selection: An Application to Managed Care.” American Economic Review 90 (4):
1055-71.
    Joyce, Geo¤rey F., Julie Zissimopoulos, and Dana P. Goldman. 2013. “Digesting the
Doughnut Hole.” Journal of Health Economics 32 (6): 1345-55.
    Kaiser Family Foundation. 2012a. http://www.k¤.org/medicare/upload/7044-13.pdf
    Kaiser Family Foundation. 2012b. http://www.k¤.org/medicare/upload/1066-15.pdf
    Medicare Payment Advisory Commission. 2009. Report to the Congress: Medicare
Payment Policy.
    Newhouse, Joseph P. 1996. “Policy Watch: Medicare.” Journal of Economic Perspectives
10 (3): 159-67.
    Newhouse, Joseph P., Mary Price, Jie Huang, J. Michael McWilliams, and John
Hsu. 2012. “Steps To Reduce Favorable Risk Selection In Medicare Advantage Largely Succeeded,
Boding Well For Health Insurance Exchanges.” Health A¤ airs 31 (12): 2618-28.
    Pauly, Mark. 1968. “The Economics of Moral Hazard: Comment.” American Economic
Review 58 (3): 531-37.


                                              16
    Poterba, James. 1996. “Government Intervention in The Markets for Education and Health
Care: How and Why?” In Fuchs, Victor (Ed.), Individual and Social Responsibility. University of
Chicago Press.
    Shepard, Mark. 2015. “Hospital Network Competition and Adverse Selection: Evidence from
the Massachusetts Health Insurance Exchange.” Mimeo, Harvard University.
    Song, Yunjie, Jonathan Skinner, Julie Bynum, Jason Sutherland, John Wennberg,
and Elliott Fisher. 2010. “Regional Variations in Diagnostic Practices.” New England Journal
of Medicine July 1: 45-53.
    Van de Ven, Wynand P.M.M., and Randall Ellis. 2000. “Risk Adjustment in Compet-
itive Health Plan Markets.” In A. Culyer and J. Newhouse (eds.), Handbook of Health Economics
Vol. 1. Elsevier.




                                              17
Appendix: An illustrative example of cream-skimming incentives
In this appendix we use a simple example to illustrate how cream-skimming incentives can still exist
in the presence of a “perfect”risk score under a given contract when individuals are heterogeneous
in their behavioral responses to contracts. We also consider the optimal risk adjustment policy for
the government in the presence of such incentives.
    For concreteness, we consider a speci…c, highly-stylized environment. Our objective is not
to derive results that can be directly applied to a speci…c real-world context, but simply to help
illustrate the potential new considerations that come into play as a result of the richer heterogeneity
documented in the paper.

Setting We assume the government o¤ers a default contract, and consider a private (monopolist)
insurer who o¤ers a contract that competes to attract bene…ciaries from the default contract. The
government reimburses the private insurer based on the risk scores of the bene…ciaries it attracts.
The key point is that an individual’s medical spending may di¤er under the private contract and
the government default contract. We show how this impacts provider cream-skimming incentives
under a given set of reimbursement rules.
    For simplicity, we assume that the default public coverage provides full insurance (i.e.  = 0 in
the framework of Section III). As a result, in our framework –see especially equations (2) and (3)
– bene…ciary  , who can be fully described by his two-dimensional type (     ), chooses medical
spending level  +   and obtains utility  =  +   2. The associated government spending 
is then  +   . These assumptions are summarized in …rst three rows of Appendix Table A2, in
the …rst column, to make them more easily comparable to our assumptions about the private plan,
summarized in the second column.
    We make the (extreme) assumption that the private plan can completely eliminate -related
medical spending. In other words, they can incentivize physicians to “perfectly” distinguish med-
ical spending associated with  – that is, medical spending that would have been made by the
bene…ciary even with no coverage – from medical spending associated with   , which would not
have occurred if the bene…ciary was uninsured. Moreover, we assume that the private plan will only
cover  -related medical spending. Under the private plan therefore, medical spending associated
with bene…ciary  is  and he obtains utility  =  as summarized in Appendix Table A2.
    The government reimburses the private insurer based on the current Medicare risk scores of
the bene…ciaries it enrolls; we denote these risk scores by  . We assume that the government can
only observe medical spending under its own, public contract, and thus can only score bene…ciaries
based on their predicted medical spending under the public contract. Risk scoring is thus based
on a prediction model of medical spending under public coverage. Speci…cally, the risk score  is
medical spending under the public plan;  =  +   As Figures 3 and 4 illustrated empirically, this
risk score does not distinguish between bene…ciary costs arising from or from . In keeping with
our focus on a challenge to risk scoring that exists even if risk scores are “perfect”in the statistical
sense, we also assume here that there are no residual characteristics of the individual that predict


                                                  18
  +   conditional on  .
    Given this “perfect” risk score  , private insurers receive a risk-adjusted transfer from the
government, ( ), for covering bene…ciary . It will be convenient to de…ne ( )            + ( )
as the sum of the cost this bene…ciary would have incurred under the public plan,  , and an
additional (positive or negative) subsidy ( ). Therefore, as shown in row 3 of Appendix Table
A2, government spending  under the public plan is given by bene…ciary medical spending under
this plan  +   , and under the private plan it is given by ( ) =  +   + (  +   ).
    As shown in row 4, insurer pro…ts  from covering individual  are given by the government
(risk-adjusted) transfer ( ) minus the cost to the insurer of covering individual  under the o¤ered
contract; private provider costs are  by assumption.7
    The bottom row of Appendix Table A2 shows the implications of each insurance allocation for
total surplus associated with bene…ciary . We de…ne total surplus as the sum of consumer surplus
and producer surplus, minus government spending (and its associated costs). For individual  it is
given by
                                         =  +  ¬ (1 + )                                     (4)

where  is the shadow cost of public funds.
    Given our assumptions, it is socially e¢ cient for everyone to be covered by the private plan if
there is no subsidy (( ) = 0), with the gain in e¢ ciency from enrolling bene…ciary  in the private
plan increasing in   . This is because we have assumed that under the private plan, insurance
coverage is still full, but does not apply to   -related medical spending; and under the assumptions
of our model,   -related medical spending is socially ine¢ cient. As a result, total surplus under the
private plan is higher by 05  for any bene…ciary  (see row 5 of Appendix Table A2). However,
as we will see below, the private provider would not …nd it optimal to cover all bene…ciaries due
to cream-skimming incentives, so an additional government subsidy ( ) would be needed to get
more bene…ciaries enrolled in the private plan. Optimal risk adjustment would thus trade o¤ these
two o¤setting forces: increasing allocative e¢ ciency from inducing more individuals to be covered
by private plan against the social cost of public funds for the subsidy needed to enroll additional
individuals in the private plan.

Private provider optimization problem We now consider the impact of the foregoing set-up
for the provider’s optimal (pro…t-maximizing) contracts and, therefore, for equilibrium cream-
skimming. We model the monopolist private insurer’s problem as a standard optimal contracting
model with incomplete information.
    The private provider observes the risk score  (which, recall, is simply spending under the public
contract) and o¤ers a family of contracts that are a function of the observed risk score  and a
self-reported (by bene…ciaries) type  0 . If a bene…ciary chooses a contract (  0 ), he would pay
a premium (  0 ) to the private insurer, and the private insurer would cover medical spending of
     7
         We abstract from any administrative costs of the private insurer which will not a¤ect the fundamental selection
analysis.



                                                             19
 0
   =  ¬  0 ; we note that, under our assumptions, this is the e¢ cient amount of medical spending
for someone with risk score  and type  0 . We assume that people know their true type ( ; ) when
choosing insurance plans. Insurers then design the contracts such that each bene…ciary truthfully
reveals his type, thus allowing the private provider to only authorize the -related medical spending
associated with the true .
    Consider the utility of bene…ciary of type ( ; ) from a private contract (  0 ). Recall that
 = +  is observed, and that individual medical spending under the private contract would be
given by 0 =  ¬  0 = +  ¬  0 . Plugging this into the utility function in equation (1) we obtain
utility under the private contract:
                                         ¬          1 ¬         2
                       ( ; ;  0 ) =     ¬ 0 ¬      ¬ 0       +  ¬ (  0 )               (5)
                                                   2

By constrast, staying in the public plan would result in utility of  + 05, as derived earlier (see
Appendix Table A2).
    Because  is observed and contractible, we can then solve the pro…t maximization problem of
the private provider separately for each . We denote by j the conditional (on ) cumulative
distribution function of . The private provider’s problem is to choose the menu of contracts (  0 )
in order to maximize pro…ts:
                      Z                                      Z
         max () = [( ) + () ¬ ( ¬ )] j () = [( ) + () + ] j ()          (6)
        ()

subject to an incentive compatibility (IC) constraint that makes bene…ciaries choose the contract
that matches their type
                            ( ; ; ) =  ¬ ( ) ( ; ;  0 ) 8 0                      (7)

and an individual rationality (IR) constraint that makes bene…ciaries willing to opt out of the public
plan and instead enroll in private coverage

                                  ( ; ; ) =  ¬ ( )    + 2                               (8)

    The IC constraint can be written as  = arg max0 ( ; ;  0 ). A necessary and su¢ cient
condition is that the IC constraint’s …rst order condition holds. Solving the IC constraint using
utility from the private contract de…ned in equation (5), gives ¬1 ¬  = 0, implying that
( ) = () ¬ , where () is the integration constant (which could depend on , as the solution
is conditional on ). Substituting this schedule into the IR constraint above (equation (8)), we
obtain  ¬ (() ¬ )  + 2. Thus selection into private coverage is given by:

                                                   2()                                           (9)

    Equation (9) describes equilibrium selection under the pro…t maximizing contract: for every risk
score , higher  bene…ciaries select into the private contract while lower  bene…ciaries remain
in the public plan. Thus, on one hand, selection will be in general favorable: the bene…ciaries
for whom it is most socially e¢ cient to be covered by the private provider will be covered by the

                                                    20
private provider. On the other hand, because risk scoring does not capture this second dimension
of heterogeneity, some fraction of bene…ciaries will ine¢ ciently remain covered by the public plan.
    Given the equilibrium selection rule in (9), the pro…t maximization problem from equation (6)
becomes

             max () = (() + ()) Pr(      2()j) = (() + ()) 1 ¬ j (2())        (10)
             ()

The monopolist therefore sets  () to solve the …rst order condition

                                            1 ¬ j (2 ())
                                   () =                     ¬ ()                            (11)
                                              2j (2 ())
                 0 ().
with j () = j
    This is a familiar pro…t maximization problem, very similar to the textbook optimal pricing
problem for a monopolist facing a downward sloping unit demand curve. The pro…t function in
equation (10) has the familiar form of      = ( ¬ )() where, here, price  is given by (),
marginal cost  is given by ¬(), and demand () is given by 1 ¬  . As in the textbook case,
the monopolist trades o¤ price vs. quantity: raising the price () will result in greater pro…ts
on inframarginal bene…ciaries, but a loss of marginal bene…ciaries to the public plan. The extent
of the loss of marginal bene…ciaries (and hence the optimal price ()) depends on the shape of
the demand curve, which in this case depends on the hazard rate of the distribution of . The
problem becomes similar to the textbook monopolist pricing problem because the private provider
does not observe , and his cream-skimming incentive –the greater pro…t he obtains from higher-
bene…ciaries –is exactly o¤set by the increased incentive of the higher- bene…ciaries to remain in
the public plan.

Implications for designing risk adjustment The analogy to the monopolist pricing problem
also makes it easy to see the role that alternative risk adjustment formulations could play. Looking
at equation (10), the government subsidy () can be thought of as shifting the monopolist’s
marginal cost, since () enters the pro…t function just like the negative of marginal cost. This
yields clear and natural comparative statics: an increase (decrease) in the subsidy () would provide
more (less) powerful incentives to the private provider to enroll additional bene…ciaries by reducing
(increasing) the “unit price” (). Therefore, as can be seen directly in equation (11), changes in
the subsidy () are partially passed through to the premium  ( ) =  () ¬ . The government
subsidy a¤ects the private provider’s pro…t maximizing pricing, and thereby a¤ects the equilibrium
selection of individuals to the private plan.
    Absent any social cost of public funds, the bottom row of Appendix Table A2 makes it clear
that the optimal subsidy should be high enough, so that the private provider would set () = 0 and
thereby, by equation (9), enroll all bene…ciaries. However, when the social cost of public funds is
positive (  0), the optimal subsidy is set to resolve a simple tradeo¤: higher () would e¢ ciently
enroll more bene…ciaries under the private plan, but would be associated with greater costs of public
funds.

                                                  21
    To see this tradeo¤ more formally, consider the government’s optimization problem. For a given
risk score , the government chooses the optimal transfer  () =  +  () in order to maximize
total surplus subject to the private insurer setting  ((); ) optimally.
    Relative to the total surplus that would arise from covering all bene…ciaries in the public plan,
the incremental surplus from allocating an individual to the private plan instead is then given by

                                   1
                 ((); ) =        j      j (2 ((); )) ¬ ()       1 ¬ j (2 ((); ))          (12)
                                   2

By increasing () the government indirectly decreases  () and thus (socially e¢ ciently) enrolls
more bene…ciaries in the private plan, at the cost of increasing the cost of public funds for all
inframarginal bene…ciaries who were already enrolled in the private plan. For a given risk score ,
the government would optimally set () to maximize  ((); ), with the optimal subsidy ()
decreasing in the cost of public funds 
    Thus far we have considered the optimal government subsidy  () for a given . Our analysis has
shown that the optimal risk adjustment –the function (), or equivalently the subsidy () = ()¬
 – can be solved for each  separately. Analysis of optimal risk adjustment requires determining
how the optimal subsidy  () varies with . This is in the spirit of inquiry of Glazer and McGuire
(2000), who found (in their unidimensional heterogeneity model) that the optimal risk adjustment
should amplify the observed risk scores.
    A full characterization of () would require assumptions (or ideally evidence) about the speci…c
objects, most importantly about the distribution j , which determines the shape of the demand
curve, and the social costs of public funds , which determines the cost of subsidies designed to
increase the set of people (e¢ ciently) covered by the private provider.8 The social cost of public
funds is typically assumed to be about 0.3 (Poterba, 1996). The conditional distribution j –i.e.
the shape of unobserved (by the government) individual type conditional on observed individual
spending under the government contract –would need to be estimated in the speci…c application.
In our empirical context, for example, some evidence on the shape of this function was provided
by our analysis of who “bunches” at the kink in the donut hole. Figure 3 indicated that healthier
individuals were more likely to bunch at the kink, suggesting that  and are negatively correlated,
at least around the donut hole, which may provide some guidance regarding j (recall, in our
example  =  + ).
   8
       Under a given set of assumptions about  and j ( ), it is easy (although typically cumbersome) to solve for the
optimal (). For example, inspection of equation (12) indicates that if j is uniformly distributed over [0 ()], the
optimal subsidy  () would scale proportionally with (). For the general case, however, the optimal () could be
either positive or negative, and could either increase or decrease (or not even be monotone) in .




                                                            22
Figure 1: Medicare Part D standard bene…t design (in 2008)




The …gure shows the standard bene…t design in 2008. “Pre-Kink coverage” refers to coverage prior to the
Initial Coverage Limit (ICL) which is where there is a kink in the budget set and the gap, or donut hole,
begins. The level at which catastrophic coverage kicks in is de…ned in terms of out-of-pocket spending (of
$4,050), which we convert to the total expenditure amount provided in the …gure. Once catastrophic coverage
kicks in, the actual standard coverage speci…es a set of co-pays (dollar amounts) for particular types of drugs;
in the …gure we use show a 7% co-insurance rate, which is the empirical average of these co-pays in our data.




                                                      23
Figure 2: Bunching of annual spending around the kink




Total annual prescription drug spending on the x-axis is reported relative to the (year-speci…c) location of
the kink, which is normalized to zero. Sample uses bene…ciary-years in our 2007-2009 baseline sample whose
annual spending is within $2,000 of the (year-speci…c) kink location. The points in the …gure display the
distribution of annual spending; each point represents the set of people that spent up to $50 above the value
that is on the x-axis, so that the …rst point represents individuals who spent between -$2,000 and -$1,950
from the kink, the second point represents individuals between -$1,950 and -$1,900, and so on. We normalize
the frequencies so that they add up to one for the range of annual spending shown. N = 2,506,305.




                                                     24
Figure 3(a): Variation in demographics around the kink




Total annual prescription drug spending on the x-axis is reported relative to the (year-speci…c) location of
the kink, which is normalized to zero. Sample uses bene…ciary-years in our 2007-2009 baseline sample whose
annual spending is within $2,000 of the (year-speci…c) kink location. The points in the …gure display the
statistic described on the y-axis for each group of bene…ciaries who spent up to $50 above the value that is
on the x-axis, so that the …rst point represents individuals who spent between -$2,000 and -$1,950 from the
kink, the second point represents individuals between -$1,950 and -$1,900, and so on. The small lines above
and below the points represent the 95% con…dence interval for each point. N = 2,506,305.




                                                    25
Figure 3(b): Variation in selected health conditions around the kink




Total annual prescription drug spending on the x-axis is reported relative to the (year-speci…c) location of
the kink, which is normalized to zero. Sample uses bene…ciary-years in our 2007-2009 baseline sample whose
annual spending is within $2,000 of the (year-speci…c) kink location. The points in the …gure display the
statistic (for the subsequent coverage year, so covering the years 2008-2010) described on the y-axis for each
group of bene…ciaries who spent up to $50 above the value that is on the x-axis, so that the …rst point
represents individuals who spent between -$2,000 and -$1,950 from the kink, the second point represents
individuals between -$1,950 and -$1,900, and so on. The small dots above and below the points represent
the 95% con…dence interval for each point. N = 2,506,305.




                                                     26
Figure 3(c): Variation in subsequent mortality and healthcare utilization around the kink




Total annual prescription drug spending on the x-axis is reported relative to the (year-speci…c) location of
the kink, which is normalized to zero. Sample uses bene…ciary-years in our 2007-2009 baseline sample whose
annual spending is within $2,000 of the (year-speci…c) kink location. The points in the …gure display the
statistic (for the subsequent coverage year, so covering the years 2008-2010) described on the y-axis for each
group of bene…ciaries who spent up to $50 above the value that is on the x-axis, so that the …rst point
represents individuals who spent between -$2,000 and -$1,950 from the kink, the second point represents
individuals between -$1,950 and -$1,900, and so on. The small dots above and below the points represent
the 95% con…dence interval for each point. N = 2,506,305.




                                                     27
Figure 4(a): Variation in “endogenous”risk score around the kink




Total annual prescription drug spending on the x-axis is reported relative to the (year-speci…c) location of
the kink, which is normalized to zero. Sample uses bene…ciary-years in our 2007-2009 baseline sample whose
annual spending is within $2,000 of the (year-speci…c) kink location. The points in the …gure display the
statistic described on the y-axis for each group of bene…ciaries who spent up to $50 above the value that is
on the x-axis, so that the …rst point represents individuals who spent between -$2,000 and -$1,950 from the
kink, the second point represents individuals between -$1,950 and -$1,900, and so on. The small dots above
and below the points represent the 95% con…dence interval for each point. N = 2,506,305.




                                                    28
Figure 4(b): Magnitude of o¤setting e¤ects




Total annual prescription drug spending on the x-axis is reported relative to the (year-speci…c) location of
the kink, which is normalized to zero. Sample uses bene…ciary-years in our 2007-2009 baseline sample whose
annual spending is within -$2,000 to +$200 of the (year-speci…c) kink location. The points in the …gure
display the statistic described on the y-axis for each group of bene…ciaries who spent up to $50 above the
value that is on the x-axis, so that the …rst point represents individuals who spent between -$2,000 and
-$1,950 from the kink, the second point represents individuals between -$1,950 and -$1,900, and so on. N =
1,948,900. The light gray series presents the actual risk score, replicating Figure 4(a). The top (grey squares)
series shows the risk score generated by taking the predicted values of the risk score components that exhibit
dips at the kink, and the actual values for the rest. The bottom (grey triangles) series shows the risk score
generated by taking the predicted values of the risk score components that exhibit bunching at the kink, and
the actual values for the rest. The predictions for each component of the risk score is generated by …tting a
trend in that component for spending more than $200 under the kink (see text for more details).




                                                      29
Table 1: Components underlying the e¤ect on risk scores around the kink

                                                                     Incidence around the kink        Share of Risk-
                                                                 Actual     "Predicted" Difference   Score difference

   Top 10 components with positive kink incidence
   Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease and Asthma              0.1908      0.1784       0.0124         20.50%
   Diabetes with Complications                                   0.0908      0.0816       0.0091         19.13%
   Breast, Lung, and Other Cancers and Tumors                    0.0582      0.0520       0.0062         10.72%
   Alzheimer's Disease                                           0.0203      0.0179       0.0024         9.32%
   Diabetes without Complications                                0.2020      0.1962       0.0058         8.45%
   Esophageal Reflux and Other Disorders of Esophagus            0.2146      0.2082       0.0064         7.26%
   Inflammatory Bowel Disease                                    0.0107      0.0093       0.0014         3.21%
   Diabetic Retinopathy                                          0.0278      0.0237       0.0041         3.20%
   Parkinson's Disease                                           0.0127      0.0119       0.0009         3.06%
   Major Depression                                              0.0196      0.0187       0.0010         2.26%

   Top 10 components with negative kink incidence
   Hypertension                                                  0.6531      0.6735       0.0203         33.48%
   Disorders of Lipoid Metabolism                                0.7344      0.7530       0.0186         21.63%
   Osteoporosis, Vertebral and Pathological Fractures            0.1730      0.1874       0.0144         13.13%
   Open-Angle Glaucoma                                           0.0918      0.0999       0.0081         11.28%
   Atrial Arrhythmias                                            0.1361      0.1460       0.0099         5.99%
   Congestive Heart Failure                                      0.1117      0.1148       0.0031         5.40%
   Thyroid Disorders                                             0.2525      0.2596       0.0071         2.64%
   Coronary Artery Disease                                       0.3107      0.3116       0.0009         1.23%
   Depression                                                    0.0659      0.0668       0.0009         1.20%
   Cereborvascular Disease, Except Hemorrhage or Aneurysm        0.1513      0.1522       0.0009         0.59%




Table presents the top 10 components responsible for the positive and negative risk score e¤ect presented
in Figure 4(b). The …rst column (“Actual”) reports the average value of the component around the kink
(speci…cally, between -$200 and $200 of the kink, whose value is normalized to 0). The second column
(“Predicted”) reports the average predicted value of each component, by extrapolating a linear relationship
from the (-$2,000,-$200) range. The third column (“Di¤erence”) reports the di¤erence between Actual
and Predicted. The last column (“Share of Risk-Score di¤erence”) reports the share of each component in
generating the positive (top panel) and negative (bottom panel) risk score e¤ect presented in Figure 4(b).
This is computed by multiplying the di¤erence associated with each component (as reported in the third
column) by the risk-score coe¢ cient on that component in the risk-adjustment formula, and normalizing this
product by the sum of all these products that are associated with positive (top panel) and negative (bottom
panel) deviations around the gap.




                                                            30
Appendix Table A1: Risk type ranking under alternative contract designs

      Spending under standard                                                                           Spending under standard
                                             Predicted spending under counterfactual contract                                                Predicted spending under counterfactual contract
             contract                                                                                          contract

       Percentile    Average          Move >1      Move 1 bin     Remain in   Move 1 bin Move >1 bin    Percentile   Average           Move >1     Move 1 bin   Remain in    Move 1 bin Move >1 bin
         range       spending         bin down       down         same bin       up         up            range      spending          bin down      down       same bin        up         up
           (1)          (2)              (3)          (4)            (5)         (6)        (7)             (1)         (2)               (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)        (7)

      Panel A. Counterfactual contract "fills" the coverage gap                                        Panel B. Counterfactual contract removes deductible and increases pre-gap cost sharing
         0-12a          0                   --           --         0.99         0.00       0.00          0-12a          0                 --          --          0.68         0.08          0.24
        12-15a          15                  --          0.00        0.99         0.00       0.00         12-15a          15                --        0.50          0.12         0.16          0.21
         15-20          65               0.00           0.01        0.98         0.00       0.00          15-20          65               0.38       0.15          0.22         0.14          0.11
         20-25         227               0.00           0.01        0.98         0.01       0.00          20-25         227               0.27       0.36          0.22         0.09          0.06
         25-30         527               0.00           0.02        0.96         0.01       0.01          25-30         527               0.05       0.38          0.41         0.11          0.05
         30-35         760               0.00           0.03        0.92         0.02       0.02          30-35         760               0.03       0.24          0.58         0.12          0.04
         35-40         950               0.00           0.07        0.87         0.04       0.03          35-40         950               0.03       0.14          0.62         0.18          0.02
         40-45        1,128              0.00           0.10        0.83         0.04       0.04          40-45        1,128              0.04       0.11          0.61         0.21          0.02
         45-50        1,305              0.00           0.13        0.78         0.04       0.04          45-50        1,305              0.05       0.11          0.58         0.25          0.02
         50-55        1,489              0.00           0.17        0.71         0.06       0.06          50-55        1,489              0.06       0.10          0.57         0.26          0.01
         55-60        1,691              0.00           0.22        0.65         0.06       0.07          55-60        1,691              0.06       0.09          0.58         0.26          0.01
         60-65        1,916              0.00           0.27        0.57         0.07       0.09          60-65        1,916              0.07       0.08          0.62         0.23          0.00
         65-70        2,162              0.00           0.34        0.45         0.10       0.12          65-70        2,162              0.06       0.09          0.64         0.21          0.00
         70-75        2,404              0.00           0.43        0.32         0.13       0.12          70-75        2,404              0.05       0.09          0.66         0.20          0.01
         75-80        2,590              0.00           0.43        0.32         0.17       0.09          75-80        2,590              0.04       0.10          0.71         0.16          0.00
         80-85        2,843              0.11           0.39        0.29         0.14       0.07          80-85        2,843              0.05       0.07          0.78         0.09          0.01
         85-90        3,296              0.07           0.40        0.36         0.13       0.04          85-90        3,296              0.03       0.05          0.86         0.06          0.00
         90-95        4,140              0.01           0.37        0.52         0.10        --           90-95        4,140              0.01       0.05          0.92         0.02           --
        95-100        7,394              0.00           0.21        0.79          --         --          95-100        7,394              0.01       0.01          0.98          --            --




Table is based on the baseline estimates from a behavioral model of healthcare spending developed and
estimated in Einav, Finkelstein, and Schrimpf (2015). In the …gure, we use those estimates to simulate
healthcare spending under the standard part D coverage contract shown in Figure 1, and under two coun-
terfactual contracts: a “…lled gap” contract (Panel A) and a “no deductible” contract (Panel B). The …lled
gap contract eliminates the gap by providing pre-gap coverage through the catastrophic limit, while the
no-deductible contract eliminates the deductible but o¤ers higher cost sharing (up to the gap) of 38.9 (rather
than 25) cents on the dollar, thus leading to the same expected cost to the insurer. To construct the …gure,
we use the model and baseline estimates from Einav, Finkelstein, and Schrimpf (2015), and simulate 43,000
individuals and associated sequences of health shocks (that are held …xed across contracts). The table entries
show the proportion of individuals whose spending ventile gets reshu- ed as they move from the standard
contract to the alternative contract. Absent heterogeneity in the response to price, all individuals would
have stayed in the same spending ventile, and all entries in column (5) would be equal to 1, and all other
entries –columns (3), (4), (6), and (7) –would be zero. Heterogeneity in the response to price leads to some
individuals moving up and others moving down in the spending distribution in response to the change in
coverage.
   The …rst two spending bins are di¤erent in size because of the mass point (of 12%) of individuals with zero
spending under the standard contract.




                                                                                                   31
Appendix Table A2: Illustrative example

                                                    Public Coverage                   Private Coverage

          1. Individual medical spending                 λi + ωi                             λi
          2. Individual optimized utilty (ui*)         yi + 0.5⋅ωi                            yi
          3. Government spending (gi)                    λi + ωi                         λi + ωi + si
          4. Profits (πi)                                 N/A                              ωi + si
          5. Total Surplus (TSi)                 yi − (1+k)λi − (0.5+k)ωi        yi − (1+k)λi − kωi - ksi




Table summarizes the assumptions of our stylized setting in which a private monopoly provider o¤ers a plan that
competes with the public default plan. We also assume risk scores are given by  =      +  and that the government
sets reimbursement for private …rms   =  +( ). That is, the reimbursement is set to be equal to what the
government would pay if the individual was covered by the public plan, plus a subsidy 




                                                          32
