NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TWO-SIDED ALTRUISM AND SIGNALING
Garance Genicot
Working Paper 21309
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21309

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2015

The comments of Shub Debgupta, Martin Ravallion and Debraj Ray are gratefully acknowledged.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Garance Genicot. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Two-sided Altruism and Signaling
Garance Genicot
NBER Working Paper No. 21309
June 2015
JEL No. D64,F24,O15,O16
ABSTRACT
This paper shows that when donors and recipients care about each other --two-sided altruism -- the
presence of asymmetry of information about the donor's income leads very naturally to a signaling
game. A donor who cares about the recipient's welfare has incentives to appear richer than he is when
the recipient cares about him. Similarly, asymmetry of information regarding the donor's income generates
a signaling game in the presence of two-sided altruism. These signaling games put upward pressure
on transfers and this pressure increases with the altruism of the recipient.

Garance Genicot
Department of Economics
Georgetown University
ICC 570
Washington, DC 20057
and NBER
gg58@georgetown.edu

“Jack’s unhappy that Jill’s unhappy
Jill’s unhappy that Jack’s unhappy
that Jill’s unhappy that Jack’s unhappy
that Jill’s unhappy”
— Laing (1970), Knots, p.26

1

Introduction

The concept of altruism has a long history in philosophical and social sciences. The term was originally coined in the 19th century by the founding sociologist and philosopher of science, Auguste
Comte (Auguste (1874)), and has become a major topic in many fields. In simple terms, altruism
is caring about the welfare of other people and acting to help them (see Hammond (1987)). Evidence of altruism abound, especially among friends and family members, (see James Andreoni and
Vesterlund (2008) and Curry, Roberts, and Dunbar (2013)) and has an evolutionary rationale (see
Hamilton (1964) and Bergstrom (1995)). Altruism has been credited to be an important motive
behind remittances and other private transfers between households (see among others Cox and
Fafchamps (2008), Foster and Rosenzweig (2001), Kazianga (2006), Ligon and Schechter (2012),
Mitrut and Nordblom (2010) and Rapoport and Docquier (2006)).1
For the purpose of this paper, we shall consider two individuals who care about each other’s welfare,
one of which (the donor) is richer than the other (the recipient) and may want to financially help the
latter. To fix ideas, think of a migrant son who can send remittances to his mother. The purpose
of this paper is to show that two-sided altruism in the presence of asymmetry of information leads
very naturally to a signaling game.
Under full information, it is a generally understood fact that if the mother also cares for her son –
two-sided versus one-sided altruism – then the son’s utility increases but it doesn’t affect the level
of remittances chosen. This is because, in valuing his entire welfare, the altruistic component of
the mother’s utility puts the same relative weights as her son on his utility of consumption and on
her utility. Hence, the son’s utility or objective is just multiplied by a constant (see for instance
Bourles and Bramoulle (2013)).
1

There is also a large literature in public economics on the role of altruism and two-sided altruism on whether
Ricardian equivalence holds (see Kotlikoff, Razin, and Rosenthal (1990) among others) and how to deal with it in
the context of welfare analysis (see Cremer and Pestieau (2006) for instance).

1

However, this result generally does not hold in the presence of asymmetry of information. Assume
that the mother does not know her son’s income. As the mother cares about her son’s welfare, she
would be like to know that he makes a good living. As the son cares about his mother’s welfare,
he would like her to believe that he makes a good living, irrespective of his real standards of living.
As a result, she cannot take his word for it and she will try to infer information about her son’s
achievement from the remittances that he sends her. This gives incentives to poorer donors to
transfer more to imitate richer donors, as transfers affect beliefs. Believing the donor to be richer
gives a utility boost to the recipient if she is altruistic, and this is valuable to the donor if he is
altruistic. This implies that, to be informative, the transfers have to satisfy an incentive constraint.
This is a standard signaling game (see Spence (1973) and Mailath (1987)).
Uncovering this effect is the first contribution of the paper. The second is to show how this puts
a pressure upward on the amounts remitted. Indeed, in a separating equilibrium all transfers, but
the transfer of the poorest donor, are higher in order to satisfy the incentive constraint. This is
because transfers have two distinct impacts: a direct one on the payoff of the recipient and an
indirect via the inference that the recipient makes about the wealth of the donor.
This work is related to the literature on signaling as a motive for charity contributions (Glazer and
Konrad (1996)) but, crucially, the present paper does not assume that individuals want to signal
their wealth but shows that this concern arises naturally when donors and recipients care for each
other.
Finally, asymmetry of information regarding the donor’s level of altruism has similar results. The
paper shows that our migrant son has an incentive to appear more altruistic than he is to his
mother, the more so the more his mother cares about him. This provides a micro-foundation for
the preferences assumed by Ellingsen and Johannesson (2008) where individuals gain esteem from
appearing altruistic to others and this gain increase in the level of altruism of others.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides the benchmark case with full information. Section 2 introduces asymmetry of information regarding the sender’s income,characterizes
the separating equilibrium in the resulting signaling game and derive a number of its properties.
Next, Section 2 shows that similar results apply when there is asymmetry information regarding
the altruism of the donor. Finally, Section 5 concludes.

2

2

Full Information

Consider two individuals, a recipient R and a donor D who are altruistic towards each other.
They both care about their own utility of consumption but also the other’s welfare. The donor’s
income y is drawn from a probability density function f (y) (with cumulative density F ) defined
over Y ≡ [y, ȳ]. As a benchmark, assume for now that the realization of the donor’s income is
known to the recipient.
Let ui be individual i’s direct utility of consumption, i ∈ {R, D}, and assume that u0 (c) > 0,
u00 (c) < 0, u000 (c) ≥ 0 and limc↓0 u0 (c) = ∞. We denote as αi ∈ (0, 1) the weight that individual
i ∈ {R, D} puts on the other’s welfare. That is, for a given allocation of consumption c = {cD , cR },
i’s utility vi (c) is given by
vi (c) = ui (ci ) + αi vj (c)

(1)

for i, j ∈ {R, D}.
It follows that
vi (c) = A[ui (ci ) + αi uj (cj )] f or i, j ∈ {R, D}
where A =

1
1−αR αD .

A donor with income y chooses to transfer the amount t ∈ IR+ that maximizes his objective
A[uD (y − t) + αD uR (t)].
He transfers t∗ (y), the transfers that satisfies
u0D (y − t∗ ) = αD u0R (t∗ )

(2)

if it is non-negative and zero otherwise. It is worth making a couple of observations.
Observation 1 Under full information, transfers are independent of the altruism of the recipient.
This observation follows directly from the first order conditions (2) that are clearly independent of
αR .

3

Observation 2 Under full information, transfers increase less than proportionally with the income
of the donor.
Proof. It is easy to check that

dt∗
dy

=

−u00
D
00
−u00
D −αD uR

< 1.

Example 1: Assume that both the migrant son and his mother have logarithmic utility, ui (c) =
ln(c) for i ∈ {R, D}. It is easy to see that, under full information, the son remits a constant fraction
of his income:
t∗ (y) = βy, where β =

αD
,
1 + αD

and this whether his mother cares about him or not.

3

Signaling Income

Now assume that the income of the donor y is private information. The distribution from which
the income is drawn is common knowledge but the actual realization is private information.
A Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium consists of a strategy profile µ : Y → IR+ , designating a strategy for
each type of donor, and a belief profile γ, designating the beliefs of the recipient at each information
set, such that µ is sequentially rational for each player given γ and γ is derived from µ using Bayes’s
rule whenever possible.
The inference function φ(z, t) is the probability that the donor is of type z if he transfers t.
Φ(t) ≡ {z|φ(z, t) > 0} is the support of types for transfer t.
A donor of income z who gives t has utility
vD (z, t) = uD (z − t) + αD vR (t),
where vR (t) is the recipient’s utility from receiving a transfer t:
Z
vR (t) = uR (t) + αR

4

φ(z, t)vD (z, t).

(3)

Using (3) in the recipient’s utility, we get
Z
vR (t) = uR (t) + αR
or

φ(z, t)uD (z − t)dt + αR αD vR (t),


vR (t) = A uR (t) + αR

where A =

1
1−αR αD



Z

φ(z, t)uD (z − t)dt ,

(4)

as earlier.

Plugging it back in equation (3), we see that
Z
vD (y, t) = uD (y − t) + αD AuR (t) + αD αR A

φ(z, t)uD (z − t)dt.

(5)

Strong single crossing (vD 12 > 0) implies that in any perfect Bayesian equilibrium, the choice of
transfer is weakly increasing in income.

3.1

Separating Equilibrium.

In a separating equilibrium, different types of donor make different transfers. The utility of a donor
with income y who gives t and is believed to be of type z is given by
w(y, z, t) = uD (y − t) + αD AuR (t) + αD αR AuD (z − t).

(6)

Donors irrespective of their income would like to be perceived as richer, w2 > 0 as long as αR > 0
and αD > 0. For any given donor’s income, we can draw the donor’s indifferent curves between t
and z. These are U -shaped as the amount transferred initially increases the donor’s utility then
decreases it. It is easy to check that the indifference curves satisfy the single crossing condition:
their slope is decreasing in y.2 Figure 1 illustrates how lower income donors have incentive to mimic
higher income donors in our logarithmic example.
Example 2: Let’s assume logarithmic utilities and αD = αR = 0.5. Consider two potential levels
of income for the migrant son: 1 and 1.5. Figure 1 illustrates the indifference curves between z
2 −w3 (y,z,t)
w2 (y,z,t)

is strictly decreasing in y for all z and t.

5

and t. Under full information, the son gives a third of his income to his mother (β = 1/3). These
levels of transfer t∗ (1) and t∗ (1.5) are indicated by crosses on the graph. We see clearly that the
son with an income level of 1 would prefer making a transfer of t∗ (1.5) and be believed to earn 1.5
by his mother than to give her t∗ (1) and for her to know that he earns 1.
z 3

2.5

2

1.5

Low income y=1
Higher income y=1.5
t L*
tH*

1

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1
t

Figure 1: Indifference Curves.

Next, we characterize the separating equilibrium. If e
t : Y → T is a one-to-one strategy for the
donor then, when he chooses t = e
t(y), the recipient infers that he is of type e
t−1 (t): φ(y, t) = 1 if
t=e
t(y) and 0 otherwise.
For e
t to be an equilibrium separating strategy, it must be that
e
t(y) ∈ argmaxt w(y, e
t−1 (t), t) ∀ y ∈ Y.

6

Hence, the first order condition for e
t(y) to locally maximize w(y, e
t−1 (t), t) tells us that
w3 (y, y, t) + w2 (y, y, t)
or
e
t0 (y) =

1
=0
0
e
t (y)

αD αR u0D (y − e
t)
∀ y < y ≤ ȳ.
0
e
uD (y − t) − αD u0R (e
t)

(7)

(8)

Since w satisfies the single crossing condition, e
t(y) is continuous and strictly increasing. The
differential equation (9), along with the initial condition e
t(y) = t∗ (y), characterizes the unique
separating equilibrium (see Mailath (1987)).

3.2

Pooling Equilibrium and D1 Criterion.

Often, pooling equilibria are also possible where donors of all income levels transfer tp and are
R
believed to be of average income y av = yf (y)dy. These are sustained by assigning the worst
beliefs on off-equilibrium-path transfers. These beliefs are in many case implausible beliefs off the
equilibrium path especially when the range of incomes is large.
For given level of altruism, we can take ȳ to be large enough that u(y − t∗ (ȳ)) → −∞. In this case,
upon receiving a transfer t∗ (ȳ) it would make little sense for the recipient to believe that the sender
has the lowest income y.
Various equilibrium refinement techniques reduces the set of equilibria in signaling games by restricting the set of disequilibrium beliefs. One such refinement is the D1 Criterion. When observing
an off-equilibrium-path transfer t, the receiver must place zero posterior weight on a type y whenever there is another type y 0 that has a stronger incentive to deviate from the equilibrium, in the
sense that type y 0 would strictly prefer to deviate for any response z that would give type y a weak
incentive to deviate. Ramey (1996) showed that under strong single crossing for a continuum of
types drawn from a compact interval D1 refinement selects the dominant separating equilibrium
described in the previous section. This justifies our focus on the separating equilibrium.

7

3.3

Properties of the transfers under asymmetric information.

This Section highlights the distinctive features of the transfers that arise under asymmetry of
information.
Observation 3 If both agents are altruistic, the transfers for all but the lowest income are higher
than when information is complete.
Proof. Since e
t is increasing, it follows directly from (7) that w3 (y, y, t) < 0 and therefore e
t(y) >
t∗ (y) for all y > y.
This Observation shows that the signaling game in the presence of asymmetry of information puts
upward pressure on transfers.
Observation 4 Transfers are increasing in the altruism of the recipient for all y > y, and strictly
so when positive transfers are made.
Proof. Assume not. Then there exist two levels of altruism α1 > α2 for the recipient and a level of
income z at which the transfers are lower when the recipient’s altruism is higher e
t1 (z) < e
t2 (z). Since
e
t1 (y) = e
t2 (y) = t∗ (y) and the slope of the transfers (9) is increasing in the altruism of the recipient,
e
t1 (y) > e
t2 (y) for y sufficiently close to y when the solution is interior. The last two inequalities
and continuity imply that there is an intermediary level of income x such that y < x < z such that
e
t1 (x) = e
t2 (x) and e
t01 (x) < e
t02 (x). This contradicts (9) that shows that the slope of the transfers is
increasing in the altruism of the recipient.
This testable implication is in direct contrast with Observation 1 that shows that transfers under
full information t∗ (y) are independent of αR .
Observation 5 There exists a threshold income ỹ > y such that transfers increase more than
proportionally with income.
Proof. Since e
t(y) = t∗ (y) and w3 (y, y, t∗ (y)) = 0, it is clear that e
t0 (y) = −w2 /w3 in equation (9)
becomes arbitrarily large for values of y close to y. Hence, there is a range of incomes so that
e
t0 (y) > 1.
8

This is also in contrast with transfers under full information that, as seen in Observation 2, increase
less than proportionally with the donor’s income.
Observation 6 For low incomes, transfers are concave so that redistribution of income increases
total remittances.
Proof. We can rewrite (9) as
e
t0 (y) =

u0 (e
t(y))
αD αR
where M (y) ≡ 0 R
1 − αD M (y)
t(y))
uD (y − e

(9)

One can easily check that e
t0 (y) ≥ 1 is a sufficient condition for M (y), and therefore e
t0 (y), to be
decreasing in income. Hence, it follows from Observation 5 that e
t(y) is concave at least up to ỹ.
Observation 7 An influx of population that widens the support of the income distribution raises
the transfers of the original population.
Proof.

Consider an influx of population whose income distribution has positive support on

[y0 , y].Clearly the transfers of individuals with income at or slightly above y must strictly increase
while the transfers for larger incomes can never be lower since the slope in (9) is unchanged.
Although these properties are clear and simple, testing them empirically is not straightforward.
Observation 3 tells us that when altruism is the dominating motive behind the transfers, the amount
remitted should increase in the presence of asymmetry of information regarding the donor’s income.
In a couple of experiments, Jakiela and Ozier (2012) and Ambler (2013) found the opposite: lower
transfers when recipients do not observe the result of a lottery for the donors. Naturally altruism
may not be the only motive for transfers. De Weerdt, Genicot, and Mesnard (2014) found that
pressure from recipients is likely to be one of the main motives for transfers among extended
family networks in Tanzania. This would explain more information resulting in larger transfers and
suggests that testing the implications of our model would require carefully controlling for pressure
and other motives of transfers.

9

3.4

Logarithmic Example.

This Section illustrates these properties in the case of logarithmic utilities. Equation (9) becomes
e
t0 (y) =

αD αR
∀ y < y ≤ ȳ.
1 − αD (y/e
t − 1)

(10)

As seen in Observation 5, transfers initially increase more than proportionally in the income. As
long as the marginal transfer e
t0 (y) is higher than average transfer e
t/y, the average increases and
therefore, from (10), the marginal transfer e
t0 (y) decreases. Hence, the marginal transfer converges
to the average transfers and in the limit transfers represent a constant fraction βe of the income:3
αD (1 + αR )
βe =
.
(1 + αD )
Clearly βe is strictly larger than the full information share β and the more so the larger the recipient’s
altruism is.
Figure 2 illustrates the transfer under full information and under private information assuming that
αD = αR = 0.5 and that the donor’s income takes value from y = 1 to ȳ = 3. As seen earlier, under
full information, the donor gives a third of his income to the recipient so that transfers range from
0.33 to 1. Under asymmetry of information, in the separating equilibrium, the transfers starts at
the same level (0.33) but increase faster with income converging towards a share of βe = 0.5 of their
income.

4

Signaling Altruism

This Section shows that in the presence of two-sided altruism, asymmetry of information regarding
the donor’s level of altruism generate a similar signaling game. To see that, assume now that the
income of the donor is known but that his level of altruism αD is not. Assume that the particular
realization of αD is private information but the distribution defined over A ≡ [α, ᾱ] from which it
is drawn is common knowledge. Let αR be the expected level of altruism of the recipient according
to the donor. Whether this belief is correct or not plays no role in the analysis since the recipient
3

Although the specific fraction differs, the same is true for all CRRA utility functions.

10

Transfers

1.6

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4
Full Information
Private Information

0.2

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

2

2.2

2.4

2.6

2.8
3
Income

Figure 2: Transfers under Full and Private Information.

is passive here. As before, the equilibrium concept is Perfect Bayesian Equilibria and we focus on
separating equilibria, where different types of donor make different transfers.
As shown in Appendix, the utility of a donor with altruism αD who gives t and is believed to be of
type α
b is given by
ω(αD , α
b, t) =

1
[(1 + αR αD − αR α
b)uD (y − t) + αD uR (t)] .
1 − αR α
b

(11)

If utility levels are positive, then donors would like to be perceived as more altruistic (ω2 > 0) when
altruism is two-sided (αR > 0). A mechanism very similar to before is at play. Let’s return to the
migrant son and his mother from the introduction. When utility levels are positive, the utility of a
mother, who cares about her son, increases if she thinks that her son is more altruistic. Hence, a

11

son who cares about his mother’s welfare would like her to believe that he is more altruistic than he
is. Since remittances convey information on altruism, his mother will try to infer her son’s altruism
from the remittances that he sends her. Hence, less altruistic sons have incentive to transfer more
to imitate more altruistic sons. This is what gives rise to a signaling game among donors.
Since this benefit is larger for more altruistic donors, the single-crossing condition holds,

−ω3 (αD ,b
α,t)
ω2 (αD ,b
α,t)

is strictly decreasing in αD for all α
b and t, so that it is possible for more altruistic donors to
distinguish themselves. In a separating equilibrium b
t : A → T is a one-to-one strategy for the
donor: when he chooses t = b
t(α), the recipient infers that he is of type b
t−1 (t), that is ψ(α, t) = 1
if t = b
t(α) and 0 otherwise.
If b
t is an equilibrium separating strategy then b
t(y) ∈ argmaxt ω(αD , b
t−1 (t), t) ∀ αD ∈ A. It follows
from the first order condition that
ω3 (αD , αD , t) + ω2 (αD , αD , t)

1
b
t0 (α

D)

so that
b0



t (αD ) =

αR αD
1 − αR αD



uR (b
t) + αR uD (y − b
t)
0
0
b
uD (y − t) − αD uR (b
t)

= 0,

!
∀ α < αD ≤ ᾱ.

(12)

The single crossing condition implies that b
t(α) is continuous and strictly increasing. And, following
Mailath (1987), the unique separating equilibrium is characterized by the differential equation (12)
along with the initial condition b
t(α) is equal to t∗ (y) evaluated at αD = α. It is easy to check that
transfers are increasing in the altruism of the recipient.
Observation 8 Transfers are increasing in the altruism of the recipient, and strictly so when
positive transfers are made.
The proof is very similar to the proof of Observation 4 and is therefore omitted, but the result is
intuitive. The more altruistic the recipient is, the more she gains from believing that the donor
is more altruistic. Hence, the incentive to signal higher altruism is higher when the recipient’s
altruism is higher. Ellingsen and Johannesson (2008) assumes that individuals gain esteem from
appearing altruistic to others and that this gain increases in the level of altruism of others, and
show that such preferences provides a simple explanation for a number of puzzling experimental
12

results.4 This model shows that two-sided altruism in the presence of asymmetry of information
provides foundation for their preferences that they assumed.

5

Conclusion

This paper shows that, under asymmetry of information regarding the donor’s income, transfers
behave very differently depending on whether the altruism is reciprocated. When both the donor
and the recipient care for each other, the asymmetry of information gives rise to a signaling game
among donors of different income levels. Donors have incentive to give more to appear better off
than they are. This puts upward pressure to the transfers and more is remitted. This also generate
concavity is the transfer schedule at least for low levels of income. Hence, redistribution increases
amounts remitted.
Finally, asymmetry of information regarding altruism levels generate very similar results. Altruistic
donors transfer more not just because they care but also to signal their altruism, all the more so
that the recipient is altruistic.

4

For instance, why in a trust game the agent is more likely to return money to the principal when the principal
chose to trust the agent (voluntary trust game) than when he had no choice in the matter (involuntary trust game).

13

References
Ambler, Kate. 2013. “Don’t Tell on Me: Experimental Evidence of Asymmetric Information in
Transnational Households.” Tech. rep., University of Michigan.
Auguste, Comte. 1874. Catéchisme positiviste. Les Classiques des Sciences Sociales. d’aprs l’édition
P. Arnaud, Paris, Garnier-Flammarion, 1966.
Bergstrom, Theodore C. 1995. “On the Evolution of Altruistic Ethical Rules for Siblings.” American
Economic Review 85 (1):58–81.
Bourles, Renaud and Yann Bramoulle. 2013. “Altruism in Networks.” AMSE Working Papers
1356, Aix-Marseille School of Economics, Marseille, France.
Cox, Donald and Marcel Fafchamps. 2008. Extended Family and Kinship Networks: Economic
Insights and Evolutionary Directions, Handbook of Development Economics, vol. 4, chap. 58.
Elsevier, 3711–3784.
Cremer, Helmuth and Pierre Pestieau. 2006.

“Intergenerational Transfer of Human Capital

and Optimal Education Policy.” Journal of Public Economic Theory 8 (4):529–545. URL
http://ideas.repec.org/a/bla/jpbect/v8y2006i4p529-545.html.
Curry, Oliver, Sam G. B. Roberts, and Robin I. M. Dunbar. 2013. “Altruism in social networks:
Evidence for a kinship premium.” British Journal of Psychology 104 (2):283–295.
De Weerdt, Joachim, Garance Genicot, and Alice Mesnard. 2014. “Asymmetry of Information
within Family Networks.” CEPR Discussion Papers 10125, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers. URL
http://ideas.repec.org/p/cpr/ceprdp/10125.html.
Ellingsen,

Tore and Magnus Johannesson. 2008.

man Side of Incentive Theory.”

“Pride and Prejudice:

The Hu-

American Economic Review 98 (3):990–1008.

URL

http://www.aeaweb.org/articles.php?doi=10.1257/aer.98.3.990.
Foster, Andrew D. and Mark R. Rosenzweig. 2001. “Imperfect Commitment, Altruism, and the
Family: Evidence from Transfer Behavior in Low-Income Rural Areas.” The Review of Economics
and Statistics 83 (3):pp. 389–407.

14

Glazer, Amihai and Kai A. Konrad. 1996. “A Signaling Explanation for Charity.” The American
Economic Review 86 (4):pp. 1019–1028.
Hamilton, W.D. 1964. “The genetical evolution of social behaviour. I.” Journal of Theoretical
Biology 7 (1):1 – 16.
Hammond, Peter J. 1987. Altruism. Macmillan Press: London.
Jakiela, Pamela and Owen Ozier. 2012. “Does Africa Need a Rotten Kin Theorem? Experimental
Evidence from Village Economies.” Tech. rep., World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 6085.
James Andreoni, William T. Harbaugh and Lise Vesterlund. 2008. Altruism in Experiments,
chap. 37. New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd edition. MacMillan.
Kazianga, H. 2006. “Motives for household private transfers in Burkina Faso.” Journal of Development Economics 79 (1):73–117.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J, Assaf Razin, and Robert W Rosenthal. 1990. “A Strategic Altruism Model
in Which Ricardian Equivalence Does Not Hold.” Economic Journal 100 (403):1261–68. URL
http://ideas.repec.org/a/ecj/econjl/v100y1990i403p1261-68.html.
Laing, R. D. (Ronald David). 1970. Knots. Pantheon Books.
Ligon, Ethan and Laura Schechter. 2012. “Motives for sharing in social networks.” Journal of
Development Economics 99 (1):13–26.
Mailath, George J. 1987. “Incentive Compatibility in Signaling Games with a Continuum of Types.”
Econometrica 55 (6):pp. 1349–1365.
Mitrut, Andreea and Katarina Nordblom. 2010. “Social norms and gift behavior: Theory and
evidence from Romania.” European Economic Review 54 (8):998–1015.
Ramey, Garey. 1996. “D1 Signaling Equilibria with Multiple Signals and a Continuum of Types.”
Journal of Economic Theory 69 (2):508 – 531.
Rapoport, Hillel and Frederic Docquier. 2006. The economics of migrants’ remittances, Handbook
on the Economics of Giving : Reciprocity and Altruism, vol. 1, chap. 17. Elsevier, 1135–1198.
Spence, Michael. 1973. “Job Market Signaling.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 87 (3):pp.
355–374.
15

Appendix
Proof of Monotonicity
Lemma 1 If y > y 0 then e
t(y) ≥ e
t(y 0 )
Proof. Assume not t = e
t(y) < t0 = e
t(y 0 ) for some y > y 0 . Let


Z
h(t) = αD A u(t) + αR φ(z, t)u(z − t)dt .
If h(t) ≥ h(t0 ), then clearly y 0 would prefer reducing its expenses to t and get more esteem. Hence,
it must be that h(t) < h(t0 ). Incentive compatibility for y and y 0 implies that
u(y − t) − u(y − t0 ) ≥ h(t0 ) − h(t) ≥ u(y 0 − t) − u(y 0 − t0 )
which is a contradiction since u(y − t) − u(y − t0 ) < u(y 0 − t) − u(y 0 − t0 ).

Altruism as Private Information
Assume that the donor’s level of αD is drawn from A ≡ [α, ᾱ] according to a distribution that is
common knowledge. However, the donor has private information over the particular realization.
Let αR be the expected level of altruism of the recipient according to the donor. Whether this
belief is correct or not plays no role in the analysis since the recipient is passive here. As before,
we focus on Perfect Bayesian Equilibria. The inference function ψ(α, t) is the probability that the
donor is of type α if he transfers t. Ψ(t) ≡ {α|ψ(α, t) > 0} is the support of types for transfer t.
A donor with altruism αD who gives t has utility
VD (αD , t) = uD (y − t) + αD ED VR (t),

(13)

where ED VR (t) is the donor’s expectation regarding the recipient’s utility from receiving a transfer
t:

Z
ED VR (t) = uR (t) + αR
16

φ(α, t)ED (α, t).

Using (13) in the recipient’s utility, we get
ED VR (t) = uR (t) + αR uD (y − t) + αR α
eED VR (t),
where α
e=

R

φ(al, t)αdα, or
ED VR (t) =

1
(uR (t) + αR uD (y − t)) .
1 − αR α
e

(14)

Plugging it back in equation (13), we see that
VD (α, t) =

1
[(1 + αR αD − αR α
e)uD (y − t) + αD uR (t)] .
1 − αR α
e

(15)

VD 12 > 0 implies that in any perfect Bayesian equilibrium, the choice of transfer is weakly increasing
in altruism.

17

