                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 ICT AND EDUCATION:
                       EVIDENCE FROM STUDENT HOME ADDRESSES

                                           Benjamin Faber
                                         Rosa Sanchis-Guarner
                                           Felix Weinhardt

                                         Working Paper 21306
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21306


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2015



We are grateful to the English Department for Education for allowing us access to the confidential
microdata of the National Pupil Database (NPD) and the Longitudinal Study of Young People in England
(LSYPE), to the technology consulting firm Point Topic Ltd for allowing us access to their proprietary data
on the UK telecommunication network, to the staff at the UK Secure Data Service (SDS) for providing us
access to the confidential microdata of the Understanding Society (US) and the British Household
Panel Surveys (BHPS), and to the staff at the LSE Research Library for providing us access to the
microdata of the English Land Registry. Amar Shanghavi provided excellent research assistance. We
thank Steve Gibbons, Victor Lavy, Magne Mogstad, Jonathan Robinson, Andres Rodriguez-Clare,
Olmo Silva and participants at multiple seminars and conferences for helpful comments. Weinhardt
would like to thank Steve Machin for advice and support during his post-Doc at the LSE. Sanchis-Guarner
would like to thank the British Academy for financial support. This work contains statistical data from
ONS which is Crown copyright and reproduced with the permission of the controller of HMSO and
Queen’s Printer for Scotland. The use of the ONS statistical data does not imply the endorsement of
the ONS in relation to the interpretation or analysis of the data. This work uses research datasets which
may not exactly reproduce National Statistics aggregates. Copyright of the statistical results may not
be assigned, and publishers of this data must have or obtain a license from HMSO. The ONS data
in these results are covered by the terms of the standard HMSO "click-use" license. SERC/LSE provided
research funding and Weinhardt acknowledges DFG funding (WE5750/1-1). All errors are our own.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Benjamin Faber, Rosa Sanchis-Guarner, and Felix Weinhardt. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
ICT and Education: Evidence from Student Home Addresses
Benjamin Faber, Rosa Sanchis-Guarner, and Felix Weinhardt
NBER Working Paper No. 21306
June 2015, Revised February 2016
JEL No. D83,F66,I20

                                              ABSTRACT

Governments are making it a priority to upgrade information and communication technologies (ICT)
with the aim to increase available internet connection speeds. This paper presents a new empirical
strategy to estimate the causal effects of these policies, and applies it to the questions of whether and
how ICT upgrades affect educational attainment. We draw on a rich collection of microdata that allows
us to link administrative test score records for the population of English primary and secondary school
students to the available ICT at their home addresses. To base estimations on exogenous variation
in ICT, we notice that the boundaries of usually invisible telephone exchange station catchment areas
give rise to substantial and essentially randomly placed jumps in the available ICT across neighboring
residences. Using this design across more than 20,000 boundaries in England, we find that even large
changes in available broadband connection speeds have a precisely estimated zero effect on educational
attainment. Guided by a simple model we then bring to bear additional microdata on student time and
internet use to quantify the potentially opposing mechanisms underlying the zero reduced form effect.
While jumps in the available ICT appear to increase student consumption of online content, we find
no significant effects on student time spent studying online or offline, or on their learning productivity.


Benjamin Faber                                       Felix Weinhardt
Department of Economics                              Humboldt-University Berlin
University of California, Berkeley                   Department of Economics
697A Evans Hall                                      Spandauer Str. 1
Berkeley, CA 94720                                   10178 Berlin
and NBER                                             Germany
benfaber@econ.berkeley.edu                           felix.weinhardt@hu-berlin.de

Rosa Sanchis-Guarner
Spatial Economics Research Centre
London School of Economics
Houghton Street, WC2A 2AE, London
United Kingdom
m.r.sanchis-guarner-herrero@lse.ac.uk
1    Introduction
    Governments around the world are currently committing substantial amounts of public funds
to upgrade information and communication technologies (ICT) with the aim to increase available
broadband internet connection speeds.1 These policies are motivated by claims that upgrades to
high-speed broadband play a vital role in achieving policy objectives in two key areas: education
and growth.2 Policy proposals have emphasized the link between broadband upgrades and educa-
tional attainment in light of both the large amounts of time that students of all age groups devote to
online content every day, and abundant online educational resources (aka "e-learning") that range
from longstanding platforms, such as the thousands of homework support channels on YouTube
or Wikipedia, to more recent developments such as massive open online courses (MOOCs).
    According to survey data, UK students in 2007 spent on average between five (ages 5-7) and
fourteen hours (ages 12-15) per week using the internet from home. The majority of students (68%)
report using the internet for studying and homework, followed by playing online games (48%),
downloading or streaming videos (35%) and downloading or playing music (31%) (OfCom, 2012).
Many of these activities require fast connections, and it is an open question whether upgrades in
the available ICT increase learning productivity, as put forward by policy makers and educators
alike, or lead to distractions that could in principle also have negative effects on learning outcomes,
which many parents seem to worry about.
    This paper proposes a new empirical strategy to estimate the causal effects of upgrades in the
available ICT on education outcomes. In doing so, the paper makes three main contributions to
the existing literature. First, we draw on a new and uniquely rich collection of English microdata
that allows us for the first time to link administrative test score records of the population of pri-
mary and secondary school students to the available ICT at student home addresses.3 Second, to
base estimations on exogenous variation in the available ICT, we notice that capacity constraints
at telephone exchange stations lead to invisible and essentially randomly placed boundaries of
station-level catchment areas that give rise to substantial and discontinuous jumps in the available
broadband connection speed across neighboring residences. Third, guided by a simple theoretical
framework we bring to bear additional microdata on student internet and time use to quantify
the channels underlying the estimated reduced form effects. As part of these estimations, we also
provide empirical evidence on the elasticity of demand for online content with respect to its time
cost, which is a key parameter for ICT policy decisions.
    At the center of the analysis lies the construction of an extremely rich collection of microdata
that allows us to estimate the causal effect of changes in the available ICT on educational out-
comes, and to quantify the underlying channels. We combine several sources of microdata that we
    1 In the US, the FCC launched the National Broadband Plan in 2010 with the objective to make 100Mbit/s connections

available to 100 million citizens by 2020. Cost estimates have ranged between USD 20bn and 250bn. In 2012, the EU
approved EUR 7bn (USD 7.9bn) for increases in internet speeds across member countries. The UK plans to cover 90%
of its population with "superfast" broadband by the end of 2016 at an estimated cost of GBP 3.9bn (USD 6.1bn).
     2 Common examples of policy claims about the link between high-speed internet and education and growth include

the White House Broadband Report (June 2013), the FCC’s National Broadband Plan (March 2010), the White House
Report on Obama’s most recent ConnectHome initiative (July 2015), or the UK Broadband Delivery Scheme (February
2013).
     3 See discussion of related literature at the end of this section.


                                                          1
are able to geo-reference at a very disaggregated spatial scale: i) Administrative test score records
for the population of English primary and secondary school students in national "Key Stage" ex-
ams over the period 2002-2008; ii) telecommunication network data including the position of the
universe (≈ 3900) of English telephone exchange stations, their assignments to each of roughly 1.5
million full postcodes (up to eight characters), and household internet connection speeds; iii) sur-
vey microdata on student time use and internet use over the period 2002-2013; and iv) a rich vector
of geo-referenced control variables including the universe of property transaction values over the
period 2002-2008 and residential proximity to a comprehensive list of local (dis-)amenities.
    Using these data, we present a new strategy to exploit a well-known feature of DSL-broadband
technology –that the length of the copper wire that connects residences to the local exchange sta-
tion is a key determinant of the available internet connection speeds.4 One possible strategy in
this context would be to compare the outcomes of students whose residences are located at dif-
ferent distances to connected exchanges. However, neither observed differences in ICT across
households (which include package choices), nor residential distances to the connected exchange
stations are randomly assigned across space. Today’s telephone exchange stations in the UK were
mainly installed before and during the Second World War and while it may seem unlikely that
residents actively sort as a function of usually unknown copper wire distances to the local tele-
phone exchange station, planners targeted central locations that were also close to road junctions
for hosting the switchboard infrastructure. To address a number of endogeneity concerns that arise
due to the non-random placement of the exchange stations, we propose an empirical strategy that
exploits boundary discontinuities across usually unobserved exchange station catchment areas.
    We notice that each telephone exchange station has an invisible catchment area of residential
addresses that it serves in its surrounding. The extent and shape of this catchment area is a by-
product of history: rapid growth in fixed-line telephony during and after the Second World War
in combination with capacity constraints at the exchange switchboards have led to invisible and
essentially randomly placed station-level boundaries. We use the telecom network microdata in
order to construct these catchment areas for each of several thousand telephone exchange stations
in England. As depicted in the right panel of Figure 1, neighboring residences on different sides of
the boundaries can face substantial differences in the available ICT at their home addresses. This
variation stems from jumps in the copper wire distances between residences and their connected
exchange stations on the slower (longer distances to connected exchange) relative to the faster side
(shorter distances to connected exchange) across a given boundary segment. We exploit this fea-
ture in a spatial regression discontinuity (RD) design in which the distance to the nearest boundary
segment is the running variable. The identifying assumption is that no other characteristics that
affect educational outcomes, except for the available ICT, change discontinuously between neigh-
boring residences when crossing the invisible boundary.
    This empirical strategy has a number of appealing features. First, rather than focusing on
zero/one variation in first-time broadband access or penetration rates, the design is explicitly tar-
geted at evaluating the large number of currently ongoing policy proposals to upgrade already ex-

     4 Telephone exchange stations are also referred to as the central office. Online Appendix Figure A.1 provides an

illustration from the UK telecom regulator OfCom.

                                                         2
isting ICT. Given close to universal internet coverage in developed countries, and the vast amounts
of public funds currently earmarked for the purpose of increasing available internet connection
speeds, this design adds a useful tool that can be applied to a variety of policy questions in addi-
tion to the effects on education. Second, the design provides a rich empirical setting that allows
for the flexible estimation of the effect of interest. Rather than exploiting a single discontinuity,
we can estimate the effect of jumps in the available ICT on education outcomes across more than
20,000 individual boundary segments in England, with rich variation in both the intensity of the
jump, as well as in the levels of ICT on the slower side across boundaries.5 Third, because the
design exploits cross-sectional variation, it allows us to estimate the medium to long-run effects of
ICT upgrades instead of shorter-term adjustments when using variation in the timing of ICT roll-
outs.6 Finally, the identifying assumption is readily assessable in any one cross-section of data,
even when panel data covering the pre-internet period are not available. In our analysis, we first
report how point estimates are affected by the inclusion of school fixed effects and observable stu-
dent characteristics.7 We also test directly to what extent property values, student characteristics
as well as local amenities vary when moving from the slow side of a boundary segment to the fast
side.
    Taking this design to the collected microdata, the empirical analysis proceeds in three steps
that exploit different combinations of the data. In the first step, we use the telecom network data
to quantify the causal effect of residential distances to their connected exchange stations on the
available ICT. In the second step, we then combine information on student test scores and their
home addresses with the telecom network database to estimate the causal effect of residential
exchange connection distances on educational outcomes, and combine these estimates with the
estimation in step 1 to quantify the effect of changes in the available ICT on education outcomes. In
the final step, guided by a simple theoretical framework, we use additional geo-referenced survey
microdata on student time use and internet use in combination with the telecom network data to
quantify the mechanisms underlying the estimated reduced form effect in step 2.
    In step 1, we find that the average jump in available ICT across invisible exchange station
boundaries is substantial. We estimate that the average difference in residential distances to their
connected exchange station between neighboring residences on different sides of the boundary
is 725 meters, or 65 percent of a standard deviation. This estimate increases to 2,250 meters, or
two standard deviations, when restricting the estimation to the top third of boundary segments
with the largest mean difference in residential connection distances across the boundary. These
discontinuous jumps in copper wire connection lengths translate into substantial differences in
the available ICT across space. We find that the average jump in the time cost of accessing a
given amount of online content rises by close to one quarter when moving from the slow side of

    5 This also relates to recent work by Angrist and Rokkanen (forthcoming) on the identification of causal effects away

from a single cutoff, and Bertanha (2015) on RD designs with multiple cutoffs.
    6 Especially in the context of educational attainment, where effects may take time to accumulate, this is an important

feature. Given broadband coverage in England was already close to universal at the beginning of our sample in 2002,
the design captures a wide range of length of exposure (>7 years towards the end of the sample). As discussed below,
we also further explore the heterogeneity of the effects across years and age groups.
    7 Because school attendance is not directly linked to residential areas in the UK, boundary segment fixed effects and

school fixed effects are not collinear.

                                                            3
a boundary segment to the faster side of the invisible boundary. This effect increases to close to
one half when restricting attention to the top third of boundary segments with the largest jumps
in connection distances. Furthermore, because broadband technology has been updated to less
distance sensitive technologies such as coaxial or fiber after 2008, and the available UK internet
speed data only start in 2012, we regard these estimates as lower bounds of the effect of connection
distances on the available ICT at student residences during the period that we observe their test
scores (2002-2008).
    In steps 2 and 3, we guide the estimation of the effect of these jumps in the available ICT on ed-
ucation outcomes by writing down a simple theoretical framework that decomposes the observed
reduced form effect into several distinct channels. At the broadest level, we distinguish between
an effect on student time supply for studying and an effect on student learning productivity per
unit of time spent studying.8 To fix ideas, we refer to the hypothesis that reductions in the time
cost of accessing online content lead to a reduction in student time spent studying as the “Facebook
effect”. On the other hand, we refer to the hypothesis that reductions in the time cost of access-
ing online content lead to an increase in learning productivity as the “MOOC effect”.9 Naturally,
both the effect on study time supply and on learning productivity could in principle also go in the
opposite direction.10
    The main results can be summarized as follows. We find that even large changes in the avail-
able internet connection speeds have a precisely estimated zero effect on educational attainment,
and that the estimates are causally identified: house prices, student socioeconomic characteristics
and access to local (dis-)amenities are flat across the boundaries. We further explore the extent to
which this average effect may mask significant heterogeneity, and find that the result holds for all
age, gender, ethnic and socioeconomic groups in the student population, for all years in the es-
timation sample 2002-2008, for different subjects (English, Mathematics, Science), across different
treatment intensities, and across different initial levels of the available ICT. Using the additional
information on student internet and time use to quantify the channels underlying the zero reduced
form effect, we find that jumps in the available ICT have no significant effect on student time spent
studying online or offline, or on the productivity of time spent studying. Finally, while ICT im-
provements appear to at least weakly increase student consumption of online content, we find
that the elasticity of student demand for online content with respect to its time cost is negative but
bounded by -1.
    The empirical strategy of this paper is related to a growing empirical literature on the socioe-
conomic consequences of the internet.11 Bhuller et al. (2013) and Akerman et al. (forthcoming)
exploit the timing of the roll-out of broadband internet across Norwegian municipalities to esti-
mate the effect on sex crime and skilled-to-unskilled wages and productivity respectively. Cam-
    8 These  channels are very general and have been discussed before. See related literature below and for example
Beltran et al. (2010) for a related model on the effect of home computers on education outcomes.
    9 So called massive open online courses (MOOC), such as EdX or the Khan Academy, increasingly target primary

and high school students. One of the earliest platforms for educational videos was YouTube, with thousands of channels
for homework support. Recent work on MOOCs in economics includes Deming et al. (2015) and Hoxby (2014).
   10 For study supply, websites such as Lumosity.com provide online learning tools/games that could make studying

more attractive. For productivity, online distractions could in principle also decrease learning per time spent studying.
   11 Our analysis is also related to existing work in the education literature using RD designs, as for example Angrist

and Lavy (1999), Black (1999), Clark (2009) and Gibbons et al. (2013).

                                                           4
pante et al. (2013) exploit time variation from the broadband roll-out across Italian municipalities
to estimate the effect on political participation, and Bellou (2015) exploits time variation in inter-
net penetration across US states to estimate the effect on marriage rates. Forman et al. (2012) use
US county-level measures of infrastructure costs, industry mix, or characteristics of nearby loca-
tions as instruments for internet investment to estimate the effect on local wages. Bauernschuster
et al. (2014) use the fact that some regions in Eastern Germany use telephony networks that are
not compatible with DSL-broadband to estimate the effect on social capital. Most closely related
to our empirical strategy is Falck et al. (2014) who exploit municipality-level variation in distances
to telephone exchange stations for a sample of German municipalities that do not host a telephone
exchange station within their own boundary to estimate the effect on political participation.12
    Relative to existing work, this paper presents a research design with a number of appealing
features that we discuss above: It provides a rich empirical setting with tens of thousands of
boundaries even in a relatively small country setting such as England; rather than focusing on
zero/one variation in broadband access, it is explicitly targeted at the evaluation of currently on-
going policy proposals to provide faster internet connections in a setting with close to universal
broadband access; it exploits cross-sectional variation that can be applied to estimate medium to
long-run effects; and the identifying assumption is readily assessable in any one cross-section of
data, even when panel data covering the pre-internet period are not available.
    Thematically, the paper relates to an existing literature on the effects of home computer use on
education outcomes.13 This literature has found some mixed results. On one hand, Fairlie (2005)
and Beltran et al. (2010) for the US, Schmitt and Wadsworth (2006) for the UK, and Fiorini (2010)
for Australia have documented positive associations between home computers and educational
outcomes. On the other hand, Fuchs and Wossmann (2004) who use data from 31 countries, and
Vigdor et al. (2014) who exploit student panel data in North Carolina, find evidence for negative
effects.14 In addition to effects of home computers, Vigdor et al. (2014) also find negative associa-
tions between expansions in broadband availability at the ZIP code level and student maths and
reading test scores in middle grades as well as reported computer use for homework. One differ-
ence of this study is that we trace the available ICT at a much finer geographical scale: the average
ZIP code in North Carolina contains more than 10,000 people, whereas postcode units in England
are equivalent to a single building in cities or segments of the same street in less urban areas and
capture on average about 15 households. This level of detail allows us to exploit discontinuous
changes in the available ICT across neighboring residences in a spatial RD design.
    In this literature we relate most closely to a number of recent studies that examine the effects
of home computer use on education outcomes using randomized controlled trials (RCTs) or quasi-
experimental variation. Malamud and Pop-Eleches (2011) find negative effects on school grades

   12 In concurrent and independent work on the effect of ICT on house prices Ahlfeldt et al. (2015) also use information

on exchange catchment areas. In contrast to the spatial RD design that we propose here, their approach conditions on
cross-sectional variation in residential distances to the connected exchanges, and instead exploits variation in the timing
of broadband upgrades across exchanges and/or households.
   13 Another recent literature examines effects of ICT in schools (e.g. Angrist and Lavy 2002; Barrow et al. 2009; Gools-

bee and Guryan 2006; Machin et al. 2007; Falck et al. 2015). In contrast, our results abstract from school-level factors by
including school fixed effects in our main specifications.
   14 See Bulman and Fairlie (forthcoming) for a comprehensive review of this literature.


                                                            5
but positive effects on computer skills and on a separate measure of cognitive ability. To estimate
these effects, they exploit a regression discontinuity from a voucher policy that subsidized com-
puters for low-income households in Romania. Fairlie and London (2012) find modestly positive
effects on education outcomes from an RCT that provided free computers to lower-income college
students in California. More recently, Fairlie and Robinson (2013) present evidence from a similar
RCT that randomly assigned home computers to more than one thousand secondary school stu-
dents in California who did not previously have access to PCs, and find no evidence for effects on
test scores or homework time.
      This paper aims to shed light on a related but different question of policy interest. Motivated
by the recent wave of government proposals to invest in ICT upgrades for providing ever faster
broadband internet, our analysis investigates the likely effect of such policies on education out-
comes. Furthermore, by empirically linking administrative test score records to the available ICT
at student home addresses, we are able to estimate the effect of ICT improvements on education
outcomes in the population of primary and secondary school students, rather than restricting at-
tention to students without prior access to ICT. This also allows us to explore the heterogeneity of
these effects along multiple dimensions of the student population.
      The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the background and data.
Section 3 presents the theoretical framework that guides the empirical analysis. Section 4 presents
the empirical strategy. Section 5 presents estimation results on the effect of jumps in the avail-
able ICT on education outcomes. Section 6 presents additional results to quantify the underlying
channels. Section 7 concludes.


2     Background and Data
      This section provides a brief description of the background and the main datasets used in the
empirical analysis. Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for each of the estimation samples.


2.1     Administrative Student Records and the English Education Context

      The English education curriculum is organized around five Key Stages (KS) at ages seven,
eleven, fourteen, sixteen and eighteen, corresponding to the grades –“academic years” in England–
two, six, nine, eleven and thirteen. Generally, students transfer from primary to secondary school
after completing grade six, where they stay at least until the end of compulsory education in grade
eleven. Towards the end of each of these Key Stages students are assessed in national exams that
are either administered by their teachers (KS1), or through externally marked tests (KS2, KS3, KS4
and KS5).15 There is no grade skipping or repeating and compulsory education ends at age sixteen
with the fourth Key Stage, which is also called “GCSE”. Until and including KS3 at age fourteen,
students have very limited options in choosing subjects or specializing according to interest or
ability. Consequently, students are tested in the three main compulsory subjects English, Mathe-
matics and Science in the national and externally assessed KS2 and KS3 tests. After KS3 students

    15 External   KS3 tests were abolished in 2009.

                                                      6
are able to specialize and choose among a large number of possible subjects.
      We obtain access to the administrative datasets covering the population of English students
which allow us to observe education outcomes for Key Stages 1-4 alongside their residential ad-
dresses. To match the student information to the telecom network data that we describe below, we
first extract the full (up to eight characters) residential postcode for each registered student in a
given year from the National Pupil Database (NPD). Full postcodes in England on average include
about 15 households and can be thought of as identifying a single building in cities or identifying a
segment of a street in less urban areas. In the second step, we use the unique student identifiers to
link this information to individual test score results, which are also provided as part of the NPD.16
      As described in the next paragraphs, our main estimation sample are observations from post-
codes within 1 km distance of an exchange station boundary segment.17 This covers slightly more
than 7 million test score observations for over 4.5 million students living in over 450,000 postcodes
in England over the period 2002-2008. These students attend over 20,000 primary and secondary
schools. Following the education literature, we percentilize the national test scores by Key Stage
exam, subject and cohort in order to make them comparable to (national) GPAs in the US. These
subject-percentiles are then added into a total score, which we percentilize to obtain an average
total score ranging from 1 to 100. In addition to test scores, the administrative data give us access
to a series of observable student characteristics, such as gender, age, ethnicity (eight groups), and
whether the student is eligible for a free school meal. Table 1 provides descriptive statistics of the
student estimation sample in the second panel.


2.2     Telecom Network Data

      The roll-out of broadband technology in the UK started in the major urban centers at the end of
the 1990s and proceeded rapidly. By the start of our estimation period in the year 2002, more than
70 percent of English households had access to broadband enabled telephone exchange stations,
and 96 percent by 2004 respectively. A salient feature of DSL-broadband technology is that the
available connection speed depends on the distance of the copper wire connection between the
router in the residence and the local telephone exchange station.18
      As a new strategy for exploiting this technological feature empirically, we obtain information
about the location of all English telephone exchange stations (roughly 3,900), and link the exchange
station identifiers to telecom network records that provide us with information on each English
postcode’s assignment (in total, there are slightly more than 1.46 million English postcodes) to
one of the 3,900 exchange stations.19 This geo-referenced dataset allows us to construct exchange
   16 The Department for Education formerly distinguished between the NPD and the Pupil Level Annual School Cen-

sus (PLASC), which is now treated as part of the NPD. Note that no information is available on private schools, which
enroll about seven percent of the English student population.
   17 Distance is defined as the minimum Euclidean (straight line) distance between the centroid of a full postcode and

the nearest boundary segment. As will become apparent from the non-parametric estimation results of the boundary
discontinuity effect, none of the presented findings are sensitive to increasing or decreasing this 1 km sample threshold.
For completeness, we also report estimation results for a wider 2 km distance band around the boundaries covering
more than 97 percent of the student population in England, as discussed in Section 5.
   18 Online Appendix Figure A.1 provides an illustration from the UK telecom regulator OfCom.
   19 We are grateful to the technology consulting firm Point Topic Ltd for providing us access to their proprietary

databases.

                                                            7
station-level catchment areas and their usually unobserved exact boundaries using a geographical
information system (GIS).20 The main estimation sample consists of more than 580,000 individual
postcodes that are within 1 km of an exchange catchment area boundary.21 The left panel of Figure
1 provides a map of these catchment areas in England, and Table 1 shows descriptive statistics
using the linked postcode-exchange station geographical dataset.
   The location of telephone exchange stations was determined during the roll-out of the English
land line telephony network which mainly occurred before and during the Second World War. Im-
portantly, distance to the local exchange station did not affect the quality of traditional telephone
services. However, while we believe it to be unlikely that households in the past or present actively
sort on the basis of distances to the connected exchange station, there are several reasons to believe
that exchange station location is far from random and may be correlated with other local neigh-
borhood characteristics that do matter for household sorting. For example, telephone exchange
stations appear to have been placed at central locations (local town centers) that were also close
to major road junctions for hosting the exchange switchboard infrastructure. To address a series
of endogeneity concerns that arise in the context of this “passive sorting”, we notice that capacity
constraints for any given exchange station coupled with the rapid growth of land line telephony
subscriptions after the Second World War have given rise to an empirical setting in which the in-
visible boundaries of exchange station-level catchment areas are essentially randomly drawn on a
map. These boundaries give rise to substantial cross-sectional variation in the available ICT due
to discontinuous jumps in the length of the copper wire that connects residences on either side of
the boundary to their assigned exchange station. The right panel of Figure 1 provides an exam-
ple of the boundary placements from one of the author’s residential areas in London. Within the
catchment areas we can also see the fine geographical resolution of the English postcodes, which
contain about 15 households on average and are often as small as a single building.
   In addition to the linked postcode-exchange station telecom network data, we also obtain mi-
crodata from the UK’s telecommunication regulator (OfCom) on the average internet speed expe-
rienced by households across close to 461 thousand English postcodes for the years 2012 and 2013.
This is important as it allows us to not just rely on the theoretical or laboratory-tested relationship
between copper wire lengths and the available internet speed depicted in Online Appendix Figure
A.1. The dataset provides us with the average, maximum, and minimum speed recorded across
individual households that we can geo-locate at the level of their full residential postcode. We
use this information to link the speed microdata to the telecom network GIS database discussed
above in order to estimate the relationship between residential exchange distances and available
internet speed in England. While observing data on actual connection speeds on the ground at
a spatially disaggregated level is a significant advance relative to much of the existing literature,
these data also have one obvious and important caveat: they significantly post-date our student
test score observations between 2002-2008. In particular, broadband internet infrastructure in the
UK was updated to significantly less distance sensitive technologies after 2008 such as coaxial or
fiber. Due to this feature of our dataset, we regard our estimates of the effect of crossing a catch-

  20 We    use exact vector (polygon) data from the Ordnance Survey.
  21 See   footnote 17.

                                                           8
ment area boundary from the slow to the fast side on the available internet connection speed as a
lower bound (for the test score estimation period). Table 1 provides additional descriptive statistics
about this dataset.


2.3     Survey Microdata on Student Time Use and Internet Use

      To further investigate the channels that underlie the reduced form effect of variation in the
available ICT at student home addresses on educational outcomes, we obtain access to the restricted-
use version of the microdata of the British Household Panel Survey (BHPS) covering the years
2002-2010 and its successor, the Understanding Society (US) Survey covering the years 2011 to
2013.22 We complement these data with the restricted-use versions of the first and second waves
of the Longitudinal Study of Young People in England (LSYPE) covering the years 2004 and 2005.
      The confidential data columns in these datasets allow us to link the survey microdata on stu-
dent time use and internet use to the residential postcode that the surveyed household resides in.
Each round of the BHPS data covers around 15,000 geo-referenced households, with an increase in
the number of surveyed households in the US successor surveys to around 25,000 in each round.
The LSYPE is a separate panel survey that includes about 14,000 students in each round. In the first
wave, the sampled students of the LSYPE were age 14 in 2004, and one year older in the second
wave in 2005. As for the other datasets, we define our main estimation samples as observations
within residential postcodes that are within a 1 km distance from an exchange station catchment
area boundary.
      Taken together, the youth surveys that are included in the BHPS and the US in combination
with the survey data from the LSYPE provide us with geo-referenced information on student time
spent on homework broken up into whether this is online or offline, as well as time spent using
computers or the internet more generally, and coincide with our test score estimation sample. De-
scriptive statistics for the BHPS, US and LSYPE estimation samples from these datasets are shown
in Table 1. English students during this period on average spent about 9 hours per week using
the internet for email and online social media and about 5.5 hours per week for doing homework.
And more than three quarters of students report using online resources for doing their homework.


2.4     Data on House Prices and Access to Local (Dis-)Amenities

      We use transaction-level data on property sales in England over the estimation period 2002-
2008. The data are administrative records from the English Land Registry and report the universe
of property transactions during the estimation period. We use the reported property address in-
formation in order to link these property transaction values to individual residential postcodes.
The estimations are based on several millions of individual property transactions that occurred
in England over the period 2002-2008. In addition to property values, we also observe property
characteristics, including the type of property (e.g. 2 bedroom house versus studio), whether it is
a new building, and the ownership type (lease or free hold).


  22 We   use the answers from the Youth Questionnaire (children aged 11-15) which is available in both surveys.

                                                           9
      We complement the house price microdata with a number of direct measures for local ameni-
ties and dis-amenities. Even though our empirical analysis is based on a spatial discontinuity
design that compares only very proximate outcomes, it could still be the case that catchment area
boundaries coincide with physical barriers such as roads or rivers, and that either the slower or the
faster side of the boundaries have a higher likelihood to host a given type of local (dis-)amenity–
the combination of which could lead to bias in the boundary effect. Using a GIS with detailed
attribute data from the UK Ordnance Survey, the commercial real estate company CBRE and the
English Department for Education, we compute Euclidean distances between each English post-
code and the following features: nearest school (primary or secondary), nearest road (class A, B
and motorways) and nearest supermarket.23 As for the other datasets, we define our main estima-
tion samples as observations within residential postcodes that are within a 1 km distance from an
exchange station catchment area boundary. Descriptive statistics in kilometers for these variables
are shown in the lower panel of Table 1.


3     Theoretical Framework
      This section presents a simple model to guide the empirical estimation. We analyze the effect of
changes in the time cost of accessing online information and communication on learning outcomes
through the lens of a basic knowledge production function. Improvements in the available ICT can
affect learning outcomes through two mechanisms: either through changing the productivity of a
given amount of time spent studying, or by affecting the supply of time spent studying relative to
other student activities. In any given period, a student i’s knowledge production function is given
by:


                                                      Hi = Ai Liα                                                   (1)

      where Hi is educational achievement, Ai is a student-specific learning productivity shifter, Li is
the student supply of time spent studying, and α > 0 is the elasticity of learning achievement with
respect to time spent studying. In the following, we let both the productivity shifter Ai and the
student study time supply Li be functions of student-specific characteristics (λiA and λiL ), neigh-
borhood characteristics (φnA and φnL ), school characteristics (µsA and µsL ), and a residual term (eins
                                                                                                     A

     L ).
and eins
      We introduce the available ICT as the inverse of the per-unit time cost (ci ) of accessing online
              1
content:      ci .   We allow this inverse cost to affect both student productivity and the supply of time
spent studying:
                                                       δ                     A
                                                       1
                                            Ains =     ci    λiA φnA µsA eeins
                                                                                                                    (2)
                                                       η                    L
                                                       1
                                             Lins =    ci    λiL φnL µsL e   eins


    23 Data
          on supermarket locations are for the first year of our test score analysis (2002), and we obtain them from the
Retail Research Unit of the real estate advisory company CBRE in the UK. Supermarkets refer to all establishments in
the category "grocery/supermarket".

                                                            10
    where δ is the elasticity of learning productivity with respect to available internet connection
speed c1i , and η is the elasticity of study time supply with respect to c1i . The first elasticity captures
the potential effect of changes in the time cost of accessing online content on the learning pro-
ductivity for a given amount of time spent studying. The second elasticity captures the potential
effect of student time allocation between studying and other activities. Analogous to a basic labor
                                                                                              1
supply equation, η can capture both a relative price effect whereby changes in                ci   affect the relative
attractiveness of studying compared to other activities online or offline, as well as an endowment
                                1
effect whereby changes in       ci   affect study time supply by endowing the student with more or less
online content for a given amount of time spent studying.
    Substituting (2) into (1) and taking logs we get the following estimation equation:
                                                     
                                                     1
                                     lnHins   = βln     + φn + µs + λi + eins                                      (3)
                                                     ci
     where β = (δ + αη ), φn = lnφnA + αlnφnL , µs = lnµsA + αlnµsL , λi = lnλiA + αlnλiL , and eins =
 A + αe L . This basic theoretical setting gives rise to several interesting hypotheses for empirical
eins     ins
estimation. To fix ideas, we refer to the hypothesis that η < 0 as the “Facebook effect”. That
is, lower information and communication costs decrease effective study time supply by either
making other online or offline activities relatively more attractive (positive relative price effect)
and/or by letting students access a fixed amount of learning content in less time (endowment
effect). For learning productivity, we refer to the hypothesis that δ > 0 as the “MOOC effect”.24
That is, lower information and communication costs increase the productivity of a given amount of
study time for educational achievement. Of course, both the effect on study supply and learning
productivity can in principle also go in the opposite direction. Websites such as Lumosity.com
offer online learning and brain-training games that could increase the perceived attractiveness of
learning relative to other activities (negative relative price effect) to an extent that outweighs the
endowment effect (η > 0). For productivity, online distractions could in principle also decrease
learning per unit of time spent studying (δ < 0).
    The empirical analysis in Section 5 (steps 1 and 2 below) combines the administrative microdata
on English student test score results with the exchange station boundary discontinuity design to
estimate the reduced form causal effect of discontinuous jumps in the available ICT on education
outcomes: β = δ + αη. The empirical analysis in Section 6 (step 3 below) then brings to bear
additional microdata on student time use and internet use to further disentangle and quantify the
underlying mechanisms.




   24 So called massive open online courses (MOOC) provide educational video streaming. They have grown rapidly

and increasingly target primary and high school students in addition to post-secondary education. One of the earliest
platforms for educational videos was YouTube which features thousands of educational channels for homework sup-
port. Even before the take-over by Google in 2006, YouTube had over 100 million daily video views in the UK and over
65,000 daily uploads according to press articles at the time.

                                                         11
4      Empirical Strategy
   In the empirical
                  analysis
                           the objective is to estimate the effect of exogenous variation in the
                   1
available ICT (ln ci ) on a number of different outcomes including student test score perfor-
mances in national exams. Our empirical analysis proceeds in three main steps that exploit dif-
ferent combinations of the microdata. In step 1 we estimate the causal effect of student home dis-
tances to connected telephone exchange stations on the available ICT at the students’ residences.
In step 2 we then estimate the causal effect of residential distances to exchange stations on student
test score performances, and use these estimates in combination with those from step 1 to quan-
tify the effect of changes in available internet speed on educational outcomes (the β = δ + αη in
Section 3 above).25 In the final step 3, we use the theoretical framework of the previous section
in combination with additional geo-referenced survey microdata on student time use and internet
use to quantify the potentially opposing mechanisms underlying the reduced form effects in step
2.
   The identifying assumption to estimate causal effects in specification
                                                                         (3)
                                                                             is that, conditional
                                                                          1
on disaggregated neighborhood and school fixed effects, variation in ln ci is orthogonal to the
error term. That is, variation in available residential ICT is uncorrelated with unobserved student
characteristics or locational factors that also affect test scores. To this end, we propose an empirical
strategy that is based on comparing student outcomes across exchange station catchment area
boundaries. We estimate variations of the following two alternative specifications:


                                        4                                                                                     
                                       ∑
                                                                                         f ast
         yipnskt = βFastSide p +                  βslow
                                                   τ    DistBoundaryτp + β τ                     FastSide p ∗ DistBoundaryτp        (4)
                                       τ =1
                       +γXit + φn + µs + κkt + eipnskt



                 10                                                9                                                           
                 ∑                                                   ∑
                                                                                 f ast
    yipnskt =              βslow
                            b    I DistBoundary p = b           +               βb       FastSide p ∗ I DistBoundary p = b                (5)
                b =1                                                 b =1
                +γXit + φn + µs + κkt + eipnskt

      where i indexes students, p the full postcode where the student lives, n neighborhoods, s
schools, k Key Stage exam types, and t test score years. The estimation sample are roughly 580
thousand residential postcodes that are within 1 km of an exchange station boundary as discussed
in the data section. As discussed in the next section, we also report estimation results for a wider 2
km distance band around the boundaries covering more than 97 percent of the student population

     25 This
          is analogous to a two-stage instrumental variable estimation where the first step represents the first stage and
the second step the reduced form, which are then used to quantify the second stage. We approach the estimation in
separate steps to use the universe of available information for each of them, as they are of interest in their own right.
Having said this, the results are virtually identical when restricting the first-stage estimation and the reduced form to a
sample of over-lapping postcodes, which is not surprising as our second stage uses the universe of postcodes containing
student residences. For sample comparisons also see Table 1. Finally, note that we refer to “reduced form effects” in the
text implying a model-based definition (i.e. β is a combination of structural parameters) rather than the econometric
definition (where step 2 is the reduced form of the IV estimation).

                                                                12
in England.
    We define neighborhoods as a group of residential postcodes that are nearest to the same
boundary segment. To ensure that we define neighborhoods at a disaggregated spatial resolu-
tion that extends on both sides of a given boundary segment, we partition each exchange station
boundary outline into individual segments by overlaying a randomly placed “cookie cutter” grid
of 1x1 km squares covering the land area of England in order to split and define individual bound-
ary segments (i.e. the maximum length is the square’s diagonal ≈ 1.4 km). This definition of
local neighborhoods leads to the inclusion of roughly 20,000 boundary segment fixed effects, φn ,
pertaining to approximately 3,900 exchange station catchment areas.26 Xit are observable student
socioeconomic controls that we obtain from the administrative school records: age, gender, free
school meal eligibility, and student ethnicity.27 In some of our specifications discussed below, we
also include school fixed effects µs , which is feasible because residential location is not determin-
istically linked to school attendance in England. Finally, year-by-Key Stage fixed effects κkt allow
for any potential differences in testing or annual shocks. To address potential autocorrelation in
the error term, eipnskt , across residences within the same local neighborhood, we cluster standard
errors at the level of individual boundary segments.
    Turning to the explanatory variables of interest in the first rows of specifications (4) and (5),
we follow two different estimation approaches. The first approach in (4) is to fit a fourth-order
polynomial function on either side of the boundary with respect to the running variable of the
discontinuity design: residential distances to the nearest exchange station boundary segment. We
define the fast and slow sides of each individual boundary segment in terms of the difference in the
mean of residential distances to their connected exchange station on either side of the same bound-
ary segment.28 The causal effect of the boundary discontinuity on an outcome variable of interest,
yipnskt , is thus estimated using only the discontinuous jump in levels that occurs when crossing
a given boundary segment from the slower side to the faster side, captured by βFastSide p , after
conditioning on the flexible functional form with respect to boundary distance on either side in
addition to neighborhood fixed effects, school fixed effects and a rich set of socioeconomic student
controls. As discussed in Section 2, the variation that this design exploits are discontinuous jumps
in the length of the copper wire that connect residences on either side of the invisible boundary to
their assigned telephone exchange stations. The identifying assumption is that other factors that
affect student test score performances vary smoothly across the boundary, which can in principle
be tested on observables as we discuss below.
    To address potential concerns about the parametric assumptions imposed by specification (4)
(e.g. Gelman and Imbens, 2014), we exploit the richness of the collected data to also estimate a less
parametric specification. To empirically assess how well the fourth-order polynomial functional

   26 Our  estimation sample are boundary segments with nearest postcodes assigned on both sides (from two different
exchange station catchment areas). Some boundary segments along the coast have nearest residences assigned from
only one exchange station catchment area, and 0.38 percent of boundary segments had nearest residences assigned
from more than two exchange station catchment areas. We exclude these latter two cases.
   27 Since there is no skipping or repeating, the effect of age is already controlled for by the test type-by-year fixed

effects (κkt ).
   28 To define this consistently for each boundary segment as well as over time, we use the universe of residential

postcodes to define the slow and fast sides for each boundary segment.

                                                           13
form captures the relationship between exchange station distances and the outcomes of interest,
the first row of specification (5) replaces the two fourth-order polynomials with 19 100-meter dis-
tance bins, where the reference category (the 20th bin) are residential postcodes within 900-1,000
meter distance from the boundary segment that are located on the fast side (i.e. these are the resi-
dences with the shortest distances to their connected exchange on the faster side). I is an indicator
function that takes the value of one if a student’s residential postcode p is within a b distance bin
from the boundary, of which there are 10 on each side of the boundary in total. In specification
(5), we label the b0 s to be increasing in distance to the boundary on either side. Overlaying the
point estimates of this less parametric specification onto the estimation results of specification (4)
allows us to assess to what extent the polynomial functional forms capture the actual relationship
between boundary distances and various outcomes of interest that we consider in the following
sections. As discussed in the next section, we also report additional results after replacing the
fourth-order polynomials with 39 50 m bins instead of the 100 m bins.
    In addition to fitting flexible functional forms, the empirical design in specifications (4) and
(5) offers three advantages. The first is that we can exploit variation in ICT in the cross-section of
students, which allows us to estimate the medium to long-run effects of ICT upgrades rather than
shorter-term adjustments.29 Especially in the context of educational attainment, where effects may
take time to accumulate, this is an important feature. Given broadband coverage in England was
already close to universal at the beginning of our sample in 2002, and the fraction of students who
move residences during secondary school is only 0.5 percent, the design captures a wide range of
length of exposure (more than 7 years towards the end of the sample).30 Second, we can provide
direct empirical evidence on the validity of the identifying assumption: We report how point es-
timates are affected by the inclusion of a rich set of additional observable control covariates, such
as school fixed effects and student socioeconomic characteristics (that is before and after including
Xit above). Furthermore, we can test to what extent property values as well as local amenities
vary when moving from the slow side of a boundary segment to the fast side. Third, we can esti-
mate the effect of changes in available connection speeds on educational outcomes across a wide
range of treatment intensities/doses, as well as across different initial positions in the distribution
of available ICT (different levels of ICT on the slower side). That is, rather than exploiting a sin-
gle discontinuity, the exchange station boundary design allows us to estimate the effect of ICT on
education across more than 20,000 individual boundary segments, with rich variation in both the
intensity of the jump in available ICT as well as initial positions in the ICT distribution on the slow
side of different segments.




   29 On a more subtle note, this also allows us to disentangle the effect of ICT on the outcome of interest while holding

constant the economic environment. For example, when using time variation, connecting an area to the internet may
have general equilibrium effects on the returns to skills that could also affect student effort. In contrast, our research
design tests for the effect of ICT improvements while holding constant the economic environment for students on either
side of the invisible exchange station boundary.
   30 As discussed below, we also further explore the heterogeneity of the estimated effects across years and age groups.


                                                           14
5     Estimation
      This section combines the microdata described in Section 2 with the empirical strategy out-
lined in Section 4 to estimate the reduced form causal effect of ICT improvements for educational
attainment ( β = δ + αη ) that we derived in Section 3.


5.1     The Boundary Effect on Connection Distances and Available ICT

      This subsection uses the telecom network data to estimate the size and statistical significance of
discontinuous jumps in the available ICT across exchange station catchment boundaries (step 1).
The two key pieces of information that we exploit in these estimations are data on the assignment
of each of the roughly 1.5 million residential postcodes in England to one of several thousand tele-
phone exchange stations in combination with additional microdata on realized internet connection
speeds across residential postcodes.
      To estimate the average effect of crossing an exchange station boundary on the residential dis-
tance to the connected exchange switchboard, we estimate the following specification:


                                         4                                                                      
                                        ∑
                                                                           f ast
DistExchange pn = βFastSide p +                   βslow
                                                   τ    DistBoundaryτp + β τ       FastSide p ∗ DistBoundaryτp       (6)
                                       τ =1
                         +φn + e pn

      where p indexes individual residential postcodes and n indexes neighborhoods defined as
boundary segments within 1x1 km squares as described above. DistExchange pn is the distance
in meters between residential postcode centroids and their connected telephone exchange station.
                                                                          
Alternatively, we replace the outcome variable of interest by ln Speed pnt , which is the logarithm
of the average realized connection speed in residential postcode p located in neighborhood n and
year t, and include year fixed effects in addition to the neighborhood fixed effects in specification
(6). As discussed above, we also estimate these two specifications after replacing the polynomial
functional forms with the less parametric version in specification (5) in order to assess the fit of the
functional forms in specification (6) on either side of the boundary.
      Figure 2 and Table 2 report the estimation results of the effect of boundary discontinuities on
residential connection distances. The the left hand side (to the left of the vertical line and with
negative distances on the x-axis) in each of the graphs refers to the slower side of a given exchange
boundary segment, i.e. the side with higher mean residential distances to the connected exchange
station. Each graph depicts estimation results from two separate specifications: The plotted func-
tional forms present results after estimating the fourth-order polynomials conditional on neigh-
borhood (boundary segment) fixed effects. The shaded area depicts 95% confidence intervals. The
black bars on the other hand depict the 95% confidence intervals for the less parametric specifi-
cation (replacing the polynomials with 100m distance bins). For display in the graphs, these bin
coefficients have been centered at the mean distance to the boundary within each 100m bin on the
x-axis. Both sets of estimates are depicted as partial predictions while holding covariates constant
at their sample means, which also implies that the 20th reference bin is not at zero in these graphs.

                                                        15
The confidence intervals are based on standard errors that are clustered at the level of boundary
segments.
      Several findings emerge. The fourth-order polynomials appear to capture the functional form
of exchange distances with respect to boundary distances on either side of the boundary extremely
well: The less parametric point estimates on the 20 100m location bins trace out the smooth polyno-
mial function almost exactly. The average jump in residential distances to the connected exchange
is substantial: 725m, or 65 percent of a standard deviation in connection distances according to the
descriptive statistics in Table 1. Restricting attention to the top 30 percent of the 20,000 English
boundary segments that are characterized by the largest jumps in mean residential connection dis-
tances, this average effect increases from 725m to close to 2,250m, or two standard deviations. In
conclusion, the boundary discontinuity design appears to provide substantial and discontinuous
variation in residential distances to the connected telephone exchange stations, as well as a wide
range of different treatment intensities across the more than 20,000 boundary segments.
      In Figure 3, we replace residential connection distances with the log of the average internet con-
nection speed experienced by households on the left hand side of specification (6). As suggested
by the technological relationship in Online Appendix Figure A.1, the jump in connection distances
translates into substantial variation in the available internet connection speeds on different sides of
the boundary. The average jump in connection speed is 22 percent across all boundary segments.
When restricting the estimation to the top 30 percent of boundary segments with the highest mean
differences in connection distances across the boundary, this average jump increases to 47 percent.
These effects suggest that a household on the slower side of an invisible catchment area bound-
ary incurs 20 or 50 percent more time in order to access the same amount of online content as a
neighboring household on the faster side of the boundary. In more practical terms, OfCom –the
UK telecom regulator– reports that in 2008 (the end of our student test score data below) more
than one quarter of English internet connections still delivered actually observed maximum speeds
below 1.8 Mbit/s, which would be significantly below common requirements for many online ac-
tivities including video streaming.31 At such levels, the documented jumps in the available ICT
across exchange boundaries give rise to significant variation in the time cost of accessing online
content. Related to this, and as discussed in the data section, we note that these estimates of the
effect on connection speeds are likely to be lower bounds for the estimation period of our test
score analysis. The reason is that the available speed data cover a period (2012-2013) with signif-
icantly less distance sensitive broadband technology compared to what was in place during our
estimation period 2002-2008 in what follows below.


5.2     The Boundary Effect on Student Test Scores

      After estimating the boundary effect on jumps in residential connection distances and the avail-
able ICT, we proceed to our second step, and estimate the effect of exchange station boundaries on
student educational attainment:



  31 See   OfCom Broadband Report 2008. Video streaming requires stable speeds of around 3 Mbit/s.

                                                         16
                                             4                                                                        
                                            ∑
                                                                                 f ast
  TestScoreipnskt = βFastSide p +                      βslow
                                                        τ    DistBoundaryτp + β τ        FastSide p ∗ DistBoundaryτp           (7)
                                            τ =1
                           +γXit + φn + µs + κkt + eipnskt

    where i indexes students, p postcodes, n neighborhoods as defined above, s schools, k Key
Stage exam types, and t test score years. As described in Section 2, TestScoreipnskt is the student’s
national test score percentile in Key-Stage exams. We report results both for a baseline specifica-
tion that includes neighborhood fixed effects (φn ) and test type-by-year fixed effects (κkt ), as well
as after additionally including controls for student socio-economic characteristics ( Xit ) and school
fixed effects (µs ) in what we refer to as the full specification in the figures. The observable stu-
dent characteristics from the administrative records are age and dummies for gender, free school
meal eligibility and eight different groups of ethnic background.32 Once again, we also estimate
specification (7) after replacing the polynomial functions with the less parametric specification in
(5) to estimate the effect across 100m distance bins. In addition, we also estimate specification (7)
both for all English boundary segments as well as after restricting attention to the 30 percent of
boundary segments with the highest mean differences in residential connections distances within
1 km on both sides.33
    Figure 4 and Table 2 report the results of these eight estimations. In addition, the left panel
of Figure 5 reports results after extending the estimation sample to 2 km on either side of the
boundary (capturing more than 97% of the student population), and the right panel of Figure 5
after replacing the 100 m bins by more granular 50 m bins instead.
    Several findings emerge. First, the effect of variation in the available ICT on test scores is a
precisely estimated zero effect.34 Second, this result holds both before and after including addi-
tional student controls and school fixed effects in the full specification. Third, even for substantial
variation in available internet connection speeds, the effect is a precisely estimated zero as de-
picted in the lower panels of Figure 4. Fourth, the estimated level and curvature of the distance
relationships on either side of the boundaries are interesting in their own right. In the full 2 km
sample reported in the left panel of Figure 5 test scores within 2 km of a given boundary segment
are on average statistically significantly lower on the slow (left) side compared to the fast side of
the boundary when estimated in terms of simple mean differences conditional on covariates. Fur-
thermore, even within a given exchange catchment area on either side of the boundary, test scores
are significantly correlated with available internet connection speeds. In Figure 5, test scores are
at first rising as we move away from the boundary on both sides, and then falling especially on
the slow side of the boundary segment. These results point to granular and unobserved locational
factors and household sorting that are correlated with distances to the connected exchange stations

   32 Since there is no skipping or repeating, the effect of age is already controlled for by the test type-by-year fixed

effects (κkt ).
   33 As part of the next subsection, we also estimate results across four quartiles of the intensity of jumps across bound-

aries.
   34 In reference to footnote 25, note that the estimated zero point estimate for the reduced form of a two-stage IV

estimation also implies that the 2nd stage estimate is a zero.

                                                              17
both across catchment areas as well as within. As depicted in Figures 4 and 5, the fact that even
substantial discontinuous jumps in available ICT at the boundary do not have a significant effect
on test scores leads to this conclusion in a clear and transparent way.
      Finally, how do our estimated effect sizes compare to existing findings in the education litera-
ture? In our main specification reported in Table 2, we can reject positive effects greater than 1.9
percent and negative effects greater than 0.6 percent of a standard deviation in test scores from
crossing the invisible boundary to the fast side.35 Focusing on the top 30 percent of boundaries in
terms of speed jumps, we can still reject small positive (negative) effects of 4.2 (-1.7) percent of a
standard deviation in test scores. In comparison, for example Malamud and Pop-Eleches (2011)
find that winning a voucher to subsidize computer ownership has negative effects of 25-30 percent
of a standard deviation on school grades in Math, English and Romanian. Fairlie and London
(2012) estimate positive effects of 14 percent of a standard deviation in a summary index of edu-
cational outcomes using experimental variation. Fairlie and Robinson (2013) report insignificant
effects on academic test scores from a random provision of home computers to students in Cal-
ifornia, rejecting positive (negative) effects greater than 8 (-4) percent of a standard deviation in
GPAs.36 Finally, according to existing studies a teacher who is one standard deviation better than
average improves student test scores by 10-20 percent of a standard deviation (Aaronson et al.,
2007; Rivkin et al., 2005). Viewed in this context, we would argue that the richness of the empirical
setting allows us to estimate reasonably precisely estimated (zero) effects.


5.3     Heterogeneity of the Test Score Effect

      The estimated average effect reported above may mask significant heterogeneity. One impor-
tant consideration is that the effect of differences in the available ICT across student residences
may take time to accumulate and materialize into test score outcomes, or that skill formation may
be more or less sensitive to ICT at certain stages/ages (e.g. Cunha et al., 2010). While our empiri-
cal strategy exploits cross-sectional variation precisely with the aim to estimate longer-term effects
(and broadband was close to universally available in England by the start of our seven-year study
period in 2002), it could still be the case that the effects only start materializing after an extended
period of exposure. If this is the case, one would expect the effect to become stronger over time
between 2002-2008. One might also expect to see on average larger effects among older student
cohorts who have been exposed to variation in ICT for longer and/or make more intensive use
of online educational resources (OfCom, 2012). On the other hand, it could also be the case that
students at younger ages are particularly sensitive to changes in their learning environment.
      To further explore these possibilities, we report to what extent the effect of jumps in the avail-
able ICT differs across survey years between 2002-08 as well as across four student age groups (7,
10, 14, and 16 year olds). We also exploit the richness of the empirical setting to explore a number
of other potential sources of heterogeneity. To this end, we estimate specification (7) separately
across two student gender groups, two income groups (eligibility for free school meals), two eth-

   35 As discussed in the previous subsection, this treatment is associated with a (lower bound) increase in available

connection speeds of roughly one quarter.
   36 Based on the reported confidence intervals and the standard deviation of GPAs in Table 3 of their paper.


                                                         18
nic groups (White and Non-White), three subjects (English, Mathematics, Science), four quartiles
of treatment intensities at different boundaries, as well as across three groups of mean residen-
tial connection distances on the slow side of each segment. One of the strengths of the exchange
station boundary discontinuity design is that it allows us to explore the effect of interest across a
range of different initial positions of the available ICT on the slower side of the boundary. This
is in contrast to typical RD designs that focus on one local effect. In our setting, this allows us to
explore potential non-linearities due to, for example, speed thresholds for certain activities such as
video streaming.
      We estimate these specifications and report the results across the different specifications in
exactly the same way as we do for the average effect reported in Figure 4. As reported in Figures
A.2-A.7 in the Online Appendix, we find that the estimated zero average effect that we report
above holds in each of these 24 sub-samples of the database. These additional results provide
further support that the cross-sectional variation that we exploit in our empirical strategy appears
to effectively capture longer-term effects (of more than seven years at the end of our sample), and
that the estimated average effect does not appear to mask significant heterogeneities across either
different groups of the student population or non-linearities with respect to initial levels of ICT or
the intensity of the jump.


5.4     Robustness

      To further assess the validity of the identification strategy we run the following specifications:


                                              4                                                                         
                                          ∑
                                                                                      f ast
ln ( PropValue) jpnt = βFastSide p +                  βslow
                                                       τ    DistBoundaryτp + β τ              FastSide p ∗ DistBoundaryτp (8)
                                         τ =1
                           +γX jt + φn + κt + e jpnt



                                          4                                                                                 
                                         ∑
                                                                                    f ast
StudentCharipnkt = βFastSide p +                      βslow
                                                       τ      DistBoundaryτp   +   βτ        FastSide p ∗   DistBoundaryτp       (9)
                                        τ =1
                          +φn + κkt + eipnkt



                                          4                                                                            
                                         ∑
                                                                                     f ast
ln ( DistAmen) pn = βFastSide p +                     βslow
                                                       τ    DistBoundaryτp + β τ             FastSide p ∗ DistBoundaryτp (10)
                                        τ =1
                          +φn + e pn

      where as before p indexes full residential postcodes and n indexes neighborhoods defined as
individual boundary segments as described above. Specifications (8)-(10) provide estimation re-
sults on six additional outcome variables. These additional estimations are aimed at testing for
statistically significant jumps when moving from the slow side of a given boundary segment to
the faster side for the following outcomes: log house prices, student propensities to be eligible for

                                                               19
free school meals or to have a non-white ethnic background, and log residential distances to super-
markets, major roads, and schools. The identification strategy outlined in Section 4 requires all of
these observable locational characteristics to vary smoothly across the invisible exchange station
boundaries.
    In specification (8) t indexes individual quarters (e.g. 1st quarter of 2005) during which prop-
erty transactions j took place over the estimation period 2002-2008. ln ( PropValue) jpnt are the uni-
verse of log property transaction values from England’s Land Registry reported for a property j,
and X jt is a vector of property characteristics including the type of property (e.g. 2 bedroom house
versus studio), whether it is a new building, and the ownership type (lease or free hold). Next, in
specification (9) t indexes years in which exam type k was taken by student i. StudentCharipnkt is
either free school meal eligibility or ethnic background (White or Other) of student i. Finally, in
equation (10) ln ( DistAmen) pn is log distance from the centroid of postcode p to the nearest super-
market, major road, or primary or secondary school. As noted at the end of Section 2, even though
the research design is based on comparisons between only very nearby outcomes, it could still be
the case that catchment area boundaries coincide with physical barriers (such as roads or rivers),
and that either the slower or the faster side have a higher likelihood to host a given type of local
(dis-)amenity –the combination of which could lead to bias in the boundary effect. Specification
(10) is aimed to assess such concerns.
    As before, we alternatively estimate specifications (8)-(10) after replacing the polynomial func-
tions with the 100m distance bins in order to assess the fit of the imposed flexible functional forms.
We also once again estimate each specification both for all English boundary segments as well
as after restricting attention to the top 30 percent of boundary segments with the highest mean
differences in residential connections distances within 1 km on both sides.
    Figure 6 reports the estimation results across four specifications for the boundary effect on
house prices, and Tables 2 and 3 report estimation results for all specifications (8)-(10). In the
interest of space, we report the figures for the five additional outcomes in specifications (9) and
(10) in the Online Appendix Figures A.8-A.12.
    House prices, student socio-economic characteristics as well as local amenities remain virtually
flat across exchange station boundaries.37 Thanks to the richness of the collected data, these results
are precisely estimated. The zero effects are also confirmed in each of the six cases after restricting
attention to the boundary segments with the largest observed variation in connection distances
and realized internet speeds.38 These additional estimation results provide reassurance for the
identification strategy outlined in Section 4.
    Finally, as above for the test score results, the figures also depict interesting correlations with
respect to exchange station distances. For example, within a given catchment area we see a sta-
   37 Note  that the estimated zero effect on property values depicted in Figure 6 is at odds with the positive effect of
speed on house prices that Ahlfeldt et al. (2015) report. In addition to using a different identification strategy (they use
variation in the timing of technology upgrades across exchanges and/or households), another difference is that we use
data on the universe of property transactions in England over the period 2002-08, whereas Ahlfeldt et al. (2015) use
information from one financial institution that finances roughly 10 percent of the mortgage-based transactions.
   38 Notice that there is a very tiny but statistically significant jump in the propensity for free school meal eligibility

depicted in the left panel of Online Appendix Figure A.9 and reported in Table 2. This becomes a statistical zero once
we control for other student characteristics and/or school fixed effects. And as we document in Figure 4 and Table 2,
the test score effect remains a precisely estimated zero both before and after conditioning on student observables.

                                                            20
tistically significant increase in access to local schools or supermarkets as exchange connection
distances become smaller, and we see that free school meal eligibility or the propensity for non-
white ethnic backgrounds are significantly higher when taking simple averages on the side with
higher connection distances (left) compared to the side with shorter connection distances (right).
Once again, these correlations indicate endogeneity concerns that operate at a very granular spa-
tial scale when projecting test scores or other outcomes on residential exchange distances, which
the exchange station boundary discontinuity design appears to effectively address.


6     Channels
     Guided by the theoretical framework in Section 3, this section (step 3) brings to bear additional
geo-referenced survey microdata on student time use and internet use to further investigate the
potentially opposing mechanisms underlying the estimated reduced form effect. To disentangle
the different components of the reduced form effect β = δ + αη in equation (3), we estimate the
following specification with a number of different student outcomes on the left hand side:


                                         4                                                                       
                                        ∑
                                                                            f ast
    TimeUseipnt = βFastSide p +                    βslow
                                                    τ    DistBoundaryτp + β τ       FastSide p ∗ DistBoundaryτp       (11)
                                        τ =1
                        +γXit + φn + κt + eipnt

     where as before i indexes students, p indexes individual residential postcodes, n indexes neigh-
borhoods and t indexes rounds of survey data and Xit is a vector of basic student characteristics
(second-order polynomial for age and a gender dummy). Again, we estimate these specifications
both before and after replacing the polynomial functions with the less parametric specifications
discussed in Section 4. TimeUseipnt in specification (11) is one of several measures for either stu-
dent internet use or study time supply. For internet use, this is measured either as the reported
number of days per week that a student in the British Household Panel Survey (BHPS) or in the
Understanding Society survey (US) uses the internet, or as the reported number of hours per day
spent using email and online social media from the US survey. For study time, we use one of
four different measures. The first is the number of weekdays doing homework in the Longitudi-
nal Study of Young People in England (LSYPE) survey. The second is the number of hours spent
doing homework per weekday in the US survey.39 The third is the propensity of using internet
resources for homework from the LSYPE survey. And the fourth is the number of hours spent
doing homework using a computer also from the LSYPE survey.40
     How do these additional empirical moments on student time use and internet use relate to the
theoretical framework that we presented in Section 3? The reduced form effect β = δ + αη that
    39 Wecompute this variable by combining answers to the following two separate survey questions: “During an
average week in term time, on how many evenings do you do any homework? Please just think about Monday to
Friday evenings during term time.”; and “When you do homework on a week-day evening during term time, how
many hours do you usually spend doing your homework?”
   40 We compute this variable by combining answers from the following two questions: “Days a week the young person

usually uses home computer for school work, during term time”; and “Number of hours the young person uses home
computer for school work, on a day when use computer for school work during term time”.

                                                            21
we estimate in Section 5 can be decomposed into the sum of two potentially opposing effects. The
first is the effect of lower time costs in accessing online content on the the learning productivity
per unit of time spent studying, which is captured by the elasticity δ. The second is the effect of
reducing the time cost of online content consumption on the supply of student time spent study-
ing, which is captured by the elasticity η. In the theory section, we refer to the hypothesis that
δ > 0 as the “MOOC effect”. That is, lower information and communication costs increase the
productivity of a given amount of study time for educational achievement. In turn, we refer to the
hypothesis that η < 0 as the “Facebook effect”. That is, lower information and communication
costs decrease effective study time supply by either making other online or offline activities rela-
tively more attractive (positive relative price effect) or by letting students access a fixed amount of
learning content in less time (endowment effect). Conversely, we also discussed that both the effect
on learning productivity and on study supply could in principle also go in the opposite direction.
      The additional specifications summarized in (11) allow us to empirically test for the sign, size
and statistical significance of η (the effect on study time supply). Furthermore, the combination of η
with our previous estimates of the effect on student test scores (the β) allow us to infer the sign and
significance of δ (the effect on educational attainment holding constant study times). Finally, by
observing student responses in their time spent on the internet, we can in addition learn about the
changes in student consumption of online content underlying these effects, and provide empirical
evidence on the elasticity of student demand for online content with respect to its time cost.


6.1     Estimation Results

      Before estimating the specifications in (11), we re-run specification (6) from Section 5 on the
sample of residential postcodes for which we have student survey microdata in order to verify
that the treatment in the available ICT is present in the same way as reported above in these esti-
mations. Appendix Figure A.13 presents the estimation results which document that the boundary
treatment jumps for surveyed students in these samples are of similar magnitude compared to the
population data presented in Figure 2. As before, crossing the average boundary is associated with
approximately 65 percent of a standard deviation reduction in distance to the connected exchange,
which corresponds to sizable changes in the available ICT as shown using the telecom network
data in Section 5.
      Despite these significant jumps in the available ICT, Figure 7 and Table 3 present estimation
results that suggest a zero effect on student time spent on the internet.41 Figures 8 and 9 then
move attention to the effect on student time spent studying and time spent studying using online
resources. Once again the estimation results, which we also report again in Table 3, suggest zero
effects both on total student time spent studying as well as on student time spent studying using
online resources.
      These results provide a number of additional insights. First, we find that exogenous changes
in the available ICT do not significantly affect student supply of study time online or offline, or
their learning productivity per time spent studying. Relating back to the terminology we use to
   41 Because we have to switch from administrative census data to using survey microdata in these estimations, point

estimates are naturally somewhat less precise than in the previous section.

                                                         22
fix ideas in the model, the empirical analysis does not provide evidence in favor of the Facebook
effect or in favor of the MOOC effect of ICT upgrades on student educational outcomes. Given
that this is the first empirical study to relate administrative test score performances to large and
exogenous variation in the available ICT in the cross-section of a student population, we believe
these results serve to inform currently ongoing policy debates on ICT infrastructure investments
that are targeted at providing ever faster broadband internet connections.
     Second, the presented results are also informative about the elasticity of student consumption
of online information and communication with respect to the per-unit (e.g. Mbit) time cost of on-
line consumption, which is a key parameter for ICT policy decisions for which we are currently
not aware of existing empirical estimates. In particular, our findings suggest that the elasticity of
student demand for online content is negative, but bounded by -1. The empirical moments un-
derlying this conclusion are that i) there are large and significant jumps in the available ICT across
catchment area boundaries as documented in Section 5, but ii) these jumps do not appear to lead to
significant increases (or reductions) in the time students spend on the internet. These results sug-
gest that upgrades in the available ICT at student residences are at least weakly increasing their
consumption of online content.42 However, in absence of a significant effect on internet time use,
the maximum increase in the consumption of online content can only be proportional to the de-
crease in the time cost of accessing that content, which effectively bounds the elasticity of demand
for online consumption with respect to its time cost to lie between 0 and -1.


7     Conclusion
     A large number of currently ongoing policy proposals are motivated by strong claims about
the benefits of increases in the available broadband connection speeds for education and growth.
However, these policies are so far based on limited empirical evidence. This paper proposes a new
empirical strategy to estimate the causal effects of these policies, and applies it to the questions of
whether and how ICT improvements affect educational attainment. To base estimations on exoge-
nous variation in ICT, we notice that capacity constraints at individual telephone exchange stations
give rise to invisible and essentially randomly placed boundaries of exchange station catchment
areas that in turn give rise to large and discontinuous jumps in the available ICT across space. Be-
cause this spatial RD design exploits cross-sectional variation in ICT across thousands of boundary
segments, it can be applied to estimate the medium to long-run effects of ICT upgrades, and to flex-
ibly explore the heterogeneity of these effects along multiple dimensions. We then combine this
methodology with a new collection of microdata that allows us to link administrative records on
educational achievement for the population of English primary and secondary school students to
the available ICT at their home addresses.
     The analysis presents several new results. We find that increases in the available broadband
connection speeds have a precisely estimated zero effect on educational attainment, and that these

    42 The ideal data to precisely estimate this parameter would be geo-referenced microdata on the amount of megabytes

downloaded or uploaded, which we could combine with the exchange boundary RD design. We are unaware that such
data have been made available for research in the English context or elsewhere.

                                                          23
effects are causally identified: house prices, student socio-economic characteristics and local ameni-
ties remain virtually flat across the boundaries. We explore to what extent this average effect may
mask significant heterogeneity, and find that the precisely estimated zero effect holds for all age,
gender, ethnic and socioeconomic groups in the student population, for all years in the estimation
sample 2002-2008, for different subjects (English, Mathematics, Science), across different treatment
intensities, and across different initial levels of the available ICT.
   Guided by a simple theoretical framework, we further explore to what extent the zero reduced
form effect may be driven by the interplay of opposing effects on students’ learning productivity as
opposed to student supply of time spent studying. While ICT upgrades appear to increase student
consumption of online content, we find no significant effects on student time spent studying online
or offline, or on the productivity of time spent studying. The results also suggest that the elasticity
of student demand for online consumption with respect to its time cost is negative, but bounded
at -1 in our empirical setting.
   The paper serves to inform currently ongoing policy debates on ICT in two main ways. The
first is that the analysis provides policy makers with credible empirical estimates for an important
outcome of interest (education) that has served as one of the central motivations for ICT upgrades
and has featured prominently in recent debates about the so-called “digital divide” (Norris, 2001).
Second, the empirical strategy that we present in this paper provides a useful tool that can be
applied in different empirical contexts and/or to study a number of additional policy-relevant
questions related to the effects of ICT upgrades.


References
Daniel Aaronson, Lisa Barrow, and William Sander. Teachers and Student Achievement in the
 Chicago Public High Schools. Journal of Labor Economics, 25:95–135, 2007.

Gabriel Ahlfeldt, Pantelis Koutroumpis, and Tommaso Valletti. Speed 2.0 Evaluating Access to
 Universal Digital Highways. CESifo Working Paper 5186, 2015.

Anders Akerman, Ingvil Gaarder, and Magne Mogstad. The Skill Complementarity of Broadband
 Internet. Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

Joshua Angrist and Victor Lavy. Using Maimonides’ Rule to Estimate the Effect of Class Size on
  Scholastic Achievement. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(2):533–575, 1999.

Joshua Angrist and Victor Lavy. New Evidende on Classroom Computers and Pupil Learning.
  Economic Journal, 112(482):735–765, 2002.

Joshua Angrist and Miikka Rokkanen. Wanna Get Away? Regression Discontinuity Estimation of
  Exam School Effects Away from the Cutoff. Journal of the American Statistical Association, forth-
  coming.

Lisa Barrow, Lisa Markman, and Cecilia Elena Rouse. The Educational Benefits of Computer-
  Aided Instruction. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 1(1):52–74, 2009.

Stefan Bauernschuster, Oliver Falck, and Ludger Woessmann. Surfing alone? The Internet and So-
  cial Capital: Evidence from an Unforeseeable Technological Mistake. Journal of Public Economics,
  117(C):73–89, 2014.
                                                   24
Andriana Bellou. The Impact of Internet Diffusion on Marriage Rates: Evidence from the Broad-
 band Market. Journal of Population Economics, 28(2):265–297, 2015.

Daniel O. Beltran, Kuntal K. Das, and Robert W. Fairlie. Home Computers and Educationl Out-
 comes: Evidence from NSLY97 and CPS. Economic Inquiry, 48(3):771–792, 2010.

Marinho Bertanha. Regression Discontinuity Design with Many Thresholds. manuscript, 2015.

Manudeep Bhuller, Tarjei Havnes, Edwin Leuven, and Magne Mogstad. Broadband Internet: An
 Information Superhighway to Sex Crime? Review of Economic Studies, 8(4):1237–1266, 2013.

Sandra E. Black. Do Better Schools Matter? Parental Valuation of Elementary Education. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 114(2):577–599, 1999.

George Bulman and Robert W. Fairlie. Technology and Education: Computers, Software, and the
 Internet. In Handbook of the Economics of Education, volume 5. Elsevier, forthcoming.

Filipe R. Campante, Ruben Durante, and Francesco Sobbrio. Politics 2.0: The Multifaceted Effect
   of Broadband Internet on Political Participation. NBER Working Paper 19029, 2013.

Damon Clark. The Performance and Competitive Effects of School Autonomy. Journal of Political
 Economy, 117(4):745–783, 2009.

Flavio Cunha, James J. Heckman, and Susanne M. Schennach. Estimating the Technology of Cog-
  nitive and Non-cognitive Skill Formation. Econometrica, 78(3):883–931, 2010.

David J. Deming, Claudia Goldin, Lawrence F. Katz, and Noam Yuchtman. Can Online Learning
 Bend the Higher Education Cost Curve? NBER Working Paper 20890, 2015.

Department for Culture, Media and Sport. The UK Broadband Delivery Scheme: Overview. Tech-
 nical Report, February 2013.

Robert W. Fairlie. The Effects of Home Computers on School Enrollment. Economics of Education
  Review, 24(5):533–547, 2005.

Robert W. Fairlie and Rebecca A. London. The Effects of Home Computers on Educational Out-
  comes: Evidence from a Field Experiment with Community College Students. Economic Journal,
  122(561):727–753, 2012.

Robert W. Fairlie and Jonathan Robinson. Experimental Evidence on the Effects of Home Com-
  puters on Academic Achievement among Schoolchildren. American Economic Journal: Applied
  Economics, 5(3):211–240, 2013.

Oliver Falck, Robert Gold, and Stephan Heblich. E-Lections: Voting Behavior and the Internet.
  American Economic Review, 107(7):2238–2265, 2014.

Oliver Falck, Constatin Mang, and Ludger Woessmann. Virtually No Effect? Different Uses of
  Classroom Computers and their Effect on Student Achievement. CESifo Working Paper No.
  5266, March 2015.

Federal Communications Commission. Connecting America: The National Broadband Plan. Tech-
  nical report, Federal Communications Commission, March 2010.

Mario Fiorini. The Effect of Home Computer Use on Children’s Cognitive and Non-Cognitive
 Skills. Economics of Education Review, 29(1):55–72, 2010.


                                              25
Chris Forman, Avi Goldfarb, and Shane Greenstein. The Internet and Local Wages: A Puzzle.
  American Economic Review, 102(1):556–75, 2012.

Thomas Fuchs and Ludger Wossmann. Computers and Student Learning: Bivariate and Multi-
  variate Evidence on the Availability and Use of Computers at Home and at School. Brussels
  Economic Review, 47(3-4):359–386, 2004.

Andrew Gelman and Guido Imbens. Why High-order Polynomials Should not be Used in Regres-
 sion Discontinuity Designs. NBER Working Paper 20405, 2014.

Stephen Gibbons, Stephen Machin, and Olmo Silva. Valuing School Quality Using Boundary Dis-
  continuities. Journal of Urban Economics, 75:15–28, 2013.

Austan Goolsbee and Johathan Guryan. The Impact of Internet Subsidies in Public Schools. Review
 of Economics and Statistics, 88(2):336–347, 2006.

Caroline M. Hoxby. The Economics of Online Postsecondary Education: MOOCs, Nonselective Ed-
  ucation, and Highly Selective Education. American Economic Review P&P, 104(5):528–533, 2014.

Stephen Machin, Sandra McNally, and Olmo Silva. New Technology in Schools: Is There a Payoff?
  Economic Journal, 117(522):1145–1167, 2007.

Ofer Malamud and Cristian Pop-Eleches. Home Computer Use and the Development of Human
  Capital. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(2):987–1027, 2011.

Pippa Norris. Digital Divide: Civic Engagement, Information Poverty, and the Internet Worldwide. Cam-
  bridge University Press, Cambridge, 2001.

UK OfCom. Children and Parents: Media Use and Attitudes Report. Report, 2012.

Steven G. Rivkin, Eric A. Hanushek, and John F. Kain. Teachers, Schools, and Academic Achieve-
  ment. Econometrica, 73(2):417–458, 03 2005.

John Schmitt and Jonathan Wadsworth. Is There an Impact of Household Computer Ownership
  on Children’s Educational Attainment in Britain? Economics of Education Review, 25(6):659–673,
  2006.

The White House. FACT SHEET: ConnectHome: Coming Together to Ensure Digital Opportunity
  for All Americans. Technical report, Office of the Press Secretary, July 2015.

The White House. Four Years of Broadband Growth. Technical report, Office of Science and Tech-
  nology Policy and the National Economic Council, June 2013.

Jacob Vigdor, Helen Ladd, and Erika Martinez. Scaling the Digital Divide: Home Computer Tech-
  nology and Student Achievement. Economic Inquiry, 52(3):1103–1119, 2014.




                                                 26
     8    Figures and Tables
     Figures

                                        Figure 1: Two Maps of Exchange Station Catchment Area Boundaries in England
                            Figure 1.1: Exchange Station Catchment Areas                   Figure 1.2: Zoom Into North London




27
     Notes: Both figures are based on the UK telecom network data. The left panel depicts exchange station catchment area boundaries in England. The right panel depicts these
     catchment boundaries (thick black lines) in addition to individual postcodes (thinner gray lines) in one of the author’s residential areas in North London. The black points
     indicate the locations of exchange stations. Descriptive statistics on the postcode and boundary estimation samples are reported in Table 1.
                                                                                      Figure 2: The Boundary Effect on Residential Distances to the Connected Exchange Station

                                                                     Figure 2.1: Full Specification - All Boundaries                                                                                 Figure 2.2: Full Specification - Top 30% of Boundary Jumps




                                                          4000
                                                                                                                                                                                              4000




                                                   3500
                                                                                                                                                                                       3500




                                            3000
                                                                                                                                                                               3000




                                  2500
                                                                                                                                                                      2500




                           2000
                                                                                                                                                               2000




28
                  1500
                                                                                                                                                     1500




          1000
                                                                                                                                              1000




          Residential Distance (meters) to Connected Exchange
                                                                 -1000 -800    -600 -400 -200          0      200    400   600   800   1000   Residential Distance (meters) to Connected Exchange    -1000 -800    -600 -400 -200          0      200    400   600   800   1000
                                                                              Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary                                                                                  Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary


     Notes: The left hand side in both graphs refers to the slower side of a given exchange boundary segment, i.e. the side with higher mean residential distances to the
     connected exchange station. Each figure depicts estimation results from two separate specifications: The plotted functional forms present results after estimating fourth-
     order polynomials conditional on boundary segment fixed effects and additional covariates as discussed in Section 5. The shaded area depicts 95% confidence intervals.
     The black bars in both graphs depict the 95% confidence intervals for the less parametric specification (replacing the polynomials with 100m distance bins). For display in
     the graphs, these bin coefficients have been centered at the mean distance to the boundary within each 100m bin on the x-axis. Both sets of estimates are depicted as partial
     predictions while holding covariates constant at their sample means. Confidence intervals are based on standard errors that are clustered at the level of boundary segments.
     Descriptive statistics on the estimation samples are reported in Table 1.
                                                                                           Figure 3: The Boundary Effect on Average Internet Connection Speed

                                                             Figure 3.1: Full Specification - All Boundaries                                                                         Figure 3.2: Full Specification - Top 30% of Boundary Jumps




                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                         1.8     2




                                         1.8
                                                                                                                                                                 1.6




                             1.6
                                                                                                                                                  1.2    1.4




29
                  1.4
                                                                                                                                           1




          Log Average Connection Speed (Mbit/Second)
                                                                                                                                      Log Average Connection Speed (Mbit/Second)
                                                                                                                                                             .8




                                 1.2
                                                         -1000 -800    -600 -400 -200          0      200    400   600   800   1000                                                  -1000 -800    -600 -400 -200          0      200    400   600   800   1000
                                                                      Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary                                                                          Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary


     Notes: The left hand side in both graphs refers to the slower side of a given exchange boundary segment, i.e. the side with higher mean residential distances to the
     connected exchange station. Each figure depicts estimation results from two separate specifications: The plotted functional forms present results after estimating fourth-
     order polynomials conditional on boundary segment fixed effects and additional covariates as discussed in Section 5. The shaded area depicts 95% confidence intervals.
     The black bars in both graphs depict the 95% confidence intervals for the less parametric specification (replacing the polynomials with 100m distance bins). For display in
     the graphs, these bin coefficients have been centered at the mean distance to the boundary within each 100m bin on the x-axis. Both sets of estimates are depicted as partial
     predictions while holding covariates constant at their sample means. Confidence intervals are based on standard errors that are clustered at the level of boundary segments.
     Descriptive statistics on the estimation samples are reported in Table 1.
                                                                                 Figure 4: The Boundary Effect on Educational Attainment
                                              Figure 4.1: Baseline Specification - All Boundaries                                                         Figure 4.2: Full Specification - All Boundaries




                       54
                                                                                                                                 54




                       53
                                                                                                                                 53




           47 48 49 50 51 52
                                                                                                                     47 48 49 50 51 52




          Test Score (Percentiles)
                                                                                                                    Test Score (Percentiles)




                       46
                                                                                                                                 46




                       45
                                                                                                                                 45




                       44
                                                                                                                                 44
                                     -1000   -800    -600    -400    -200    0      200    400   600   800   1000                              -1000   -800    -600    -400    -200    0      200    400   600   800   1000
                                                    Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary                                                        Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary


                  Figure 4.3: Baseline Specification - Top 30% of Boundary Jumps                                                                  Figure 4.4: Full Specification - Top 30% of Boundary Jumps




                       54
                                                                                                                                 54




                       53
                                                                                                                                 53




30
           47 48 49 50 51 52
                                                                                                                     47 48 49 50 51 52




          Test Score (Percentiles)
                                                                                                                    Test Score (Percentiles)




                       46
                                                                                                                                 46




                       45
                                                                                                                                 45




                       44
                                                                                                                                 44




                                     -1000   -800    -600    -400    -200    0      200    400   600   800   1000                              -1000   -800    -600    -400    -200    0      200    400   600   800   1000
                                                    Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary                                                        Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary


     Notes: The left hand side in all graphs refers to the slower side of a given exchange boundary segment, i.e. the side with higher mean residential distances to the connected
     exchange station. Each figure depicts estimation results from two separate specifications: The plotted functional forms present results after estimating fourth-order poly-
     nomials conditional on boundary segment fixed effects and additional covariates as discussed in Section 5. The shaded area depicts 95% confidence intervals. The black
     bars in both graphs depict the 95% confidence intervals for the less parametric specification (replacing the polynomials with 100m distance bins). For display in the graphs,
     these bin coefficients have been centered at the mean distance to the boundary within each 100m bin on the x-axis. Both sets of estimates are depicted as partial predictions
     while holding covariates constant at their sample means. Confidence intervals are based on standard errors that are clustered at the level of boundary segments. Descriptive
     statistics on the estimation samples are reported in Table 1.
                                                                 Figure 5: The Boundary Effect on Educational Attainment – Additional Results

                                             Figure 5.1: Full Specification - Extended Estimation Sample                                                      Figure 5.2: Full Specification - 50 m Bins




                       54
                                                                                                                              54




                       53
                                                                                                                              53




           47 48 49 50 51 52
                                                                                                                  47 48 49 50 51 52




          Test Score (Percentiles)
                                                                                                                 Test Score (Percentiles)




31
                       46
                                                                                                                              46




                       45
                                                                                                                              45




                       44
                                     -2000    -1500 -1000        -500      0        500    1000    1500   2000                44            -1000 -800    -600 -400 -200          0      200    400   600   800   1000
                                                  Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary                                                     Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary


     Notes: The left hand side in both graphs refers to the slower side of a given exchange boundary segment, i.e. the side with higher mean residential distances to the
     connected exchange station. Each figure depicts estimation results from two separate specifications: The plotted functional forms present results after estimating fourth-
     order polynomials conditional on boundary segment fixed effects and additional covariates as discussed in Section 5. The shaded area depicts 95% confidence intervals. The
     black bars in both graphs depict the 95% confidence intervals for the less parametric specification (replacing the polynomials with 100 or 50 m distance bins). For display
     in the graphs, these bin coefficients have been centered at the mean distance to the boundary within each bin on the x-axis. Both sets of estimates are depicted as partial
     predictions while holding covariates constant at their sample means. Confidence intervals are based on standard errors that are clustered at the level of boundary segments.
     Figure 5.1 is estimated using approximately 8.7 m test score observations of 5.5 m students in 561,584 residential postcodes, across 19,586 boundary segments and 3,894
     exchange stations. Descriptive statistics on the main estimation sample of Figure 5.2 are reported in Table 1.
                                                                                        Figure 6: The Boundary Effect on Property Values

                                              Figure 6.1: Full Specification - All Boundaries                                                          Figure 6.2: Full Specification - Top 30% of Boundary Jumps




                                                                                                                                      12




                         12
                                                                                                                                               11.95




                                  11.95
                                                                                                                                    11.9




                      11.9




32
           Log Property Value (Pounds)
                                                                                                                        Log Property Value (Pounds)
                                                                                                                       11.85




          11.85          11.8
                                                                                                                                      11.8
                                          -1000 -800    -600 -400 -200          0      200    400   600   800   1000                                   -1000 -800    -600 -400 -200          0      200    400   600   800   1000
                                                       Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary                                                           Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary


     Notes: The left hand side in both graphs refers to the slower side of a given exchange boundary segment, i.e. the side with higher mean residential distances to the
     connected exchange station. Each figure depicts estimation results from two separate specifications: The plotted functional forms present results after estimating fourth-
     order polynomials conditional on boundary segment fixed effects and additional covariates as discussed in Section 5. The shaded area depicts 95% confidence intervals.
     The black bars in both graphs depict the 95% confidence intervals for the less parametric specification (replacing the polynomials with 100m distance bins). For display in
     the graphs, these bin coefficients have been centered at the mean distance to the boundary within each 100m bin on the x-axis. Both sets of estimates are depicted as partial
     predictions while holding covariates constant at their sample means. Confidence intervals are based on standard errors that are clustered at the level of boundary segments.
     Descriptive statistics on the estimation samples are reported in Table 1.
                                                                                  Figure 7: The Boundary Effect on Student Time Spent Online

                                      Figure 7.1: Days Per Week Using the Internet                                     Figure 7.2: Weekly Hours Spent on Email and Online Social Media




                                                                                                                                            25




                    7
                                                                                                                                                             20




                                 6
                                                                                                                                                    15




                     4     5
                                                                                                                                           10




              3
                                                                                                                                   5




       Internet Use, Days per Week



33
       2
                                                                                                                           0




                    1
                                                                                                                        Weekly Hours Email and Online Social Media




                    0
                                     -1000   -800   -600 -400 -200            0       200    400    600   800   1000                                                 -1000   -800   -600 -400 -200            0       200    400    600   800   1000
                                                     Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary                                                                              Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary


     Notes: The left hand side in both graphs refers to the slower side of a given exchange boundary segment, i.e. the side with higher mean residential distances to the
     connected exchange station. Each figure depicts estimation results from two separate specifications: The plotted functional forms present results after estimating fourth-
     order polynomials conditional on boundary segment fixed effects and additional covariates as discussed in Section 6. The shaded area depicts 95% confidence intervals.
     The black bars in both graphs depict the 95% confidence intervals for the less parametric specification (replacing the polynomials with 100m distance bins). For display in
     the graphs, these bin coefficients have been centered at the mean distance to the boundary within each 100m bin on the x-axis. Both sets of estimates are depicted as partial
     predictions while holding covariates constant at their sample means. Confidence intervals are based on standard errors that are clustered at the level of boundary segments.
     Descriptive statistics on the estimation samples are reported in Table 1.
                                                                           Figure 8: The Boundary Effect on Student Time Spent Studying

                                Figure 8.1: Weekly Hours Spent on Homework                                                                              Figure 8.2: Number of Weekdays Doing Homework




                                                                                                                                                                6




                 25
                                                                                                                                                         5




                 20
                                                                                                                                                  4




                     15
                                                                                                                                          3




            10
                                                                                                                                  2




       Weekly Homework Hours



34
                 5
                                                                                                                           1




                 0
                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                 Number of Weekly Term-time Evenings Doing Homework
                               -1000   -800   -600 -400 -200            0       200    400    600   800   1000                                                        -1000 -800    -600 -400 -200          0      200    400   600   800   1000
                                               Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary                                                                                  Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary


     Notes: The left hand side in both graphs refers to the slower side of a given exchange boundary segment, i.e. the side with higher mean residential distances to the
     connected exchange station. Each figure depicts estimation results from two separate specifications: The plotted functional forms present results after estimating fourth-
     order polynomials conditional on boundary segment fixed effects and additional covariates as discussed in Section 6. The shaded area depicts 95% confidence intervals.
     The black bars in both graphs depict the 95% confidence intervals for the less parametric specification (replacing the polynomials with 100m distance bins). For display in
     the graphs, these bin coefficients have been centered at the mean distance to the boundary within each 100m bin on the x-axis. Both sets of estimates are depicted as partial
     predictions while holding covariates constant at their sample means. Confidence intervals are based on standard errors that are clustered at the level of boundary segments.
     Descriptive statistics on the estimation samples are reported in Table 1.
                                                                                                Figure 9: The Boundary Effect on Student Time Spent Studying Online

                                                               Figure 9.1: Propensity Using Online Resources for Homework                                                                    Figure 9.2: Weekly Hours Doing Homework Using Computer




                               .4       .6        .8      1




35
          0         .2
                                                                                                                                            0 .5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 6
                                                                                                                                            Weekly Hours Home Computer Use for School Work




          Propensity for Using Online Resources for Homework
                                                               -1000 -800    -600 -400 -200          0      200    400   600   800   1000                                                    -1000 -800    -600 -400 -200          0      200    400   600   800   1000
                                                                            Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary                                                                            Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary


     Notes: The left hand side in both graphs refers to the slower side of a given exchange boundary segment, i.e. the side with higher mean residential distances to the
     connected exchange station. Each figure depicts estimation results from two separate specifications: The plotted functional forms present results after estimating fourth-
     order polynomials conditional on boundary segment fixed effects and additional covariates as discussed in Section 6. The shaded area depicts 95% confidence intervals.
     The black bars in both graphs depict the 95% confidence intervals for the less parametric specification (replacing the polynomials with 100m distance bins). For display in
     the graphs, these bin coefficients have been centered at the mean distance to the boundary within each 100m bin on the x-axis. Both sets of estimates are depicted as partial
     predictions while holding covariates constant at their sample means. Confidence intervals are based on standard errors that are clustered at the level of boundary segments.
     Descriptive statistics on the estimation samples are reported in Table 1.
Tables

                                                                         Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

                                                                                                Number of                Standard
  Data Set                                                   Variable                                           Mean                   Min        Max
                                                                                               Observations              Deviation

                                    Distance to Connected Exchange Station (m)                      581,594      1,638    1,152          0       240,266
    Network Data




                                    Distance to Nearest Boundary Segment (m)                        581,594      415.3    276.9      0.000274      1,000
      Telecom




                                    Fast Side Dummy                                                 581,594      0.614    0.487          0            1
                                    Number of Exchange Stations                                       3,920         .        .            .           .
                                    Number of Boundary Segments                                      20,248         .        .            .           .
                                    Test Score Percentile                                          7,021,667     48.05    28.52          1          100
    Administrative Test Score




                                    Year                                                           7,021,667     2,005    1.990        2,002       2,008
                                    Male                                                           7,021,667     0.504    0.500          0           1
       Records 2002-08




                                    Free School Meal                                               7,021,667     0.177    0.382          0           1
                                    Ethnic Background White British                                7,021,667     0.741    0.438          0            1
                                    Distance to Connected Exchange Station (m)                     7,021,667    1,622     944.9          0        62,599
                                    Distance to Nearest Boundary Segment (m)                       7,021,667    419.8     272.2      0.000620      1,000
                                    Fast Side Dummy                                                7,021,667    0.607     0.488          0           1
                                    Number of Exchange Stations                                      3,883          .        .            .           .
                                    Number of Boundary Segments                                      19,472         .        .            .           .
                                    Average Internet Speed                                          178,027     6.179     3.771        0.200         15
    Internet Speed Data




                                    Log Average Internet Speed                                      178,027     1.607     0.698       -1.609       2.708
                                    Year                                                            178,027     2,012     0.499        2,012       2,013
          2012-13




                                    Distance to Connected Exchange Station (m)                      178,027     1,960     1,283          0        80,033
                                    Distance to Nearest Boundary Segment (m)                        178,027     436.4     277.6       0.0389       1,000
                                    Fast Side Dummy                                                 178,027     0.619     0.486          0           1
                                    Number of Exchange Stations                                      3,800          .        .            .           .
                                    Number of Boundary Segments                                      15,997         .        .            .           .
                                    Property Value (British Pound)                                 3,559,352   191,463   186,276       5,250    19,750,000
    Property Transactions 2002-08
    UK Land Registry Records of




                                    Log Property Value                                             3,559,352    11.93     0.662        8.566       16.80
                                    Year                                                           3,559,352    2,005     1.915        2,002       2,008
                                    Apartment Dummy (as opposed to houses)                         3,559,352    0.238     0.426          0           1
                                    Newly Built Dummy                                              3,559,352    0.0937    0.291          0           1
                                    Leasehold Dummy (as opposed to freehold)                       3,559,352    0.299     0.458          0           1
                                    Distance to Connected Exchange Station (m)                     3,559,352    1,535     927.4          0        61,828
                                    Distance to Nearest Boundary Segment (m)                       3,559,352    411.5     275.1      0.000620      1,000
                                    Fast Side Dummy                                                3,559,352    0.618     0.486          0           1
                                    Number of Exchange Stations                                      3,815          .        .            .           .
                                    Number of Boundary Segments                                      18,308         .        .            .           .
                                    Distance to the Nearest Supermarket (m)                         581,594     1,200     1,430          0        21,805
                                    Distance to the Nearest Major Road (m)                          581,594     370.4     474.6          0         9,314
    GIS Data on Local




                                    Distance to the Nearest Primary or Secondary School (m)         581,594      549.4    567.6          0         8,624
       Amenities




                                    Distance to Connected Exchange Station (m)                      581,594      1,637    1,152          0       240,266
                                    Distance to Nearest Boundary Segment (m)                        581,594      415.3    276.9          0         1,000
                                    Fast Side Dummy                                                 581,594      0.614    0.487          0            1
                                    Number of Exchange Stations                                       3,920         .        .            .           .
                                    Number of Boundary Segments                                      20,248         .        .            .           .
                                    Days per Week Using the Internet                                  5.046      4.668    2.496          0            7
 Data from the BHPS/US
 Geo-referenced Survey




                                    Weekly Hours Email and Social Media                               5,308      8.777    9.791          0           48
                                    Weekly Homework Hours                                             3,135      5.319    5.332          0           52
         2002-13




                                    Distance to Connected Exchange Station (m)                       10.066      1.569    924.3          0        12,331
                                    Distance to Nearest Boundary Segment (m)                         10.066      413.9    273.9          0         999.8
                                    Fast Side Dummy                                                  10.066      0.608    0.488          0            1
                                    Number of Exchange Stations                                        984          .        .            .           .
                                    Number of Boundary Segments                                       1,999         .        .            .           .
                                    Number of weekdays doing homework                                11,020      2.937    1.348          0            5
 Geo-referenced Survey
 Data from the LSYPE




                                    Use online resources for homework                                10,345      0.760    0.427          0            1
                                    Weekly homework hours using ICT                                  10,345      3.280    3.657          0           60
        2004-05




                                    Distance to Connected Exchange Station (m)                       10,345      1.558    910.2          0         7.669
                                    Distance to Nearest Boundary Segment (m)                         10,345       403     267.5          0         999.5
                                    Fast Side Dummy                                                  10,345      0.601    0.490          0            1
                                    Number of Exchange Stations                                        966          .        .            .           .
                                    Number of Boundary Segments                                       2,709         .        .            .           .

Notes: The reported statistics refer to our estimation samples that are based on all observations within 1 km of an
exchange station boundary segment in England.


                                                                                              36
                                                                                     Table 2: Point Estimates

                                               (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)          (6)           (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)          (11)          (12)
                                            Exchange     Exchange
                                                                                                Test Score   Test Score   Log Property Log Property   FSME        FSME           White         White
     Dependent Variable                     Distance     Distance    Log Speed    Log Speed
                                                                                                Percentile   Percentile      Value        Value       Dummy       Dummy         Dummy         Dummy
                                             (meters)     (meters)
                                                         Top 30%                   Top 30%                   Top 30%                     Top 30%                  Top 30%                    Top 30%
     Estimation Sample                        Full                      Full                       Full                       Full                     Full                       Full
                                                           Jumps                    Jumps                     Jumps                       Jumps                    Jumps                      Jumps

     Fast Side Dummy (Jump)                  -725.2***    -2,252***     0.224***   0.465***         0.196       0.349      -0.000255        0.0100   -0.00896**   0.000846       0.00359        0.0105
                                               (19.75)     (96.04)      (0.0178)   (0.0425)        (0.181)     (0.432)     (0.00652)       (0.0116)   (0.00389)   (0.00949)     (0.00365)     (0.00777)
     Boundary Dist X Slow Side Dummy         -1.549***    -5.622***    -0.000246 -0.00201***    0.00423**     0.00204       0.000110     0.000259* -0.000146*** 3.14e-05      0.000142***    0.000165*
                                               (0.224)     (1.223)    (0.000163) (0.000411)      (0.00205)   (0.00543)     (7.40e-05)    (0.000156)   (4.50e-05) (0.000113)     (4.23e-05)   (8.84e-05)
     Boundary Dist^2 X Slow Side Dummy      0.00277*** 0.0191*** 1.99e-06*** 7.98e-06***        -1.53e-05*   -1.60e-05     -4.81e-07     -1.19e-06* 6.54e-07***   -1.00e-08   -6.04e-07***   -6.90e-07*
                                            (0.000827)    (0.00456)   (6.79e-07)  (1.68e-06)    (8.89e-06)   (2.39e-05)    (3.16e-07)    (6.74e-07)   (1.90e-07) (4.72e-07)     (1.71e-07)   (3.57e-07)
     Boundary Dist^3 X Slow Side Dummy     -3.85e-06*** -2.67e-05*** -2.53e-09** -1.05e-08***     2.15e-08    2.54e-08      7.57e-10      1.77e-09* -1.02e-09*** -6.02e-11     8.64e-10***   9.09e-10*
                                             (1.17e-06)  (6.46e-06)   (1.05e-09)  (2.59e-09)    (1.41e-08)   (3.82e-08)    (4.97e-10)    (1.06e-09)   (2.97e-10) (7.37e-10)     (2.63e-10)   (5.51e-10)
     Boundary Dist^4 X Slow Side Dummy      1.81e-09*** 1.23e-08***        0**       0***             -0          -0            -0             -0        0***          0           -0***           -0
                                             (5.52e-10)  (3.07e-09)        (0)        (0)            (0)         (0)           (0)            (0)         (0)         (0)            (0)          (0)




37
     Boundary Dist X Fast Side Dummy         -0.965***    -0.615*** 0.000653*** 0.000978***      0.00315*     0.00218     0.000142**     0.000231*    -3.57e-05   -5.47e-05   0.000120***     -2.13e-05
                                              (0.0643)     (0.194)    (0.000128) (0.000232)      (0.00184)   (0.00425)    (6.57e-05)     (0.000120)   (3.83e-05) (7.90e-05)     (3.33e-05)   (6.57e-05)
     Boundary Dist^2 X Fast Side Dummy        5.34e-05   -0.000866     -8.07e-07 -2.44e-06***    -1.03e-05   -7.43e-06    -4.98e-07*    -9.59e-07**    3.15e-08    1.73e-07   -3.92e-07***     1.67e-07
                                            (0.000250) (0.000711)     (5.00e-07)  (8.64e-07)    (7.51e-06)   (1.67e-05)    (2.61e-07)    (4.72e-07)   (1.55e-07) (3.10e-07)     (1.32e-07)   (2.53e-07)
     Boundary Dist^3 X Fast Side Dummy        3.09e-07    1.81e-06*     1.20e-09 3.53e-09***      1.72e-08    1.01e-08     7.17e-10*      1.32e-09*        -0     -2.63e-10    4.99e-10**     -2.87e-10
                                             (3.76e-07)  (1.01e-06)   (7.35e-10)  (1.24e-09)    (1.14e-08)   (2.46e-08)    (3.92e-10)    (6.99e-10)   (2.33e-10) (4.57e-10)     (1.99e-10)   (3.72e-10)
     Boundary Dist^4 X Fast Side Dummy       -1.89e-10   -9.45e-10*        -0*       -0***           -0*          -0           -0*            -0*           0          0            -0**            0
                                             (1.88e-10)  (4.90e-10)        (0)        (0)            (0)         (0)           (0)            (0)         (0)         (0)            (0)          (0)
     Boundary Segment FX                                                                                                                                                                
     Key Stage-by-Year FX                                                                                                                                                               
     School FX                                                                                                                                                                          
     Controls (X-vectors in specs)                                                                                                                                                      
     Quarter FX                                                                                                                                                                         
     Observations                             581,594      128,994      178,027     53,077      7,021,667    1,512,011     3,559,352       750,618    7,021,667   1,512,011     7,021,667    1,512,011
     R-squared                                  0.786       0.705         0.819      0.838          0.272       0.266         0.749          0.741       0.138       0.125         0.389         0.314
     Number of Boundary Segment Clusters       20,248       6,074        15,997      4,848         19,472       5,832        18,308          5,338      19,472       5,832        19,472         5,832

     Notes: The table depicts the estimation results for the full specifications using the fourth-order polynomial functional form. See Sections 4-6 for discussion. The zero
     estimates are due to rounding limits when saving the point estimates. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.
                                                                              Table 3: Point Estimates (continued)

                                              (13)         (14)        (15)         (16)        (17)        (18)         (19)          (20)         (21)         (22)       (23)         (24)
                                                                                                                                                              Number of Propensity of
                                           Supermarket Supermarket    Road         Road        School      School                   Weekly        Weekly                              Weekly Study
                                                                                                                       Days per                               Weekdays     Online
     Dependent Variable                     Distance    Distance     Distance     Distance    Distance    Distance                Hours Social   Homework                             Hours using
                                                                                                                      Week Online                               Doing   Resources for
                                             (meters)    (meters)    (meters)     (meters)    (meters)    (meters)                  Media          Hours                                 ICT
                                                                                                                                                              Homework     H'work
                                                         Top 30%                  Top 30%                Top 30%
     Estimation Sample                        Full                     Full                     Full                      Full         Full         Full         Full         Full         Full
                                                          Jumps                    Jumps                  Jumps

     Fast Side Dummy (Jump)                     2.468        7.233      -1.310      -8.955      -2.172       -6.666       0.173         0.204       -0.224      0.0774         0.348       0.0132
                                               (3.352)      (8.791)     (2.602)    (6.795)     (2.686)      (7.184)      (0.783)       (2.741)     (2.198)      (0.164)       (0.573)     (0.0679)
     Boundary Dist X Slow Side Dummy           0.0609        0.144     0.174***      0.141     -0.0235      -0.0426     0.00876        0.0331      -0.0101      0.00168      0.00934     0.000915
                                              (0.0571)      (0.160)    (0.0411)    (0.117)    (0.0436)      (0.123)    (0.00951)      (0.0376)    (0.0220)    (0.00189)     (0.00626)   (0.000688)
     Boundary Dist^2 X Slow Side Dummy     -0.000510*     -0.000833   -0.000293   0.000243    4.10e-05    0.000112     -2.41e-05     -8.97e-05    2.21e-06    -2.24e-06    -4.65e-05*    -3.04e-06
                                           (0.000260)    (0.000772) (0.000186) (0.000553) (0.000199) (0.000593)        (4.05e-05)   (0.000167)   (0.000106)   (8.49e-06)   (2.57e-05)   (2.92e-06)
     Boundary Dist^3 X Slow Side Dummy       4.30e-07      7.86e-07    1.12e-07  -6.67e-07   -3.76e-07    -2.82e-07     2.20e-08      4.01e-08    3.73e-08     -1.17e-09   7.97e-08**     3.65e-09
                                            (4.28e-07)   (1.31e-06)   (3.02e-07) (9.20e-07)  (3.26e-07)  (1.01e-06)    (6.27e-08)   (2.64e-07)   (1.80e-07)   (1.39e-08)   (3.90e-08)   (4.57e-09)
     Boundary Dist^4 X Slow Side Dummy       -1.80e-10    -3.05e-10        -0     3.06e-10    2.55e-10     9.82e-11         -0            0            -0           0           -0**          -0




38
                                            (2.27e-10)   (7.07e-10)   (1.59e-10) (4.92e-10)  (1.72e-10)  (5.49e-10)        (0)      (1.36e-10)   (9.58e-11)        (0)           (0)         (0)
     Boundary Dist X Fast Side Dummy         -0.00407       -0.0141    0.132***    0.170**     0.0263       0.0318      0.00876        0.0383     -0.00864     0.000472      0.00166     0.000854
                                              (0.0466)     (0.0988)    (0.0332)   (0.0749)    (0.0372)     (0.0786)    (0.00951)      (0.0306)    (0.0215)    (0.00163)     (0.00477)   (0.000619)
     Boundary Dist^2 X Fast Side Dummy      -0.000298     -0.000343 -0.000396*** -0.000455 -0.000442*** -0.000654**    -2.63e-05     -0.000155    2.84e-06    -7.56e-07     -7.20e-06    -4.10e-06
                                           (0.000195)    (0.000400) (0.000140) (0.000304) (0.000157) (0.000324)        (2.99e-05)   (0.000134)   (9.94e-05)   (6.80e-06)   (1.96e-05)   (2.51e-06)
     Boundary Dist^3 X Fast Side Dummy       1.53e-07      2.82e-07   3.84e-07*   4.25e-07  5.22e-07**    7.75e-07      2.83e-08      1.98e-07    1.28e-08     5.99e-11      1.40e-08    6.71e-09*
                                            (3.06e-07)   (6.10e-07)   (2.16e-07) (4.53e-07)  (2.43e-07)  (4.91e-07)    (4.63e-08)   (2.09e-07)   (1.62e-07)   (1.06e-08)   (2.99e-08)   (3.81e-09)
     Boundary Dist^4 X Fast Side Dummy            -0      -8.82e-11   -1.55e-10  -1.64e-10  -2.45e-10**   -3.32e-10         -0       -7.72e-11         -0           0            -0          -0*
                                            (1.56e-10)   (3.06e-10)   (1.09e-10) (2.22e-10)  (1.23e-10)  (2.45e-10)        (0)      (1.06e-10)   (8.57e-11)        (0)           (0)         (0)
     Boundary Segment FX                                                                                                                                                           
     Survey Round FX                                                                                                                                                               
     Controls (X-vectors in specs)                                                                                                                                                 
     Observations                             581,594      128,994     581,594    128,994     581,594      128,994        5,046         5,308        3,135      11,020        10,345       10,345
     R-squared                                  0.962        0.970       0.832       0.857       0.866        0.882       0.494         0.455        0.524       0.437         0.358        0.373
     Number of Boundary Segment Clusters       20,248        6,074      20,248       6,074     20,248         6,074       1,720         1,597        1,372       2,772         2,709        2,709

     Notes: The table depicts the estimation results for the full specifications using the fourth-order polynomial functional form. See Sections 4-6 for discussion. The zero
     estimates are due to rounding limits when saving the point estimates. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.
9   Online Appendix

     Figure A.1: Technological Relationship between Exchange Distance and Internet Speed




Notes: The Source is England’s Telecommunication Regulation Authority OfCom.




                                                      1
    Exploring the Heterogeneity of the Effect of ICT on Test Scores

                                                         Figure A.2: Heterogeneity across Gender, Ethnic Background and Free School Meal Eligibility
                                               Full Specification - By Gender                                                                   Full Specification - By White/Non-White Ethnic Background




                      54
                                                                                                                                                                  55




                      53
                                                                                                                                                       45     47.552.5 50




          47 48 49 50 51 52
         Test Score (Percentiles)
                                                                                                                                                     Test Score (Percentiles)




                      46
                                                                                                                                                                  42.5




                      45
                      44
                                                                                                                                                                  40
                                    -1000   -800    -600    -400    -200    0      200    400   600   800                            1000                                       -1000   -800    -600    -400    -200    0      200    400   600   800   1000
                                                   Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary                                                                                          Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary


                                                                                                                  Full Specification - By Free School Meal Eligibility




                                                                                           50




2
                                                                                           47.5
                                                                               Test Score (Percentiles)
                                                                              35 37.5 40 42.5 45
                                                                                           32.5
                                                                                           30
                                                                                                          -1000    -800    -600    -400    -200    0      200    400   600   800                          1000
                                                                                                                          Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary


    Notes: The left hand side in all graphs refers to the slower side of a given exchange boundary segment, i.e. the side with higher mean residential distances to the connected
    exchange station. Each figure depicts estimation results from four separate specifications: The plotted functional forms present results after estimating fourth-order polyno-
    mials conditional on boundary segment fixed effects and additional covariates as discussed in Section 5, and by each group. Within each graph, the groups with the higher
    average test scores present estimates for (1) females, (2) Whites and (3) students not eligible for free school meals. The shaded area depicts 95% confidence intervals. The
    black bars in both graphs depict the 95% confidence intervals for the less parametric specification (replacing the polynomials with 100m distance bins). For display in the
    graphs, these bin coefficients have been centered at the mean distance to the boundary within each 100m bin on the x-axis. Both sets of estimates are depicted as partial
    predictions while holding covariates constant at their sample means. Confidence intervals are based on standard errors that are clustered at the level of boundary segments.
    Descriptive statistics on the estimation samples are reported in Table 1.
                                                                                        Figure A.3: Heterogeneity across Age Groups
                                                                        Full Specification - Age 7                                                    Full Specification - Age 10




                      54
                                                                                                                                54




                      53
                                                                                                                                53




          47 48 49 50 51 52
                                                                                                                    47 48 49 50 51 52




         Test Score (Percentiles)
                                                                                                                   Test Score (Percentiles)




                      46
                                                                                                                                46




                      45
                                                                                                                                45




                      44
                                                                                                                                44
                                    -1000   -800    -600    -400    -200    0      200    400   600   800   1000                              -1000   -800    -600    -400    -200    0      200    400   600   800   1000
                                                   Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary                                                        Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary


                                                                           Full Specification - Age 14                                        Full Specification - Age 16




                      54
                                                                                                                                54




3
                      53
                                                                                                                                53




          47 48 49 50 51 52
                                                                                                                    47 48 49 50 51 52




         Test Score (Percentiles)
                                                                                                                   Test Score (Percentiles)




                      46
                                                                                                                                46




                      45
                                                                                                                                45




                      44
                                                                                                                                44




                                    -1000   -800    -600    -400    -200    0      200    400   600   800   1000                              -1000   -800    -600    -400    -200    0      200    400   600   800   1000
                                                   Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary                                                        Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary


    Notes: The left hand side in all graphs refers to the slower side of a given exchange boundary segment, i.e. the side with higher mean residential distances to the connected
    exchange station. Each figure depicts estimation results from two separate specifications: The plotted functional forms present results after estimating fourth-order poly-
    nomials conditional on boundary segment fixed effects and additional covariates as discussed in Section 5. The shaded area depicts 95% confidence intervals. The black
    bars in both graphs depict the 95% confidence intervals for the less parametric specification (replacing the polynomials with 100m distance bins). For display in the graphs,
    these bin coefficients have been centered at the mean distance to the boundary within each 100m bin on the x-axis. Both sets of estimates are depicted as partial predictions
    while holding covariates constant at their sample means. Confidence intervals are based on standard errors that are clustered at the level of boundary segments. Descriptive
    statistics on the estimation samples are reported in Table 1.
                                                                                             Figure A.4: Heterogeneity over Time
                                                        Full Specification - Years 2002 and 2003                                                       Full Specification - Years 2004 and 2005




                      54
                                                                                                                                54




                      53
                                                                                                                                53




          47 48 49 50 51 52
                                                                                                                    47 48 49 50 51 52




         Test Score (Percentiles)
                                                                                                                   Test Score (Percentiles)




                      46
                                                                                                                                46




                      45
                                                                                                                                45




                      44
                                                                                                                                44
                                    -1000   -800    -600    -400    -200    0      200    400   600   800   1000                              -1000   -800    -600    -400    -200    0      200    400   600   800   1000
                                                   Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary                                                        Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary


                                                                  Full Specification - Years 2006 and 2007                                            Full Specification - Year 2008




                      54
                                                                                                                                54




4
                      53
                                                                                                                                53




          47 48 49 50 51 52
                                                                                                                    47 48 49 50 51 52




         Test Score (Percentiles)
                                                                                                                   Test Score (Percentiles)




                      46
                                                                                                                                46




                      45
                                                                                                                                45




                      44
                                                                                                                                44




                                    -1000   -800    -600    -400    -200    0      200    400   600   800   1000                              -1000   -800    -600    -400    -200    0      200    400   600   800   1000
                                                   Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary                                                        Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary


    Notes: The left hand side in all graphs refers to the slower side of a given exchange boundary segment, i.e. the side with higher mean residential distances to the connected
    exchange station. Each figure depicts estimation results from two separate specifications: The plotted functional forms present results after estimating fourth-order poly-
    nomials conditional on boundary segment fixed effects and additional covariates as discussed in Section 5. The shaded area depicts 95% confidence intervals. The black
    bars in both graphs depict the 95% confidence intervals for the less parametric specification (replacing the polynomials with 100m distance bins). For display in the graphs,
    these bin coefficients have been centered at the mean distance to the boundary within each 100m bin on the x-axis. Both sets of estimates are depicted as partial predictions
    while holding covariates constant at their sample means. Confidence intervals are based on standard errors that are clustered at the level of boundary segments. Descriptive
    statistics on the estimation samples are reported in Table 1.
                                                                                                                                 Figure A.5: Heterogeneity across Subjects
                                                                            Full Specification - English                                                                                                  Full Specification - Mathematics




                              50
                                                                                                                                                                               50




                              49
                                                                                                                                                                               49
                                                                                                                                                                Maths Test Score (Percentiles)




             English Test Score (Percentiles)
             42 43 44 45 46 47 48
                                                                                                                                                               42 43 44 45 46 47 48




                              41
                                                                                                                                                                               41




                              40
                                                                                                                                                                               40
                                                -1000   -800    -600    -400    -200    0      200    400   600   800                                  1000                                      -1000   -800    -600    -400    -200    0      200    400   600   800   1000
                                                               Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary                                                                                               Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary


                                                                                                                                              Full Specification - Science




                                                                                                       50




5
                                                                                                       49
                                                                                      Science Test Score (Percentiles)
                                                                                      42 43 44 45 46 47 48
                                                                                                       41
                                                                                                       40
                                                                                                                         -1000   -800    -600    -400    -200    0      200    400   600   800                                 1000
                                                                                                                                        Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary


    Notes: The left hand side in all graphs refers to the slower side of a given exchange boundary segment, i.e. the side with higher mean residential distances to the connected
    exchange station. Each figure depicts estimation results from two separate specifications: The plotted functional forms present results after estimating fourth-order polyno-
    mials conditional on boundary segment fixed effects and additional covariates as discussed in Section 5. The shaded area depicts 95% confidence intervals. The black bars
    in both graphs depict the 95% confidence intervals for the less parametric specification (replacing the polynomials with 100m distance bins). For display in the graphs, these
    bin coefficients have been centered at the mean distance to the boundary within each 100m bin on the x-axis. Both sets of estimates are depicted as partial predictions while
    holding covariates constant at their sample means. Confidence intervals are based on standard errors that are clustered at the level of boundary segments.
                                                                               Figure A.6: Heterogeneity with Respect to Intensity of Jump
                                                        Full Specification - First (Smallest) Quartile                                                        Full Specification - Second Quartile




                      54
                                                                                                                                 54




                      53
                                                                                                                                 53




          47 48 49 50 51 52
                                                                                                                     47 48 49 50 51 52




         Test Score (Percentiles)
                                                                                                                    Test Score (Percentiles)




                      46
                                                                                                                                 46




                      45
                                                                                                                                 45




                      44
                                                                                                                                 44
                                    -1000   -800    -600    -400    -200    0      200    400   600   800   1000                               -1000   -800    -600    -400    -200    0      200    400   600   800   1000
                                                   Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary                                                         Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary


                                                            Full Specification - Third Quartile                    Full Specification - Fourth (Biggest) Quartile




                      54
                                                                                                                                 54




6
                      53
                                                                                                                                 53




          47 48 49 50 51 52
                                                                                                                     47 48 49 50 51 52




         Test Score (Percentiles)
                                                                                                                    Test Score (Percentiles)




                      46
                                                                                                                                 46




                      45
                                                                                                                                 45




                      44
                                                                                                                                 44




                                    -1000   -800    -600    -400    -200    0      200    400   600   800   1000                               -1000   -800    -600    -400    -200    0      200    400   600   800   1000
                                                   Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary                                                         Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary


    Notes: The left hand side in all graphs refers to the slower side of a given exchange boundary segment, i.e. the side with higher mean residential distances to the connected
    exchange station. Each figure depicts estimation results from two separate specifications: The plotted functional forms present results after estimating fourth-order polyno-
    mials conditional on boundary segment fixed effects and additional covariates as discussed in Section 5. The shaded area depicts 95% confidence intervals. The black bars
    in both graphs depict the 95% confidence intervals for the less parametric specification (replacing the polynomials with 100m distance bins). For display in the graphs, these
    bin coefficients have been centered at the mean distance to the boundary within each 100m bin on the x-axis. Both sets of estimates are depicted as partial predictions while
    holding covariates constant at their sample means. Confidence intervals are based on standard errors that are clustered at the level of boundary segments. Quartiles refer to
    the distribution of the intensity of the jump across boundaries.
                                                                             Figure A.7: Heterogeneity across Initial Levels of Available ICT
                                     Full Specification - Slow Available ICT on Slow Side                                                                                             Full Specification - Medium Available ICT on Slow Side




                      54
                                                                                                                                                                54




                      53
                                                                                                                                                                53




          47 48 49 50 51 52
                                                                                                                                                    47 48 49 50 51 52




         Test Score (Percentiles)
                                                                                                                                                   Test Score (Percentiles)




                      46
                                                                                                                                                                46




                      45
                                                                                                                                                                45




                      44
                                                                                                                                                                44
                                    -1000   -800    -600    -400    -200    0      200    400   600   800                          1000                                       -1000    -800    -600    -400    -200    0      200    400   600   800   1000
                                                   Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary                                                                                         Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary


                                                                                                             Full Specification - Fast Available ICT on Slow Side




                                                                                           54




7
                                                                                           53
                                                                               47 48 49 50 51 52
                                                                              Test Score (Percentiles)
                                                                                           46
                                                                                           45
                                                                                           44
                                                                                                         -1000   -800    -600    -400    -200    0      200    400   600   800                           1000
                                                                                                                        Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary


    Notes: The left hand side in all graphs refers to the slower side of a given exchange boundary segment, i.e. the side with higher mean residential distances to the connected
    exchange station. Each figure depicts estimation results from two separate specifications: The plotted functional forms present results after estimating fourth-order poly-
    nomials conditional on boundary segment fixed effects and additional covariates as discussed in Section 5. The shaded area depicts 95% confidence intervals. The black
    bars in both graphs depict the 95% confidence intervals for the less parametric specification (replacing the polynomials with 100m distance bins). For display in the graphs,
    these bin coefficients have been centered at the mean distance to the boundary within each 100m bin on the x-axis. Both sets of estimates are depicted as partial predictions
    while holding covariates constant at their sample means. Confidence intervals are based on standard errors that are clustered at the level of boundary segments. Descriptive
    statistics on the estimation samples are reported in Table 1.
    Additional Robustness Results

                                                                               Figure A.8: The Boundary Effect on the Propensity of White British Ethnicity
                                                                        Full Specification - All Boundaries                 Full Specification - Top 30% of Boundary Jumps




                              .88
                                                                                                                                                       .88       .84    .86




                                  .82 .84 .86
                                                                                                                                                         .82




                           .8
                                                                                                                                            .78    .8




8
                                                                                                                                      .76




           Propensity of White British Ethnicity
                                                                                                                                   Propensity of White British Ethnicity




         .74 .76 .78
                                                                                                                                .74




                              .72
                                                                                                                                                       .72

                                                   -1000 -800    -600 -400 -200          0      200    400   600   800   1000                                                 -1000 -800    -600 -400 -200          0      200    400   600   800   1000
                                                                Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary                                                                         Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary


    Notes: The left hand side in both graphs refers to the slower side of a given exchange boundary segment, i.e. the side with higher mean residential distances to the
    connected exchange station. Each figure depicts estimation results from two separate specifications: The plotted functional forms present results after estimating fourth-
    order polynomials conditional on boundary segment fixed effects and additional covariates as discussed in Section 5. The shaded area depicts 95% confidence intervals.
    The black bars in both graphs depict the 95% confidence intervals for the less parametric specification (replacing the polynomials with 100m distance bins). For display in
    the graphs, these bin coefficients have been centered at the mean distance to the boundary within each 100m bin on the x-axis. Both sets of estimates are depicted as partial
    predictions while holding covariates constant at their sample means. Confidence intervals are based on standard errors that are clustered at the level of boundary segments.
    Descriptive statistics on the estimation samples are reported in Table 1.
                                                                                 Figure A.9: The Boundary Effect on the Propensity of Free School Meal Eligibility

                                                                           Full Specification - All Boundaries                                                                   Full Specification - Top 30% of Boundary Jumps




                               .2
                                                                                                                                                         .2




                                            .18
                                                                                                                                                                      .18




                                   .16
                                                                                                                                                             .16




                            .14
                                                                                                                                                      .14




                   .12
                                                                                                                                             .12




9
           .1
                                                                                                                                     .1




         Propensity of Free School Meal Eligibility
                                                                                                                                   Propensity of Free School Meal Eligibility




                               .08
                                                                                                                                                         .08
                                                      -1000 -800    -600 -400 -200          0      200    400   600   800   1000                                                -1000 -800    -600 -400 -200          0      200    400   600   800   1000
                                                                   Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary                                                                        Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary


    Notes: The left hand side in both graphs refers to the slower side of a given exchange boundary segment, i.e. the side with higher mean residential distances to the
    connected exchange station. Each figure depicts estimation results from two separate specifications: The plotted functional forms present results after estimating fourth-
    order polynomials conditional on boundary segment fixed effects and additional covariates as discussed in Section 5. The shaded area depicts 95% confidence intervals.
    The black bars in both graphs depict the 95% confidence intervals for the less parametric specification (replacing the polynomials with 100m distance bins). For display in
    the graphs, these bin coefficients have been centered at the mean distance to the boundary within each 100m bin on the x-axis. Both sets of estimates are depicted as partial
    predictions while holding covariates constant at their sample means. Confidence intervals are based on standard errors that are clustered at the level of boundary segments.
    Descriptive statistics on the estimation samples are reported in Table 1.
                                                                                Figure A.10: The Boundary Effect on Local Amenities - Distance to Nearest Supermarket

                                                                               Full Specification - All Boundaries                                                                      Full Specification - Top 30% of Boundary Jumps




                                                   1600
                                                                                                                                                                                1600




                                            1500
                                                                                                                                                                         1500




                                    1400
                                                                                                                                                                 1400




                            1300
                                                                                                                                                         1300




                    1200
                                                                                                                                                 1200




10
           1100
                                                                                                                                        1100




          Distance (meters) to Nearest Supermarket
                                                                                                                                       Distance (meters) to Nearest Supermarket




                                  1000
                                                                                                                                                               1000
                                                          -1000 -800    -600 -400 -200          0      200    400   600   800   1000                                                   -1000 -800    -600 -400 -200          0      200    400   600   800   1000
                                                                       Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary                                                                           Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary


     Notes: The left hand side in both graphs refers to the slower side of a given exchange boundary segment, i.e. the side with higher mean residential distances to the
     connected exchange station. Each figure depicts estimation results from two separate specifications: The plotted functional forms present results after estimating fourth-
     order polynomials conditional on boundary segment fixed effects and additional covariates as discussed in Section 5. The shaded area depicts 95% confidence intervals.
     The black bars in both graphs depict the 95% confidence intervals for the less parametric specification (replacing the polynomials with 100m distance bins). For display in
     the graphs, these bin coefficients have been centered at the mean distance to the boundary within each 100m bin on the x-axis. Both sets of estimates are depicted as partial
     predictions while holding covariates constant at their sample means. Confidence intervals are based on standard errors that are clustered at the level of boundary segments.
     Descriptive statistics on the estimation samples are reported in Table 1.
                                                                           Figure A.11: The Boundary Effect on Local Amenities - Distance to Nearest Major Road

                                                                         Full Specification - All Boundaries                                                                Full Specification - Top 30% of Boundary Jumps




                               550
                                                                                                                                                      550




                                           500
                                                                                                                                                                  500




                                 450
                                                                                                                                                        450




                       400
                                                                                                                                              400




11
             350
                                                                                                                                    350




          Distance (meters) to Nearest Major Road
                                                                                                                                 Distance (meters) to Nearest Major Road




                               300
                                                                                                                                                      300
                                                    -1000 -800    -600 -400 -200          0      200    400   600   800   1000                                             -1000 -800    -600 -400 -200          0      200    400   600   800   1000
                                                                 Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary                                                                     Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary


     Notes: The left hand side in both graphs refers to the slower side of a given exchange boundary segment, i.e. the side with higher mean residential distances to the
     connected exchange station. Each figure depicts estimation results from two separate specifications: The plotted functional forms present results after estimating fourth-
     order polynomials conditional on boundary segment fixed effects and additional covariates as discussed in Section 5. The shaded area depicts 95% confidence intervals.
     The black bars in both graphs depict the 95% confidence intervals for the less parametric specification (replacing the polynomials with 100m distance bins). For display in
     the graphs, these bin coefficients have been centered at the mean distance to the boundary within each 100m bin on the x-axis. Both sets of estimates are depicted as partial
     predictions while holding covariates constant at their sample means. Confidence intervals are based on standard errors that are clustered at the level of boundary segments.
     Descriptive statistics on the estimation samples are reported in Table 1.
                                                                            Figure A.12: The Boundary Effect on Local Amenities - Distance to Nearest School

                                                                       Full Specification - All Boundaries                                                              Full Specification - Top 30% of Boundary Jumps




                              750
                                                                                                                                                   750




                                            700
                                                                                                                                                                 700




                                     650
                                                                                                                                                          650




                               600
                                                                                                                                                    600




                       550
                                                                                                                                            550




                500
                                                                                                                                     500




12
           Distance (meters) to Nearest School
                                                                                                                                Distance (meters) to Nearest School




          450
                                                                                                                               450




                              400
                                                                                                                                                   400
                                                  -1000 -800    -600 -400 -200          0      200    400   600   800   1000                                           -1000 -800    -600 -400 -200          0      200    400   600   800   1000
                                                               Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary                                                                   Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary


     Notes: The left hand side in both graphs refers to the slower side of a given exchange boundary segment, i.e. the side with higher mean residential distances to the
     connected exchange station. Each figure depicts estimation results from two separate specifications: The plotted functional forms present results after estimating fourth-
     order polynomials conditional on boundary segment fixed effects and additional covariates as discussed in Section 5. The shaded area depicts 95% confidence intervals.
     The black bars in both graphs depict the 95% confidence intervals for the less parametric specification (replacing the polynomials with 100m distance bins). For display in
     the graphs, these bin coefficients have been centered at the mean distance to the boundary within each 100m bin on the x-axis. Both sets of estimates are depicted as partial
     predictions while holding covariates constant at their sample means. Confidence intervals are based on standard errors that are clustered at the level of boundary segments.
     Descriptive statistics on the estimation samples are reported in Table 1.
                   Figure A.13: The Boundary Effect in the Survey Microdata Samples
                                                                        2500
                      Residential Distance (meters) to Connected Exchange
                           1000            1500           2000




                                                                               -1000   -800   -600    -400     -200     0       200    400    600   800   1000
                                                                                               Residential Distance (meters) to Exchange Boundary


Notes: The left hand side in the graph refers to the slower side of a given exchange boundary segment, i.e. the side with
higher mean residential distances to the connected exchange station. The figure depicts estimation results from two sep-
arate specifications: The plotted functional forms present results after estimating fourth-order polynomials conditional
on boundary segment fixed effects and additional covariates as discussed in Section 5. The shaded area depicts 95%
confidence intervals. The black bars in both graphs depict the 95% confidence intervals for the less parametric specifi-
cation (replacing the polynomials with 100m distance bins). For display in the graphs, these bin coefficients have been
centered at the mean distance to the boundary within each 100m bin on the x-axis. Both sets of estimates are depicted as
partial predictions while holding covariates constant at their sample means. Confidence intervals are based on standard
errors that are clustered at the level of boundary segments. Descriptive statistics on the estimation samples are reported
in Table 1.




                                                                                                                  13
