NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GOVERNMENT ECONOMIC POLICY, SENTIMENTS, AND CONSUMPTION
Atif Mian
Amir Sufi
Nasim Khoshkhou
Working Paper 21316
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21316

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2015

This research was supported by funding from the Initiative on Global Markets at Chicago Booth, the
Fama-Miller Center at Chicago Booth, and Princeton University. We thank Jung Sakong and Xiao
Zhang for excellent research assistance. For helpful comments, we thank Fernando Alvarez, Bob Barsky,
Guido Lorenzoni, Claudia Sahm, and seminar participants at Chicago Booth, the Federal Reserve Board
of Governors, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Northwestern (Kellogg), NYU (Stern), Princeton,
and the World Bank. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this material
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the view of any other institution. Corresponding
authors: Mian: (609) 258 6718, atif@princeton.edu; Sufi: (773) 702 6148, amir.sufi@chicagobooth.edu
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Atif Mian, Amir Sufi, and Nasim Khoshkhou. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Government Economic Policy, Sentiments, and Consumption
Atif Mian, Amir Sufi, and Nasim Khoshkhou
NBER Working Paper No. 21316
July 2015
JEL No. E20,E21,E60
ABSTRACT
We examine how consumption responds to changes in sentiment regarding government economic
policy using cross-sectional variation across counties in the ideological predisposition of constituents.
When the incumbent party loses a presidential election, individuals in counties more ideologically
predisposed toward the losing party experience a dramatic and discontinuous relative decrease in optimism
on government economic policy. Using the interaction of constituent ideology in a county with election
timing as an instrument, we estimate the impact of government policy sentiment shocks on consumer
spending, and we find a very small effect that cannot be statistically distinguished from zero. The small
magnitude of the effect is estimated precisely. For example, we can reject the hypothesis that pessimism
regarding government economic policy effectiveness during the Great Recession had as large an effect
on consumption as the negative shock to household net worth coming from the collapse in house prices.

Atif Mian
Princeton University
Bendheim Center For Finance
26 Prospect Avenue
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
atif@princeton.edu
Amir Sufi
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
amir.sufi@chicagobooth.edu

Nasim Khoshkhou
Argus Information & Advisory Services
1 North Lexington Avenue
White Plains, NY 10601
NKhoshkhou@argusinformation.com

1

Introduction

Theory suggests that sentiment shocks, or shocks to consumer beliefs that are orthogonal to economic fundamentals, could at times impact spending and output independently.1 However, estimating the effect of sentiment shocks on consumer spending has proven difficult because sentiment
shocks are often correlated with changes in fundamentals such as revised expectations of income
growth.
This paper introduces a new empirical methodology to estimate how consumption responds to
a specific type of sentiment shock: a shock to sentiments regarding government economic policy.
We exploit variation across U.S. counties in the constituent response to the outcome of presidential
elections. We show that ideological predisposition of residents in a county is a strong predictor
of changes in sentiments regarding government policy whenever a new party wins the presidency.
Specifically, partisans become very pessimistic about economic policy when their party loses the
White House.
The idea that views on government economic policy might affect economic activity has been
proposed by academics and policy-makers alike. For example, in January 2015, the incoming Senate
majority leader Mitch McConnell suggested that rising strength in the U.S. economy toward the
end of 2014 was related to the expectation of a new Republican Congress. Nobel laureate Edward
Prescott is reported to have attributed the Great Recession to the election of Barack Obama in
2008 and the expectation of higher future taxes. Consumer confidence dropped sharply during the
“fiscal cliff” standoff in December of 2012, sparking worries of an effect on spending.2
Figure 1 uses data measuring optimism on government economic policy from the University of
Michigan survey of consumers, and shows that there is indeed a strong correlation between government economic policy optimism and consumption growth in quarterly data (correlation coefficient
of 0.57). However, it is not clear from Figure 1 whether government economic policy views have a
causal impact on growth in consumption, or whether the growth in consumption and views about
government economic policy are jointly determined by some common factors such as productivity
1

See, for example, Azariadis (1981), Benhabib and Farmer (1994), Lorenzoni (2009), and Angeletos and La’O
(2013)
2
See Lucy McCalmont of Politico, “Is Mitch McConnell Right About the Economy?”, January 9, 2015; Stephen
Williamson on his blog New Monetarist Economics “SED Report,” July 8, 2010; and Richard Leong of Reuters,
“Consumer Confidence Plunges on “Fiscal Cliff” fears,” December 7, 2012.

1

shocks.
In order to estimate the causal effect of government economic policy views on consumption,
we begin with the observation that a change in the party with control of the White House affects
people’s sentiments very differently depending on their ideological predisposition. For example,
the defeat of the incumbent Republican party in the presidential election of 2008 leads to an
increase in optimism regarding government economic policy among liberal voters but worsens the
outlook among conservatives. We use this variation across U.S. counties to test whether a change
in sentiments about government economic policy has an effect on spending.
We implement our methodology by matching each individual in the University of Michigan
Survey of Consumers to county-level data on presidential voting, a voter ideology score developed
by Tausanovitch and Warshaw (2013) [TW score henceforth], and consumer spending. Our final
data set covers the period from 2000 to 2013, and includes four presidential elections.
A change in party control of the White House results in a huge relative increase in pessimism
about government economic policy for individuals who are predisposed against the winning party.
Views on whether the government is doing a good job or not in controlling inflation and unemployment fall by 1.4 standard deviations for a county voting against the winning party with probability
0 relative to a county voting with probability 1 for the winning party.
A concern with our finding may be that the shift in sentiment about government policy is not
driven by the interaction of ideological differences and the change in control of the White House,
but some unobserved economic shock that happens to be correlated with constituent ideology and
emerges at the same time as the elections. However, this concern is unlikely given that the shift
in government economic policy sentiment occurs precisely around the news of election results.
Moreover, the relative shift in sentiment occurs only around the 2000 and 2008 elections that
resulted in a change in the party controlling the White House. There is no significant relative shift
in sentiment around the 2004 and 2012 elections that resulted in incumbent victories.
The impact of party-changing elections on government economic policy sentiment is robust to
demographic controls, county-level industry exposure, and state fixed effects. We also examine
income, tax, and transfer growth around 2000 and 2008 elections, and we find no significant differences in Republican-leaning counties versus Democrat-leaning counties. These facts justify our
interpretation of the relative movement in views on government economic policy as a sentiment
2

shock that is orthogonal to fundamentals.
We then estimate the effect of ideology-driven change in sentiment regarding government policy
on consumer spending using both self-reported spending plans in the Michigan survey, as well as
actual county-level consumer spending data. For actual spending, we utilize a new data set that
tracks credit card purchases, and a separate dataset on new auto purchases – both at the county
level.
Across all measures, we find no effect of government economic policy sentiment shocks on
consumer spending around the Bush 2000 elections, and the estimates are reasonably precise.
There is no significant effect of the sentiment shock on either self-reported spending plans, or actual
spending as measured by the purchase of new automobiles. The IV estimate rejects at the 5% level
that the effect of a one standard deviation increase in sentiment about government economic policy
is greater than a seven percentage point increase in new automobile spending growth.
There is a significant effect of the sentiment shock on survey-reported spending plans on automobiles after the Obama 2008 election. However, there is no significant effect of sentiment on
actual spending on the purchase of new automobiles. Similarly, there is no significant effect of
sentiment on credit card spending. The IV estimates can reject at the 5% level that the effect of
a one standard deviation increase in sentiments is greater than seven percentage points increase
in new automobile sales, or 3.4 percentage point increase in credit card spending. We contrast
the small magnitude of the impact of government policy sentiment on spending during the 2008
Obama-McCain election with the magnitude of the impact of falling house prices on spending estimated in Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013). We can easily reject the equality of the two effects. The
housing net worth shock has a dramatic effect on all measures of spending, whereas the change in
sentiment about government policy has close to a zero effect.
It is useful to put our empirical approach in the context of the extant literature on sentiments
and consumer spending. A large empirical literature posits that sentiments, noise, or animal spirits
shocks matter for consumption.3 But the literature has struggled to find instruments that move
sentiment independently of fundamentals. In the absence of such shifters, the empirical work has
adopted two approaches: (i) control for as many of the fundamental shocks as possible treating the
3

See, for example, the studies by Blanchard (1993) and Hall (1993) which were in part motivated by the 19901991 recession. A related literature measures the effect of news about economic fundamentals on business cycle
fluctuations. See for example, Cochrane (1994), Beaudry and Portier (2006), and Jaimovich and Rebelo (2009).

3

residual variation in measures of confidence as sentiment shocks or (ii) use a structural model to
separate the effect of news or fundamentals from the direct effect of sentiments.4
Methodologically, our paper differs from the existing empirical literature on sentiments and
consumer spending in two ways. First, instead of using aggregate time-series data to tease out the
effect of sentiments on spending, we use county-level panel data. This allows us to absorb unobserved economy-wide supply and demand shocks that jointly affect both sentiments and consumer
spending. The granularity of county-level data also enables us to control for possibly spurious
shocks at the industry or state level. For example, sentiments and spending may be jointly affected
by a boom in the oil industry, or certain counties may be more exposed to swings in the construction
sector. Further, we use independent measures of actual spending at a microeconomic level instead
of only using survey responses to measure spending.5
Second, our methodology does not rely on residual variation after controlling for fundamental
shocks to identify sentiment shocks. Instead we specify an exact channel, namely the interaction of ideological predisposition with election news, to identify the effect of sentiments regarding
government policy on consumer spending.
The results of our paper our similar in spirit to the recent paper by Barsky and Sims (2012),
who use a structural decomposition of the innovation in sentiments into a “news’’ and an “animal
spirits’’ component to argue that the forecasting power of consumer confidence is mostly driven by
news, not sentiments. Our paper differs from Barsky and Sims (2012) in that we use cross-sectional
variation driven by ideological predisposition as an instrument for change in sentiments. A second
difference is that our focus is on sentiments regarding government policy, and not the broader
consumer sentiments index.6
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section presents the empirical framework
we use to estimate the effect of sentiment shocks on consumption. Section 3 presents the data and
4

Carroll, Fuhrer, and Wilcox (1994) control for as many of the observable news shocks as possible (e.g. labor
income growth, productivity), and assume that the residual variation in sentiments is driven by non-fundamental
factors.
5
A blossoming recent literature uses microeconomic data from the Michigan survey to explain inflation expectations. See for example, Bachmann, Berg, and Sims (2012), Burke and Ozdagli (2013), Malmendier and Nagel
(2009). We are unaware of any research using microeconomic data on consumer confidence from the Michigan data
to explain household consumption. A recent FEDS Note from Aladangady and Sahm (2015) use the micro-data from
the Michigan survey to examine how views on gasoline prices affect views on spending.
6
There is also a growing literature on policy uncertainty and its potential effect on investment and GDP (e.g.
Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2015)). However, “uncertainty” is often associated with second moments of the data such
as stock market volatility and as such is different from the measure of sentiments used in this paper.

4

summary statistics, including a discussion of the Michigan survey question on government economic
policy view. Sections 4 through 6 present results, and Section 7 concludes.

2
2.1

Empirical Framework
Fundamentals and Sentiment Shocks

We motivate the empirical analysis with the framework in Lorenzoni (2009). In his model, a
representative consumer maximizes expected utility over consumption and labor, and the technology
of the economy evolves over time. More specifically, the representative consumer maximizes:

E

∞
X

β t ∗ U (Ct , Nt )

t=0

Technology allows consumers to convert labor into income according to a linear production function:

Yt = At ∗ Nt

where at = ln(At ). The only source of uncertainty is the evolution of productivity. Productivity
has a permanent component xt and a temporary component ηt :

at = xt + ηt
where ηt is an i.i.d. shock, normal, with zero mean and variance ση2 . The permanent component of
productivity is a random walk process given by:

xt = xt−1 + t
where t is also i.i.d., normal, with zero mean and variance σ2 . Agents observe current productivity at each period in addition to a noisy signal wt regarding the permanent component of the
productivity process, given by:

wt = xt + ψt

5

where ψt is i.i.d., normal, with zero mean and variance σψ2 .
The shock ψ plays a crucial role in our framework, because it represents noise that affects signals
on the permanent component of productivity. What exactly does ψt capture? Lorenzoni (2009)
refers to realizations of ψt as “noise shocks” which distort the true information from public signals
and “induce consumers to temporarily overestimate or underestimate the productive capacity of
the economy.” We refer to ψt as sentiment shocks in the rest of this study.
Consumers update their beliefs on productivity using both at and wt . Using a Kalman filter,
the expected value of xt at time t follows:

xt|t = ρ ∗ xt−1|t−1 + (1 − ρ) ∗ (δwt + (1 − δ)at )

(1)

As this equation shows, consumer beliefs on the evolution of productivity depends on wt , which is
itself a function of the sentiment shock ψt . Fundamental shocks ηt and t also affect beliefs about
productivity through their effect on at , but the consumer cannot delineate whether sentiment or
fundamentals move xt in any period.

2.2

Effect on Consumption

Our goal in this study is to estimate the effect of sentiment shocks on consumption. Equation 1
represents household beliefs on the evolution of productivity. Whether or not revised beliefs about
productivity affect consumption and output is a function of many other factors, such as preferences,
nominal rigidities, adjustment costs, and the stochastic properties of the shocks. Our setting is more
reduced form, and as such it is better to view equation 1 as describing household beliefs about the
evolution of permanent income rather than productivity. Under this alternative interpretation,
sentiment shocks ψt affect wt which in turn informs households about their permanent income.
Our approach is to estimate the direct effect of sentiment shocks on consumption, allowing for a
flexible functional form to capture the timing and magnitude of the effect.
Using aggregate data, a natural test would be a regression of change in log consumption (ct )
on the shocks. Let Θ be a t x 2 matrix of fundamental shocks:

Θt = ηt t

6



We could then estimate the following time-series regression:

∆ct = ψt γ + Θt Λ + ζt

The problem with such an approach is that we don’t observe ψt or Θt in the data. Instead, the most
common measure used in the literature is survey-based answers to consumer confidence questions,
what we call ∆St . As has long been recognized in the literature, answers to consumer confidence
questions likely reflect both sentiment shocks and fundamental shocks, neither of which can be
separately observed by the econometrician:

∆St = f (ψt , Θt )

The core identification problem in estimating the effect of sentiment shocks on consumption growth
is separating out shocks to sentiments (ψt ) from shocks to fundamentals (Θt ).

2.3

Cross-Sectional Variation

Previous research has used either structural methods (Barsky and Sims (2012)) or control variables
(Carroll, Fuhrer, and Wilcox (1994)) to tease out the independent effects of ψt and Θt on consumption. Our approach differs by focusing on the cross-sectional variation in sentiment shocks across
U.S. counties.
Formally, let each U.S. county be an island i that consumes its own income and has no communication with other islands. Each island receives shocks ψi and Θi at period 1. The consumption
impulse response function between period 0 and τ ≥ 1 can be written down as:

∆ciτ = γτ ∗ ψi + Θi Λτ + νiτ

(2)

where γτ allows for a flexible response of consumption to sentiment shocks over time, and exploits
cross-sectional variation across islands in sentiment shocks at t = 1 to identify the effect of sentiment
shock on consumption.
Let ∆Si be the change in consumer sentiment as measured in consumer surveys between t = 0
to t = τ on island i. The key problem is that ∆Si reflects both sentiment shock ψi and fundamental
7

shocks Θi . The cross-sectional approach does not solve the core identification problem of separating
sentiment shocks from fundamental shocks, unless we can find an instrument zi that is correlated
with with sentiment shock but is uncorrelated with the fundamental shocks, i.e. ψi = f (zi ), and
Θi ⊥ zi .
Such an instrument zi moves ∆Si but is orthogonal to fundamental shocks occurring on island
i. With such an instrument, two-stage least squares provides a consistent estimate of γτ , or the
effect of sentiment shocks on consumption growth:

∆Siτ = δτ ∗ zi + Xi Πτ + uiτ

(3)

diτ + Xi Λτ + ωiτ
∆ciτ = γτ ∗ ∆S

(4)

where Xi represents a set of variables that proxy for possible fundamental shocks, such as industry
employment share in county i, state fixed effects, demographics, or income level. There are a number
of advantages to this approach. First, given control variables Xi , the orthogonality condition can
be weakened to say that the instrument is orthogonal to fundamental shocks after partialling out
the variation due to observable control variables. Second, using a specific instrument zi takes an
explicit stand on the source of variation being used to isolate sentiment shocks. This is a more
transparent approach than relying on residual variation that may still be driven by fundamental
shocks.
However, the use of an instrument comes at the usual cost that the consumption response
estimated in equation 4 is a local average treatment effect. This implies that our estimates refer
to the effect of sentiments on consumption that is driven by a change in sentiments through the
instrument zi . The next section explains the appropriate interpretation of the sentiment shock
isolated by our instrument.

2.4

IV Strategy: Isolating Sentiment Regarding Government Economic Policy

Our instrument zi is county-level ideology, where we use two measures for ideology. The first is
the share of the population in a county voting for the Republican candidate in the election being

8

examined. The second is from Tausanovitch and Warshaw (2013) which we refer to as the TW
score. The latter variable is meant to capture the policy preferences of constituents in a county,
and is extracted from a large number of surveys with 275,000 participants in total.7 We use the
ideological predisposition instrument to isolate sentiment shocks coming from presidential elections
that result in a change in party in control of the White House in 2000 and 2008.
As we will show below, the instrument has a very strong first stage. Constituent ideology in a
county has an enormously powerful and statistically robust effect on views on government economic
policy right after presidential elections where the party in control of the White House changes.
We refer to the predicted effect of constituent ideology on government economic policy views in
equation 3 above) as government policy sentiment shocks, and the coefficient γτ in equation 4
capture the effect of government policy sentiment shocks on consumer spending.

3

Data and Summary Statistics

The analysis employs individual level data and county level data. The individual level data on
consumer confidence comes from the Thomson Reuters University of Michigan Survey of Consumers.
The county-level data set includes data from a variety of sources. Below, we provide more details
and summary statistics.

3.1

Data

The individual level survey of consumer confidence is from Thomson Reuters University of Michigan
Survey of Consumers. This survey is a nationally representative survey of about 500 individuals
every month. On average two-thirds of the individuals surveyed in a month are interviewed a second
time after six months. The remaining third are only surveyed once. An important advantage of the
Michigan survey is that we can match individuals to the counties they live in. The county match is
possible in the survey for data after the year 2000 and as such we focus on the period 2000 to 2013
in this study. There are 81,691 individual survey responses in the Michigan Survey of Consumers
7
In a robustness test reported in the appendix, we also use the fraction of the population who are members of
Evangelical, Latter-day Saints, or mainline Protestant churches. As we will show, church membership among these
groups strongly predicts changes in views on government economic policy around elections.

9

data between January 2001 and September 2013.8
The counties in our final sample are a subset of all U.S. counties, where the main sample
restriction is the availability of Michigan survey data. We impose the restriction that respondents
to the survey in counties both before and after each election in order to estimate the effect of
sentiment shocks on consumer spending.9 For the four elections in our sample, we have on average
about 1,000 counties which represent on average about 80% of the population. The number of
survey responses per county is highly correlated with the population of the county, with a univariate
regression giving an R-squared of 0.90. Given the highly skewed distribution of population - and
hence survey counts - across counties, we weight regressions by total number of survey respondents
behind each observation.
We merge a number of additional county-level variables to our data set from various sources.
Our main measure of ideology in a county is the fraction of total votes going to the Republican
candidate in the four presidential elections that fall during our sample period: 2000, 2004, 2008
and 2012. However, as mentioned above, we also employ the TW score as a measure of constituent
ideology. Both measures are increasing in conservatism.
To measure shocks to economic fundamentals Xi , we use income and wage data from the IRS
and employment data from the County Business Patterns data set published by the U.S. Census
Bureau. The CBP data are used to construct county-level share of employment in each 2-digit
NAICS industry. We use these variables to control for possible industry specific shocks hitting a
county at a point in time.
To measure spending at the county-level, we utilize three data sets. First, we use new auto
purchases from R.L. Polk. These data are derived from new car registrations and are based on
the county where the buyer lives. The data are described in detail in Mian and Sufi (2012), and
are available over our entire sample period. Second, we use a previously unused data set on credit
card spending from Argus Information and Advisory Services, a Verisk Analytics company. Argus
specializes in credit card and deposit benchmarking. The benchmarking data is collected from
individual issuers at the account and transaction level, and then aggregated at the county level
8
This data is restricted to individuals with information on the county that they live in, so we can match the
individual level data to county level data.
9
Since the underlying individual level data is a nationally representative random sample, restricting attention to
counties that have responses in both pre and post election year does not introduce any particular bias. The only cost
of this restriction is the loss of some statistical power.

10

to construct an annual measure of spending through credit cards. The Argus spending data is
available from 2006 onwards, so we can only use it for the 2008 election. Third, we use answers to
questions in the Michigan survey, which asks respondents whether it is a good time to spend on
household items or autos.
In addition to these variables, we add county-level information on demographics from the U.S.
decennial census. We also utilize house price data from CoreLogic, and the housing net worth shock
variable from Mian and Sufi (2014). The latter variable represents the percentage decline in total
household net worth coming from the decline in house prices from 2006 to 2009.
The income and spending variables are constructed in per capita terms. Income is normalized
by dividing total income in a county by the number of returns, while spending is normalized by
dividing by total population in a county. There is a secular trend in relative population growth
throughout the 1990s and the 2000s, with Republican leaning counties growing at a faster pace.

3.2

Summary Statistics

Table 1 contains summary statistics for the two main presidential elections we examine. The consumer sentiment index from the Michigan survey is one of the most common consumer confidence
measures used by academics and financial press alike. It is computed as the relative favorability
score on five broad questions in the survey: current financial well-being, current buying attitude, expected financial well-being, expected business conditions, and expected broad economic conditions.
The first two questions are also separately summarized by the sub-index of current economic conditions, whereas the last three questions are separately summarized by the sub-index of consumer
expectations. We average these indices for all individuals within a county-year.
Views on government policy, which are the focus of our analysis, are measured with the response
to the question: “As to the economic policy of the government – I mean steps taken to fight inflation
or unemployment – would you say the government is doing a good job, only fair, or a poor job?”
We code the variable as 0 if the response is poor job, 0.5 for only fair, and 1 for good job.
In Table 1, all measures from the Michigan survey are normalized to be mean zero and standard
deviation one, and counties are weighted by the average number of survey respondents during the
time period examined. On average, there is a decline in measures of consumer confidence from 2000
to 2001, which likely reflects economic weakness and the terrorist attacks of September 2001. New
11

auto purchases also fell from 2000 to 2001.
On average, there is a rise in consumer confidence measures from 2008 to 2009, which partially
reflects the very low levels reached in 2008. There is a decline in both new auto purchases and
credit card spending from 2008 to 2009, which reflects the severity of the recession and the weak
recovery at the end of 2009. The three main measures of ideology are the Republican vote share
fractions in 2000 (48%) and 2008 (45%) along with the TW ideology score.
The last panel provides county-level summary statistics on variables we use as controls. It also
shows the housing net worth shock is on average 10%. In other words, the decline in household
net worth driven by the decline in house prices from 2006 to 2009 is on average 10% across U.S.
counties in the sample.

4

First Stage: Government Policy Sentiment Shock

We can estimate equation 3 around presidential elections in 2000 and 2008, that resulted in a
change in party in the White House, to test if ideology predicts a change in sentiments regarding
government economic policy. We do so by first estimating equation 3 in levels instead of firstdifferences because this allows us to estimate the entire pre- and post-election trajectory of relative
sentiments in counties that are ideologically aligned with the winning party. In particular, we
estimate the equation:

Siτ =

τX
=T

τ

0

α ∗ dτ + γ ∗ zi +

τX
=T

γ τ ∗ (dτ ∗ zi ) + νiτ

(5)

τ =−T,τ 6=0

τ =−T

where dτ is an indicator variable for quarter τ , τ = 0 is the “omitted” quarter and refers to the
quarter of the election (e.g., 2000Q4 or 2008Q4), ατ represents quarter fixed effects, and γ τ are
the coefficients of interest that tell us about the relative shift in government economic policy view
among counties that lean conservative.

12

4.1

Ideology and Views on Government Economic Policy

Figure 2 presents estimates from equation 5 for both the Bush-Gore 2000 election and the ObamaMcCain 2008 election.10 The measure of county-level ideology is the share voting for the Republicans in each respective election, and the outcome variable is views on government economic policy,
normalized to be mean zero and standard deviation one. The coefficient estimates of γ τ tell us
the relative shift in government economic policy view among counties with a higher vote share for
Republicans.
Both panels show a dramatic relative shift in government economic policy view that occurs in
the quarter after the election. There is almost no pre-trend prior to the quarter of the election, and
the response is immediate. This helps to ensure that the change in views on government economic
policy are not due to some other factor. Given that the left hand side variable is normalized,
magnitudes are easy to interpret. Moving from a county with zero share voting for the Republican
to everyone voting for the Republican moves views on government economic policy by about 1.5
standard deviations. The magnitude is similar across both elections. Republicans become much
more optimistic about government policy after the Bush victory in 2000, and much more pessimistic
after the Obama victory in 2008.
The first column of panels A and B of Table 2 show the first difference regression version of this
result, where we explicitly estimate the first stage equation 3 from Section 2. We use the change
in views over two years in the regression, but the full time series of the effect can be seen in Figure
2. Both estimates show a strong effect of the Republican vote share on the change in government
economic policy view. The magnitudes show that moving from 0 to 1 Republican vote share moves
views on government economic policy by 1.3 and 1.5 standard deviations for the Bush and Obama
election, respectively. Column 4 uses the alternative definition of ideology based on the TW-score,
and we find the same result.
Sentiment is measured at the individual level, so in principal we could have run equation 5 at the
individual level if we could observe an individual’s ideology or the party for which she voted. While
we do not have this information at the individual level, we can use race as a proxy for ideology. It is
well-known that whites are significantly more likely to vote Republican. For example, whites were
10

We do not include any control variables in the figures; we add controls in the first difference specifications reported
in the tables.

13

13 percentage points more likely to vote for Bush in the 2000 election, and 12 percentage points
more likely to vote for McCain in the 2008 election.
Appendix Figure 1 uses an indicator variable for white as zi in equation 5 at the individual
level. It shows a very similar pattern when estimating the differential views on government economic policy among whites and non-whites. In relative terms, whites become more optimistic after
the Bush 2000 election in terms of their views regarding government economic policy, and more
pessimistic after the Obama 2008 election.
The results in this section strongly indicate that ideological predisposition moves sentiments regarding government economic policy depending on election outcomes. One of our instruments was
the TW-score that is directly based on survey evidence regarding constituents’ ideological preferences. As additional evidence, we use church attendance as an instrument for the sentiment shock.
We use data from the Association of Religion Data Archives on church membership, and calculate
the share of the population that are members of Evangelical, Latter-day Saints, or mainstream
Protestant churches.11
Appendix Tables 1 shows the first stage of regressing the change in sentiments regarding government economic policy around elections on the fraction of the population that is a member of one of
these churches. Counties with higher church membership see a large relative increase in optimism
on government economic policy after the Bush election and decrease in optimism after the Obama
election. It is less likely that people in counties with higher membership in these churches vote
Republican because of pure economic interests, and yet these counties see optimism on government
economic policy move strongly after elections.

4.2

Do Shifting Views Reflect Fundamental Shocks?

Figure 2 and columns 1 and 4 of Table 2 show that the ideological pre-disposition of a county
has very strong predictive power for the change in views regarding economic policy. However,
could the relationship between ideology and the change in sentiments around elections be driven
by unobserved spurious factors? In the language of the model presented earlier, there is a concern
that the shift in government policy view may be driven by some unobserved fundamental shocks
Θi as oppoed to sentiment shocks ψi .
11

The data were downloaded from the Association of Religion Data Archives, www.TheARDA.com.

14

The ideological pre-disposition of a county is correlated with a number of factors, and one
may be concerned that some of these factors - and not ideology per se - are responsible for the
shift in sentiments. Table 3 explores the factors that are correlated with ideology. The first row
shows that the Republican vote shares in both 2000 and 2008 are highly correlated with the TW
ideology score, which suggests that vote shares do a good job capturing ideological differences across
counties in the perception of what good policy is. However, Table 3 also shows that ideology is
not randomly distributed. Republican leaning counties tend to be more white and have higher
homeownership rates. While median income is not strongly correlated with ideology, there is a
larger fraction of the population in poverty or unemployed in Democrat leaning counties. There also
are important differences in industry employment shares in Republican versus Democrat leaning
counties. Republican leaning counties have more jobs in the manufacturing, retail trade, and
construction industries. Democrat leaning counties have higher employment shares in finance,
education, and other professional services. The housing net worth shock, which Mian, Rao, and
Sufi (2013) show has a strong effect on consumption growth from 2006 to 2009, is uncorrelated with
the Republican vote share in 2008 after controlling for state fixed effects.
Could one of the factors correlated with ideology be driving the key result shown in Figure 2?
Columns 2, 3, 5, and 6 of Table 2 show that this is unlikely to be the case. The inclusion of control
variables based on correlations in Table 3 has almost no effect on the responsiveness of government
economic policy view to ideology. Columns 2 controls for demographics and employment shares
in 2-digit NAICS codes. The demographic controls include fraction of population that is white,
log of median household income, homeownership rate, fraction less than high school education,
fraction with exactly high school education, unemployment rate, poverty rate and fraction urban.
All values are as of year 2000. The 2-digit employment share controls include the fraction of total
county employment that is employed in each of the 23 2-digit NAICS industries. The industry
share controls thus account for changes in sentiments that might be driven by conservative counties
differing in their industry mix.
The results in column 2 show that while the R2 increases by 0.05, the coefficient on the Republican vote share is almost identical. This is true for both the Bush 2000 victory (Panel A) and
the Obama 2008 victory (Panel B). Adding state fixed effects in column 3 increases R2 further but
has almost no effect on the coefficient estimate for Republican vote share. The results are similar
15

using the TW ideology score instead of the Republican vote share in columns 5 and 6.
The absence of a pre-trend in relative sentiment shift and the sharp rise in relative sentiment at
the news of election results in Figure 2, coupled with the robustness to extensive controls in Table
2 make it unlikely that ideology affects views on government economic policy for some reason other
than the change in the Presidency. We perform one additional placebo test to confirm this result.
If the relative shift in sentiments is driven by a change in party in the White House, then we should
not find this effect around the 2004 and 2012 presidential elections that resulted in incumbent
victories.
Figure 3 and Table 4 conduct this placebo experiment and find no significant shift in sentiment
around the election news. In both the Bush victory in 2004 and the Obama victory in 2012, we
see no relative shift in views on government policy among conservatives. There is a slight negative
reaction by Democrat leaning counties in 2004 that is seen in Figure 3, which may reflect dashed
hopes of a possible Kerry victory. However, as Table 4 shows, the change is not statistically
significant and is estimated close to zero with the inclusion of control variables. Moreover, the
coefficient on Republican vote share also switches signs depending on which control variables are
included. The placebo tests help ensure that there is nothing spurious about presidential elections
and changes in views on government economic policy across the ideological spectrum.

4.3

Do Elections Directly Affect Fundamentals in a Partisan Fashion?

So far we have addressed the concern that fundamental shocks - such as shocks to permanent income
- that independently move sentiments may be spuriously correlated with ideological predisposition
of counties exactly around the timing of presidential elections. The placebo tests, evidence on
timing, and the statistical robustness of the government policy view shift makes this unlikely. An
alternative concern is that the election result directly affects fundamentals, and does so differentially
for supporters versus opponents of the winning candidate. For example, if policies implemented by
President Obama after his inauguration disproportionately hurt Republican-leaning counties, then
the shift in views on government economic policy in Republican-leaning counties may be a response
to a fundamental shock.
We evaluate this concern in Tables 5 and 6. Table 5 examines income growth at the county
level from before to after the 2000 (Panel A) and 2008 (Panel B) elections. Income is measured at
16

the county level using data from IRS returns. Columns 1 through 3 use growth in adjusted gross
income from tax returns as the dependent variable, while columns 4 through 6 use growth in wages
and salaries alone as the dependent variable. There is no evidence of a differential income shock in
counties that lean Republican in either of the elections. There is some slight evidence that wage
growth falls disproportionately in Republican leaning counties following the Bush 2000 election,
but this goes in the opposite direction and cannot explain our key finding that Republicans become
much more optimistic regarding government economic policy. In summary, there is no evidence
that a switch in White House control hurts income growth in the counties that voted for the losing
party.12
While Table 5 looks at income, there may be a concern that transfer payments to and from
the government are affected differently for Republicans versus Democrats depending on election
outcomes. Table 6 tests for this particular concern using state-level data on taxes, the tax rate,
and government transfer payments. These data come from the IRS and the Consolidated Federal
Funds Report reported by the Census. For both elections that result in a change in party at
the White House, we look for any evidence that taxes paid, tax rates, or transfer payments change
differentially for counties that lean Republican. There is no such evidence. The coefficient estimates
are typically small and insignificant.
As a final note, our results in the next section suggest that government policy sentiment shocks
have almost no effect on household spending. If one believes that shift in views on government
economic policy are partially capturing a shock to fundamentals, our null result becomes even more
notable.

5

Second Stage: Consumption Response to Sentiment Shocks

Armed with a strong first stage effect across U.S. counties of ideological predisposition on views of
government economic policy, we are now ready to estimate whether government policy sentiment
shocks affect spending. The results overall suggest that the shocks have almost no effect on consumption. Despite partisans reacting strongly in their views toward government policy, they do
not seem to adjust actual household spending in response to their updated views.
12

Picking a wider window around election times, for example using 2-year income growth, does not change the
result in Table 5.

17

5.1

Consumption Response after Bush 2000 Victory

We begin by evaluating the Bush 2000 election victory. Figure 4 presents results from the reduced form equation 5 where the outcome variables are consumer responses to the Michigan survey
question of whether it is a good time to buy household items (left panel) or a car (right panel).
The outcome variables are normalized to be mean zero and standard deviation one. Given this
normalization, we have kept the y-axis scale of Figure 4 the same as that for Figures 2 and 3,
so the magnitude of the reduced form equation can be visually compared with the magnitude of
the first stage. As Figure 4 shows, there is almost no effect whatsoever on consumer attitudes
towards spending. Republican-leaning counties are no more likely to answer that it is a good time
to buy household items or cars despite the strong first-stage effect of becoming more optimistic on
government economic policy.
Figure 5 presents results from the same specification but with the logarithm of new auto purchases as the outcome variable. These are actual new auto purchases, not a response to a survey
question. As before, we normalize the left hand side variable to be mean zero and standard deviation one in order to make the coefficient magnitudes comparable. We examine new auto purchases
at an annual frequency because quarterly auto purchases are extremely noisy given differential
seasonality patterns across counties. The coefficient estimates of γ τ reveal a negligible effect of the
Republican vote share on new auto purchases. There looks to be some differential effect of the
Republican vote share on new auto purchases in 2000 relative to 1999 and 2001. We will take this
into account by using the change from 1999 to 2001 when running first difference specifications
below.
Table 7 presents the reduced form specification relating views on spending with ideology. As
in Figure 4, the outcome variable is based on consumer responses to the Michigan survey question
of whether it is a good time to buy household items (left panel) or a car (right panel). For each
county, we calculate the difference in the answer to these questions from 2000 to 2001 or 2000 to
2002, and we relate this difference to the Republican vote share in the county as of 2000. The left
hand side variables are normalized to be mean zero and standard deviation one. The results are
consistent with the pattern shown in Figure 4: we find no significant effect of ideology on whether
it is a good time to spend on household items or cars.

18

Table 8 evaluates the growth in purchases of new autos. Panel A presents reduced form estimates
and panel B presents instrumental variables estimates from estimation of equation 4 from Section
2. The reduced form estimates in columns 1 and 2 of panel A show some evidence of an increase in
new auto purchases in counties leaning Republican following the Bush 2000 election. However, as
mentioned above, there appears to be a temporary downward blip in 2000 that drives this result.
If we examine 1999 to 2001 or 1999 to 2002, we see no effect of the 2000 Republican vote share on
growth in new auto purchases.
The instrumental variables estimates in panel B generally show no strong effect of the government policy sentiment shock on new auto purchases. As is the norm when using instrumental
variables, the standard errors are larger than in the reduced form. However, despite the larger
standard errors, we can reject at the 5% level of confidence that a one standard deviation increase
in the government policy sentiment shock leads to a 7 percentage point or larger increase in new
auto sales.

5.2

Consumption Response after Obama 2008 Victory

Figure 6 shows the analogous coefficient estimates as in Figure 4 but for the Obama 2008 victory.
The left hand side variable is the answer to survey questions on whether now is a good time to
spend on household items (left panel) or a car (right panel). Here is the only setting in which we
see an effect of government policy sentiment shocks. Respondents in Republican leaning counties
become relatively more pessimistic about spending after the Obama election victory at exactly the
same time they report becoming relatively more pessimistic on government economic policy. Table
9 shows that the survey-reported pessimism on car purchase plans is robust to control variables
and state fixed effects, but the result on household items is not.
However, when we examine actual spending, we cannot replicate this finding. In Figure 7,
we use new auto purchases and credit card spending, and we see almost no differential effect for
counties with a high 2008 Republican vote share. Following the Obama victory in 2008, respondents
in Republican leaning counties say in surveys that it is a bad time time to purchase autos. But
actual measures of household spending do not decline disproportionately in Republican leaning
counties. There appears to be a gap between what people say in survey responses relative to what
they actually spend.
19

Tables 10 and 11 present the reduced form and second stage estimation relating household
spending growth on government policy sentiment shocks. Consistent with Figure 7, we see no
evidence that the powerful government policy sentiment shocks isolated in the first stage estimation
affect household spending in a significant manner. The standard errors are small enough that we
can be reasonably precise in estimating a null effect. For example, we can reject at the 5% level
of confidence that a one standard deviation increase in government policy sentiment leads to a 7
percentage point or larger effect on auto purchases, or 3.4 percentage point increase or larger in
credit card spending.
Another way we can evaluate the precision of the null result is to compare it with other shocks
that we know from extant literature affect household spending. The shock we examine in comparison is the housing net worth shock in Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013). Their study shows that counties
experiencing a sharp decline in net worth coming from the collapse in house prices saw a dramatic
decline in household spending form 2006 to 2009.
In Figure 7, we directly compare the two shocks. As already mentioned, we measure the effect
of the government policy sentiment shock by examining how spending differentially evolves in
Republican leaning counties after 2008. Year 0 is 2008 for the reduced form sentiment shock. The
housing net worth shock is the decline in household net worth coming from the collapse in house
prices from 2006 to 2009; therefore, year 0 is 2006 when evaluating the housing net worth shock.
In order to directly compare magnitudes, both the 2008 Republican vote share and the housing net
worth shock from 2006 to 2009 are normalized to be mean zero and standard deviation one.
Figure 7 replicates the Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013) result that counties experiencing a more
negative housing net worth shock from 2006 to 2009 see a much bigger drop in spending. A
negative housing net worth shock of one standard deviation leads to a 12 percentage point decline
in new auto purchases and a 6 percentage point decline in credit card spending.
Recall from above that we can reject at the 5% level of confidence that a one standard deviation
change in government policy sentiment shocks leads to a 7 percentage point or larger effect on auto
purchases or a 3.4 percentage point or larger effect on credit card purchases. These magnitudes
together with the results from Figure 7 imply that we can reject at the 5% confidence level that a
one standard deviation change in government policy sentiment shocks has as large an effect as the
housing net worth channel identified in previous research.
20

6

Discussion of Null Result

The cross-sectional variation across counties in ideology strongly predicts shifts in opinion on the
effectiveness of government economic policy, and yet these shifts have almost no effect on household
spending. How do we interpret this null result? We started with the assumption that the change
in views regarding government economic policy is a function of both sentiment and fundamental
di be the part of ∆Si driven by sentiment shocks (ψi ) alone.
shocks, i.e. ∆Si = f (ψi , Θi ). Let ∆S
di ): consumption is not affected by changes in government
Then our central result is that ∆ci 6= f (∆S
economic policy views that are orthogonal to fundamentals.
One potential worry with this interpretation is that there is something wrong with the crosssectional specification we run. For example, perhaps there is not enough power in county-level
analysis or perhaps variables from the Michigan survey are too noisily measured. We address this
concern in the first three columns of Table 12. In particular, we examine cross-sectional variation
across U.S. counties in a fundamental shock: the shock to housing net worth from 2006 to 2009.
Column 1 shows that the Michigan index of consumer sentiment reacts strongly to the shock,
with areas seeing a decline in housing net worth also reporting pessimism about future economic
conditions. Further, measures of consumption are correlated with the change in consumer sentiment
from 2006 to 2009 in the expected direction. The first three columns show that a fundamental shock
moves the index of consumer sentiment in the expected direction, and has the expected effect on
consumption growth. County-level regressions can detect the effect of a fundamental shock.
We believe that we find no effect of changes in government economic policy views on consumption because most of the variation in answers to this question reflect sentiments that do not
affect permanent income directly. We present two results to support this view. First, in columns
4 through 6 of Table 12, we report OLS estimates of the change in consumption directly on the
change in views regarding government economic policy, and find that there is a zero effect even in
the OLS specification. This suggests that observed changes in government economic policy views,
even in the absence of an instrument, purely reflects shifts in sentiment, not shifts in fundamentals.
That is, ∆Si = f (ψi ).
In cross-sectional analysis, variation in views on government economic policy are not even correlated with changes in consumption growth, which suggests that survey respondents are not changing

21

their views on government economic policy because of fundamental changes in their economic wellbeing.
We can provide further support to this view by examining aggregate correlations. In Table 13,
we provide correlations between aggregate real consumption growth, government policy views, and
the index of consumer sentiment.13 The latter two variables come from the same Michigan survey.
The first column shows that both government policy views and the index of consumer sentiment
are strongly correlated with consumption growth. The aggregate correlation between the index of
consumer sentiment and consumption growth explains why a large amount of research focuses on
consumer confidence and economic fluctuations. We already know from Figure 1 that there is a
strong correlation between government policy views and consumption in the aggregate. Further,
the index of consumer sentiment and government economic policy views are highly correlated with
each other: when survey respondents are pessimistic about the overall economy, they are also
pessimistic about government economic policy.
However, the correlation of government economic policy views with aggregate consumption
growth is not robust. To show this, we first regress government economic policy views on the wider
index of consumer sentiment to obtain the predicted residuals. By construction, the residuals are
the time series component of shifts in government economic policy views that are orthogonal to the
index of consumer sentiment. As we show, there is almost zero correlation between consumption
growth and the residual variation in government economic policy views that is orthogonal to the
broader index of consumer sentiment. This is consistent with the argument above that the pure
sentiment part of government economic policy views does not affect consumption.
For the last row, we do the converse: we regress the index of consumer sentiment on government economic policy views and use the predicted residuals. The part of the index of consumer
sentiment that is orthogonal to government economic policy views remains strongly correlated with
consumption growth. In other words, aggregate changes in government economic policy views add
very little power to understanding changes in consumption growth. Aggregate consumption growth
is largely independent of views on government economic policy once general consumer confidence is
taken into account. This aggregate finding is very much consistent with our cross-sectional analysis.
13

We thank Claudia Sahm for leading us toward this test.

22

7

Conclusion

We highlight a novel empirical methodology for estimating the effect of sentiment shocks, or shocks
that are orthogonal to economic fundamentals, on household spending. Our methodology uses
cross-sectional variation across U.S. counties in government economic policy sentiment shocks to
estimate the elasticity of spending with respect to such shocks. Our specific setting is the reaction
to presidential elections in the United States in 2000 and 2008 which led to a different political
party controlling the White House.
We show that individuals in counties predisposed against the winning party see an immediate
and large decline in views on government economic policy when the election outcome is realized.
Our central result is that government policy sentiment shocks have small and reasonably precisely
estimated effects on household spending. Despite individuals becoming quite pessimistic on government economic policy when their party loses the White House, it does not appear to affect
household spending in a significant manner. We interpret this null result as showing that the variation in views on government economic policy that is orthogonal to fundamentals has a limited
effect on consumption.
One example to show the importance of these findings is the 2012/2013 fiscal cliff impasse. There
was a dramatic decline in views on government economic policy in December 2012 when the impasse
materialized. The financial press pointed to the decline driven by the fiscal cliff as particularly
worrisome.14 Our findings suggest caution in interpreting changes in views on government economic
policy as reflecting beliefs about the future of the economy that lead consumers to cut spending.
Our results do not imply that sentiment shocks more broadly defined are unimportant for overall
economic activity. Our focus in this paper is limited to sentiments regarding government economic
policy and its impact on consumer spending. The fact that we do not find a significant effect of
government economic policy sentiment on consumer spending does not imply that other types of
consumer sentiment shocks are irrelevant for consumer spending. For example, using high frequency
spending data, Taylor (2009) documents a sharp decline in consumer spending in the last week of
September 2008 that accelerates into October. It may be possible to use a cross-sectional empirical
14

For example, Business Insider reported on December 31, 2012 that “the consumer confidence report shows that
the fiscal cliff is hurting the consumer’s assessment of economic conditions.” See “Hard evidence that the fiscal cliff
negotiations are hurting consumer confidence,” Walter Kurtz, 2012.

23

strategy to see whether this very sharp decline was caused at least in part due to sentiment shocks
regarding the financial crisis.
Alternatively, Blanchard (1993) in his discussion of the 1990-1991 recession points out that
“the first large decline in confidence in August 1990 was associated with an important but largely
noneconomic event, the invasion of Kuwait by Iraq.” A potential empirical strategy could use crosssectional variation across individuals or geographic units in exposure to news about this event to
see if it affects household spending. More generally, it might be the case that sentiments associated
with a boom in asset prices are associated with a rise in consumer spending. We look forward to
research on other settings, and are open to findings that show sentiment shocks matter in alternative
environments.

24

References
Aditya Aladangady and Claudia Sahm. Do lower gasoline prices boost confidence? FEDS Note,
2015.
George-Marios Angeletos and Jennifer La’O. Sentiments. Econometrica, 81(2):739–779, 2013.
Costas Azariadis. Self-fulfilling prophecies. Journal of Economic Theory, 25(3):380–396, 1981.
Rüdiger Bachmann, Tim O Berg, and Eric R Sims. Inflation expectations and readiness to spend:
Cross-sectional evidence. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2012.
Scott Baker, Nick Bloom, and Steve Davis. Measuring economic policy uncertainty. working paper,
2015.
Robert B Barsky and Eric R Sims. Information, animal spirits, and the meaning of innovations in
consumer confidence. The American Economic Review, 102(4):1343–1377, 2012.
Paul Beaudry and Franck Portier. Stock prices, news, and economic fluctuations. The American
Economic Review, 96(4):1293–1307, 2006.
Jess Benhabib and Roger EA Farmer. Indeterminacy and increasing returns. Journal of Economic
Theory, 63(1):19–41, 1994.
Olivier Blanchard. Consumption and the recession of 1990-1991. The American Economic Review,
pages 270–274, 1993.
Mary A Burke and Ali Ozdagli. Household inflation expectations and spending: Evidence from
panel data. In 4th Ifo Conference on Macroeconomics and Survey Data, 2013.
Christopher D Carroll, Jeffrey C Fuhrer, and David W Wilcox. Does consumer sentiment forecast
household spending? if so, why? The American Economic Review, pages 1397–1408, 1994.
John H Cochrane. Shocks. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 41:295–364,
1994.
Robert E Hall. Macro theory and the recession of 1990-1991. The American Economic Review,
pages 275–279, 1993.
25

Nir Jaimovich and Sergio Rebelo. Can news about the future drive the business cycle?

The

American Economic Review, pages 1097–1118, 2009.
Guido Lorenzoni. A theory of demand shocks. The American Economic Review, 99(5):2050–2084,
2009.
Ulrike Malmendier and Stefan Nagel. Learning from inflation experiences. Unpublished manuscript,
UC Berkley, 2009.
Atif Mian and Amir Sufi. The effects of fiscal stimulus: Evidence from the 2009 cash for clunkers
program. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3):1107–1142, 2012.
Atif Mian and Amir Sufi. What explains the 2007–2009 drop in employment? Econometrica, 82
(6):2197–2223, 2014.
Atif Mian, Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi. Household balance sheets, consumption, and the economic
slump. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(4):1687–1726, 2013.
Chris Tausanovitch and Christopher Warshaw.

Measuring constituent policy preferences in

congress, state legislatures, and cities. The Journal of Politics, 75(02):330–342, 2013.
John Taylor. Analysis of daily sales data during the financial panic of 2008. Unpublished manuscript,
2009.

26

Figure 1: Views on Government Economic Policy and Consumption Growth

6

1

This figure plots year over year growth in real personal consumption expenditures and views on government economic policy. Government
economic policy view is normalized to be mean zero and standard deviation one.

−2

0

2
4
Real PCE Growth

Government Policy View
(dashed line)
0
.5

Real PCE growth

−.5

Gov policy view
1980q1

1990q1

2000q1

2010q1

Figure 2: Effect of Ideology on Government Economic Policy View around Elections
This figure plots coefficient estimates of γ τ for the following regression specification:
Pτ =8
P
τ
τ
0
GovP olicyV iewiτ = ττ =8
τ =−3,τ 6=0 γ ∗ (dτ ∗ RepubV oteSharei0 ) + νiτ
=−3 α ∗ dτ + γ ∗ RepubV oteSharei0 +
The left panel is focused on the Bush-Gore election of 2000 (τ = 0 is 2000q4) and the right panel is focused on the Obama-McCain
election of 2008 (τ = 0 is 2008q4). Government economic policy view is normalized to be mean zero and standard deviation one.

Obama−McCain 2008

2000q1 2000q3 2001q1 2001q3 2002q1 2002q3

−2

0

γ

γ

0

2

Bush−Gore 2000

2008q1 2008q3 2009q1 2009q3 2010q1 2010q3

Figure 3: Effect of Ideology on Government Economic Policy View Around Elections: Placebo Tests
This figure plots coefficient estimates of γ τ for the following regression specification:
Pτ =8
P
τ
τ
0
GovP olicyV iewiτ = ττ =8
τ =−3,τ 6=0 γ ∗ (dτ ∗ RepubV oteSharei0 ) + νiτ
=−3 α ∗ dτ + γ ∗ RepubV oteSharei0 +
The left panel is focused on the Bush-Kerry election of 2004 (τ = 0 is 2004q4) and the right panel is focused on the Obama-Romney
election of 2012 (τ = 0 is 2012q4). Government policy view is normalized to be mean zero and standard deviation one.

Obama−Romney 2012

2004q1 2004q3 2005q1 2005q3 2006q1 2006q3

0

−2

γ

γ

0

2

Bush−Kerry 2004

2012q1 2012q3 2013q1 2013q3 2014q1 2014q3

Figure 4: Effect of Government Economic Policy View Shock on Good Time to Spend: Bush 2000 Election
This figure plots coefficient estimates of γ τ for the following regression specification:
Pτ =8
P
τ
τ
0
GoodT imetoSpendiτ = ττ =8
τ =−3,τ 6=0 γ ∗ (dτ ∗ RepubV oteSharei0 ) + νiτ
=−3 α ∗ dτ + γ ∗ RepubV oteSharei0 +
Both panels focus on the Bush-Gore election of 2000 (τ = 0 is 2000q4). The left panel focuses on household items, and the right panel
focuses on cars. Government policy view is normalized to be mean zero and standard deviation one.

γ
0

0

γ

2

Bush−Gore 2000: Cars

2

Bush−Gore 2000: Durables

2000q1 2000q3 2001q1 2001q3 2002q1 2002q3

2000q1 2000q3 2001q1 2001q3 2002q1 2002q3

Figure 5: Effect of Government Economic Policy View Shock on New Auto Purchases: Bush 2000 Election

.04
.02
0
−.02

γ

.06

.08

.1

This figure plots coefficient estimates of γ y for the following regression specification:
P
Py=4
y
0
y
Ln(N ewAutoP urchasesiy ) = y=4
y=−2 α ∗ dy + γ ∗ RepubV oteSharei0 +
y=−2,y6=0 γ ∗ (dτ ∗ RepubV oteSharei0 ) + νiy
The figure focuses on the Bush-Gore election of 2000 (y = 0 is 2000). Republican vote share in 2000 is normalized to be mean zero and
standard deviation one.

−2

0

2
Years since shock

4

Figure 6: Effect of Government Economic Policy View Shock on Good Time to Spend: Obama 2008 Election
This figure plots coefficient estimates of γ τ for the following regression specification:
Pτ =8
P
τ
τ
0
GoodT imetoSpendiτ = ττ =8
τ =−3,τ 6=0 γ ∗ (dτ ∗ RepubV oteSharei0 ) + νiτ
=−3 α ∗ dτ + γ ∗ RepubV oteSharei0 +
Both panels focus on the Obama-McCain election of 2008 (τ = 0 is 2008q4). The left panel focuses on household items, and the right
panel focuses on cars. Government policy view is normalized to be mean zero and standard deviation one.

Obama−McCain 2008: Cars

γ
2008q1 2008q3 2009q1 2009q3 2010q1 2010q3

−2

−2

γ

0

0

Obama−McCain 2008: Durables

2008q1 2008q3 2009q1 2009q3 2010q1 2010q3

Figure 7: Reduced Form Obama-McCain 2008 versus Housing Net Worth Shock
This figure plots coefficient estimates of the effect of the Republican vote share in 2008 in a county and the housing net worth shock
from 2006 to 2009 in a county on measures of household spending. For the housing net worth shock, the shock year is 2006. For the
Republican vote share, the shock year is 2008. The specific regression is estimated separately for the housing net worth shock and for
the Republican vote share, and takes the following form:
Py=4
P
y
y
0
Ln(SpendingM easureiy ) = y=4
y=−2 α ∗ dy + γ ∗ CountyCharacteristici +
y=−2,y6=0 γ ∗ (dτ ∗ CountyCharacteristici ) + νiy
Both the Republican vote share and the housing net worth shock are normalized to have zero mean and a standard deviation of one.
The figures below plot γ y . The left panel focuses on new auto purchases, and the right panel focuses on credit card spending.

γ
.02

.04
.02
0

0

−.02

γ

.06

.08

.04

.1

.12

.06

Credit card spending

.14

New auto purchases

−2

0

2

Years since shock

4

−2

0

2

Years since shock

Reduced form sentiment effect

Reduced form sentiment effect

Housing net worth effect

Housing net worth effect

4

Table 1: Summary Statistics
This table presents summary statistics for U.S. counties. The TW ideology score is from
Tausanovitch and Warshaw (2013) and is an increasing measure of conservatism of the county.
All measures from the Michigan survey are normalized to be mean zero and standard deviation
one, and ∆ is raw difference in measure.

Bush 2000 election
∆ gov’t policy view, 2000-2001
∆ consumer sentiment, 2000-2001
∆ good time to buy household items, 2000-2001
∆ good time to buy car, 2000-2001
Republican vote share, 2000
Wage growth, 1999-2001
AGI growth, 1999-2001
Auto purchase growth, 2000-2001
Obama 2008 election
∆ gov’t policy view, 2008-2009
∆ consumer sentiment, 2008-2009
∆ good time to buy household items, 2008-2009
∆ good time to buy car, 2008-2009
Republican vote share, 2008
Wage growth, 2008-2009
AGI growth, 2008-2009
Auto purchase growth, 2008-2009
Credit card spending growth, 2008-2009
County-level variables
TW ideology score
Housing net worth shock, 2006-2009
Fraction white, 2000
Median HH income, 2000, thousands
Homeownership rate, 2000
Fraction less than HS education, 2000
Fracion with exactly HS education, 2000
Unemployment rate, 2000
Poverty rate, 2000
Fraction urban, 2000

N

Mean

SD

10th

90th

946
970
929
921
3112
3121
3121
3135

-0.210
-0.475
-0.297
-0.030
0.479
0.063
0.026
-0.023

0.605
0.513
0.527
0.616
0.134
0.028
0.033
0.081

-0.796
-1.025
-0.834
-0.687
0.306
0.030
-0.009
-0.109

0.531
0.125
0.328
0.616
0.643
0.094
0.062
0.064

1016
1026
992
1008
3113
3143
3143
3135
3135

0.436
0.081
0.043
0.262
0.453
-0.034
-0.050
-0.261
-0.024

0.636
0.544
0.701
0.645
0.145
0.024
0.037
0.118
0.074

-0.294
-0.524
-0.734
-0.457
0.261
-0.059
-0.083
-0.405
-0.086

1.145
0.700
0.766
0.926
0.643
-0.004
-0.016
-0.128
0.043

3098
944
3133
3133
3133
3133
3133
3133
3133
3133

-0.023
-0.097
0.791
44.901
0.662
0.195
0.284
0.059
0.123
0.790

0.332
0.102
0.153
11.450
0.115
0.072
0.072
0.023
0.054
0.256

-0.483
-0.213
0.556
31.724
0.525
0.112
0.190
0.035
0.060
0.378

0.382
-0.006
0.968
61.455
0.791
0.291
0.380
0.087
0.187
0.997

Table 2: First Stage: Republican Vote Share and Government Economic Policy View Shock
This table presents the first stage regressions relating the change in views on government economic policy to the
Republican share of votes in a county. Panel A examines the 2000 presidential election and Panel B examines
the 2008 presidential election. The industry controls are employment shares in 2-digit NAICS indsutries, the
census controls are fraction white, natural log of median household income, fraction with less than a high school
education, fraction with exactly a high school education, the unemployment rate in 2000, the poverty rate in 2000,
and the fraction of the county that is urban. Government economic policy view is normalized to be mean zero
and standard deviation one. Standard errors are clustered by state, and regressions are weighted by the number
of respondents to the Michigan survey in the county.
Panel A: Bush 2000
∆ government policy view, 2000-2002
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Republican vote share, 2000

1.273**
(0.156)

1.158**
(0.231)

No
No
No
828
0.063

Yes
Yes
No
828
0.117

(6)

0.566**
(0.070)

0.516**
(0.097)

0.363**
(0.104)

No
No
No
828
0.072

Yes
Yes
No
828
0.120

Yes
Yes
Yes
828
0.171

(5)

(6)

-0.619**
(0.049)

-0.703**
(0.091)

-0.625**
(0.116)

No
No
No
900
0.083

Yes
Yes
No
900
0.114

Yes
Yes
Yes
900
0.157

0.973**
(0.329)

TW ideology score
Industry Controls
Census Controls
State Fixed Effects
Observations
R2

(5)

Yes
Yes
Yes
828
0.171

Panel B: Obama 2008
∆ government policy view, 2008-2010
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Republican vote share, 2008

-1.462**
(0.108)

-1.967**
(0.198)

-2.155**
(0.302)

TW ideology score
Industry Controls
Census Controls
State Fixed Effects
Observations
R2

Yes
Yes
No
900
0.087

Yes
Yes
No
900
0.129

Yes
Yes
Yes
900
0.173

**,* Coefficient statistically different than zero at the 1% and 5% confidence level, respectively.

Table 3: Republican Vote Share Correlations
This table presents correlations between the Republican vote share in a county and county-level characteristics.
The first two columns use the Republican vote share in the 2000 presidential election and the second two columns
use the Republican vote share in the 2008 presidential election. The industry variables reflect the share of total
employment in the industry in the county. Standard errors used to calculate significance are clustered by state.
Republican Vote Share, 2000

TW ideology score
Housing net worth shock, 2006-2009
Fraction white, 2000
Ln(medhhinc, 2000)
Homeownership rate, 2000
Fraction less than HS education, 2000
Fracion with exactly HS education, 2000
Unemployment rate, 2000
Poverty rate, 2000
Fraction urban, 2000
Industry: Educational Services, Health Care
Industry: Manufacturing
Industry: Retail Trade
Industry: Professional Services
Industry: Arts and Entertainment
Industry: Construction
Industry: Finance and Insurance
Industry: Transportation and Warehousing
State Fixed Effects

Republican Vote Share, 2008

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.838**

0.779**

0.566**
-0.114
0.616**
-0.116
0.311**
-0.400**
-0.251**
-0.457**
-0.339**
0.259**
0.303**
-0.463**
-0.126**
0.520**
-0.401**
0.049
No

0.733**
0.123
0.627**
-0.230**
0.385**
-0.427**
-0.441**
-0.416**
-0.266**
0.252**
0.243**
-0.398**
-0.195**
0.427**
-0.300**
-0.046
Yes

0.854**
0.175**
0.601**
-0.222**
0.646**
0.002
0.436**
-0.347**
-0.175*
-0.545**
-0.271**
0.275**
0.313**
-0.533**
-0.174**
0.527**
-0.427**
0.088
No

0.815**
0.007
0.759**
-0.001
0.675**
-0.099
0.526**
-0.370**
-0.370**
-0.526**
-0.250**
0.308**
0.253**
-0.495**
-0.230**
0.459**
-0.378**
-0.004
Yes

**,* Coefficient statistically different than zero at the 1% and 5% confidence level, respectively.

Table 4: First Stage: Placebo Elections
This table presents the first stage regressions relating the change in views on government economic policy to the
Republican share of votes in a county. Panel A examines the 2004 presidential election and Panel B examines
the 2012 presidential election. The industry controls are employment shares in 2-digit NAICS indsutries, the
census controls are fraction white, natural log of median household income, fraction with less than a high school
education, fraction with exactly a high school education, the unemployment rate in 2000, the poverty rate in 2000,
and the fraction of the county that is urban. Government policy view is normalized to be mean zero and standard
deviation one. Standard errors are clustered by state, and regressions are weighted by the number of respondents
to the Michigan survey in the county.

(1)
Republican vote share, 2004

-0.216
(0.174)

Panel A: Bush 2004
∆ government policy view, 2004-2005
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.045
(0.251)

0.420
(0.340)

TW ideology score
Industry Controls
Census Controls
State Fixed Effects
Observations
R2

No
No
No
1029
0.002

(1)
Republican vote share, 2012

0.133
(0.126)

Yes
Yes
No
1029
0.035

Yes
Yes
Yes
1029
0.095

No
No
No
920
0.001

-0.026
(0.098)

No
No
No
1029
0.002

Yes
Yes
No
1029
0.035

Yes
Yes
No
920
0.042

(5)

-0.039
(0.344)

TW ideology score
Industry Controls
Census Controls
State Fixed Effects
Observations
R2

-0.087
(0.067)

Panel B: Obama 2012
∆ government policy view, 2012-2013
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.111
(0.232)

(5)

Yes
Yes
Yes
920
0.108

0.014
(0.062)

0.001
(0.107)

No
No
No
920
0.000

Yes
Yes
No
920
0.042

**,* Coefficient statistically different than zero at the 1% and 5% confidence level, respectively.

Table 5: Income Shock around Elections?
This table examines whether counties voting Republican experience differential income shocks around the election
year. Panel A focuses on the 2000 presidential election and Panel B focuses on the 2008 presidential election.
The industry controls are employment shares in 2-digit NAICS indsutries, the census controls are fraction white,
natural log of median household income, fraction with less than a high school education, fraction with exactly a
high school education, the unemployment rate in 2000, the poverty rate in 2000, and the fraction of the county
that is urban. Standard errors are clustered by state, and regressions are weighted by the number of respondents
to the Michigan survey in the county.
Panel A: Bush 2000
AGI growth, 1999-2001
Wage growth, 1999-2001

Republican vote share, 2000
Industry Controls
Census Controls
State Fixed Effects
Observations
R2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.012
(0.013)

0.011
(0.014)

0.005
(0.010)

-0.034*
(0.015)

-0.015
(0.016)

-0.021
(0.015)

No
No
No
3097
0.002

Yes
Yes
No
3091
0.281

Yes
Yes
Yes
3091
0.429

No
No
No
3097
0.026

Yes
Yes
No
3091
0.306

Yes
Yes
Yes
3091
0.512

Panel B: Obama 2008
AGI growth, 2008-2009
Wage growth, 2008-2009

Republican vote share, 2008
Industry Controls
Census Controls
State Fixed Effects
Observations
R2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.002
(0.015)

-0.014
(0.019)

0.002
(0.020)

0.011
(0.008)

0.013
(0.012)

0.015
(0.011)

No
No
No
3113
0.000

Yes
Yes
No
3107
0.162

Yes
Yes
Yes
3107
0.260

No
No
No
3113
0.005

Yes
Yes
No
3107
0.329

Yes
Yes
Yes
3107
0.519

**,* Coefficient statistically different than zero at the 1% and 5% confidence level, respectively.

Table 6: Changes in Taxes or Transfers after Elections?
This table examines whether counties voting Republican experience differential tax or transfer shocks around the
election year. Panel A focuses on the 2000 presidential election and Panel B focuses on the 2008 presidential
election. Taxes paid in a state are total individual income taxes paid as reported by the IRS. Transfers are
measured using Census data from the Consolidated Federal Funds Report.
Panel A: Bush 2000
(3)
(4)
Change in Change in
tax rate
tax rate
00 to 02
00 to 01

(1)
Taxes paid
growth
00 to 01

(2)
Taxes paid
growth
00 to 02

Republican vote share, 2000

0.003
(0.100)

0.071
(0.107)

-0.012
(0.016)

Constant

0.042
(0.049)

-0.045
(0.053)

47
0.000

47
0.005

Observations
R2

(5)
Growth in
transfers
00 to 01

(6)
Growth in
transfers
00 to 02

0.015
(0.017)

0.046
(0.051)

-0.014
(0.047)

0.006
(0.008)

-0.022*
(0.009)

0.069*
(0.027)

0.177**
(0.025)

47
0.016

47
0.008

49
0.024

49
0.002

(5)
Growth in
transfers
08 to 09

(6)
Growth in
transfers
08 to 10

Panel B: Obama 2008
(3)
(4)
Change in Change in
tax rate
tax rate
08 to 10
08 to 09

(1)
Taxes paid
growth
08 to 09

(2)
Taxes paid
growth
08 to 10

Republican vote share, 2008

-0.002
(0.133)

-0.081
(0.136)

0.004
(0.027)

0.017
(0.018)

-0.070
(0.100)

-0.088
(0.108)

Constant

-0.111
(0.063)

-0.104
(0.064)

-0.013
(0.013)

-0.030**
(0.009)

0.186**
(0.047)

0.211**
(0.050)

49
0.000

49
0.009

49
0.001

49
0.014

49
0.014

49
0.015

Observations
R2

**,* Coefficient statistically different than zero at the 1% and 5% confidence level, respectively.

Table 7: Government Economic Policy View Shock and Good Time to Spend, Bush 2000
This table examines whether people living in counties voting Republican in 2000 increasingly say it is a good time
to spend on either durables or cars. The industry controls are employment shares in 2-digit NAICS indsutries,
the census controls are fraction white, natural log of median household income, fraction with less than a high
school education, fraction with exactly a high school education, the unemployment rate in 2000, the poverty rate
in 2000, and the fraction of the county that is urban. All measures from the Michigan survey are normalized to
be mean zero and standard deviation one. Standard errors are clustered by state, and regressions are weighted by
the number of respondents to the Michigan survey in the county.
∆ durables, 00-01

Republican vote share, 2000
Industry Controls
Census Controls
State Fixed Effects
Observations
R2

∆ car, 00-01

∆ durables, 00-02

∆ car, 00-02

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.156
(0.136)

0.538
(0.353)

0.163
(0.145)

0.455
(0.285)

0.146
(0.189)

0.216
(0.435)

0.123
(0.149)

-0.124
(0.266)

No
No
No
929
0.001

Yes
Yes
Yes
929
0.094

No
No
No
921
0.001

Yes
Yes
Yes
921
0.085

No
No
No
801
0.001

Yes
Yes
Yes
801
0.111

No
No
No
805
0.001

Yes
Yes
Yes
805
0.087

**,* Coefficient statistically different than zero at the 1% and 5% confidence level, respectively.

Table 8: Government Economic Policy View Shock and New Auto Purchases, Bush 2000
This table examines the effect of the shift in views on government economic policy on new auto purchases after the
2000 presidential election. Panel A presents reduced form estimates and Panel B instrumental variables estimates
where the change in views on government policy is instrumented with the 2000 Republican vote share in a county.
The industry controls are employment shares in 2-digit NAICS indsutries, the census controls are fraction white,
natural log of median household income, fraction with less than a high school education, fraction with exactly a
high school education, the unemployment rate in 2000, the poverty rate in 2000, and the fraction of the county
that is urban. Government policy view is normalized to be mean zero and standard deviation one. Standard errors
are clustered by state, and regressions are weighted by the number of respondents to the Michigan survey in the
county.
Auto sales growth, 00-01

Republican vote share, 2000
Industry Controls
Census Controls
State Fixed Effects
Observations
R2

Panel A: Reduced form
Auto sales growth, 99-01

Auto sales growth, 99-02

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.062
(0.032)

0.062
(0.049)

-0.021
(0.045)

0.042
(0.046)

-0.028
(0.040)

0.010
(0.058)

No
No
No
3110
0.011

Yes
Yes
No
3106
0.115

No
No
No
3109
0.001

Yes
Yes
No
3105
0.157

No
No
No
3109
0.001

Yes
Yes
No
3105
0.147

Panel B: Instrumental variables
Auto sales growth, 00-01 Auto sales growth, 99-01 Auto sales growth, 99-02

∆ gov’t policy view, 2000-2001

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.013
(0.052)

0.021
(0.064)

0.057
(0.073)

∆ gov’t policy view, 2000-2002
Industry Controls
Census Controls
State Fixed Effects
Observations
R2

No
No
No
946
.

Yes
Yes
No
946
0.188

Yes
Yes
Yes
946
0.265

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.003
(0.036)

0.006
(0.059)

0.071
(0.050)

No
No
No
828
.

Yes
Yes
No
828
0.204

Yes
Yes
Yes
828
0.273

**,* Coefficient statistically different than zero at the 1% and 5% confidence level, respectively.

Table 9: Government Economic Policy View Shock and Expenditure Plans, Obama 2008
This table examines whether people living in counties voting Republican in 2000 increasingly say it is a good time
to spend on either durables or cars. The industry controls are employment shares in 2-digit NAICS indsutries,
the census controls are fraction white, natural log of median household income, fraction with less than a high
school education, fraction with exactly a high school education, the unemployment rate in 2000, the poverty rate
in 2000, and the fraction of the county that is urban. All measures from the Michigan survey are normalized to
be mean zero and standard deviation one. Standard errors are clustered by state, and regressions are weighted by
the number of respondents to the Michigan survey in the county.
∆ durables, 08-09

Republican vote share, 2008
Industry Controls
Census Controls
State Fixed Effects
Observations
R2

∆ car, 08-09

∆ durables, 08-10

∆ car, 08-10

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.533**
(0.153)

-0.024
(0.389)

-0.600**
(0.143)

-0.594*
(0.270)

-0.339
(0.194)

-0.025
(0.440)

-0.567**
(0.164)

-0.530
(0.294)

No
No
No
992
0.009

Yes
Yes
Yes
992
0.085

No
No
No
1008
0.014

Yes
Yes
Yes
1008
0.080

No
No
No
885
0.004

Yes
Yes
Yes
885
0.094

No
No
No
891
0.012

Yes
Yes
Yes
891
0.092

**,* Coefficient statistically different than zero at the 1% and 5% confidence level, respectively.

Table 10: Government Economic Policy View Shock and New Auto Purchases, Obama 2008
This table examines the effect of the shift in views on government economic policy on new auto purchases
after the 2008 presidential election. The instrumental variables specifications use the 2008 Republican vote
fraction as an instrument for changes in views on government policy following the election. The industry
controls are employment shares in 2-digit NAICS indsutries, the census controls are fraction white, natural
log of median household income, fraction with less than a high school education, fraction with exactly a high
school education, the unemployment rate in 2000, the poverty rate in 2000, and the fraction of the county that
is urban. Government policy view is normalized to be mean zero and standard deviation one. Standard errors
are clustered by state, and regressions are weighted by the number of respondents to the Michigan survey in
the county.
Auto sales growth, 2008-2009
(1)
Republican vote share, 2008

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.054
(0.048)

∆ gov’t policy view, 2008-2009

Auto sales growth, 2008-2010
(5)

0.039
(0.036)

No
No
No
OLS
3111
0.004

(7)

(8)

0.085
(0.054)

-0.020
(0.057)

-0.042
(0.042)

No
No
No
IV
900
.

Yes
Yes
No
IV
900
0.197

Yes
Yes
Yes
IV
900
0.352

-0.102
(0.068)
0.025
(0.054)

-0.023
(0.043)

∆ gov’t policy view, 2008-2010
Industry Controls
Census Controls
State Fixed Effects
Estimation Method
Observations
R2

(6)

No
No
No
IV
1016
.

Yes
Yes
No
IV
1016
0.397

Yes
Yes
Yes
IV
1016
0.592

No
No
No
OLS
3111
0.008

**,* Coefficient statistically different than zero at the 1% and 5% confidence level, respectively.

Table 11: Government Economic Policy View Shock and Credit Card Spending, Obama 2008
This table examines the effect of the shift in views on government policy on credit card spending after the 2008
presidential election. The instrumental variables specifications use the 2008 Republican vote fraction as an instrument
for changes in views on government policy following the election. The industry controls are employment shares in
2-digit NAICS indsutries, the census controls are fraction white, natural log of median household income, fraction with
less than a high school education, fraction with exactly a high school education, the unemployment rate in 2000, the
poverty rate in 2000, and the fraction of the county that is urban. Government policy view is normalized to be mean
zero and standard deviation one. Standard errors are clustered by state, and regressions are weighted by the number
of respondents to the Michigan survey in the county.
Credit card spending growth, 2008-2009
(1)
Republican vote share, 2008

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.000
(0.023)

∆ gov’t policy view, 2008-2009

Credit card spending growth, 2008-2010
(5)

0.014
(0.017)

No
No
No
OLS
3111
0.000

(7)

(8)

0.068*
(0.027)

0.013
(0.024)

0.003
(0.021)

No
No
No
IV
900
.

Yes
Yes
No
IV
900
0.182

Yes
Yes
Yes
IV
900
0.310

-0.067
(0.035)
0.008
(0.036)

0.012
(0.034)

∆ gov’t policy view, 2008-2010
Industry Controls
Census Controls
State Fixed Effects
Estimation Method
Observations
R2

(6)

No
No
No
IV
1016
.

Yes
Yes
No
IV
1016
0.140

Yes
Yes
Yes
IV
1016
0.457

No
No
No
OLS
3111
0.007

**,* Coefficient statistically different than zero at the 1% and 5% confidence level, respectively.

Table 12: Explaining the Null Result
The first column of this table shows how the index of consumer sentiment responds to the housing net worth shock from 2006 to 2009. In
columns 2 and 3, we examine how changes in the index of consumer sentiment from 2006 to 2009 in a county affect consumption. Columns 4
through 6 present the OLS regression of consumption growth on changes in government policy view. Standard errors are clustered by state,
and regressions are weighted by the number of respondents to the Michigan survey in the county.
(1)
∆ consumer
sentiment
2006-2009
Housing net worth shock, 2006-2009

(2)
Auto purchase
growth
2006-2009

(3)
Credit card
spending growth
2006-2009

0.085*
(0.034)

0.036**
(0.011)

(4)
Auto purchase
growth
2000-2001

(6)
Credit card
spending growth
2008-2009

0.011
(0.009)

0.006
(0.004)

1016
0.003

1016
0.004

0.826**
(0.300)

∆ consumer sentiment, 2006-2009
∆ gov’t policy view, 2000-2001

0.002
(0.007)

∆ gov’t policy view, 2008-2009
Estimation Method
Observations
R2

(5)
Auto purchase
growth
2008-2009

622
0.021

622
0.054

622
0.052

946
0.000

**,* Coefficient statistically different than zero at the 1% and 5% confidence level, respectively.

Table 13: Correlations of Sentiment Measures
This table shows the aggregate correlation between year over year real consumption growth, the index of consumer sentiment, and views
on government economic policy. The last two rows of the correlation matrix examine the variation in the index of consumer sentiment and
views on government economic policy that are orthogonal to one another. More specifically, orthogonal government policy view represents
the residuals from a regression of government policy view on the index of consumer sentiment, and orthoginal index of consumer sentiment
represents the residuals from a regression of the index of consumer sentiment on government policy view.
Year over year
consumption
growth
Year over year real consumption growth
Government policy view
Index of consumer sentiment
Orthogonal government policy view
Orthogonal index of consumer sentiment

1.000
0.568
0.761
-0.063
0.511

Government
policy view

Index of consumer
sentiment

1.000
0.796
0.605
-0.000

1.000
0.000
0.605

Orthogonal
government policy
view

Orthogonal
index of consumer
sentiment

1.000
-0.796

1.000

A

Appendix Figures and Tables

In Figure A.1, we use individual level data from the Michigan survey to estimate how views on
government economic policy change around the 2000 and 2008 election depending on the race of
the survey respondent.
In Tables A.1 and A.2, we use the fraction of the population who are members of Evangelical,
Latter-day Saints, or mainstream Protestant churches as an instrument for changes in government
economic policy views around elections. The church membership data were downloaded from the
Association of Religion Data Archives, www.TheARDA.com.

Figure A.1: Effect of Race on Government Economic Policy View around Elections
This figure plots coefficient estimates of γ t for the following regression specification:
P
t
GovP olicyV iewit = t=8
t=−3 γ ∗ W hitei0 ∗ QuarterDummyt + t
This specification is based on individual data, where W hitei0 is an indicator for whether the survey respondent is white. The left panel
is focused on the Bush-Gore election of 2000 (t = 0 is 2000q4) and the right panel is focused on the Obama-McCain election of 2008
(t = 0 is 2008q4). The omitted quarter in both figures is the quarter of the election. Government economic policy view is normalized to
be mean zero and standard deviation one.

Obama−McCain 2008 Election

2000q1

−.5

0

0

.5

Bush−Gore 2000

2000q3

2001q1

2001q3

2002q1

2002q3

2008q1

2008q3

2009q1

2009q3

2010q1

2010q3

Table A.1: Using Church Membership as Instrument for Change in Government Economic Policy Views
This table presents the first stage of a specification using the fraction of the population in a county
that are members of evangelical, Latter-day Saints, or mainline protestant churches. The industry
controls are employment shares in 2-digit NAICS indsutries, the census controls are fraction white,
natural log of median household income, fraction with less than a high school education, fraction
with exactly a high school education, the unemployment rate in 2000, the poverty rate in 2000, and
the fraction of the county that is urban. Government policy view is normalized to be mean zero
and standard deviation one. Standard errors are clustered by state, and regressions are weighted
by the number of respondents to the Michigan survey in the county.
∆ gov’t policy view, 00-02

Church membership fraction, 2000

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.860**
(0.181)

0.677**
(0.230)

0.564
(0.327)

Church membership fraction, 2010
Industry Controls
Census Controls
State Fixed Effects
Observations
R2

No
No
No
828
0.035

Yes
Yes
No
828
0.107

Yes
Yes
Yes
828
0.165

∆ gov’t policy view, 08-10
(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.823**
(0.186)

-0.921**
(0.262)

-1.001*
(0.457)

No
No
No
790
0.028

Yes
Yes
No
790
0.093

Yes
Yes
Yes
790
0.157

**,* Coefficient statistically different than zero at the 1% and 5% confidence level, respectively.

Table A.2: Using Church Membership as Instrument, Obama 2008
This table presents the IV specification using the fraction of the population in a county that are members of evangelical, Latter-day
Saints, or mainline protestant churches as instrument for the change in views regarding government economic policy. The industry
controls are employment shares in 2-digit NAICS indsutries, the census controls are fraction white, natural log of median household
income, fraction with less than a high school education, fraction with exactly a high school education, the unemployment rate in 2000,
the poverty rate in 2000, and the fraction of the county that is urban. Government policy view is normalized to be mean zero and
standard deviation one. Standard errors are clustered by state, and regressions are weighted by the number of respondents to the
Michigan survey in the county.
Auto purchase growth, 00-02

∆ gov’t policy view, 2000-2002

(1)

(2)

-0.114
(0.108)

0.030
(0.084)

∆ gov’t policy view, 2008-2010
Industry Controls
Census Controls
State Fixed Effects
Observations
R2

Yes
Yes
No
828
.

Yes
Yes
Yes
828
0.345

Auto purchase growth, 08-10

Credit card spending growth, 08-10

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.055
(0.117)

-0.056
(0.127)

-0.029
(0.076)

-0.109
(0.100)

Yes
Yes
No
790
0.169

Yes
Yes
Yes
790
0.348

Yes
Yes
No
790
0.167

Yes
Yes
Yes
790
.

**,* Coefficient statistically different than zero at the 1% and 5% confidence level, respectively.

