                AGGREGATING ELASTICITIES:
INTENSIVE AND EXTENSIVE MARGINS OF FEMALE LABOUR SUPPLY
                       Orazio Attanasio
                         Peter Levell
                         Hamish Low
                   Virginia Sánchez-Marcos
                  WORKING PAPER 21315
                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        AGGREGATING ELASTICITIES:
        INTENSIVE AND EXTENSIVE MARGINS OF FEMALE LABOUR SUPPLY

                                      Orazio Attanasio
                                        Peter Levell
                                        Hamish Low
                                  Virginia Sánchez-Marcos

                                     Working Paper 21315
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w21315


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          July 2015, Revised February 2018




We are grateful for a number of useful conversations with Joe Altonji, Richard Blundell, Guy
Laroque, Costas Meghir, Richard Rogerson and Tom Sargent. We received several useful
comments from different seminar audiences and during presentation at the NBER Summer
Institute and the Society for Economic Dynamic Conference. Attanasio's research was partially
funded by an ESRC Professorial Fellowship and by the ESRC Centre for the Microeconomic
Analysis of Public Policy at the Institute for Fiscal Studies. Sánchez-Marcos thanks Spanish
MCYT for Grant ECO2009-09614. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Orazio Attanasio, Peter Levell, Hamish Low, and Virginia Sánchez-Marcos. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Aggregating Elasticities: Intensive and Extensive Margins of Female Labour Supply
Orazio Attanasio, Peter Levell, Hamish Low, and Virginia Sánchez-Marcos
NBER Working Paper No. 21315
July 2015, Revised February 2018
JEL No. D12,J22

                                          ABSTRACT

We estimate labour supply elasticities at the micro level and show what we can learn from
possibly very heterogeneous elasticities for aggregate behaviour. We consider both intertemporal
and intratemporal choices, and identify intensive and extensive responses in a consistent life-
cycle framework, using US CEX data. There is substantial heterogeneity in how individuals
respond to wage changes at all margins, both due to observables, such as age, wealth, hours
worked and the wage level as well as to unobservable tastes for leisure. We estimate the
distribution of Marshallian elasticities for hours worked to have a median value of 0.18, and
corresponding Hicksian elasticities of 0.54 and Frisch elasticities of 0.87. At the 90th percentile,
these values are 0.79, 1.16, and 1.92. Responses at the extensive margin are important, explaining
about 54% of the total labour supply response for women under 30, although this importance
declines with age. We show that aggregate elasticities are cyclical, being larger in recessions and
particularly so in long recessions. This heterogeneity at the micro level means that the aggregate
labour supply elasticity is not a structural parameter: any aggregate elasticity will depend on the
demographic structure of the economy as well as the distribution of wealth and the particular
point in the business cycle.

Orazio Attanasio                                 Hamish Low
Department of Economics                          Faculty of Economics
University College London                        University of Cambridge
Gower Street                                     Cambridge CB3 9DD ENGLAND
London WC1E 6BT                                  hamish.low@econ.cam.ac.uk
UNITED KINGDOM
and NBER                                         Virginia Sánchez-Marcos
o.attanasio@ucl.ac.uk                            Department of Economics
                                                 Universidad de Cantabria
Peter Levell                                     Santander
Institute for Fiscal Studies                     virginia.sanchez@unican.es
7 Ridgmount Street
London WC1E 7AE
peter_l@ifs.org.uk
1     Introduction
The size of the elasticity of labour supply to changes in wages has been studied for a long time.
Recent debates have focused on the perceived discrepancy between estimates coming from micro
studies, which, with a few exceptions, point to relatively small values of such an elasticity, and the
assumptions made in macro models, which seem to need relatively large values. Keane and Rogerson
(2015) and Keane and Rogerson (2012) survey some of these issues and the papers by Blundell et al.
(2011), Ljungqvist and Sargent (2011) and Rogerson and Wallenius (2009) contain some alternative
views on the debate. To reconcile the micro evidence and the assumptions made in macroeconomics,
much attention has been given to the distinction between the extensive and intensive margins of labour
supply, see, in particular, Chetty et al. (2011). Perhaps surprisingly, in this debate, aggregation issues
and the pervasive and complex heterogeneity that characterise labour supply behaviour have not been
given much attention.1 This paper aims to fill this gap, while making some original methodological
contributions and presenting new empirical evidence.
    Preferences for consumption and leisure are bound to be affected in fundamental ways by family
composition, health status, fertility, as well as unobserved tastes ‘shocks’, and so heterogeneity in
labour supply elasticities in these dimensions is something to be expected. Labour supply elasticities
vary much in the cross section and, importantly, over the business cycle. The key issue, however, is
how significant this heterogeneity is and whether it is important at the aggregate level: does it make
any sense to talk about the elasticity of labour supply as a structural parameter? Aggregation issues
are likely to be relevant both for the intensive and extensive margin, as we show.
    In this paper, we address these issues focusing on female labour supply. Our approach consists in
taking a relatively standard life-cycle model of labour supply to the data. Whilst the essence of the
model is relatively simple, we stress two elements that are important for our analysis and that make
our contribution novel. First, we consider all the relevant intertemporal and intratemporal margins
and choices simultaneously; in particular, consumption and saving as well as participation and hours
of work. This allows for interaction between different decisions. Second, we specify a flexible utility
function that allows for substantial heterogeneity, fits the data well and, at the same time, allows
us to make precise quantitative statements. These elements are important because they allow us to
address directly the interaction between extensive and intensive margins and to evaluate empirically
the importance of aggregation issues and to calculate both micro and macro elasticities.
    In evaluating aggregate labour supply elasticities, it is necessary to specify the whole economic
environment because, as noted by Chang and Kim (2006), the aggregate response depends on the
distribution of reservation wages. On the other hand, an important methodological contribution
   1 One exception is Keane and Wasi (2016) who show there male labour supply responses vary substantially with age,

education and the tax structure.




                                                         1
of our paper is to stress that a number of key components of the model can be estimated using
considerably weaker assumptions while maintaining consistency with the overall model structure.
We separate our estimation into three steps and specify what assumptions are needed at each step.
The first step identifies the within-period preferences over consumption and labour supply at the
intensive margin; the second step identifies intertemporal preferences; the third step identifies the
fixed costs and full economic environment that drive the participation decisions over the life-cycle.
In the first step, within period Marshallian and Hicksian elasticities at the intensive margin can
be computed from the parameters of the Marginal Rate of Substitution between consumption and
leisure. These are estimated using only static conditions, holding intertemporal allocations constant
and are conditional on participation.2 This means that the estimates of these elasticities, which
under certain circumstances can provide a good approximation to the overall life-cycle response, are
robust to further specific assumptions on the economic environment. Analogously, to estimate the
Frisch elasticity, we use the Euler equation for consumption, again without taking a stance on the
determinants of participation and a variety of other issues, such as retirement or the cost of children.
Finally, to assess and characterise behaviour at the extensive margin, we need to specify the model
fully. In this step, we characterise the behaviour of the model by calibrating its key parameters to
a number of life-cycle moments. Labour supply responses to wages may change beyond the static
response if savings decisions are affected by wages. Our life-cycle elasticities account for these effects.
    While throughout the paper we make specific assumptions about the shape of the utility function,
we use flexible specifications to allow for observed and unobserved heterogeneity in tastes. In partic-
ular, we allow many observed variables to affect the intratemporal and intertemporal margins while
at the same time allowing for possible non-separability of consumption and leisure. Our specification
of preferences is much more flexible than the ones that are in general considered in the literature and
this is important. Classic papers in the micro literature (such as Heckman and Macurdy (1980)) im-
ply a strong relationship between the Frisch intertemporal elasticity and the intratemporal Marginal
Rate of Substitution conditions, which, in turn, forces a strict relationship between intraperiod and
intertemporal conditions. Our approach avoids this restriction.
    In the macro literature, most papers impose additive separability between consumption and leisure,
and isoleastic, homothetic preferences that conform to the restrictions for balanced growth, as in Erosa
et al. (2016). This assumption is predicated on the perceived need to work with models that match
historical trends showing steady secular increases in real wages with little change in aggregate hours.
Browning et al. (1999) already noted that the fact that the historical trend for aggregate hours is
roughly constant hides a large decrease for males and an increase for females. Here, we show that
    2 The MRS condition hold as an equality only for women who work. Therefore, empirically, we need to address the

issue of participation. As we discuss below, this can be done with a reduced form that is consistent with the model we
are studying as well as other more general models.




                                                          2
the isoelastic specification for consumption and hours is strongly rejected by the data. The challenge,
therefore, is to work with specifications that admit much more heterogeneity and changes over time.
   When bringing the model to the data, we are explicit about what variation in the data identifies
each component of the model. When considering the within-period MRS condition, we do not use
the variation in individual wages, which is likely to be related to individual characteristics correlated
with unobserved taste heterogeneity. Instead, we use group level variability that is driven by group or
aggregate shocks such as policy reforms. This makes our approach in this step similar to Blundell et al.
(1998). In our second step, estimating the Euler equation for consumption, we take into account the
presence of unobserved taste shocks and the fact that the lack of longitudinal data forces us to work
with synthetic cohort data; our approach here is similar to Blundell et al. (1993) and Attanasio and
Weber (1995). Finally, in our third step, we estimate the full life-cycle model and explicitly aggregate
individual behaviour, similar in spirit to Erosa et al. (2016).
   Estimates of the size of the elasticity of labour supply in the literature vary considerably, even
for women. Different authors have used different identification strategies, different specifications and
different data sources. Our estimates, at the median, are not too different from some of the estimates
in the literature. In particular, on the intensive margin, we obtain a Marshallian median elasticity
of 0.18, with the corresponding Hicksian elasticity considerably larger at 0.54, indicating a sizeable
income effect. For the same median household, the Frisch elasticity for hours is 0.87. At the same
time, we document considerable variation in the size of the estimated elasticities in the cross section.
The Marshallian, for instance, has an inter-decile range of -0.14 to 0.79. As we show, these static
Marshallian elasticities can be smaller than the responses when we allow savings to adjust.
   In comparing our estimates to those available in the literature, we investigated extensively what
drives, in our data, differences in results. It turns out that a key factor is that the size of the
estimates depends on the specific estimator and normalisation used. When using standard IV or
GMM methods, we typically obtain very large estimates when we normalize to one the coefficient on
wages in the equation that relates them to the MRS. Instead, we get much smaller estimates when we
normalise to one the coefficient on consumption or hours worked. In our baseline estimation, we use
methods robust to normalization. In particular, we use a method proposed by Fuller (1977), which is
a generalization of a LIML approach.
   Using the entire model, we can aggregate explicitly individual behaviour and study aggregate
elasticities that correspond to the concept used in the macro literature. We find an important role for
the extensive margin in generating aggregate movements in labour supply. And, even at the extensive
margin, we find a considerable amount of heterogeneity in the cross section, driven by age, the number
of children and wealth. Most importantly in linking the micro and macro analysis of labour supply,
we show that what we call the ‘aggregate’ elasticity changes considerably over the business cycle,




                                                    3
and is typically larger in recessions. Moreover, it gets larger in longer recessions. To the best of our
knowledge, changes in the elasticity over the business cycles have never been discussed.
   We use the fully specified model to run two experiments: in the first, we evaluate the labour supply
response to temporary changes in wages; in the second, we evaluate the response to a change in the
entire life-cycle wage profile. The first experiment captures the impact of a temporary tax cut, which
will have little effect on the marginal utility of wealth, whether the cut is anticipated or not, because
of the temporary nature of the cut. The second captures the impact of a permanent tax cut which
will change the marginal utility of wealth. Without an extensive margin, the response to the first
experiment would be captured by the Frisch elasticity. Introducing the extensive margin doubles the
size of the response in the first experiment, and is particularly important at younger ages when non-
participation because of children is prevalent. Further, the extensive margin is especially important
when we simulate responses to tax changes in recessions. The response to the second experiment would
be approximated by the static Marshallian elasticity if there was no change in savings behaviour.
Allowing intertemporal allocations to adjust gives what we call life-cycle Marshallian and Hicksian
elasticities. These responses are lower than the Frisch responses to temporary changes. However,
life-cycle elasticities are greater than the static approximations because not all income is spent on
nondurable consumption in the period it is earned.
   The closest macroeconomic paper to ours is Erosa et al. (2016), who have similar aims of building
aggregate elasticities from male labor supply behaviour over the life-cycle, and of distinguishing the
intensive and extensive margins using a fully specified life-cycle model. The focus of our paper is on
female labour supply responses, distinguishing the intensive margin defined by typical hours per week,
from the extensive margin of whether participating in a quarter. A second related paper is Guner
et al. (2012), who model heterogeneous married and single households with a female extensive margin
and a male and female intensive margin. Their focus is on evaluating different reforms of the US tax
system and they abstract from wage uncertainty. Both papers operate with very specific preference
specifications. We discuss the extent to which our results differ from these papers in the conclusions.
Among papers using microeconometrics, our paper builds on a long literature starting from MaCurdy
(1983) and Altonji (1986), and on Blundell et al. (1993), who condition on the extensive margin, and
estimate jointly the within period decision and the intertemporal decision.
   Our exercise is not without important caveats. In much of our analysis, we do not consider the
effect of tenure and experience on wages. Such effects can obviously be important, as labour supply
choices may change future wages and, therefore, future labour supply behaviour, as stressed by Imai
and Keane (2004). Keane and Wasi (2016) extend the model to introduce human capital and find
that labor supply elasticities are highly heterogenous and vary substantially with age, education and
the tax structure. In Appendix F, we extend our analysis to introduce returns to experience on the




                                                   4
extensive margin. Introducing returns only on the extensive margin means within-period allocations
at the intensive margin are unaffected. By contrast, if the return to experience operates on the number
of hours (rather than only on participation), we would need to change our analysis substantially.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we outline the life-cycle framework. We
show how the preference parameters can be mapped into static, intertemporal and life-cycle elasticities,
and discuss the meaning of the different elasticities. In section 3 we explain the three steps of our
empirical strategy to identify the preference parameters and opportunity set, using intraperiod first
order conditions, intertemporal first order conditions and full structural estimation. Section 4 describes
the data and provides some descriptive statistics. Section 5 presents and discusses the parameter
estimates. In section 6 we report the implications of our estimates for labour supply elasticities,
distinguishing between Marshallian, Hicksian and Frisch elasticities, and distinguishing static from
life-cycle responses. We also report responses on the extensive margin, aggregate responses and, more
generally, the aggregation issues that are central to our argument. Section 7 concludes. An online
appendix provides supporting evidence.


2     A life-cycle model of female labour supply
To study both the intensive and the extensive margin elasticity of female labour supply, we use a
rich model of female labour supply and saving choices embedded in a unitary household, life-cycle
framework. In our model, both the intensive and extensive margins are meaningful because of the
presence of fixed costs of going to work related to family composition and because of preference costs
specifically related to participation. The intensive choice is over the typical number of hours work per
week, the extensive margin is over whether to work at all in each quarter. A key aspect of our approach
is that we consider the model as a whole. Changes at different margins interact and heterogeneity in
these responses is important for understand aggregate labour supply responses to changes to wages.
    We consider married couples, who maximise the lifetime expected utility of the household, h, and
choose consumption and female labour supply within each period.

                                T
                                X
                       max Et         β j u (ch,t+j , lh,t+j , Ph,t+j ; zh,t+j , χh,t+j , ζh,t+j )    (1)
                        c,l
                                j=0

where c is consumption, l is female leisure, and P is an indicator of the woman’s labour force participa-
tion which can affect utility over and above the effect of hours worked. zh,t is a vector of demographic
variables (which include education, age and family composition), χh,t and ζh,t represent taste shifters.
We assume that demographics, zh,t , are observable, whereas χh,t and ζh,t are unobservable to us, but
are known to the individual. Husband leisure does not enter the utility function.




                                                           5
   The period utility function is given by:
                                                          1−γ
                                                         Mh,t
                             u (ch,t , lh,t , Ph,t ) =            exp(ξPh,t + πzh,t + ζh,t )                     (2)
                                                         1−γ

The preference aggregator for hours of lesuire and consumption, Mh,t is:

                                                         (c1−φ                                    1−θ
                                                                                                             !
                                                           h,t − 1)                             (lh,t − 1)
                Mh,t (ch,t , lh,t ; zh,t , χh,t ) =                   + (αh,t (zh,t , χh,t ))                    (3)
                                                           1−φ                                    1−θ

The function αh,t that determines the weight on leisure as a function of demographics is specified as:

                                           αh,t = exp(ψ0 + ψz zh,t + χh,t )                                      (4)

   The unknown parameters governing within period utility over consumption and leisure are φ,
θ, ψ0 and ψz , with additional parameters governing the full utility specification γ, ξ and π. Our
specification allows for non-separability between consumption and leisure both at the intensive and
extensive margin. The taste shifter χh,t affects within period utility over consumption and leisure,
and the taste shifter ζh,t affects intertemporal choices. These are specific to the cohort-education
group and known to the individual and may be correlated. Non-separability between consumption
and leisure depends on the value of γ and so cannot be identified from within-period choices alone.
   The general specification of utility allows substantial heterogeneity across individuals in intratem-
poral and intertemporal preferences, across the intensive and extensive margins, and does not impose
that elasticities of intertemporal substitution for leisure and for consumption are constant. Hetero-
geneity arises partly because elasticities will differ by observable characteristics, z, such as education
and the presence of children, and partly because elasticities differ at different levels of consumption
and hours of work. Our parametric specification gives a log linear MRS and guarantees integrability.
Further, our approach is more flexible than various alternatives in the literature that have much less
scope for heterogeneity at the intensive margin, so that heterogeneity would have to come through
the extensive margin and the distribution of reservation wages.
   Maximisation is subject to the intertemporal budget constraint:
                                                                                       
                                           f                                   m
              Ah,t+1 = (1 + rt+1 ) Ah,t + wh,t (H − lh,t ) − F (ah,t ) Ph,t + yh,t − ch,t                        (5)

where Ah,t is the beginning of period asset holding, rt is the risk-free interest rate, F the fixed cost of
                                                                                   f
work, dependent on the age of the youngest child ah,t . Female wages are given by wh,t , and husband’s
                       m
earnings are given by yh,t .
   There are no explicit borrowing constraints but households cannot go bankrupt. Therefore, in
each period, households are able to borrow against the minimum income they can guarantee for the
rest of their lives. This minimum income is a positive amount because we bound husband’s income
away from zero. Households have no insurance markets to smooth aggregate or idiosyncratic shocks.



                                                              6
    We assume that the cost of work has a fixed component and a component that depends on the
child care cost needed for the youngest child, whose age is ah,t . Denoting with G(ah,t ) child care
services and p their price, we have:

                                                 F (ah,t ) = pG(ah,t ) + F̄                                                (6)

Women differ in their age at childbirth, but this is assumed to be deterministic and so children are
fully anticipated.3 The fixed cost of work is deterministic and known. The presence of fixed costs
of going to work and discrete utility costs introduces the possibility that some women decide not to
work at all, especially at low levels of productivity. If a woman does not work, she does so by choice,
given the offered wage, demographics, taste shifters and unearned income. By the same token, it is
unlikely that women who do choose to work, work only very few hours.
    Female wages are given by the following process:

                                               f         f
                                           ln wh,t = ln wh,0 + ln efh,t + vh,t
                                                                           f
                                                                                                                           (7)

where efh,t is the level of female human capital at the start of the period. We assume that wage rates
do not depend on the number of hours worked in that period, ruling out part-time penalties. This
assumption, for women, is consistent with what we observe in our data and with other US-based
studies (Hirsch (2005); Aaronson and French (2004)).
    In our baseline specification, human capital does not depend on the history of labour supply and
is assumed to evolve exogenously according to:


                                                     ln eft = ιf1 t + ιf2 t2                                               (8)

    Equation (8) implies that women’s wages do not depend on the history of labour supply and
evolve exogenously, meaning that decisions on current labour supply do not have a direct effect on
continuation values. Therefore, the only linkage across periods is through the decision about total
within-period spending. This assumption, combined with the intertemporally additive structure of
preferences, implies that standard two-stage budgeting holds so that we can focus on the within-period
problem without considering explicitly the intertemporal allocation.4
    Men always work and male earnings are given by:

                                           m               m
                                       ln yh,t   =     ln yh,0 + ιm      m 2    m
                                                                  1 t + ι2 t + vh,t                                        (9)

                                                         f                           m
    There are initial distributions of wages for women, wh,0 , and earnings for men yh,0 . Both female
wages and male earnings are subject to permanent shocks that are positively correlated, as in MaCurdy
    3 In reality, there is of course some degree of uncertainty in the realisation of households fertility decisions. We do not

consider fertility as a stochastic outcome, as that would increase the numerical complexity of the problem substantively.
    4 In the appendix, we relax the assumption that there are no returns to experience. We distinguish the cases where

returns to experience depend on participation and where returns depend on hours worked. The first two steps of our
estimation approach go through in former case but not in the latter.




                                                               7
(1983) and Abowd and Card (1989):

                         vh,t   = vh,t−1 + ξh,t                                                              (10)
                                      f      m                     2
                                                                     
                         ξh,t   =   (ξh,t , ξh,t ) ∼ N µξ , σξ                                               (11)
                                         σξ2f        σξ2m                      σξ2f
                                                                                                 
                                                                                        ρξf ,ξm
                           µξ   =   (−          ,−          ) and σξ2 =
                                          2           2                       ρξf ,ξm    σξ2m

   One period in the model is one quarter. Households choose typical hours of work each week, which
are then kept constant across weeks within the quarter, to give within-period hours of work. The
extensive margin is the decision whether or not to work that quarter. The intensive margin is how
many hours to work in a typical week. This assumption means we do not allow individuals to choose
how many weeks to work in a quarter. This restriction is driven by data limitations.5 However, we
provide empirical support for our approach in section 4.2.
   Within the dynamic problem just described, individual households make decisions taking the
stochastic processes above as given. When considering aggregation, we need to take a stand on
the degree of correlations in the shocks different households receive. We assume that households
are subject to both idiosyncratic and aggregate shocks, by letting the shocks that affect individual
households at a point in time to be correlated. However, from an individual perspective, households
do not distinguish aggregate and idiosyncratic shocks and condition their future expectations only
on their own observed wage realisations. Our framework is not a general equilibrium one: we do
not construct the equilibrium level of wages (and interest rates). Rather, we study aggregate female
labour supply and its elasticity to wages by simulating a large number of households and aggregating
explicitly their behaviour.

2.1       Marginal Rate of Substitution, Marshallian and Hicksian Elasticities

Given the assumptions of our model, we can use a two-stage budget approach and consider the
allocation of resources between consumption and female hours of leisure within each period. We
define within-period resources that are not earned by women as:

                                             m
                                                                    Ah,t+1
                                yt = Ah,t + yh,t − F (ah,t ) Ph,t −                                          (12)
                                                                    1 + rt+1

As discussed in Blundell and MaCurdy (1999), yt accounts for resources saved into the next period.
When taken to the data, this measure of unearned resources implicitly also includes (with a negative
sign) durable and other spending not included in consumption ct . This gives the within period budget
constraint:
                                                ct + wt lt = yt + wt H                                       (13)
   5 Inthe data we use, we observe typical hours per week and number of weeks per year and we do not observe the
number of weeks per quarter that an individual works. We also cannot distinguish the number of days per week, from
the number of hours per day, as in Castex and Dechter (2016).




                                                               8
   For an interior solution with a strictly positive number of hours of work, the first order condition for
within-period optimality implies that the ratio of the marginal utility of leisure to that of consumption,
that is the Marginal Rate of Substitution, equals the after tax real wage. For our specification of
preferences, for lh,t < H, this f.o.c. is:
                                                                   −θ
                                                      ulh,t       lh,t
                                             wh,t =         = αh,t −φ                                         (14)
                                                      uch,t       ch,t
   This equilibrium equation can be used to compute Marshallian and Hicksian labour supply elas-
ticities. The Marshallian and Hicksian elasticities are fundamentally static concepts, as both hold
constant the intertemporal allocation of resources.6 The Marshallian response captures the change
in behaviour due to a change in the price of leisure and the related change in resources available
to spend. This latter income effect arises, even if the intertemporal allocation of resources is held
constant, because resources within the period change along with the wage.
   In the full dynamic model, when the realised wage is permanently higher than expected, lifetime
resources increase, and these extra resources are allocated across periods. The static Marshallian
elasticity is a good approximation to the full response if extra resources are spent on nondurable
consumption in the period they are earned. To the extent that resources are reallocated, the static
Marshallian elasticity only captures part of the labour supply response. For example, if within period
spending is homothetic, and wages have gone up by the same amount in every period, then there may
be little change in saving patterns following the wage increase. In this case, the Marshallian elasticity
gives a good approximation of the complete life-cycle response. On the other hand, if the extra income
from the wage increase is saved to spend in retirement, then there is no within period income effect
and the response will be closer to a Hicksian compensated response. More generally, it is an open
question how well the static Marshallian and Hicksian elasticities approximate the complete life-cycle
responses to compensated and uncompensated wage changes. In section 6, we use the full structural
model to evaluate how closely the static elasticities approximate the full life -cycle ones.
   We differentiate the within period budget constraint (25) and the MRS equation (26) with respect
to wages to get an expression for Marshallian elasticities for female hours of work and consumption
(see Appendix A for details on the derivations):
                                                            
                           M     ∂ ln h       φw (H − l) − c     l
                          εh =          =−                                                                    (15)
                                 ∂ ln w          θc + φwl      H −l

                                                  ∂ ln c   θw (H − l) + wl
                                          εM
                                           c =           =
                                                  ∂ ln w      θc + φwl
If preferences were Cobb-Douglas, θ and φ would both equal 1; and the Marshallian wage elasticities
for consumption and for hours of work would be equal to 1 and 0, respectively, if there were no
   6 Blundell and MaCurdy (1999) and Keane (2011) discuss how the concepts of Marshallian and Hicksian elasticities

can be put within the framework of a dynamic life-cycle model through two-stage budgeting, as developed by Gorman
(1959) and applied to labour supply by MaCurdy (1981), MaCurdy (1983) and Blundell and Walker (1986).




                                                         9
unearned income or savings. For balanced growth (in female labour supply) we would require φ = 1.
If preferences were a standard CES, θ = φ. If this value were greater than 1, εM           M
                                                                               c < 1, and εh < 0.

In section 6, we show how much heterogeneity is introduced through our more general specification
in equations (15) and through allowing for unearned income.
    The static Hicksian response nets off the increase in within-period resources due to the wage
increase, again holding constant the intertermporal allocation. We calculate the Hicksian response
from the Marshallian elasticities by using the Slustky equation and income elasticities, as would be
done in a static labour supply model:


                                                                                    −wl2
                                                            
                                         ∂ ln l    w(H − l)      −l
                  εH
                   h =        εM
                               l −                                       =                                       (16)
                                     ∂ ln(c + wl) (c + wl) H − l              (θc + φwl)(H − l)
                                                    ∂ ln c      wl               −c
                               εH
                                c    = εM c +                            =
                                                ∂ ln(c + wl) (c + wl)         θc + φwl
    To think about the labour supply responses to permanent changes in wages or taxes, the Marshal-
lian and Hicksian elasticities are the relevant concepts. However, as we discuss in section 6, estimates
based on the within period problem might miss potential intertemporal reallocations that might occur
in response to wage changes.
    Besides the interpretation of these elasticities, two points are worth noting. First, despite their
simplicity, the Marshallian and Hicksian elasticities are non-linear in c and l. They have the potential
of varying greatly across consumers and not aggregating in a straightforward way. Second, for the
specification we use, the Marshallian and Hicksian elasticities depend only on φ and θ (and on the
values of earnings and consumption). In particular, they do not depend on intertemporal parameters
or on whether the utility function is separable in consumption and leisure, which depends on γ.

2.2     Frisch Elasticities

While the size of changes in labour supply induced by permanent shifts to the wage structure can
be approximated by the Hicksian or Marshallian elasticities, changes induced by expected changes
in wages over time are captured by the Frisch (or marginal utility of wealth constant) elasticity. A
change in the structure of wages (possibly induced by changes in taxes) may induce a reallocation of
resources over time through changes to the time path of hours of work or of the marginal utility of
wealth, or both. The Frisch elasticity captures the change over time in hours worked in response to
the anticipated evolution of wages, with the marginal utility of wealth unchanged because the wage
change conveys no new information or because the wage change is temporary so that lifetime wealth is
approximately unchanged.7 The Frisch elasticity is the right concept to think about the implications
of changes in wages over the business cycle or about temporary changes to taxation.
    7 When wages change stochastically, the response of hours worked is affected by the change in the marginal utility

of wealth due to a particular wage realisation, whose size depends on how permanent the wage shock is.




                                                         10
    The expression for the Frisch elasticity for hours of work, derived in Appendix A, is given by:8

                                                           uc ucc     w
                                               εF
                                                h =−               2                                                (17)
                                                        ucc ull − ucl h
    As is well known, Frisch intertemporal elasticities must be at least as large as Hicks elasticities.
Thus, the static elasticities discussed above provide a bound on the intertemporal elasticity, which is
particularly useful if data are limited or direct estimation of Frisch elasticities difficult. In the context
of quasi-linear utility as used by Chetty (2012), the Frisch elasticity equals the Hicks elasticity (and
the Marshallian) because there are no wealth effects on hours of work.
    To compute the Frisch elasticity we need the parameters that characterise intertemporal allocation,
such as γ and χ, the parameter that controls how participation affects utility. We obtain them using
a set of Euler equations. While in principle we could consider either the Euler equation for hours or
that for consumption, only one is relevant, when coupled with the intratemporal condition (14). If
we were to use the Euler equation for labour supply, we would need to consider corner solutions at
different points in time (and the dynamic selection problems these involve). Instead, we focus on the
Euler equation for consumption, as in Blundell et al. (1993). In the absence of binding borrowing
constraints, the following intertemporal condition holds:
                                                                 
                                                  uch,t+1 (·)
                                  E β (1 + rt+1 )             Ih,t = 1                                              (18)
                                                   uch,t (·)

The term Ih,t denotes the information available to the household at time t.
    Individual Frisch responses can be reflected in changes in participation and hours of work. An
elasticity is easily defined when thinking of the intensive margin, while the same concept is somewhat
vaguer when thinking of the extensive margin, especially in the case of the Frisch elasticity, which
keeps the marginal utility of wealth constant. Instead, with the extensive margin, we define the
Frisch as the impact that a change in wages has on the fraction of individuals that participate, given
the distribution of state variables. In this sense, the consideration of the extensive margin brings to
the forefront aggregation issues that have not figured prominently in the discussion of labour supply
elasticities. Aggregate participation responses to an aggregate shock are bound to depend on the
distribution of state variables in the cross section. Aggregation issues, however, can also be relevant
for the intensive margin because of nonlinearities.


3     Empirical strategy
In this section, we discuss our empirical approach, the identification assumptions we make, and what
type of variability in the data identifies which parameters. We estimate a complete model of individual
   8 Analogous expressions for the consumption Frisch wage elasticities, as well as the interest rate elasticities can be

found in Appendix A.




                                                           11
labour supply. Considering the whole model in its various components is essential to evaluate the size
and aggregation properties of the elasticity of labour supply to changes in wages. Our empirical
strategy, however, proceeds in three steps, with each successive step identifying a set of structural
parameters using the weakest possible assumptions. Each component provides an important element
of the overall effect which, as we discuss below, affects our interpretation of the aggregate data and
provides important insights on the relationship between ‘micro’ and ‘macro’ elasticities.
   We estimate the components of the model by exploiting different sets of equilibrium conditions
and different sources of variability in the data. In the first step, we consider only the static first
order condition that determines within-period optimal allocations, conditional on participation. This
first set of parameters can therefore be identified while being agnostic about intertemporal conditions
and on life-cycle prospects and, as discussed in section 2.1, can be used to derive Marshallian and
Hicksian elasticities. In the second step, we identify the parameters that govern the intertemporal
allocation of resources using the Euler equation for consumption, making use of an additional set of
assumptions. We can still identify these parameters, however, without specifying the entire life-cycle
environment faced by households. For instance, we can be silent about pension arrangements or the
specifics of the wage and earning processes. Finally, in the third step, we characterise behaviour at the
extensive margin. This step requires solving the entire model and, therefore, specifying completely
the environment in which households operates. We identify the final set of parameters by calibration,
matching a set of life-cycle statistics.
   We divide the discussion of our empirical strategy into three sections, corresponding to the three
steps of the procedure: the Marginal Rate of Substitution, the Euler equation and the dynamic problem
that determines the extensive margin. Before delving into that discussion, however, we cover some
econometric issues relevant for parameter estimation using equilibrium and orthogonality conditions.

3.1    Using equilibrium conditions

When estimating the parameters that determine the MRS or those that enter the Euler equation, we
use first order conditions to derive restrictions on the data to identify structural parameters. Although
these sets of conditions are different, as one set is static in nature and one set is dynamic, they are of
a similar nature, in that they can be reduced to an expression of the type


                                            E [h(X; θ)Z] = 0                                         (19)

where h(·) is a function of data X and parameters, θ, and is linear in the vector of parameters. The
vector Z contains observable variables that will be assumed to be orthogonal to h. The nature of
the instruments that deliver identification depends on the nature of the residual h and, as we discuss
below, is different when we estimate the MRS conditions or the Euler equations. However, in both




                                                   12
cases, we exploit a condition such as (19).
    In equation (19), one needs to normalise one of the parameters to 1. In the context of the MRS
equation (20), for example, we set the coefficient on ln wh,t to 1, but we could have set the coefficient on
ln lh,t , or that on ln ch,t to be 1. A well-known issue with many estimators in this class is that in small
samples they are not necessarily robust to the normalisation used. A number of alternative estimators
that avoid this issue are available, ranging from LIML-type estimators, to the estimator discussed in
Alonso-Borrego and Arellano (1999), to the iterated GMM proposed by Hansen et al. (1996). We
use the estimator proposed by Fuller (1977) to estimate both our MRS and Euler equations. This
estimator is a modified version of LIML with an adjustment that is designed to ensure that it has
finite moments. Roughly speaking, it can be thought of as a compromise between LIML and 2SLS
(being closer to LIML when the sample size is large relative to the number of instruments). While this
estimator is not completely normalisation free, it is much less sensitive to the choice of normalisation
than estimators such as 2SLS and GMM.
    An additional advantage of the Fuller estimator is that it is known to have better bias properties
than estimators such as 2SLS, when instruments are relatively weak. In what follows, we test the
strength of our instruments comparing the values of the Cragg-Donald test statistic to the relevant
entries of the table supplied in Stock and Yogo (2005).9 For the Fuller estimator that we employ,
these critical values are typically lower than those for 2SLS, and, unlike 2SLS, they are decreasing in
the number of instruments used. We report further details on the Fuller estimator in Appendix B.

3.2     Intratemporal margins

As a first step, we estimate the parameters of the within-period utility function: θ, φ and α. Taking
logs of the MRS equation 26, and noticing from equation (4) that log αh,t = ψzh,t + χh,t , we obtain:


                               ln wh,t = φ ln ch,t − θ ln lh,t + ψz zh,t + ψ0 + χh,t                               (20)

where the vector zh,t includes observable demographic variables. Estimates of θ and φ pin down the
within-period elasticities.
    The econometric estimation of the MRS equation poses two problems. First, the subset of house-
holds for whom the wife works and the MRS condition holds as an equality is not random. For this
selected group, the unobserved heterogeneity term χh,t would not average out to zero and would be
correlated with the variables that enter equation (20). Second, even in the absence of participation
issues, individual wages (and consumption and leisure) are likely to correlate with χh,t , so OLS esti-
mation of equation (20) would result in biased estimates of the structural parameters φ and θ. We
discuss these two issues in turn.
    9 The Cragg-Donald statistic is usually used to provide a test of underidentification. Stock and Yogo (2005) propose

using it as a test of instrument relevance as well.




                                                          13
    For participation, we specify a reduced form equation for the extensive margin. We then use a
Heckman-type selection correction approach to estimate the MRS equation (20) only on the households
where the wife works. In particular, we augment the MRS equation with a polynomial in the estimated
residuals of the participation equation.10 Non-parametric identification requires that some variables
that enter the participation equation do not enter the MRS specification: these variables are male
earnings and employment status, and we assume these are uncorrelated with χh,t .
    The fully-specified participation decision depends on a large set of state variables, some of which
are not observable; in our ‘reduced form’, participation depends only on a subset of these variables.
Obviously, our reduced form participation equation would be mis-specified and, at best, could be con-
sidered an approximation of the ’true’ participation equation. However, to obtain consistent estimates
of the parameters of the MRS, we do not need to specify the participation equation correctly nor the
full solution, as long as we have sufficient variability in the variables that we assume drive participa-
tion but are excluded from the MRS. The intuition for this argument is similar to an IV correction
for endogeneity: not all the determinants of the endogenous variable being instrumented are needed;
instead a subset is sufficient to achieve identification, even though the first stage is mis-specified.
    One issue to worry about, in such a situation, is the intrinsic non-linearity of the participation
equation. The omission of some state variables could change the properties of the residuals of such
a nonlinear equation and, therefore, the shape of the appropriate control function to enter the MRS
equation. For this reason, we use a polynomial to model the dependence between the residuals of the
participation equation and those of the MRS equation.
    The second issue in the estimation of equation (20) is that consumption and hours, as well as
our measures of individual wages, obtained dividing earnings by hours, might be correlated with the
residual term χh,t , either because of the possible correlation between taste for leisure and heterogeneity
in productivity or because of measurement error in hours or earnings. To avoid these problems,
following the most recent literature on labour supply (such as Blundell et al. (1998)), we refrain from
using variation in individual wages to identify the parameters of interest. Instead, we exploit variation
induced by changes in taxation and/or aggregate demand for labour and make use of changes in cohort
and education groups’ average wages over time.
    Various papers have used differential changes in wages and hours across education groups to iden-
tify labour supply elasticities; for example MaCurdy (1983) and Ziliak and Kniesner (1999) both use
age-education interactions as instruments for wages and hours in their MRS/labour supply conditions.
Similarly, Kimmel and Kniesner (1998) use education interacted with a quadratic time trend to in-
strument wages. However, one concern with this approach is that individuals with different levels of
education might have different preferences for leisure and consumption. Moreover, the composition of
   10 We assume that χ                          2         3                       s
                       h,t = β0 + β1 eh,t + β2 eh,t + β3 eh,t and then compute E[eh,t |eh,t > −ΠZh,t ], s = 1, 2, 3 where eh,t
is the normally distributed residual from the participation equation and ΠZh,t are the determinants of participation.




                                                             14
education groups has changed substantially over time: an issue that may be particularly important for
women.11 These compositional changes may well lead to changes in the mix of ability and preferences
of workers within each education group over time - making education an invalid instrument.
    We use as instruments the interaction of ten-year birth cohort and education dummies with a
quintic time trend. Using fully interacted cohort-education and year dummies would be equivalent to
taking averages within cells defined by year, education and cohort groups, and using group level rather
than individual level variability, as in Blundell et al. (1998). Given our sample size, we do not adopt
this approach, as it would result in taking averages over relatively small cells and, therefore, getting
very noisy estimates. Using very finely defined and small groups can introduce the very biases grouping
is meant to avoid. Our use of a quintic time trend rather than fully interacted time dummies, whilst
in the spirit of Blundell et al. (1998), helps smooth intertemporal movements in wages, consumption
and hours for each of our cohort-education groups.
    In our estimating equation, we allow many variables to shift the taste for leisure through an effect
on the term αh,t in the CES utility function. In particular, the z vector includes: log family size,
woman’s race, a quartic in woman age, an indicator for the presence of any child, the numbers of
children aged 0-2, 3-15, and 16-17, the number of individuals in the household 65 or older, region and
season dummies, and, most importantly, cohort-education dummies. A corollary of putting variables
such as cohort and education dummies in the vector z is that we do not exploit the variation in wages
(and leisure and consumption) over these dimensions to identify the structural parameters φ and θ.
In our estimation, we also control for year dummies, therefore removing year to year fluctuations from
the variability we use to identify the parameters of interest. The inclusion of year dummies, as in
Blundell et al. (1998), is needed because aggregate fluctuations change the selection rule year to year
in ways that are not fully captured by the selection model we use.12

3.3     Euler Equation Estimation

The second step of our approach uses the Euler equation (18) to estimate the preference parameters
that govern the intertemporal substitutability and non-separability between consumption and leisure,
γ, and the non-separability with participation, ξ. A natural approach to the estimation of equation (18)
is non-linear GMM. However, as discussed in Attanasio and Low (2004), the small sample properties of
non-linear GMM estimators can be poor in contexts similar to ours. Moreover, given the specification
of the utility function and nature of the data we have, we can only estimate its log-linearised version.
    The evolution of the marginal utility of consumption can then be written as:

                                    β (1 + rt+1 ) uch,t+1 (·) = uch,t (·) h,t+1                                 (21)
   11 In 1980, 19.4% of married women had not attained a high school diploma, and only 18.4% had obtained a college

degree in our data. By 2012, these proportions had changed to 9.7% and 36.5% respectively.
   12 We have also run specifications where we do not control for time dummies in the MRS and checked that our results

are not affected much by the introduction of the time dummies.




                                                         15
where h,t+1 , whose conditional expectation is 1, is the innovation to the expected discounted marginal
utility of consumption. Equation (21) uses the variability in rt to identify the parameters of uc (.).
Taking the log of equation (21), given utility is given by equation (2):

    ηh,t+1 = κh,t + ln β + ln(1 + rt+1 ) − φ∆ ln ch,t+1 − γ∆ ln(Mh,t+1 ) + ϕ∆Ph,t+1 + π∆zh,t+1                        (22)

where ηh,t+1 ≡ ln h,t+1 − E [ln h,t+1 |Ih,t ] + ∆ζh,t+1 and κh,t ≡ E [ln h,t+1 |Ih,t ].
    The identification and estimation of the parameters of this equation depends, obviously, on the
nature of the ‘residual’ term ηh,t+1 , which contains expectations errors (εh,t+1 ), higher order moments
and taste shifters unobservable to the econometrician (ζh,t+1 ). To achieve consistency it is necessary
to exploit explicitly the time series variation and, therefore, as discussed in Attanasio and Low (2004),
a long time series is required.13 We also need to assume that the lagged variables used as instruments
are uncorrelated with the innovations to the taste shifters ∆ζh,t+1 . This is trivially true if taste shifters
are constant over time or if they are random walks. We maintain one of these two assumptions, a
hypothesis that we can in part test by checking over-identifying restrictions.
    We estimate equation (22) using the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX). Although the CEX
covers many years, each household is only observed for a few quarters and so we use a synthetic cohort
approach (see Browning et al. (1985)): we aggregate equation (22) over groups with constant member-
ship and follow the average behaviour of the variables of interest (or their non-linear transformation)
for such groups. A time series of quarterly cross sections can be used to construct consistent estimates
of these aggregates and, in this fashion, use a long time period to estimate the parameters of the Euler
equation and test its validity.
    We define groups using married couples in ten year birth-cohorts. The assumption of constant
membership of these groups might be questioned at the beginning and at the end of the life-cycle for
a variety of reasons, including differential rates of family formation, differential mortality and so on.
To avoid these and other issues, we limit our sample to households whose husband is aged between
25 and 65 and where wives are aged between 25 and 60.14
    Having identified groups, we aggregate equation (22) to be estimated across group g households.
For this approach to work, however, it is necessary that the equation to be esdtimated is linear in
parameters, which would be the case if Mh,t were observable. However, Mh,t is a non-linear function
of data and unobserved parameters, so that, in principle it cannot be aggregated within groups to
obtain Mg,t . On the other hand, the parameters that determine Mh,t can be consistently estimated
   13 The reason for the need of a long time series is that, even under rational expectations, expectations errors do not

necessarily average out to zero (or are uncorrelated with available information) in the cross section, but only in the time
series: expectation errors may be correlated with available information in the cross section in the presence of aggregate
shocks. See the discussion in Hayashi (1987), Miller and Sieg (1997), Attanasio (1999), or Attanasio and Weber (2010).
   14 If credit constraints are binding, the Euler equation will not be holding as an equality. The youngest consumers

are excluded because they are more likely to be affected by this issue. For older consumers, in addition to changes in
labour force participation and family composition, health status also changes in complex ways that maybe difficult to
capture with the taste shifters that we have been considering.




                                                            16
using the MRS conditions as discussed in section 3.2.15 These estimates can be used to construct
consistent estimates of Mh,t , which can be aggregated across households to give Mg,t .
    We can obtain consistent estimates of the grouped variables from the time series of cross sections,
giving the group average log-linear Euler equation:

     ηeg,t+1 = κ + ln β + ln(1 + rt+1 ) − φ∆ln cg,t+1 + −γ∆ ln(M
                                                               cg,t+1 ) + ϕ∆Pg,t+1 + π∆zg,t+1                        (23)

    The residual term ηeg,t+1 now includes, in addition to the average of the expectation errors and of
the changes in taste shifters, several other terms: (i) a linear combination of the difference between the
population and sample averages at time t and t + 1 for all the relevant variables (induced by the fact
that we are considering sample means rather than population means for group g); (ii) the difference
between the (consistently) estimated Mg,t and its actual value (induced by estimation error in the
parameters of the MRS); (iii) the difference between the innovation over time to the average value of
κg,t , which we have denoted with the constant κ.
    All the variables on the right hand side of equation (23) are observable. We can therefore use this
equation to estimate the parameters of interest. However, the instruments need to be uncorrelated with
ηeg,t+1 .16 The covariance structure of the ηeg,t+1 is quite complex: the contemporaneous covariance of
ηegi ,t+1 and ηegj ,t+1 is not, in general, zero, as aggregate shocks have effects that correlate across different
groups. When computing the variance-covariance matrix of the estimates, this structure should be
taken into account. Whilst it is in principle possible, given our assumptions, to estimate the variance-
covariance matrix of ηeg,t+1 from estimated parameters, in practice it turns out to be cumbersome,
as there is no guarantee that, in small samples, these estimates are positive-definite. Given these
difficulties, we follow a different and, as far as we know, novel approach, based on bootstrapping
our sample, with a structure consistent with the basic assumptions of our model. We describe the
bootstrapping procedure in detail in the online Appendix B.
    This procedure recovers the intertemporal preference parameter γ and the participation preference
parameter ψ. We cannot identify any additional effect of participation that is separable in the utility
function. Nor, at this stage, do we know the fixed costs of work and so we cannot identify the extensive
margin response to wage changes.
    In principle, the first two steps of our estimation could be followed without -aking parametric
assumptions about the utility function and, instead, estimating leisure and consumption demands
directly. However, such an approach would require that the demand functions satisfy integrability
   15 M
        h,t includes χh,t which is unobserved. However, since it is the residual from the MRS equation, it can be included
in the calculation of αh,t that is needed to calculate Mh,t .
   16 As noted by Deaton (1985) and discussed extensively in the context of the CEX by Attanasio and Weber (1995),

the use of sample rather than population averages for all the ‘group’ variables induces an MA(1) in the residuals, because
of the sampling variation in the rotating panel structure. We need to assume that the instruments are not correlated
with the (average) estimation error of the Mh,t or with the innovations to the higher moments of the expectation errors
(κg,t − κ). This last assumption is discussed in Attanasio and Low (2004).




                                                           17
conditions. Furthermore, the actual underlying utility function would still need to be recovered to
study participation and the extensive margins. We make functional form assumptions using, however,
a general and flexible parametric specification of utility.

3.4    Extensive margins

The last step of our approach obtains estimates of the remaining model parameters, including the fixed
costs of work and childcare costs, which drive the extensive margin decision. When considering the
extensive margin, it is necessary to solve explicitly the whole dynamic problem. This involves making
assumptions on the entire economic environment faced by households over the life-cycle, including
both present and future conditions. We solve the model numerically and use the solution to estimate
and calibrate the model parameters. To reduce the numerical burden, when simulating the model, we
assume a fixed interest rate. As the MRS conditions do not change, this assumption will not change
within period elasticities, but the life-cycle solution of the model and life-cylce elasticities will be
affected to the extent that uncertainty about interest rates affects saving. We provide details about
the numerical solution in Appendix B.
    We take as given the estimates of the parameters we obtained from the MRS and the Euler
Equation, and obtain some parameters from either the literature or auxiliary regressions. We estimate
the remaining parameters so that data generated from simulations match key life-cycle aspects of the
extensive margin: the participation rate, the participation rate of mothers and average wage growth
of participants (which is endogenous because of selection). We can then simulate the model for a large
number of individuals to study the properties of individual and ‘aggregate’ labour supply.


Goodness of fit. Having estimated all parameters, we check whether the model is able to fit several
features of the data, over and above those that have been used to derive the parameter estimates. In
particular we explore: participation and hours life-cycle profiles, participation rates conditioning on
several characteristics such as motherhood, and the distribution of hours worked and of wages.


4     Data and descriptive statistics
We take our data from the CEX for the years 1980-2012. In the CEX, households are interviewed
up to four times, answering detailed recall questions on expenditures as well as on the demographics,
incomes and labour supply of household members.
    We calculate gross hourly wages for individuals using information on the value of each individual’s
last pay cheque, the number of weeks it covered and the typical number of hours worked per week. Net
wages are then calculated by subtracting marginal federal income tax rates generated using the NBER




                                                    18
TAXSIM model (Feenberg and Coutts, 1993).17 We deflate all expenditures, wages and incomes using
the Consumer Price Index. Weekly leisure is calculated by subtracting weekly hours worked from the
maximum number an individual has to divide between leisure and labour supply per week (which we
set to 100). Participation is defined by employment status at the time of the interview. Consumption
covers nondurable goods excluding medical and education spending. We divide quarterly consumption
spending by 13 to put it in weekly terms.
    Our sample consists of couples where the female is aged between 25 and 60 and males are aged
between 25 and 65. We drop those in rural areas and those in the top 1% of the distribution of
consumption and net wages. We also trim those who are seen to earn less than 3 quarters of the
national minimum wage in any given year, and those who are employed but who report working less
than 5 hours a week. Since labour supply and income questions are (almost always) only asked in
the fist and last interviews, we drop responses from interviews apart from these two. Our sampling
choices leaves us with a sample of just under 79,000 households (50,895 where the female is working).
Appendix C presents descriptive statistics on individual characteristics over time.

4.1       Cohort averages

Our MRS estimation exploits differences in the rate of growth of wages and hours to identify the
intensive elasticities for different groups. As the CEX is not a panel data, we follow group averages.
We separate households into birth cohorts and examine the evolution of wages and hours by education
within each cohort group, as in Blundell et al. (1998), and as shown in Figure 1.18
    Within the 1950s cohort, the net wages of those with more than high school education increased
from an average of $16.90 per hour in 1980 to $21.40 in 2012 (an increase of 27%), while the wages of
those with less than high school education only increased by 19% from $13.40 to $16.00. Despite this,
the bottom row of Figure 1 shows average weekly hours of less educated worked actually increased by
more than those from the more educated group (increasing from 36.8 hours per week to 38.2 compared
to an increase from 37.4 to 38.5 for those with more than high school education).

4.2       Individual Variation in Hours and Wages

In addition to changes in average hours and wages over our sample period, there are two important
issues at the individual level: what is the relative importance of the intensive and extensive margins
in the raw data and what fraction of individuals are experiencing changes in hours or wages over time.
    The individual extensive margin decision is being whether to incur a fixed cost F (ah,t ) and partic-
ipate in the current quarter. We measure this by the stated current employment status. The intensive
margin decision is over how many hours to work per week (when working). An additional labour
  17 We  are grateful to Lorenz Kueng for making his mapping of the CEX to TAXSIM publically available.
  18 The  advantage of considering the variability over time of a given cohort, is that their composition is unlikely to
change, as it is relatively rare for workers to increase their educational qualifications after age 25.




                                                          19
                     Figure 1: Wages and hours by education group and cohort
                                                   1940s                             1950s                             1960s




                                25




                                                                      25




                                                                                                       25
                         Net wages ($)
                                  20




                                                                      20




                                                                                                       20
                          15




                                                                      15




                                                                                                       15
                                10




                                                                      10




                                                                                                       10
                                          1980   1990   2000   2010        1980   1990   2000   2010        1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010




                                45




                                                                      45




                                                                                                       45
                         Hours per week
                                    40




                                                                      40




                                                                                                       40
                          35




                                                                      35




                                                                                                       35
                                30




                                                                      30




                                                                                                       30
                                          1980   1990   2000   2010        1980   1990   2000   2010        1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010



                                                           High school or less                  More than high school




supply response may be through changing weeks worked per quarter. However, we are not able to
estimate this margin of adjustment because of data limitations: the CEX asks current workers about
the number of weeks they worked over the previous year rather than the previous quarter.
   Whether ignoring the margin of the number of weeks worked within a quarter matters, depends on
how much of the variance of workers’ quarterly hours is driven by differences in weeks worked within
a quarter rather than hours per week. Table 1 decomposes the variance of log annual hours into that
due to variation in log annual weeks, log workers’ typical weekly hours, and their covariance. The first
panel shows this breakdown for the entire sample of workers. The variance in annual weeks worked
makes for the larger share (around two thirds) of the total variance in hours worked. However, much
of this could be due to some workers not participating for entire quarters: our extensive margin. In
the second panel, we therefore restrict our sample to workers who we observe working for more than
39 weeks (and thus could not have been unemployed for a complete quarter). Focusing attention
on these workers, who account for 84% of the total, almost all of the variance in annual hours is a
result of differences in hours worked per week, with differences in weeks worked having a negligible
contribution. In the third panel, we restrict our sample further to those working exactly 52 weeks
per year and notice that even among workers who do not differ in the number of weeks worked, the
variance in log hours per week remains substantial (at 0.08).
   These results suggest that among participating workers, hours worked per week is the key margin
by which workers adjust their quarterly hours. In Appendix E, we check the robustness of this strategy
by showing that our estimates and results are little affected by replacing our current measure of hours
worked with a measure of annual hours worked.
   A further question is whether individual workers adjust their weekly hours at all in response to
wage changes, or whether there are market frictions that prevent this. Table 2 shows the proportion



                                                                                     20
                          Table 1: Variances of Labour Supply Measures, 2012

                                                Less than        High       Some       Degree or     All
                                               high school      school     college      higher

         All workers
         Variance (ln hours per week)             0.148          0.117     0.128         0.126      0.126
         Variance (ln weeks per year)             0.550          0.271     0.231         0.482      0.367
         Covariance (ln hours, ln weeks)          0.031          0.046     0.010         0.028      0.027
         Variance (ln annual hours)               0.761          0.479     0.380         0.665      0.546

         Working at least 39 weeks
         (84% of workers)
         Variance (ln hours per week)             0.061          0.040     0.086         0.110      0.086
         Variance (ln weeks per year)             0.001          0.003     0.003         0.005      0.004
         Covariance (ln hours, ln weeks)          -0.001         0.001     0.002         0.000      0.001
         Variance (ln annual hours)               0.062          0.042     0.090         0.115      0.090

         Working 52 weeks
         (69% of workers)
         Variance (ln hours per week)             0.064          0.031     0.068         0.117      0.080



of workers who changed their typical hours from the first to the last CEX interview (a period of nine
months). While it is true that most women do not change their hours within this period, a substantial
fraction (46%) do. Around a quarter of workers change their weekly hours by 1-5 hours, and 2%
change their hours by more than 20 hours.


                        Table 2: Changes in Weekly Hours among the Employed

         Change in Weekly Hours            No change        1-5 hrs   6-10 hrs       11-20 hrs   >20 hrs


         All Workers                         53.8%          25.2%        11.9%         6.9%        2.2%

         Extent of Change in wages:
         < 5% wage change                    75.9%          17.5%        4.6%          2.3%        0.71%
         > 5% wage change                    47.5%          27.5%        14.0%         8.2%        2.7 %


Notes: Changes in hours are measured between the 2nd and 5th interviews for individuals who are employed at each
interview.




                                                       21
5     Results: Parameter Estimates and Calibration
In this section, we report the estimates of the structural parameters of our model that we obtain from
the three steps of the estimation procedure. In sections 5.1 and 5.2 we report the estimation results
obtained using the MRS conditions and the Euler equation. In section 5.3, we report the calibration
of the remaining parameters of the model that govern choices at the extensive margin. In the last
subsection, we show how well the complete model fits a number of features of the data that were not
explicitly used to obtain the parameter estimates.

5.1     MRS estimates

In Table 3, we report the estimates of key parameters for the MRS equation and tests on the quality of
our instruments. The results for the participation model are reported in Appendix C. We estimate a
value for θ of 1.75 and a value for φ of 0.76: there is much more curvature in utility on leisure than on
consumption. A standard Cobb-Douglas specification imposes that φ = θ = 1, while a standard CES
specification imposes that φ = θ. The values of θ and φ we estimate are however quite different. We
test the restrictions implied by Cobb-Douglas and standard CES specifications using a wild-cluster
residual bootstrap. The Cobb-Douglas specification for preferences is rejected at the 5% level (p-value
0.01), while the standard CES specification is rejected at the 10% level (p-value 0.06).
    Table 3 also shows the coefficients, ψ, on demographic variables in zh,t . A positive coefficient
implies that when the variable increases, women will supply fewer hours of work in the market, for
a given level of consumption and wages: a larger value for ψ means, other things equal, a higher
marginal utility of leisure. The positive and significant coefficient on the dummy for having children
indicates that the presence of children tends to reduce labour supply, but the effect of children on
hours worked depends on the age of the children. The coefficient on the number of children aged 0-2 is
positive and highly significant, on children aged 3-15 the coefficient is positive, but smaller; for older
children, the coefficient is negative.
    We include three Heckman selection terms corresponding to the first, second and third moments
                                                                            10
of the truncated normal distribution (as described in footnote                   ). We test the joint significance of
these in both our first and second stage regressions. These terms are highly significant in each of the
first stages, where we are predicting individual consumption, hours and wages. On the other hand,
the selection terms are insignificant in the second stage of the MRS.
    The Cragg-Donald statistic for weak instruments in our MRS equation takes a value of 2.00 for
138 instruments, well above the relevant Stock and Yogo (2005) critical level of 1.69, and therefore
suggesting that weak instruments are not a problem.19 The Sargan test does not reject the null of no
   19 The value of 1.69 is given for two endogenous variables and 100 instruments, and given that the critical values for

a maximum 5% relative bias for the Fuller estimator are decreasing in the number of instruments, the use of this test
statistic is conservative.




                                                           22
violation of the overidentifying restrictions.


                                    Table 3: Estimation of MRS equation

 Parameter                            Estimate     (Standard Error)              [95% Confidence Interval]

 θ                                    1.75**             (1.230)                          [0.34,5.12]
 φ                                    0.76***            (0.103)                          [0.55,0.95]

 Ψ
  ln(f amsize)                        -0.32***           (0.037)                         [-0.38,-0.23]
  Has kids                            0.07***            (0.021)                          [0.04, 0.10]
  No. of kids 0-2                     0.15***            (0.030)                          [0.10, 0.22]
  No. of kids 3-15                    0.06***            (0.017)                          [0.04, 0.10]
  No. of kids 16-17                   -0.02**            (0.011)                          [-0.05,0.00]

 Joint tests of selection terms (p-value)
  First stage: ln wage                              166.47 (< 0.001)
  First stage: ln consumption                       311.75 (< 0.001)
  First stage: ln leisure                            40.83 (< 0.001)
  Main equation                                        0.72 (0.87)
 Cragg-Donald statistic                                    2.00
 Sargan statistic (p-value)                            127.8 (0.66)
 N = 50,895. *p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Additional controls for the number of elderly (aged over 65) individuals
 in the household, a quadratic in age, race, region, season, cohort-education interactions and year dummies. Consump-
 tion and leisure are instrumented with the interaction of cohort and education groups and a fifth-order polynomial
 time trend. Confidence intervals are bootstrapped with 1000 replications allowing for clustering at the individual
 level.




5.2      Euler equation estimates

Table 4 shows estimates of the Euler equation (23). We estimate γ to be 2.07, significantly different
from zero at the 10% level, providing evidence that preferences are non-separable and that consumption
and leisure are substitutes (γ = 0 would imply additively separable preferences over consumption
and leisure). Since φ, θ and γ are all positive, the concavity requirements of the utility function are
satisfied. The coefficients on the control variables included in the vector zt are not significant, implying
demographics have no role over and above their impact on the relative weight on leisure within-period.
The specification in Table 4 imposes that ξ, the parameter on participation in equation (2), is zero.
When we include this term (instrumented with its own lags), the coefficient estimate is negative and
insignificantly different from zero.
     Our instruments are second, third and fourth lags of ln Mg,t and the lagged real interest rate
(defined as the 3 month Treasury Bill rate minus the inflation rate), and we have two endogenous
variables φ(∆ ln cg,t + ln(1 + rt+1 )) and ∆ ln Mg,t . We place the second of these on the left-hand side



                                                         23
                                     Table 4: Estimation of Euler equation

      Parameter                             Estimate      (Standard Error)         [95% Confidence Interval]

      hline γ                                 2.07*              (0.656)                    [-0.11,2.60]
      κ̄ + ln(β)                               0.03              (0.040)                   [-0.08, 0.10]
      π
          ln(f amsize)                         -0.47             (0.244)                   [-0.69,   0.31]
          Has kids                              0.05             (0.069)                   [-0.09,   0.19]
          No. of kids aged 0-2                  0.22             (0.099)                   [-0.05,   0.35]
          No. of kids aged 3-15                0.03              (0.038)                   [-0.06,   0.09]
          No. of kids aged 16-17               0.03              (0.071)                   [-0.11,   0.18]

      First Stage F-stats (p-values)
       −φ(∆ ln cg,t + ln(1 + rt+1 )                         7.95 (<0.001)
       ∆ ln Mg,t                                             2.08 (0.08)
      Sargan statistic (p-value)                                5.70 (0.13)
      N = 1,519. *p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Additional controls for season dummies, a quartic in age,
      the change in the proportion of households in each of four education groups, the change in proportion who
      are white, and the change in the average number of elderly individuals per household. Instruments are
      second, third and fourth lags of ln Mg,t , as well as the lagged real interest rate. Confidence intervals are
      bootstrapped with 1000 replications.




of the equation. With only one left-hand side endogenous variable, the Cragg-Donald test for weak
instruments is equivalent to a standard F-test of the instruments’ joint significance in the first stage
regression. The critical values of these F-tests suggest that the instruments are highly correlated
with the dependent variable (with an F-statistic of 7.95) but less strongly correlated with our choice
of left-hand side variable (with an F-statistic of 2.08). The relevant Stock and Yogo test statistic
for having less than a 5% relative bias in our parameter estimates when there are four instruments
and one left-hand side endogenous variable is 7.63. When we carry out a Sargan test for the Euler
equation, we fail to reject the null of over-identification (p-value 0.13) as we do for the MRS.

5.3       Calibration of the Remaining Parameters

As discussed in section 3.4, to estimate the responsiveness on the extensive margin, we need to specify
all the details of the model. There are three sets of parameters used in the calibration: those estimated
via the MRS conditions and the Euler equation, those coming from external sources and those that
we calibrate using the full model.
   To obtain the calibrated parameters of our model, we have to specify the ex-ante heterogeneity that
is captured by z, χ and ζ in our estimation. To to this, we focus on the cohort of women born in the
1950s. Attanasio et al. (2008) show that labour supply behaviour differs substantially across cohorts.



                                                           24
The main cause in that paper is differences in costs of childcare, but there are also differences in
wage processes across cohorts. These differences will lead to different responses across cohorts on the
extensive margin and could also lead to differences in the intensive margin because of different levels of
consumption and leisure. On the other hand, to check the robustness of our results, we reestimate the
MRS by cohort and compute static elasticities. Point estimates suggest that elasticities are smaller
in more recent cohorts, but this is not statistically significant.
   Within the 1950s cohort, we assume there are nine different groups of women: one group of
women who remain childless for the whole of their lifetime, and eight groups of women who differ by
maternity experience. These women exogenously receive two kids but differ in the age at which the
first child arrives. To determine when these children are born, we draw on Rendall et al. (2010) who
use population and survey data sources to calculate the distribution of maternity age at arrival of the
first child for different cohorts of women in various countries. Consistent with the distribution they
provide for our cohort of interest, we assume 16% of women are childless, 27% have their first child
at the age of 19, 12% at the age of 22, 11% at the age of 24, 5% at the ages of 26, 28, 30 and 32 and,
finally, 14% at the age of 34. We assume that the second child arrives 2 years after the first.

External Parameters. Table 5 reports the estimated and external parameters used in the calibra-
tion. The first panel reports the estimated parameters from Tables 3 and 4 above. The second panel
reports parameters which come from external sources.


                                     Table 5: External Parameters

                          Estimated Parameters (from first-order conditions)
             Curvature on leisure                                    θ         1.75
             Curvature on consumption                                φ         0.76
             Curvature on utility                                    γ         2.07

                                         Exogenous Parameters
             Interest Rate (annual)                                  r         0.015
             Regression Log Wage on Age and Age2 (Men)               ιm    m
                                                                      1 , ι2   0.0684, -0.00065
             Husband and Wife Wage Correlation                       ρ         0.25
             Standard Deviation of Permanent Shock (Men)             σξ m      0.077
             Standard Deviation of Initial Wage (Men)                σξm ,0    0.54
             Length of Life (in years)                               T         50
             Length of Working Life (in years)                       R         40



   We fix the annualized interest rate to equal the average real return on three monthly T-bill at
0.015. The deterministic component of the male earnings process is estimated from the CEX: we take
the two parameters of a regression of husband log earnings on age and age squared.
   The standard deviation of the innovation for husband’s earnings is set to be 0.077, consistent with



                                                    25
Huggett et al. (2011). Further, we estimate an initial standard deviation of husband earnings of 0.54.
There is limited evidence on the variability of female wages and/or earnings. Further, in contrast with
men, this statistic is highly affected by non-random self-selection into the labour market, therefore we
calibrate the parameters that characterise the women’s wage process within the model as explained
below. Finally, we assume that the correlation coefficient between the two shocks (for husband and
wife) is equal to 0.25 as estimated by Hyslop (2001).
    As in Attanasio et al. (2008), there are two components to child care costs: the function G(ah,t )
and the price p. We estimate the function G(ah,t ) directly from data. In particular, for households
where the mother is working, we regress total childcare expenditure on the age of the youngest child,
the age of the oldest child, the number of children and a dummy that equals one if the youngest child
is 0. The shape G(ah,t ) can be derived from the coefficients of this regression function, using the
assumption that in our model all women have two children at an interval of two years.20 This implies
that the child care cost can be expressed as a function of the age of the youngest child.
    Finally, we assume individuals in this cohort live for 50 years from age 22, with the last 10 in
retirement, and we assume that the household receives a pension equal to 70% of the husband’s
earnings in the final working period.

    Calibrated parameters. There are nine parameters that we calibrate within our decision model:
the fixed cost of working, F̄ ; the price of child care, p; the offered wage gender gap, y0f /y0m ; the standard
deviation of the permanent shock to women, σξf ; the standard deviation of the initial wage for women,
σξf ,0 ; two parameters that determine exogenous wage growth, ιf1 and ιf2 ; and the base weighting on
leisure in the CES utility function, ψ0 , which, together with a set of demographics z and the estimates
of ψz , determine the total weight on leisure in the utility function. Finally, we also calibrate the
discount rate β.
    The targets for the calibration are taken from the data for the cohort of women born in the 1950s
and observed between age 25 and 55. We target the female participation rate, the participation rate
of mothers, average hours worked, the observed wage gender gap, the observed variance wage growth,
the observed initial variance in wages and the observed wage growth at two different stages of the
life-cycle. Finally, we target median wealth to median household income ratio as in Low (2005).
    In Table 6, we report the value of the parameters we obtain in this calibration exercise as well as
the value of the targeted moments in the data and in the simulated data. The monetary fixed cost of
working is about 6% of median earnings of women aged 25 to 55. The monetary fixed childcare cost
is up to 13% of median earnings of women aged 25 to 55 for a child age 0-2.
    The initial offered wage gender gap that it is needed to target the observed wage gender gap of
  20 Our
                            
         estimate of G ah,t combines the cost of the first born child along with any subsequent costs associated with
                                                                                                                     
additional children who are born later. In this way, any economies of scale in child costs will be captured by G ah,t ,
but we do not identify separately the marginal cost of extra children.




                                                          26
0.72 is 0.74. Note however than in addition to the initial wage gender gap there is a further, exogenous
wage gap that opens up through differential wage growth for men and women over the life-cycle. In
particular the calibrated exogenous wage growth implies that male wages are on average 77% higher
by the age of 45 than at the moment of entering the labour market. In contrast for a female the figure
will be only 31%. We calibrate the standard deviation of female wages innovations to be 0.063 and
the standard deviation of the initial women’s wages to 0.50.


                             Table 6: Calibrated Parameters and Targets

              Parameters                                                         Value
              Constant term weight of leisure                           ψ0         4.20
              Childcare Cost                                            p          967
              Fixed Cost of Working                                     F̄         468
              Offered Wage Gender Gap at age 22                       y0f /y0m    0.74
              Standard Deviation of Permanent Shock (Women)             σξ f      0.063
              Standard Deviation of Initial Wage (Women)               σξf ,0     0.50
              Exogenous growth in offered wage                          ιf1       0.052
              Exogenous growth in offered wage                          ιf2      -0.0006
              Discount Factor (annualized)                               β        0.99

              Targets                                                 Data       Model
              Weekly hours worked                                      37.3        37.3
              Participation Rate                                      0.684       0.679
              Participation Rate of Mothers 0-2                       0.538       0.546
              Observed Wage Gender Gap                                0.720       0.727
              Observed Variance Wage Growth (Women)                   0.005       0.005
              Observed Initial Variance of Wages (Women)               0.15        0.15
              Wage Growth (if younger than 40)                        0.012       0.010
              Wage Growth (if older than 40)                          0.001       0.004
              Median wealth to income ratio                            1.84       1.80
              Statistics for women born in the 1950s and aged 25 to 55. Wage growth
              is annual.




5.4    Goodness of fit

Our next step is to show to what extent the model can account for some observed features of female
labour supply behaviour that were not explicitly targeted in the calibration. The calibration was
focused on averages taken over the life-cycle. Our focus here is on life-cycle paths and on the distri-
bution of hours and wages. Figure 2 shows life-cycle profiles in the simulations and in the data while
Table 7 reports additional moments on heterogeneity.



                                                  27
Figure 2: Life-Cycle Profiles: Baseline Model (solid black line) versus Data (dashed red line)

                                  Participation                                              Hours




                                                                        600
        1




                                                                        500
        .8




                                                                        400
        .6




                                                                        300
                                                                        200
        .4




              25   30        35        40         45     50   55              25   30   35     40      45        50   55


                        Variance of Log Observed Wages                                  Observed Net Wage




                                                                        2.9
        .25




                                                                        2.8
                                                                        2.7
        .15




                                                                        2.6
                                                                        2.5
        .05




              25   30        35        40         45     50   55              25   30   35     40      45        50   55




                                        Table 7: Statistics on Hetereogeneity

                                                                                              Data          Model

      Participation Rate: Mothers with Children Aged 3-17                                     0.681         0.688
      Participation Rate: Women without Dependent Children                                    0.754         0.692
      Average      Hours     Worked          10th      Percentile                             20            25
      Average      Hours     Worked          25th      Percentile                             35            31
      Average      Hours     Worked          50th      Percentile                             40            38
      Average      Hours     Worked          75th      Percentile                             40            44
      Average      Hours     Worked          90th      Percentile                             48            48
      Wage 10th Percentile                                                                    8.16          8.36
      Wage 50th Percentile                                                                    15.05         16.02
      Wage 90th Percentile                                                                    29.23         31.02
      Correlation of wages and hours                                                          0.32          0.45
      Women without dependent children are women who have never had children and those whose
      children are over 17.




                                                                   28
    The life-cycle path of female labour supply both at the extensive and intensive margin is similar
in the model and in the data. From Table 7, the model does a good job in terms of participation of
other demographic groups such as women who have no dependent children, and mothers of children
aged 3 to 17. Regarding the intensive margin the distribution of hours worked is very close to the
data, although the fraction of women working an average of 40 hours a week is higher in the data.
Observed female wages and the variance of wages are increasing with age in our simulations, consistent
with what we observe in the data. The distribution of observed wages is also similar to that in the
data. The profiles shown are shaped not only by our assumptions on the wage process, but also by
the endogenous selection of women into the labour market. Finally, we report the correlation of wages
and hours worked for those employed is 0.32 in the data, compared to 0.45 in the simulations.
    Finally, we use a simulated sample to reestimate the MRS equation, employing the same procedure
used in getting our estimates from the data and described in section 2.1. The estimates of the MRS
parameters θ and φ that we obtained from actual data (and that were used to generate the simulated
data) are almost identical to those we recover from the simulated data. Given the complexity of the
model that includes discrete choices over the life-cycle, this is an important validation of our strategy.


6     Labour supply elasticities
This section provides the key results of the paper. We use the estimates of the model to discuss
implications for various wage elasticities. We start our discussion with the static Marshallian and
Hicksian elasticities that can be obtained from the MRS parameters. We then move on to the Frisch
elasticities at the intensive margin using estimates from our Euler equation. We then simulate the
full calibrated model to obtain elasticities at the extensive margin and the aggregate response of labor
supply to changes in wages. When using the full model, we analyse both responses to transitory
changes to wages, which do not have wealth effects and so are analogous to the Frisch elasticities, and
the effect of shifts in the entire wage profile allowing for savings and wealth to change, which leads to
life-cycle Marshallian and Hicksian elasticities.

6.1    Marshallian and Hicksian hours elasticities

The first two columns in Table 8 show how the MRS parameters translate into within-period Marshal-
lian and Hicksian wage elasticities separately for hours of work and for consumption. These elasticities
vary according to family characteristics and the levels of consumption and leisure. We report elas-
ticities at different points of the distribution of Marshallian elasticities to highlight the heterogeneity
across individuals.
    The median Marshallian hours elasticity is estimated to be 0.18, implying an upward sloping labour
supply function. As the estimates of the utility function parameters satisfy quasi-concavity, Hicksian




                                                    29
elasticities are greater than Marshallian elasticities: for the household with the median Marshallian
elasticity, the Hicksian hours elasticity is three times larger at 0.54, indicating large income effects.
   The Marshallian and Hicksian elasticities show substantial heterogeneity. The 90-10 range of the
Marshallian hours elasticity is 0.93 (from -0.14 to 0.79) while for the Hicksian one it is 0.78 (from
0.38 to 1.16). Differences in hours worked are an important source of variation in both the Hicksian
and Marshallian elasticities. Figure 3 plots average elasticities by wages and by hours worked. Those
working the fewest hours and those with the lowest wages have the largest proportional response to a
wage increase.


                      Table 8: Elasticities at Percentiles of Marshallian distribution

                                              Wage                             Interest rate
                          Marshallian         Hicksian        Frisch               Frisch


                                           Hours worked                       Hours worked
                 10th         −0.14             0.38           0.80               0.78
                           [−0.31,0.00]       [0.21,0.62]   [0.25,1.85]           [0.25,1.61]

                 25th          0.01             0.44           0.80                 0.76
                           [−0.11,0.13]       [0.22,0.79]   [0.24,1.99]           [0.24,1.68]

                 50th          0.18             0.54           0.87                 0.81
                            [0.05,0.38]       [0.24,1.07]   [0.26,2.29]           [0.24,1.90]

                 75th          0.39             0.69           1.00                 0.93
                            [0.16,0.86]       [0.28,1.49]   [0.31,2.85]           [0.31,2.34]

                 90th          0.79             1.16           1.92                 1.82
                            [0.36,1.65]       [0.51,2.30]   [0.57,4.96]           [0.57,4.07]


                                           Consumption                         Consumption
                 25th          0.82             0.43           0.04               −1.17
                            [[0.68,1.08]      [0.18,0.87]   [−0.02,0.50]        [−1.83,−0.56]

                 50th          1.05             0.52           0.05                −1.19
                            [0.94,1.23]       [0.24,0.98]   [−0.02,0.57]        [−1.84,−0.52]

                 75th          1.30             0.61           0.05                −1.20
                            [1.14,1.46]       [0.31,1.06]   [−0.02,0.63]        [−1.84,−0.50]


                 Elasticities are calculated as averages within five percentage point bands around the
                 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th and 90th percentiles of the Marshallian distribution. 95%
                 confidence intervals in square brackets. Confidence intervals are bootstrapped with
                 1000 replications.




   In common with much of the labour supply literature, our estimates of the Marshallian elasticity
are quite small (see Keane (2011) for a survey). They are comparable to those found for female labour
supply in Blundell et al. (1998), who find values of the Marshallian elasticity ranging from 0.13 to
0.37 (depending on the age of the youngest child). Our estimates of the Hicksian elasticity are not too
dissimilar from other estimates in the literature obtained a similar methodology to ours. For example,
Blundell et al. (1998) obtain Hicksian elasticities ranging from just 0.14 to 0.44. Other results in the



                                                            30
                                                            Figure 3: Intensive elasticities




                                         6




                                                                                                                  6
                                         4




                                                                                                                  4
                      Hours elasticity




                                                                                               Hours elasticity
                                         2




                                                                                                                  2
                                         0




                                                                                                                  0
                                             0   20        40       60        80         100                          0   20    40      60    80   100
                                                 Percentiles of wage distribution                                              Weekly hours


                                                                          Marshallian                                      Hicksian
                                                                          Intensive Frisch

                   Lines show the distributions of Marshallian, Hicksian and intensive Frisch elasticities
                   smoothed using a local polynomial.




literature, however, report much larger estimates. MaCurdy (1983), for instance, estimates elasticities
ranging from 0.74 to 1.43 (for men). The meta-study by Chetty et al. (2011) report an average
elasticity (for men and women) of 0.33.
   Different studies take different approaches and use different sources of variation to estimate elastic-
ities. We investigated extensively the main reasons for different estimates of labour supply elasticities.
Our hypotheses ranged from the type of specification used,21 to the type of variation in wages that is
used to identify the elasticity (that is what type of instruments are used), to sample selection rules.
As 2SLS or GMM approaches to estimate equilibrium conditions such as the MRS equation are sen-
sitive to the normalization used, we also investigated whether the results we obtain depend on which
variable is used as a dependent variable. It turns out that the normalization used drives the result in
a fundamental fashion, while results are robust to the other hypotheses considered. In particular, we
find that IV or GMM estimates obtained using wages as the left hand side variable (as in MaCurdy)
result in very large elasticities while putting hours on the left hand side (similar to Blundell et al.
(1998), who use hours worked) yields much smaller elasticities. As noted above, we use the Fuller
estimator, which is less sensitive to the normalisation of the estimating equation than alternative
methods. In Appendix F we report results from GMM estimation with different normalisations.
  21 That   is whether one uses consumption to proxy for the marginal utility of wealth or other indicators.




                                                                                    31
6.2    Frisch hours elasticity

We compute Frisch elasticities with respect to wages at the intensive margin using equation (17) and
the estimates of the Euler equation parameters reported in section 5.2. We report these elasticities in
the third column of Table 8 and plot them alongside Hicksian and Marshallian elasticities in Fig. 3.
   The Frisch elasticity for hours of work is larger than the Hicksian elasticity, as theory would predict.
The elasticity also varies in the cross section rising from 0.8 at the 10th percentile of the Marshallian
elasticity to 1.92 at the 90th percentile. The median value is 0.87. It is quite common to find large
estimates of the Frisch hours elasticity among married women, and our findings are broadly in line
with those of previous studies. In a recent paper, Blundell et al. (2016b) find a Frisch elasticity for
married women of 0.96. Kimmel and Kniesner (1998) estimate a Frisch elasticity for this group of
0.67. Part of the heterogeneity we observe in the Frisch elasticities is due to differences across the
life-cycle and in demographics, but, once again, much of it is also due to differences in the level of
hours of work. As with the Hicksian and Marshallian elasticities, Figure 3 shows that Frisch hours
elasticities are largest for those working the fewest hours.
   The elasticity of consumption with respect to anticipated wage changes is small but positive (owing
to the fact consumption and leisure are substitutes). The Frisch elasticity of consumption with respect
to the interest rate at the median level of consumption is -1.19.
   We compare these results with those obtained when we impose additive separability for preferences
over consumption and leisure, as well as when we use a standard CES utility specification in Appendix
E. This exercise highlights the importance of adopting a flexible utility specification. A standard
CES specification, which is shown to be rejected by the estimation in section 5.1, leads to similar
estimates of Marshallian hours elasticities, but much larger Hicksian and Frisch elasticities. The
median Frisch hours elasticity estimated using the more restrictive standard CES specification is 1.33,
which is roughly 50% larger than our baseline result. The corollary of this result is that the Frisch
elasticity of consumption with respect to the interest rate is much lower: imposing a standard CES
forces consumption and leisure to have the same substitution parameters and therefore consumption
would be less elastic and leisure more elastic than in our baseline. In addition, the standard CES
utility implies much greater non-separability between consumption and leisure: implying a Frisch wage
elasticity of consumption of 0.4 compared to 0.05 under our more general utility specification. On
the other hand, when we impose additive separability with our general CES specification, the Frisch
hours elasticity is very similar to the one we estimate allowing for non-separability.

6.3    The Extensive margin, aggregate elasticities and life-cycle responses

This section discusses the responsiveness of labour supply at the extensive margin, life-cycle responses
and aggregation issues at different margins and across households. We define the extensive margin as




                                                   32
the change in the percentage of women participating as the wage changes. We can then calculate how
total hours worked in the economy change as wages change, which is the result of both the extensive
and intensive margin responses. This is what we call the “aggregate response”. We also calculate
aggregate changes in efficiency units, because women with different levels of productivity may respond
differently, as suggested by Figure 3.
    We explore the response to two different types of wage changes. First, in section 6.3.1, we focus on
the response of labour supply to temporary changes in wages, as would be relevant one for temporary
tax changes.22 We discuss heterogeneity in responses across age groups, across the wealth distribution,
across demographic groups and over the business cycle. Second, in section 6.3.2 we calculate labour
supply changes in response to changes in the entire life-cycle wage profile. This is interesting for two
reasons. First, the responses to changes in the entire wage profile are useful for thinking about the
implications of differences in taxes over time or across countries; and second, it allows us to compare
these life-cycle Marshallian and Hicksian elasticities with the static elasticities from the MRS to assess
the accuracy of the static approximation.

6.3.1    Response to Temporary Wage Changes

Frisch responses are calculated by comparing labour supply at a given age between the baseline
economy and a counterfactual economy in which wages are anticipated to be higher at that particular
age.23 The wage difference generates differences in participation rates, differences in hours worked
for participants and, therefore, differences in the aggregate labour supply. In Table 9, we report
the average response for different age groups. The third column reports the ‘extensive response’,
calculated as the percentage point change in participation following a one percent increase in the
wage. The fourth to sixth columns report three different percentiles of the hours intensive margin
elasticity distribution at each age, computed by considering only those individuals who participate
both in the baseline economy and in the counterfactual economy.24 Changes in participation also
induce changes in the distribution of hours worked that would be reflected in the aggregate response
of labor supply. Finally, therefore, the last two columns reports the ‘aggregate’ elasticity: the change
in the total number of hours worked and the change in efficiency units of labour, considering both
intensive and extensive margins.
    A first point to notice is the variation in the size of the extensive margin elasticity over the life-
cycle. As a consequence, the age composition of the population may have important implications
for the aggregate response of labour supply to changes in wages. Early in life, the percentage point
   22 We compute responses to both anticipated and unanticipated the temporary changes. The results are almost

identical because there is very little effect on the marginal utility of wealth, λ, of a temporary change.
   23 As expected, if the temporary wage change was unanticipated, the labor supply response will be almost identical.

This is due to the absence of an income effect as a result of the wage change.
   24 The comparable value calculated direct from step 2 of the estimation process is 0.86. The similarity of estimates

from step 2 and step 3 of the estimation provides validation for the more restrictive assumptions invoked in step 3.




                                                          33
                                     Table 9: Frisch Responses by Age

          Age      Participation      Extensive        Intensive Elasticity      Aggregate Elasticity
          Band         Rate           Response
                    (Percent)        (Percent Pt)      25th    50th     75th     Hours      Eff units

          25-29         61.61             0.82         0.69     0.85    1.09      1.93         1.44
          30-34         70.07             0.63         0.66     0.82    1.11      1.51         1.12
          35-39         70.00             0.63         0.64     0.82    1.14      1.49         1.08
          40-44         72.05             0.56         0.64     0.85    1.21      1.37         1.01
          45-49         69.53             0.59         0.65     0.88    1.25      1.42         1.04
          50-55         65.37             0.59         0.67     0.91    1.30      1.49         1.06

          The extensive response is the percentage point change in participation in response to a 1%
          increase in the wage. The aggregate elasticity reports the percentage change in hours corre-
          sponding to a percentage change in the wage, accounting for changes at both the extensive and
          intensive margins.




response is about 0.82, falling to 0.63 between 30 and 35 and to a minimum of 0.56 for the 40-45
group. The intensive margin median elasticity is stable over the life-cycle, however the 75th percentile
elasticity increases substantially with age.
   The aggregate elasticity for hours is about 1.45 on average, but again is larger at the start of the
life-cycle. The relative importance of the extensive and intensive margins to explaining the macro
elasticity varies with age. Before age 30, the intensive margin response contributes approximately
46% of the response in the aggregate. However, by age 50-55, the contribution of the intensive
response has increased to 63%. The contribution of the intensive margin is somewhat larger than
Erosa et al. (2016), who find that the response through the intensive margin contributes about 38%
to the aggregate response. This difference is not surprising since the Erosa et al. (2016) calculation
is for men where we see less variability in hours worked but it highlights the difficulty of aggregating
behaviour to create a single labour supply elasticity. The aggregate elasticity for efficiency units is
smaller than that for hours, but also declines with age.
   Household Wealth. In Table 10, we report household responses across the wealth distribution.
We calculate the percentiles of household’s wealth at each age and classify households in four different
groups (those below the 25th percentile, those between the 25th and 50th percentiles, those between
the 50th and 75th percentiles and, finally, those above the 75th percentile). We find a very clear
pattern of a decreasing response of the extensive margin with increasing household’s wealth. This is
the case at all ages. There is also heterogeneity in the intensive margin elasticity by wealth, with the
wealthy being less responsive, but the differences are more moderate than in the case of the extensive




                                                        34
margin response. The message from these results is that the distribution of wealth is a key aspect to
understand the response of aggregate labor supply to changes in wages.

                              Table 10: Frisch Responses by Household Wealth

                  Wealth         Participation       Extensive        Intensive       Aggregate
                  Quartile           Rate            Response         Elasticity      Elasticity
                                  (Percent)         (Percent Pt)      (Median)

                  Below p25           45.42              1.20            1.20             3.53
                  p25 − p50           59.25              0.77            1.03             2.07
                  p50 − p75           76.80              0.39            0.81             1.23
                  Above p75           90.10              0.16            0.66             0.81

                  The extensive response is the percentage point change in participation in response
                  to a 1% increase in the wage. The aggregate elasticity reports the percentage
                  change in hours corresponding to a percentage change in the wage, accounting for
                  changes at both the extensive and intensive margins.




   Macroeconomic Conditions. Labour supply responses may change across the business cycle.
Differences in the economic environment will lead to differences in the estimated elasticity for the same
underlying preference parameters, as also discussed by Keane and Rogerson (2012). This issue is likely
to be relevant particularly for the extensive margin, which is driven by non-convexities in the dynamic
problem, such as fixed costs of going to work. If these non-convexities are important, it is likely that
a certain sequence of aggregate shocks will tend to bunch (or further disperse) households around the
kinks that determine the extensive margin response. As a consequence, different distributions of the
state variables will trigger different responses in the aggregate. In particular, whether an economy is
in a recession or not may well affect how much individuals are willing to respond to wage growth.
   In Table 11, we analyse the extensive margin, intensive margin and aggregate labour supply re-
sponses to temporary changes in wages at different points of the business cycle.25 We report the labour
supply response in the first and fourth quarters of the recession. The key finding is that responses
are higher in recessions than in the baseline, and further, responses increase with the duration of the
recession. From the results in Table 10, the decrease in wealth that households suffer over a recession
could be behind the increasing responsiveness of the extensive margin to anticipated changes in wages.
Effects may persist beyond the end of the recession, especially if wages or wealth are permanently
lower. Both lower wages and lower wealth lead to higher elasticities: households who have been hit
by recessions earlier in their life are more responsive throughout the remainder of their lives.26
   25 In the simulation used to derive these numbers, we define a recession as a situation in which all men and women

receive an unexpected negative earnings shock for four consecutive quarters. These wage changes are to the permanent
wage and will affect the marginal utility of wealth as well as changing intertemporal incentives.
   26 We show this by using our simulations to compare women hit by a recession at age 25 with those not hit by




                                                         35
                            Table 11: Frisch Responses across the Business Cycle

                       Business             Extensive      Intensive      Aggregate Elasticity
                       Cycle                Response       Elasticity     Hours    Eff units
                                            (Percent)      (Median)

                       Baseline                 0.63            0.86       1.53          1.12
                       Recession
                        First quarter           0.67            0.87       1.61          1.15
                       Fourth quarter           0.73            0.86       1.71          1.20

                       The extensive response is the percentage point change in participation in
                       response to a 1% increase in the wage. The aggregate elasticity reports the
                       percentage change in hours corresponding to a percentage change in the
                       wage, accounting for changes at both the extensive and intensive margins.




    Demographics. Finally, we explore the effect of children on the size of the elasticities. Mothers
of children aged 0 to 2 are more elastic at the extensive margin (0.82) than mothers of older children
(0.68) and that childless women show the lowest elasticity (0.57). In contrast, differences in intensive
margin elasticities are less pronounced, with mothers of young children being slightly less elastic.

6.3.2    Life-Cycle Responses to Wage Changes

In this section, we use our model to compute the response to a change in the entire wage profile. This
is the appropriate way to measure the response to a permanent tax change. The life-cycle Marshallian
elasticity captures the effect on labour supply to a change in wages when savings are allowed to change,
meaning that the extra income that arises in period t due to the increased wage, does not have to be
spent in that period.
    The life-cycle Hicksian elasticity arises after netting off the extra lifetime resources from the lifetime
budget constraint. This is in contrast with a static Hicksian response which would net off the extra
resources within period. There are two ways in a life-cycle context to net off the extra income:
compensation could be calculated as the income needed to keep the original bundle of consumption
and hours worked affordable. In practice, this means that the extra income from each period would
     f
be ∆wh,t ∗ (H − lh,t ). Summing across all periods would give the extra resources that need to be
subtracted. This can be implemented either by imposing a person-specific lump-sum tax that is
identical across periods, or a person-specific lump-sum tax at a given point in time. The choice
will matter because uncertainty means the timing of income is important.27 The alternative to this
exact compensation is to do the compensation within a group, or indeed within the whole population
recession. Differences persist throughout their lifetimes. The detail of these results are not reported here.
   27 In a model with substantial heterogeneity, this is computationally costly.




                                                           36
as discussed by Keane (2011). This would mean calculating the extra income for all individuals as
with the exact calculation, but then redistributing through a common per period lump-sum payment.
This does not exactly give the life-cylce Hicksian response because some households will be over-
compensated and some under-compensated relative to the change in lifetime resources. On the other
hand, this can be the right way to calculate the response to a funded tax change. If preferences are
quasi-linear, as in Chetty (2012), then there are no income effects and so there is no effect on labour
supply of any redistribution associated with the lump sum compensation.
    In Table 12, we calculate the life-cycle Marshallian and Hicksian responses. We show separately
the extensive, intensive and aggregate responses, and further show the aggregate response in terms of
hours and in terms of efficiency units. The first panel shows responses when the Hicksian compensation
is common across all individuals. The second panel shows responses when compensation is common
within quartiles of the inital female wage distribution. We compare these life-cycle elasticities with the
static elasticities estimated from the MRS. As we argued in section 2.1 and emphasized by Meghir and
Phillips (2008), life-cycle labor supply responses may be well approximated by the static elasticities
computed from the MRS.
    The median life-cycle Marshallian elasticity for the intensive margin is 0.43, substantially above the
0.18 static Marshallian elasticity. The static elasticities are calculated from the MRS using nondurable
consumption, holding constant saving and also, implicitly, durable spending. In a full life-cycle model,
however, following a wage increase, savings adjust and individuals reallocate resources across periods.
Furthermore, all life-cycle resources are spent, so that we have a broader consumption measure in these
calculations. In other words, the extra income from the wage increase is not all spent on nondurables
in the period it is earned. Spreading these resources across periods and other goods reduces the
amount of extra income and hence the income effect in the period it is earned. This means the life-
cycle Marshallian elasticity is more like the static Hicksian elasticity. However, the life-cycle Hicksian
elasticity is close to the Hicksian elasticity we estimate with the MRS.
    Looking at the responses by quartile in the bottom panel, there is substantial heterogeneity in
the size of the life-cycle Marhsallian intensive margin response depending on the initial conditions,
particularly in the extensive margin response. On the other hand, the life-cycle Hicksian elasticity
when there is within quartile compensation, does not vary much with the quartile of the initial
conditions.28 The substitution effect is very similar across groups, and it is the income effect which
matters more for the heterogeneity in the Marshallian labor supply responses across groups.
   28 Making the individual transfer contingent on initial husband earnings and the maternity group does not alter the

overall intensive margin response.




                                                         37
                                Table 12: Life-Cycle Responses

                                  Extensive        Intensive Elasticity      Aggregate Elasticity
                                  Response         25th 50th 75th            Hours    Eff Units
                                 (Percent Pt)

                                         Whole Sample

Marshallian
Life-cycle Response                   0.51         0.28     0.42    0.67      0.91          0.63
Static (MRS)                                       0.01     0.18    0.39
Hicksian
Life-cycle Response                   0.65         0.42     0.63    0.96      1.26         0.84
Static (MRS)                                       0.44     0.54    0.69

                                By Quartile of Initial Wage

Life-cycle Marshallian
        1st quartile                  0.62         0.40     0.57    0.80      2.25          1.88
       2nd quartile                   0.70         0.34     0.48    0.78      1.44          1.21
        3rd quartile                  0.55         0.32     0.48    0.75      0.97          0.83
        4th quartile                  0.17         0.22     0.33    0.52      0.46          0.40
Life-cycle Hicksian
        1st quartile                  0.66         0.46     0.65    0.87      2.47          2.05
       2nd quartile                   0.81         0.45     0.62    0.94      1.71          1.43
        3rd quartile                  0.64         0.48     0.67    0.97      1.25          1.04
        4th quartile                  0.21         0.41     0.56    0.81      0.71          0.60
The extensive response is the percentage point change in participation in response to a 1% increase in
the wage. The baseline participation rate is 67.8%. Within quartiles, the baseline participation rates
are 29,56,77 and 95% respectively. The aggregate elasticity reports the percentage change in hours
corresponding to a percentage change in the wage, accounting for changes at both the extensive and
intensive margins.




                                                 38
6.4    Elasticities with Returns to Experience

An important maintained assumption to this point has been the absence of any returns to experience.
Imai and Keane (2004) argue that assuming wages are exogenous may introduce a downward bias
in the estimates of the willingness to substitute intertemporally. Indeed, they present estimates of
such a parameter as high as 3.8 in a model that accounts for returns to labor market experience. We
consider as a robustness exercise an alternative framework in which returns to experience accrue to
individuals who are participating, but are not affected by the number of hours worked conditional on
participation. In particular, we assume that human capital accumulates following the process:

                         ln efh,t = ln efh,t−1 + νI (Ph,t−1 = 1) − δI (Ph,t−1 = 0)

    We make the assumption that returns to experience operate only through the participation margin
because, in this case, the estimates of the MRS and Euler equations remain valid and are unaffected.
However, the solution for the discrete participation decision will change. Appendix F details the
estimation results allowing for returns to experience. Intensive elasticities are similar to our baseline.
The extensive margin response differs: with returns to experience, the current wage is only part of
the return to work and so changes to the current wage make little difference to participation. The
extensive margin response becomes very small.


7     Conclusion
This paper shows that in understanding labour supply behaviour and in calculating aggregate labour
supply elasticities, heterogeneity across individuals is very important. We also stress that aggregate
elasticities vary over the business cycle and with the duration of recessions. To make these points
precisely and show their quantitative importance, we estimate a life-cycle model of work and saving
choices and characterise the response of female labour supply to different types of wage changes. In
the process of estimating such a model, we use a flexible specification of preferences that allows us
to test some of the assumptions commonly used both in the macro and labour literature on labour
supply. Empirically, we use as a robust an approach as possible.
    We find substantial heterogeneity in labour supply responses, and this heterogeneity is prevalent
at both the intensive and extensive margins. The median Marshallian elasticity is 0.18, but has an
interquartile range of 0.01 to 0.39 and 90-10 range of -0.14 to 0.79. The corresponding Hicksian
elasticity is 0.54, with interquartile range of 0.44 to 0.69 and 90-10 range of 0.38 to 1.16; and the
corresponding Frisch wage elasticity is 0.87, with an interquartile range from 0.8 to 1.0 and 90-10 range
of 0.8 to 1.92. In terms of heterogeneity in the intensive margin due to observable characteristics,
the Marshallian, Hicksian and Frisch elasticities are greatest for those working the least number of
hours, those with the lowest wages and those with the least wealth. For the extensive margin, the



                                                    39
response to anticipated wage growth is large for women under 30 and can explain 54% of their labour
supply response. This sizable contribution of the extensive margin declines with age. We find some
evidence of nonseparability between consumption and leisure, but assuming there is separability does
not substantially change the distribution of estimates of the Frisch elasticity.
   Our preference parameter estimates reject the restrictions required for balanced growth, which
are widely used in the macro literature. The curvature on consumption in utility is less than log,
and the curvature on hours worked is much greater than the curvature on consumption. This implies
individuals are less willing to substitute hours of work over time than they are willing to substitute
consumption. Further, the heterogeneity we observe means it is not sensible to talk about a single
elasticity measuring how labour supply in the economy responds to wage changes. Instead, we aggre-
gate explicitly from individual behaviour to the aggregate to understand how economy wide hours of
work change given the demographic and age structure of the economy, the wealth distribution and
the state of the business cycle.
   Our results on the importance of the extensive margin in explaining macro elasticities can be
compared to others in the literature, especially Erosa et al. (2016) and Guner et al. (2012). Our
estimates put a greater importance on intensive margin changes in hours worked per week than those
papers, but we do find that a substantial fraction of the changes in total hours is due to changes in
participation, ranging from 54% to 37%. Erosa et al. (2016) find that the extensive margin is the
dominant labour supply response, explaining 62% of the aggregate response. Their model has a similar
life-cycle structure to ours, but is focused on male labour supply and the conclusion on the importance
of the extensive margin is for men where hours of work are less variable. Guner et al. (2012) analyse
the importance of the female extensive margin for the aggregate response of labor supply to changes
in taxes in a model with heterogeneous married and single households, and with a female extensive
margin as well as a male and female intensive margin. As with Erosa et al. (2016), they find that
the female extensive margin is a key contributor to the aggregate response to tax reform. The key
difference from our framework is their assumption that there is no uncertainty in wages and this
assumption of certainty tends to lead to greater labour supply responses, as shown in Low (2005).
   One key point that emerges from our exercise is that aggregate responses of labour supply to
changes in wages (both at the intensive and the extensive margin) is not constant: it changes with the
structure of the population as well as with the state of the economy. This finding is similar to Keane
and Rogerson (2012), who argue that there is no contradiction between macro and micro elasticities
of labour supply and that they are simply measuring different concepts. Our conclusion is however
stronger: the macro elasticity is not a structural parameter, it is simply the result of highly nonlinear
aggregation which depends on demographic structure as well as the distribution of wealth and the
particular point in the business cycle.




                                                   40
References
Aaronson, D. and E. French (2004): “The Effect of Part-Time Work on Wages: Evidence from
  the Social Security Rules,” Journal of Labor Economics, 22, 329–352.

Abowd, J. M. and D. Card (1989): “On The Covariance Structure of Earnings and Hours
  Changes,” Econometrica, 57, 411–445.

Alonso-Borrego, C. and M. Arellano (1999): “Symmetrically Normalized Instrumental-
  variable Estimation Using Panel Data,” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 17, 36–49.

Altonji, J. (1986): “Intertemporal Substitution in Labor Supply: Evidence from Micro Data,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 94, S176–S215.

Attanasio, O. P. (1999): Handbook of Macroeconomics, Elsevier, vol. 1, chap. 11, 741–812.

Attanasio, O. P. and H. Low (2004): “Estimating Euler Equations,” Review of Economic Dy-
  namics, 7, 406–435.

Attanasio, O. P., H. Low, and V. Sánchez-Marcos (2008): “Explaining Changes in Female
  Labor Supply in a Life-cycle Model,” American Economic Review, 98, 1517–1552.

Attanasio, O. P. and G. Weber (1995): “Is Consumption Growth Consistent with Intertemporal
  Optimization? Evidence from The Consumer Expenditure Survey,” Journal of Political Economy,
  103, 1121–1157.

——— (2010): “Consumption and Saving: Models of Intertemporal Allocation and their Implications
  for Public Policy,” Journal of Economic Literature, 48, 693–751.

Blundell, R., A. Bozio, and G. Laroque (2011): “Labor Supply and the Extensive Margin,”
  American Economic Review, 101, 482–486.

Blundell, R., M. Costa, C. Meghir, and J. Shaw (2016a): “Female Labor Supply, Human
  Capital and Welfare Reform,” Econometrica, 84, 17051753.

Blundell, R., A. Duncan, and C. Meghir (1998): “Estimating Labor Supply Responses Using
  Tax Reforms,” Econometrica, 66, 827–861.

Blundell, R. and T. MaCurdy (1999): Handbook of Labor Economics, Elsevier, vol. 3, chap.
  Labor supply: A review of alternative approaches, 1559–1695.

Blundell, R., C. Meghir, and P. Neves (1993): “Labour Supply and Intertemporal Substitu-
  tion,” Journal of Econometrics, 59, 137–160.




                                                 41
Blundell, R., L. Pistaferri, and I. Saporta-Eksten (2016b): “Consumption Inequality and
  Family Labor Supply,” American Economic Review, 106, 387–435.

Blundell, R. and I. Walker (1986): “A Life-Cycle Consistent Empirical Model of Family Labour
  Supply Using Cross-Section Data,” Review of Economic Studies, 53, 539–558.

Browning, M., A. Deaton, and M. Irish (1985): “A Profitable Approach to Labor Supply and
  Commodity Demands over the Life-Cycle,” Econometrica, 53, 503–544.

Browning, M., L. P. Hansen, and J. J. Heckman (1999): “Micro data and general equilibrium
  models,” in Handbook of Macroeconomics, ed. by J. B. Taylor and M. Woodford, Elsevier, vol. 1 of
  Handbook of Macroeconomics, chap. 8, 543–633.

Castex, G. and E. Dechter (2016): “A Model of Labor Supply, Fixed Costs and Work Schedules,”
  University of New South Wales, mimeo.

Chang, Y. and S.-B. Kim (2006): “From individual to aggregate labor supply : a quantitative
  analysis based on a heterogeneous agent macroeconomy,” International Economic Review, 47, 1–27.

Chetty, R. (2012): “Bounds on Elasticities with Optimization Frictions: A Synthesis of Micro and
  Macro Evidence on Labor Supply,” Econometrica, 80, 969–1018.

Chetty, R., A. Guren, D. Manoli, and A. Weber (2011): “Are Micro and Macro Labor Supply
  Elasticities Consistent? A Review of Evidence on the Intensive and Extensive Margins,” American
  Economic Review, 101, 471–475.

Davidson, R. and J. G. MacKinnon (2004): Econometric Theory and Methods, Oxford University
  Press.

Deaton, A. (1985): “Panel Data from Time Series of Cross-Sections,” Journal of Econometrics, 30,
  189–194.

Erosa, A., L. Fuster, and G. Kambourov (2016): “Towards a micro-founded theory of aggregate
  labor supply,” Review of Economic Studies, 83, 1001–1039.

Feenberg, D. and E. Coutts (1993): “An introduction to the TAXSIM model,” Journal of Policy
  Analysis and Management, 12, 189–194.

Fuller, W. A. (1977): “Some Properties of a Modification of the Limited Information Estimator,”
  Econometrica, 45, 939–953.

Goldin, C. and L. F. Katz (2007): “Long-Run Changes in the Wage Structure: Narrowing,
  Widening, Polarizing,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 135–167.



                                               42
Gorman, W. M. (1959): “Separable utility and aggregation,” Econometrica, 27, 469481.

Guner, N., R. Kaygusuz, and G. Ventura (2012): “Taxation and Household Labour Supply,”
  Review of Economic Studies, 79, 11131149.

Hahn, J. and J. Hausman (2002): “A New Specification Test For The Validity Of Instrumental
  Variables,” Econometrica, 70, 163–189.

——— (2003): “Weak Instruments: Diagnosis and Cures in Empirical Econometrics,” American
  Economic Review, 93, 118–125.

Hahn, J., J. Hausman, and G. Kuersteiner (2004): “Estimation with Weak Instruments: Accu-
  racy of Higher-order Bias and MSE Approximations,” Econometrics Journal, 7, 272–306.

Hansen, L. P., J. Heaton, and A. Yaron (1996): “Finite-Sample Properties of Some Alternative
  GMM Estimators,” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 14, 262–280.

Hausman, J., W. K. Newey, T. Woutersen, J. C. Chao, and N. R. Swanson (2012): “In-
  strumental Variable Estimation with Heteroskedasticity and Many Instruments,” Quantitative Eco-
  nomics, 3, 211–255.

Hayashi, F. (1987): “Tests for Liquidity Constraints: A Critical Survey,” in Advances in Economet-
  rics, Fifth World Congress, ed. by T. Bewley, Cambridge University Press, vol. 2, 91–120.

Heckman, J. J. and T. E. Macurdy (1980): “A Life Cycle Model of Female Labour Supply,” The
  Review of Economic Studies, 47, 47–74.

Heckman, J. J. and T. E. MaCurdy (1982): “Corrigendum on a Life Cycle Model of Female
  Labour Supply,” Review of Economic Studies, 49, 659–660.

Hirsch, B. T. (2005): “Why Do Part-Time Workers Earn Less? The Role of Worker and Job Skills,”
  ILR Review, 58, 525–551.

Huggett, M., G. Ventura, and A. Yaron (2011): “Sources of Lifetime Inequality,” American
  Economic Review, 101, 2923–2954.

Hyslop, D. R. (2001): “Rising U.S. Earnings Inequality and Family Labor Supply: The Covariance
  Structure of Intrafamily Earnings,” American Economic Review, 91, 755–777.

Imai, S. and M. P. Keane (2004): “Intertemporal Labor Supply and Human Capital Accumulation,”
  International Economic Review, 45, 601–641.




                                                43
Iskhakov, F., T. H. Jrgensen, J. Rust, and B. Schjerning (2017): “The endogenous grid
  method for discrete-continuous dynamic choice models with (or without) taste shocks,” Quantitative
  Economics, 8, 317–365.

Keane, M. P. (2011): “Labor Supply and Taxes: A Survey,” Journal of Economic Literature, 49,
  961–1075.

Keane, M. P. and R. Rogerson (2012): “Micro and Macro Labor Supply Elasticities: A Reassess-
  ment of Conventional Wisdom,” Journal of Economic Literature, 50, 464–476.

——— (2015): “Reconciling Micro and Macro Labor Supply Elasticities: A Structural Perspective,”
  Annual Review of Economics, 7, 89–117.

Keane, M. P. and N. Wasi (2016): “Labor Supply: the Roles of Human Capital and the Extensive
  Margin,” The Economic Journal, 126, 578–617.

Kimmel, J. and T. J. Kniesner (1998): “New Evidence on Labor Supply: Employment versus
  Hours Elasticities by Sex and Marital Status,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 42, 289–301.

Ljungqvist, L. and T. J. Sargent (2011): “A Labor Supply Elasticity Accord?” American
  Economic Review, 101, 487–491.

Low, H. (2005): “Self-insurance in a Life-cycle Model of Labour Supply and Savings,” Review of
  Economic Dynamics, 8, 945–975.

MaCurdy, T. (1981): “An Empirical Model of Labour Supply in a Life Cycle Setting,” Journal of
  Political Economy, 89, 1059–1085.

——— (1983): “A Simple Scheme for Estimating an Intertemporal Model of Labor Supply and
  Consumption in the Presence of Taxes and Uncertainty,” International Economic Review, 24, 265–
  289.

Mariano, R. and T. Sawa (1972): “The Exact Finite-Sample Distribution of the Limited-
  Information Maximum Likelihood Estimator in the Case of Two Included Endogenous Variables,”
  Journal of the American Statistical Association, 67, 159–163.

Meghir, C. and D. Phillips (2008): “Labour Supply and Taxes,” IZA WP, 3405.

Miller, R. A. and H. Sieg (1997): “A Microeconometric Comparison of Household Behavior
  between Countries,” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 15, 237–253.

Nelson, C. R. and R. Startz (1990a): “The Distribution of the Instrumental Variables Estimator
  and Its t-Ratio When the Instrument is a Poor One,” Journal of Business, 63, S125–S140.



                                                44
——— (1990b): “Some Further Results on the Exact Small Sample Properties of the Instumental
  Variables Estimator,” Econometrica, 58, 967–976.

Rendall, M., E. Aracil, C. Bagavos, C. Couet, A. DeRose, P. DiGiulio, T. Lappegard,
  I. Robert-Bobée, M. Rønsen, S. Smallwood, and G. Verropoulou (2010): “Increasingly
  Heterogeneous Ages at First Birth by Education in Southern European and Anglo-American Family-
  Policy Regimes: A Seven-country Comparison by Birth Cohort,” Population Studies, 64, 209–227.

Rogerson, R. and J. Wallenius (2009): “Micro and Macro Elasticities in a Life Cycle Model with
  Taxes,” Journal of Economic Theory, 144, 2277–2292.

Sawa, T. (1972): “Finite-Sample Properties of the k-Class Estimators,” Econometrica, 40, 653–680.

Staiger, D. and J. H. Stock (1997): “IV Regression with Weak Instruments,” Econometrica, 65,
  557–586.

Stock, J. H. and M. Yogo (2005): “Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV Regression,” in
  Identification and Inference for Econometric Models: Essays in Honor of Thomas Rothenberg, ed.
  by D. W. K. Andrews and J. H. Stock, Cambridge University Press, chap. 6, 80–108.

Ziliak, J. P. and T. J. Kniesner (1999): “Estimating Life-cycle Labor Supply Tax Effects,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 107, 326–359.




                                                45
Online Appendix A (to section 2): Derivation of Elasticities
Marshallian and Hicksian Elasticities
                                          m
                                                                 Ah,t+1
                             yt = Ah,t + yh,t − F (ah,t ) Ph,t −                                   (24)
                                                                 1 + rt+1


                                            ct + wt lt = yt + wt H                                 (25)

                                                                   −θ
                                                      ulh,t       lh,t
                                           wh,t =           = αh,t −φ                              (26)
                                                      uch,t       ch,t
   Taking the derivative of the budget constraint and the MRS equation and stacking them gives a
matrix equation:
                                           wl         ∂ ln c               w(H−l)
                                 "               #"            #       "            #
                                     1     c          ∂ ln w                 c
                                                                   =
                                                      ∂ ln l
                                     φ    −θ          ∂ ln w                 1
   This can be inverted to give the Marshallian elasticities in the main text (equation ??):

                                                   ∂ ln c   θw (H − l) + wl
                                          εM
                                           c =            =                                        (27)
                                                   ∂ ln w      θc + φwl
                                             ∂ ln l    φw (H − l) − c
                                           εM
                                            l =      =                                             (28)
                                             ∂ ln w      θc + φwl
                                                            
                                  ∂ ln h      φw (H − l) − c      l
                           εM
                            h   =        =−                                                        (29)
                                  ∂ ln w          θc + φwl     H −l

   To calculate the Hicksian elasticities, we first calculate the income elasticities by differentiating
the MRS equation and the budget constraint with respect to income:

                                                 ∂ ln c      θy
                                         εyc =          =                                          (30)
                                                 ∂ ln y   θc + φwl
                                                 ∂ ln l      φy
                                         εyl =          =                                          (31)
                                                 ∂ ln y   θc + φwl

Frisch Elasticities

In this section we provide the formulae for the first and second derivatives that are used to calculate
the different elasticities. We define D = exp(πz + ξP + ζ) (omitting subscripts for convenience). Then
it is easy to show that:


                                            uc (c, l) = DM −γ c−φ                                  (32)



                                            ul (c, l) = DαM −γ l−θ                                 (33)




                                                          1
                                        ucl (c, l) = (−γ)DM −γ−1 αc−φ l−θ                                                     (34)


                                                                ul (c, l) −θ
                                 ull (c, l) = (−γ)                       l − ul (c, l) θl−1                                   (35)
                                                                 αM

                                                              uc (c, l) −φ
                                 ucc (c, l) = (−γ)                     c − uc (c, l) φc−1                                     (36)
                                                                M
   Finally, note that:

                                                                           α                     1
                         ucl (c, l) = (−γ)uc (c, l) l−θ                      = (−γ)ul (c, l) c−φ                              (37)
                                                                           M                     M
   These expressions can be used to calculate the Frisch elasticities in the paper. The formula for the
wage Frisch for intensive margin choices can be derived as follows:

                                                                       ∂c
                                        "                       #"               #       "             #
                                              ucc       ucl            ∂w                      0
                                                                                     =
                                                                       ∂l
                                              ucl       ull            ∂w
                                                                                             uc
                                       "    ∂c
                                                    #       "                        #−1 "              #
                                            ∂w                   ucc       ucl                     0
                                                        =
                                            ∂l
                                            ∂w
                                                                 ucl       ull                 uc

                                 ∂c
                             "         #                               "                               #"            #
                                 ∂w                1                         ull           −ucl                  0
                                           =
                                 ∂l          ucc ull − u2cl                 −ucl           ucc               uc
                                 ∂w


                                                    w ∂c        uc ucl     w
                                           εF
                                            c =          =−                                                                   (38)
                                                    c ∂w    ucc ull − u2cl c

                                                        w ∂l      uc ucc      w
                                            εF
                                             l =             =                                                                (39)
                                                        l ∂w   ucc ull − u2cl l

                                           w ∂h ∂l       uc ucc      w       l
                                 εF
                                  h =              =−                  = −εl                                                  (40)
                                           h ∂l ∂w    ucc ull − u2cl h       h
   The formula for the interest-rate Frisch can similarly be derived as follows:

                                   "                     #"           ∂c              #        "             #
                                        ucc       ucl             ∂(1+Rt+1 )                           uc
                                                                      ∂l
                                                                                           =
                                        ucl       ull             ∂(1+Rt+1 )                           ul
                                 "         ∂c            #        "                        #−1 "             #
                                       ∂(1+Rt+1 )                      ucc       ucl                    uc
                                           ∂l
                                                              =
                                       ∂(1+Rt+1 )                      ucl       ull                    ul
                         "       ∂c           #                              "                               #"           #
                             ∂(1+Rt+1 )                   1                          ull       −ucl                  uc
                                                  =
                                 ∂l                 ucc ull − u2cl               −ucl              ucc               ul
                             ∂(1+Rt+1 )




                                                                       2
                 (1 + Rt+1 )      ∂c             uc ull − ul ucl         1 + Rt+1    uc ull − ul ucl
        εF
         c =
           R
                                          =                                       =                      (41)
                      c      ∂(1 + Rt+1 )   (1 + Rt+1 )(ucc ull − u2cl )     c      c(ucc ull − u2cl )

                 (1 + Rt+1 )      ∂l             ul ucc − uc ucl        1 + Rt+1    ul ucc − uc ucl
        εF
         l
           R
             =                            =                        2             =                       (42)
                      l      ∂(1 + Rt+1 )   (1 + Rt+1 )(ucc ull − ucl )     c      c(ucc ull − u2cl )

                  (1 + Rt+1 ) ∂h      ∂l              ul ucc − uc ucl         1 + Rt+1         l
         εF
          h =
            R
                                              =−                                       = −εF
                                                                                           l
                                                                                             R
                                                                                                         (43)
                       h      ∂l ∂(1 + Rt+1 )    (1 + Rt+1 )(ucc ull − u2cl )     h            h

Online Appendix B (to section 3): Estimation Strategy and
Solution Method
Bootstrap Procedure

We bootstrap standard errors and confidence intervals for both our MRS and Euler equations.
   The two step Heckman-selection procedure for estimating the MRS coefficients can be bootstrapped
in the standard way. Bootstrapping results for our Euler equation requires a slightly more complicated
procedure however. This is because we aggregate our data into cohort groups and then implement an
IV procedure. Taking Zt as a vector of exogenous variables, and Xt and Yt as endogenous variables
(with Yt as our dependent variable) we can reformulate our approach as estimating the equations

                                             Xt    =     ΠZt + vt

                                              Yt   = Xt β + ut

   where vt is a vector of errors in our first stage. These can be thought of as economic shocks
which may have a complicated structure. For instance they may be correlated across time for a
given cohort, or may have an aggregate component which is correlated across cohorts for a given time
period. Errors may also be correlated across the equations for different exogenous variables Zt . We
will wish to preserve these correlations when we implement our bootstrap procedure. In order to do
this, we attempt to construct the variance-covariance matrix of the residuals v. Rather than filling
in all possible cross-correlations in this matrix, we calculate the following moments for each cohort c,
and equation i



                                                   var(v i,c )

                                                   cov(vti,c , vt−1
                                                                i,c
                                                                    )

                                                   cov(vti,c , vtj,c )

                                                   cov(vti,c , vti,k )




                                                        3
   Setting all other correlations to zero. Thus we impose for instance that there is zero correlation
between vti,c and vt−1
                   i,k
                       . Unfortunately, there is no guarantee that this matrix will be positive definite.
In our procedure we therefore apply weights to the non-zero elements of our ‘off-diagonal’ matrices
- which give the covariances across different cohorts for the same equation - and to our 1st autoco-
variances for residuals for the same cohort and same equation. The weights we apply to these are the
maximum that ensure the resulting matrix is positive definite: in our case they are both set at 0.23.
   Once we have this matrix we can Cholesky decompose it to obtain a vector of orthogonalised
residuals


                                           Ω = vv 0 = CC 0 0

   We then draw from the orthogonalised residuals, premultiply them by C and then add them to
ΠZt to reconstruct the endogenous variables (including Y ). We then reestimate our second stage
equation to obtain a new set of estimates for β.
   The values of Zt in our case will depend on the results we obtain from our MRS equation, so
in each iteration of our bootstrap we resample with replacement from from our disaggregated data,
re-run the MRS equation, reaggregate to obtain the cohort averages which make up Zt and then make
a draw from our residuals.

Solution Method

Households have a finite horizon and so the model is solved numerically by backward recursion from
the terminal period. At each age we solve the value function and optimal policy rule, given the current
state variables and the solution to the value function in the next period. This approach is standard.
The complication in our model arises from the combination of a discrete choice (to participate or
not) and a continuous choice (over saving). This combination means that the value function will
not necessarily be concave. We briefly describe in this appendix how we deal with this potential
non-concavity. An alternative would be to follow the method in Iskhakov et al. (2017).
   In addition to age, there are four state variables in this problem: the asset stock, the permanent
                                       m                                              f
component of earnings of the husband, vh,t , the permanent component of wife’s wage, vh,t ,and the
experience level of the wife. We discretise both earning and wage variables and the experience level,
leaving the asset stock as the only continuous state variable. Since both permanent components of
earnings are non-stationary, we are able to approximate this by a stationary, discrete process only
because of the finite horizon of the process. We select the nodes to match the paths of the mean
shock and the unconditional variance over the life-cycle. In particular, the unconditional variance of
the permanent component must increase linearly with age, with the slope given by the conditional
variance of the permanent shock. Our estimates of the wage variance are for annual shocks, but the




                                                   4
model period is one quarter. We reconcile this difference by imposing that each quarter an individual
receives a productivity shock with probability 0.25, and this implies that productivity shocks occur
on average once a year.
   Value functions are increasing in assets At but they are not necessarily concave, even if we condition
on labour market status in t. The non-concavity arises because of changes in labor market status in
future periods: the slope of the value function is given by the marginal utility of consumption, but this
is not monotonic in the asset stock because consumption can decline as assets increase and expected
labour market status in future periods changes. By contrast, in Danforth (1979) employment is an
absorbing state and so the conditional value function will be concave. Under certainty, the number
of kinks in the conditional value function is given by the number of periods of life remaining. If there
is enough uncertainty, then changes in work status in the future will be smoothed out leaving the
expected value function concave: whether or not an individual will work in t + 1 at a given At depends
on the realisation of shocks in t + 1. Using uncertainty to avoid non-concavities is analogous to the
use of lotteries elsewhere in the literature.
   The choice of participation status in t is determined by the maximum of the conditional value
functions in t. In our solution, we impose and check restrictions on this participation choice. In par-
ticular, we use the restriction that the participation decision switches only once as assets increase,
conditional on permanent earnings and experience. When this restriction holds, it allows us to in-
terpolate behaviour across the asset grid without losing our ability to determine participation status.
We therefore define a reservation asset stock to separate the value function and the choice of con-
sumption made when participating from the value function and choice of consumption made when not
participating. There are some regions of the state space where individuals are numerically indifferent
between working and not-working. Since we solve the model by value function iteration, it does not
matter which conditional value function we use in these regions.
   In solving the maximisation problem at a given point in the state space, we use a simple golden
search method. Note that in addition to the optimal total expenditure, the optimal amount of leisure
is computed in each period by solving the MRS condition. We solve the model and do the calibration
assuming this process is appropriate and assuming there is a unique reservation asset stock for each
point in the state space, and then check ex-post.
   There are no non-concavities due to borrowing constraints in our model because the only borrowing
constraint is generated by the no-bankruptcy condition which is in effect enforced by having infinite
marginal utility of consumption at zero consumption.




                                                    5
Online Appendix C (to section 4): Data Sources and Descrip-
tive Statistics
As discussed in the paper, most of the data are from the CEX. One important exception are the
data on the real interest rate. We define this variable as the 3 month T-Bill rate (on a quarterly
basis) minus the rate of growth in the CPI. The source for the T-Bill rate is from the St Louis Fed
(https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/TB3MS).
   In for Table 13 presents descriptive statistics at the individual level using data from three particular
years (1980, 1995 and 2012). Married women have seen large changes in their wages, hours and patterns
of employment over our sample period. Employment rates increased from 60% in 1980 to 69.8% in
1995 before falling back to 61.9% in 2012.


              Table 13: Descriptive statistics for married women, 1980, 1995 and 2012

                                                                          1980    1995    2012
           Demographics                       No. of children             1.25    1.15     1.17

           Education                          %   Less than high school   19.4    12.3     9.7
                                              %   High school             44.1    36.8    25.3
                                              %   Some college            18.1    25.3    28.5
                                              %   Degree or higher        18.4    25.5    36.5

           Hours (workers)                    All                         35.2    37.5    38.4
                                              Less than high school       34.9    37.4    34.2
                                              High school                 35.2    36.2    38.6
                                              Some college                35.0    36.7    37.1
                                              Degree or higher            35.5    39.7    39.5

           Hourly net wages ($ 2016)          All                         15.58   16.63   18.95
                                              Less than high school       12.16   11.23   11.33
                                              High school                 14.22   13.41   14.61
                                              Some college                16.62   16.41   17.28
                                              Degree or higher            19.30   22.26   23.20

           % Employed                         All workers                 60.0    69.8    61.9
                                              % Workers part-time         28.4    23.7    20.6

           Sample sizes                        All                        2,199   2,064   2,026
                                               Workers                    1,318   1,441   1,254
           Part-time is defined as working less than 35 hours per week.




   Table 13 also shows wage levels over the three years. Average real wages increased over this
period, though with marked differences across different education groups. The wages of those with
less than high school education actually fell slightly from $12.16 in 1980 to $11.33 in 2012. By
contrast, married women with a college degree or higher saw a 20% increase in their wages between



                                                         6
1980 and 2012 (from $19.30 to $23.20). This increase in the education premium has been attributed
to skill-biased technological change which outstripped the supply of educated workers (Goldin and
Katz, 2007).
   Changes in hours worked across education groups appear to mirror these patterns. While all
education groups worked very similar hours in 1980, by 2012 those with a college degree were working
on average five hours more per week than those with less than high school education, although the
fraction with a college degree has markedly increased over the period.


Online Appendix D (to section 5): Alternative methods of es-
timating the MRS
In this appendix we discuss results from alternative MRS specifications. For comparison with later
results, we present a more complete set of parameter estimates from our baseline MRS specification
in Table 15. First, we present results for the selection probit we run prior to estimating our MRS
equation. Husband’s earnings are strongly negatively correlated with participation.



                                  Table 14: Selection Probit Results
                     Log earnings of husband              -0.164***         (0.007)
                     Husband employed                     -1.929***         (0.064)
                     No. of Elderly HH members                0.023         (0.026)
                     Log family size                      -0.110***         (0.022)
                     Wife: White                             -0.015         (0.014)
                     Age                                     -0.056         (0.042)
                     Age2                                     0.001         (0.001)
                     Age3 /1000                               0.003         (0.018)
                     Age4 /10000                            -0.003*         (0.001)
                     Has kids                                -0.034         (0.018)
                     No. of kids aged 0-2                 -0.515***         (0.014)
                     No. of kids aged 3-15                -0.167***         (0.008)
                     No. of kids aged 16-17                0.071***         (0.017)
                     North East                              -0.004         (0.015)
                     Mid-West                              0.119***         (0.014)
                     South                                  0.035**         (0.013)
                     N= 78,674. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001 Standard errors in
                     parentheses. Additional controls for season and year dummies and
                     cohort-education interactions.




Estimation method and normalisation

We start by considering the issue of how the MRS is normalised. Recall that our MRS relationship is


                           ln wh,t = ψ0 + ψzh,t − θ ln lh,t + φ ln ch,t + υh,t                 (44)



                                                      7
                                     Table 15: Baseline MRS estimates

       Parameter                       Estimate     (Standard Error)        [95% Confidence Interval]

       θ                               1.75**               (1.230)                  [0.34,5.12]
       φ                               0.76***              (0.103)                  [0.55,0.95]

       Ψ
       Age                             0.05*                  (0.02)                   [0.01,0.09]
       Age2                            -0.0005              (0.0007)                [-0.003,0.001]
       Age3 /1000                      -0.01                  (0.01)                  [-0.03,0.03]
       Age4 /10000                     0.002                 0.0007                [-0.0005,0.003]
       North East                      0.01                   (0.03)                  [-0.06,0.14]
       Mid West                        -0.05                  (0.01)                  [-0.08,0.00]
       South                           -0.11                  (0.02)                 [-0.22,-0.05]
       White                           -0.04                  (0.03)                  [-0.13,0.08]
       No. elderly HH members          0.02                   (0.02)                  [-0.05,0.06]
       ln(f amsize)                    -0.32***              (0.037)                 [-0.38,-0.23]
       Has kids                        0.07***               (0.021)                  [0.04, 0.10]
       No. of kids 0-2                 0.15***               (0.030)                  [0.10, 0.22]
       No. of kids 3-15                0.06***               (0.017)                  [0.04, 0.10]
       No. of kids 16-17               -0.02**               (0.011)                  [-0.05,0.00]
       Constant (Ψ0 )                  4.70                   (4.94)                 [-8.74,28.03]

       Heckman selection terms
       e1                              0.07                 (0.167)                 [-0.18, 0.48]
       e2                              0.05                 (0.172)                 [-0.21, 0.51]
       e3                              0.01                 (0.052)                 [-0.08, 0.13]

       N = 50,895. *p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Additional controls for season and year dummies and
       cohort-education interactions. Confidence intervals are bootstrapped with 1000 replications allowing
       for clustering at the individual level.




   As Keane (2011) notes, this is not a labour supply equation but an equilibrium condition in which
wages, leisure and consumption are all endogenous. All three variables are potentially correlated with
the error term υh,t and so there is no natural choice of the dependent variable.
   Despite this, we find that, when conventional methods are used, results can be highly sensitive to
whether wages, leisure or consumption are placed on the left hand side of the MRS equation. Table 16
shows results from estimating φ and θ using GMM under the three different possible normalisations.
We include results form our baseline specification in the first column. The implied parameter estimates
and elasticities vary a great deal across these different approaches. When wages are selected as the
left-hand side variable, elasticites are relatively large. When leisure is the dependent variable, they
are much smaller. Very similar considerations apply to the estimation of our Euler equation.
   Differences of this kind can emerge in IV estimation in 2SLS and GMM estimation when the
instruments chosen are relatively weak. Indeed, Hahn and Hausman (2002, 2003) propose using the



                                                        8
                                   Table 16: MRS Estimates using GMM
                                               Fuller                          GMM
                                                                         Dependent variable
                                               Wages          Wages         Leisure      Consumption
        Parameters
        θ                                      1.75∗∗         0.46∗           13.8                0.13
                                            [0.34,5.12]   [−0.03,0.61]   [−120.14,186.11]      [−0.54,0.58]

        φ                                    0.76∗∗∗          0.61∗∗∗         0.17              1.38∗∗∗
                                            [0.55,0.95]    [0.48,0.65]     [−3.44,2.78]         [1.24,1.74]

        Wage elasticities at median
        Marshallian                             0.18           0.55           0.09                0.17
                                            [0.05,0.38]    [0.50,1.16]      [0.00,0.12]       [−0.41,−0.08]

        Hicksian                                0.54           1.19           0.11                0.77
                                            [0.27,1.29]    [1.10,2.25]     [−0.01,0.14]         [0.59,1.10]

        N = 50,895. *p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Controls as in Table 3. Elasticities are calculated
        as averages within a 5 percent band of the 50th percentile of the Marshallian distribution. 95%
        confidence intervals in square brackets. Confidence intervals are bootstrapped with 1000 replications.




differences in parameters implied by 2SLS estimates run under different normalisations as a test of
instruments’ strength.
   Various papers have discussed possible remedies for cases when strong instruments are not available
(Hahn and Hausman, 2003; Hausman et al., 2012). One possible solution is the use estimators such
as Limited Information Maximum Likelihood (LIML) rather than 2SLS, which is known to have poor
bias properties in such circumstances (Staiger and Stock, 1997; Nelson and Startz, 1990a,b). Using
the notation from Davidson and MacKinnon (2004), for the case where



                                       y   = Zβ1 + Y β2 + u = Xβ + u

                                      Y    =    ΠW + v

   where Z is a matrix of exogenous variables, Y a matrix of endogenous variables, and W = [Z, W1 ]
(with W1 being a matrix of instruments). Matrices X and W are n × k and n × l respectively (with
l ≥ k). In general, so-called k-class estimators such as OLS, 2SLS, and LIML can be written in the
form


                               β̂ LIML = (X 0 (I − kMW )X)−1 X 0 (I − kMW )y                                     (45)

   where MW = I − W (W 0 W )W 0 . In the case of OLS k = 0, and in the case of 2SLS k = 1. In the
case of LIML we use

                                                   (y − Y β2 )0 MZ (y − Y β2)
                                   k = kLIML =                                                                   (46)
                                                   (y − Y β2 )0 MW (y − Y β2)



                                                          9
   While LIML is often found to have better bias properties than 2SLS, it has long been recognised
that conventional normalisations of LIML do not have finite moments (Mariano and Sawa, 1972;
Sawa, 1972), and simulation exercises have shown that this can add considerable volatility to empirical
estimates (Hahn et al., 2004). As a result Hahn et al. (2004) recommend the use of either jack-knifed
2SLS or the modification of LIML proposed by Fuller (1977). For this latter estimator, we replace k
in equation (45) with

                                                                      λ
                                         kFuller = kLIML −                                         (47)
                                                                   (n − k)
   where λ here is a parameter chosen by the researcher, to obtain a value for β̂ Fuller . We choose a
value of one for this as suggested by Davidson and MacKinnon (2004) as it yields estimates that are
approximately unbiased. The resulting estimator is guaranteed to have bounded moments in finite
samples Fuller (1977). Since the adjustment to LIML is smaller when (n − k) is large, the Fuller
estimator will be closer to LIML when sample sizes are large relative to the number of instruments.
In our case, the Fuller estimator can be thought of as a compromise between 2SLS and LIML, as it
adjusts the value of k we use downwards slightly towards one.
   As well as its superior bias properties, the Fuller estimator has the advantage that is much less
sensitive than GMM or 2SLS to the choice of the dependent variable, as Table 17 shows. Both the
elasticity and parameter estimates obtained using alternative normalisations of the Fuller estimator
are very similar to our baseline results.


                     Table 17: MRS Estimates with Different Dependent Variables
                                                                   Dependent variable
                                                      Wages           Leisure   Consumption
                 Parameters
                 θ                                    1.75∗∗            1.84∗         1.75∗
                                                     [0.34,5.12]     [−0.43,5.38]   [−0.00,4.60]

                 φ                                    0.76∗∗∗         0.76∗∗∗        0.77∗∗∗
                                                     [0.55,0.95]      [0.53,0.95]   [0.58,0.95]

                 Wage elasticities at median
                 Marshallian                           0.18             0.17           0.18
                                                     [0.05,0.38]      [0.06,0.37]   [0.07,0.42]

                 Hicksian                              0.54             0.53           0.54
                                                     [0.24,1.07]      [0.23,0.95]   [0.27,1.29]

                 N = 50,895. *p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Controls as in Table 3. Elastic-
                 ities are calculated as averages within a 5 percent band of the 50th percentile
                 of the Marshallian distribution. 95% confidence intervals in square brackets.
                 Confidence intervals are bootstrapped with 1000 replications.




                                                       10
Alternative instruments

In Table 18 we show results using alternative choices of instruments. We show results using GMM
(with wages as the dependent variable) and the Fuller estimator described above, in both cases using
a full set of cohort-education-year interactions as used in Blundell et al. (1998). This approach is
similar to the approach we adopt for our main results but interacts cohort-eduction dummies full set
of year effects rather than a polynomial in time trends. The estimates we obtain from fully adopting
the Blundell et al. (1998) approach are very similar to our main results, though somewhat less precise.
   The sensitivity of our results to the choice of instruments is on the whole quite small when we
compare it to the differences that can arise from the choice of estimation method. Just as we find
for our main set of results, the hours elasticities estimated using the GMM estimator with wages as
the dependent variable are substantially larger than those using the Fuller estimator when using the
alternative instrument set.

                       Table 18: MRS Estimates using alternative instruments
                                                                    BDM (1998)
                                                       Fuller              GMM
                 Parameters
                 θ                                      1.93                   0.08
                                                    [−9.09,11.58]           [−0.20,0.19]
                                                           ∗∗∗                    ∗∗∗
                 φ                                     0.76                  0.52
                                                      [0.42,1.03]           [0.41,0.52]
                 Wage elasticities at median
                 Marshallian                            0.17                   1.08
                                                     [−0.84,1.13]           [1.04,2.29]
                 Hicksian                               0.51                   1.97
                                                     [−1.91,2.65]           [1.82,3.85]
                 N = 50,895. *p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. BDM (1998) instruments are
                 a full set of cohort-education-year dummies. Controls as in Table 3. Elastici-
                 ties are calculated as averages within a 5 percent band of the 50th percentile
                 of the Marshallian distribution. 95% confidence intervals in square brackets.
                 Confidence intervals are bootstrapped with 1000 replications.




Alternative samples

Table 19 shows how our MRS results are affected by alternative sample selection choices. Column (1)
presents results when we exclude those individuals who report working exactly 40 hours a week. The
justification of this experiment is that these individuals may be affected by some kind of friction that
does not allow them to adjust their hours worked as desired. Such frictions would mean that the MRS
condition that we exploit to recover φ and θ need not hold. Excluding these observations, we obtain
greater estimates of our Marshallian and Hicksian hours elasticities (at 0.45 and 0.72 respectively).
These values are however somewhat imprecisely estimated and the confidence bands that surround
them include our baseline estimates.



                                                      11
     In Column (2) we show results when we exclude individuals working less than 20 hours per week
(with an appropriate adjustment to our selection correction). We consider results from this specifi-
cation because there may be certain frictions that prevent individuals working fewer hours than this,
which would again lead to potential violations of the MRS condition. Excluding these observations
delivers somewhat lower elasticity estimates, but again the estimates are imprecise.


                  Table 19: MRS Estimates using alternative samples/hours measures


                                     Exc. 40 hours       Exc. <20 hours        Born 1925-1965          Ann. hours
                                          (1)                  (2)                   (3)                  (4)

 Parameters
 θ                                         1.52                   2.81              2.08∗∗∗                2.29∗
                                        [−3.16,5.69]           [−2.48,9.81]         [0.68,4.66]          [−1.30,7.00]
                                                ∗                    ∗∗∗                  ∗∗∗                  ∗∗∗
 φ                                        0.42                  0.76                0.56                  0.78
                                        [−0.06,0.92]           [0.33,1.03]          [0.42,0.82]          [0.53,1.01]

 Wage elasticities at median
 Marshallian                               0.45                   0.13                0.27                  0.13
                                        [−0.45,1.41]           [0.02,0.30]          [0.09,0.62]          [−0.09,0.41]
 Hicksian                                  0.72                   0.39                0.53                  0.42
                                        [−1.29,2.57]           [−0.14,1.43]         [0.28,1.09]         [−0.25,1.24]

 N                                        26,060                 47,743              39,057               50,895
 *p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Specification (1) excludes individuals who work exactly 40 hours. Specification
 (2) excludes those working less than 20 hours (part-time workers). Specification (3) only includes individuals from
 cohorts with the most similar labour supply choices over the life-cycle. Elasticities are calculated as averages within
 a 5 percent band of the 50th percentile of the Marshallian distribution. 95% confidence intervals in square brackets.
 Confidence intervals are bootstrapped with 1000 replications.




     Finally, in Column (3) we consider only those ten-year birth cohorts with the most similar labour-
supply behaviour over the life-cycle. In particular we exclude those born before 1925 as they tend
to work fewer hours at older ages than other cohorts, and those born after 1975, as less-educated
individuals born after this date tend to have lower employment rates than other earlier cohorts at the
same ages. Using this sample, we obtain a Marshallian elasticity of 0.27 and a Hicksian 0.53. While
the Marshallian elasticity estimated from this sample is slightly higher than our baseline estimates,
the Hicksian elasticity is essentially unchanged.

Alternative definitions of hours

In Column (4) of Table 19 we consider how elasticity estimates are affected when we use an alternative
measure of hours of leisure. The measure we use here is

                                    5200 − hours per week × weeks worked per year
                        leisure =                                                                                      (48)
                                                          52



                                                          12
   This measure accounts for the observed variation in weeks worked per year in addition to variation
in hours worked per week across workers.
   The elasticities resulting from this exercise are in general lower but on the whole similar to than
those in our baseline specification, with a Marshallian elasticity of 0.13 and a Hicksian elasticity of
0.42. The value of θ is larger than in our main results (at 2.29), and much less precisely estimated.
The value of φ is essentially unchanged.


Online Appendix E (to section 6): Results for CES and additive
separability
In this Appendix we discuss results for alternative specifications of our utility function. In particular
we consider results from a standard CES utility function (where we impose that θ=φ), and one where
we impose additive separability between consumption and leisure (i.e γ = 0).
   Table 20 presents parameter estimates when we impose the restrictions implied by CES utility.
Under this functional form for utility, we get a slightly larger value of φ and a much lower value of θ
than we obtain from our preference specification (at 0.83 compared to 0.76 and 1.75 that we obtain
for φ and θ respectively in Table 3). We also obtain a slightly larger value of γ however (at 3.03
compared to 2.07 for our less restrictive utility function).


                                      Table 20: Parameter values
                                                    CES
                                              φ     0.83
                                                  [0.66,0.97]
                                              θ      0.83
                                                  [0.66,0.97]
                                              γ      3.03
                                                  [0.64,4.27]




   Taken together, the CES parameter estimates imply that utility is less concave in leisure, and hence
that labour supply elasticities are greater. We show the elasticities implied by these estimates in Table
21. While Marshallian hours elasticities for the CES specification are only greater at the upper end
of the distribution, the estimated Hicksian and Frisch hour elasticities are roughly 50% larger. The
CES estimates also imply a more substantial degree of non-separability between consumption and
leisure. The Frisch elasticity of consumption with respect to predictable wage increases has a median
of around 0.4 compared to 0.05 from our main estimates. This reflects both a greater sensitivity of
the marginal utility of consumption to changes in leisure and the fact that leisure responses to given
wage changes will in general be greater under these preferences. Finally we note that, the interest
rate Frisch elasticity at the median is much lower than in our baseline specification.
   Table 21 also shows Frisch elasticities for our preference specification in the case where we impose




                                                   13
additive separability for preferences over consumption and leisure (that is we impose that γ = 0). This
necessarily sets the Frisch consumption responses to wage changes to zero. It turns out that Frisch
hours elasticities are very similar to those estimated when we allow for non-separability in our main
specification. This reflects the fact that when, as we find, the parameters θ and φ are small and α
large, then the numerator and denominator in formulae for Frisch elasticities given in equations (38)
and (39) will be dominated by the term Mt . Consequently, the impact of small changes in γ will be
limited.
   When additive separability is imposed, the Frisch elasticity is identical - a direct result of setting
ucl = 0 in expressions (41) and (42). The estimated Frisch elasticity of consumption with respect to
the interest rate (now simply given by −1/φ ) also falls relative to our baseline results, from -1.19 to
-1.31.

                     Table 21: Elasticities at Percentiles of Marshallian distribution: CES


                         γ=0                                                  CES
            Wage          Interest rate                   Wage                               Interest rate
            Frisch           Frisch       Marshallian     Hicksian        Frisch                 Frisch

                Hours worked                                            Hours worked
  10th       0.84        0.84                −0.24             0.48       1.08                    0.83
           [0.23,3.17]      [0.23,3.17]   [−0.30,−0.11]   [0.41,0.60]   [0.97,1.47]             [0.63,1.32]

  25th       0.83              0.83          −0.04             0.60        1.16                   0.85
           [0.23,3.15]      [0.23,3.15]    [−0.13,0.12]   [0.51,0.76]   [1.06,1.56]             [0.65,1.35]

  50th       0.90              0.90           0.21             0.77        1.33                   0.93
           [0.25,3.40]      [0.25,3.40]    [0.10,0.42]    [0.67,0.98]   [1.23,1.75]             [0.71,1.47]

  75th       1.04              1.04           0.54             1.04        1.66                   1.13
           [0.29,3.93]      [0.29,3.93]    [0.39,0.82]    [0.89,1.32]   [1.53,2.17]             [0.86,1.78]

  90th       1.98              1.98           1.11             1.62        2.71                   1.89
           [0.55,7.50]      [0.55,7.50]    [0.88,1.55]    [1.39,2.06]   [2.51,3.57]             [1.44,2.99]




                Consumption                                             Consumption
  25th       0.00      −1.31                  0.91             0.63       0.32                   −0.59
             [−,−]        [−1.81,−1.05]    [0.82,1.08]    [0.54,0.80]   [0.12,0.53]           [−0.93,−0.45]

  50th       0.00            −1.31            1.07             0.72        0.37                  −0.58
             [−,−]        [−1.81,−1.05]    [0.97,1.27]    [0.62,0.91]   [0.15,0.62]           −0.91,−0.44]

  75th       0.00            −1.31            1.23             0.80        0.42                  −0.57
             [−,−]        [−1.81,−1.05]    [1.12,1.44]    [0.68,1.01]   [0.17,0.69s]          [−0.90,−0.43]


 Elasticities are calculated as averages within 5 percent bands of the 10th, 25th, 50th and 75th and 90th percentiles
 of the Marshallian distribution. 95% confidence intervals in square brackets. Confidence intervals are bootstrapped
 with 1000 replications.




                                                          14
Appendix F: Returns to Experience
We recalibrate parameter values: the fixed cost of working, F̄ , child care price, p, the offered wage
gender gap and ψ0 . In addition to these parameters, we also need to calibrate the parameter that
characterises human capital accumulation function and its depreciation rate.29 As in the baseline, we
identify these parameters by targeting the female participation rate, the participation rate of mothers,
the average hours worked, the observed wage gender gap, the observed wage growth at early ages, and
the observed depreciation of wages during non-participation. We report the calibrated parameters in
Table 22 and compare to the baseline. In the context of returns to experience, where there is a strong
incentive to work to reap future returns, a much larger childcare cost is required in order to reduce
participation and match participation statistics.
   Analogously to Figure 2, Figure 4 shows life-cycle profiles in the simulations and in the data;
and Table 23 reports additional statistics on the distribution of hours and of wages. There are some
differences between the model with returns to experience and the baseline. First, there is a decline in
the participation profiles at ages beyond 35. These patterns are not observed either in the data or in
the baseline model. Second, very few women change their participation decisions. For example, the
fraction of women who worked in all previous periods at the age of 52 is 57%, which compares to 40%
in the economy without returns to experience. Third, the childcare cost that is needed here to keep
women out of the labour market during childbearing is substantially higher because of the incentive
to accumulate labour market experience. In particular the monetary fix childcare cost is up to 76%
of median earnings of a women aged 25 to 55.

Response to Temporary Wage Changes

In Table 24, we report the labour supply responses in the economy with returns to experience. The
key finding is that, in contrast to the economy without returns to experience, the extensive margin
response is close to zero and, as a result, the aggregate elasticity is about half of the one in the baseline
economy (reproduced in the final column). In the return to experience economy, there is a strong
incentive to participate to obtain the return to experience. The larger childcare cost of participating
that is estimated in this economy alongside the strong incentive to participate implies that changes
in the current wage makes little difference to the incentive to participate. As expected, the size of the
intensive margin response is similar to the one in the economy without returns to experience. Our
results here are in line with Imai and Keane (2004) who argue that the response of labor supply to
transitory changes in wages may be mitigated when there are returns to experience. Our results show
that the response of the participation margin to a transitory anticipated change in the wage (for given
  29 Note this is only one parameter in contrast to the two parameters ιf1 and ιf2 for the exogenous wage growth that
were used in the baseline economy.




                                                         15
           Table 22: Baseline economy: Calibrated Parameters and Targets

Parameter Name                                                        Values
                                                              Ret to Exp Baseline

Constant term weight of leisure                      ψ0          4.13       4.20

Childcare Cost                                        p         5820        967

Fixed Cost of Working                                 F̄         315        468

Offered Wage Gender Gap at age 22                  y0f /y0m      0.79       0.74

Standard Deviation of Permanent Shock (Women)        σξ f       0.063       0.063

Standard Deviation of Initial Wage (Women)          σξf ,0       0.50       0.50

Exogenous growth in offered wage                     ιf1          -         0.052

Exogenous growth in offered wage                     ιf2          -        -0.0006

Female Human Capital Tech                             ν         0.003         -

Discount Factor (annualized)                          β          0.99       0.99

Depreciation rate                                     δ         0.017         -


Targets                                             Data      Ret to Exp   Baseline


Weekly hours worked                                 37.3         37.0       37.3

Participation Rate                                  0.677       0.690       0.678

Participation Rate of Mothers                       0.538       0.544       0.546

Observed Wage Gender Gap                            0.720       0.720       0.727

Observed Variance Wage Growth (Women)               0.005       0.005       0.005

Observed Initial Variance of Wages (Women)          0.15         0.15       0.15

Wage Growth (if younger than 40)                    0.012       0.013       0.010

Wage Growth (if older than 40)                      0.001       0.013       0.004

Median wealth to income ratio                       1.84         1.82       1.80

Observed Depreciation Rate                         -0.050       -0.040      0.02

Statistics for women born in the 1950s and aged 25 to 55. Wage growth is annual.




                                         16
                   Table 23: Returns to Experience: Statistics on Hetereogeneity

                                                                                          Data        Model

      Participation Rate Mothers with Children Aged 3-17                                  0.682       0.672
      Participation Rate Childless Women                                                  0.730       0.724

      Average      Hours      Worked          10th      Percentile                        260         277
      Average      Hours      Worked          25th      Percentile                        455         400
      Average      Hours      Worked          50th      Percentile                        520         518
      Average      Hours      Worked          75th      Percentile                        520         595
      Average      Hours      Worked          90th      Percentile                        624         648

      Wage 10th Percentile                                                                8.17        10.60
      Wage 50th Percentile                                                                15.09       15.58
      Wage 90th Percentile                                                                29.45       31.71

      Women without dependent children are women who have never had children and those whose
      children are over 17.




Figure 4: Life-Cycle Profiles: Baseline Model (solid black line) versus Data (dashed red line)

                                   Participation                                              Hours
                                                                         600
        1




                                                                         500
        .8




                                                                         400
        .6




                                                                         300
                                                                         200
        .4




              25    30        35        40         45     50   55              25   30   35     40      45    50   55


                         Variance of Log Observed Wages                                  Observed Net Wage
                                                                         3
                                                                         2.9
        .25




                                                                         2.8
                                                                         2.7
        .15




                                                                         2.6
                                                                         2.5
        .05




              25    30        35        40         45     50   55              25   30   35     40      45    50   55




                                                                    17
preferences on the intensive margin) may be very different depending on the assumption that is made
about the nature of the wage growth over the life-cycle (exogenous or endogenous). The extra wage
that is provided by an anticipated increase in the wage in a particular period is a small fraction of the
total return to participate in that period (in particular at early ages) and then it has a small impact
on the participation decision.


                             Table 24: Returns to experience: Frisch Changes

                              Extensive     Intensive Elasticity       Agg Hours       Baseline
                              Response      25th 50th 75th             Elasticity


                    25-29        0.02        0.65    0.81     1.15         0.91          1.85
                    30-34        0.04        0.63    0.79     1.17         0.91          1.48
                    35-39        0.03        0.63    0.78     1.17         0.90          1.45
                    40-44        0.03        0.61    0.79     1.19         0.89          1.35
                    45-49        0.04        0.60    0.77     1.19         0.88          1.39
                    50-55        0.07        0.58    0.75     1.09         0.86          1.45

                    The extensive response is the percentage point change in partic-
                    ipation in response to a 1% increase in the wage. The aggregate
                    hours elasticity reports the percentage change in hours corre-
                    sponding to a percentage change in the wage, accounting for
                    changes at both the extensive and intensive margins.




   It may well be that the small response of the extensive margin labour supply that we find is related
to the simple model of return to experience we have considered. Whether returns to experience operate
in a more subtle manner through intensive margins and the number of hours is a question we leave
for future research. If that is the case, we would need to change substantially the estimation methods
we used in the core of the paper.
   One possibility, of course, is that returns to tenure are important for some occupations and/or skill
levels and not for others. In such a case, it would be necessary to introduce an additional dimension of
heterogeneity that would make the aggregation issues we have repeatedly stressed even more salient.30

Life-Cycle Responses to Changes in Wage Profiles

Finally, in Table 25 we report the extensive, intensive margin and the macro responses to an increase
in the entire wage profile of 10% for both husband and wife. In this case the response both at
the extensive and the intensive margin is very similar in the economy with and without returns to
   30 Alternatively it could be that returns to experience depend on hours worked. Blundell et al. (2016a) show that

these returns are close to zero for part-time work.




                                                         18
experience.


                         Table 25: Labour supply changes, Marshallian

                                     Extensive      Intensive Elasticity      Agg Hours
                                     Response       25th 50th 75th            Elasticity


              Ret to experience          0.53       0.25    0.40     0.77        0.99
                   Baseline              0.51       0.28    0.42     0.67        0.91

              The extensive response is the percentage point change in participation in re-
              sponse to a 1% increase in the wage. The aggregate hours elasticity reports
              the percentage change in hours corresponding to a percentage change in the
              wage, accounting for changes at both the extensive and intensive margins.




                                                   19
