                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     HEALTH DISPARITIES ACROSS EDUCATION:
                   THE ROLE OF DIFFERENTIAL REPORTING ERROR

                                         John Cawley
                                          Anna Choi

                                      Working Paper 21317
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w21317


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2015




For helpful comments and suggestions, we thank John Mullahy, an anonymous referee, Benjamin
Cowan, Joseph Price, and participants in the American Society of Health Economists biennial
conference, and the seminar of the Cornell Institute for Health Economics, Health Behaviors and
Disparities. Cawley thanks the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation for its financial support
through an Investigator Award in Health Policy Research. The authors have no conflicts of
interest. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by John Cawley and Anna Choi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Health Disparities Across Education: The Role of Differential Reporting Error
John Cawley and Anna Choi
NBER Working Paper No. 21317
July 2015
JEL No. I1,I12,I14,I20,I24,I3

                                           ABSTRACT

One of the most robust findings in health economics is that higher-educated individuals tend to be
in better health. This paper tests whether health disparities across education are to some extent
due to differences in reporting error across education. We test this hypothesis using data from the
pooled National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) Continuous for
1999-2012, which include both self-reports and objective verification for an extensive set of
health behaviors and conditions, including smoking, obesity, high blood pressure, high
cholesterol and diabetes.

We find that college graduates are more likely to give false negative reports of obesity and high
total cholesterol; one possible explanation for this is social desirability bias. However, college
graduates are also significantly less likely to give false positive reports of smoking, obesity, high
cholesterol, and diabetes. Because there are far more truly negative people (who are less likely to
give a false positive report) than truly positive people (who are more likely to give a false
negative report), we find that college graduates report their health significantly more accurately
overall.


John Cawley
2312 MVR Hall
Department of Policy Analysis and Management
and Department of Economics
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
JHC38@cornell.edu

Anna Choi
Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development (OECD)
ac774@cornell.edu
    1. Introduction

         One of the most robust findings in health economics is that the higher educated tend to be in

better health (Grossman and Kaestner, 1997; Cutler and Lleras-Muney, 2010; Cutler, Huang &

Llreas-Muney, 2015). This is true for many health behaviors and conditions, including smoking,

drinking alcohol, obesity, exercise, and cancer screening (Cutler, Huang & Llreas-Muney, 2015;

Grossman and Kaestner, 1997).

         There are several possible mechanisms for this correlation. The model of health capital

(Grossman, 1972) predicts that those with more schooling will demand more health. Education may

increase both allocative efficiency (i.e. the better educated may choose a healthier mix of inputs) and

productive efficiency (i.e. the better educated may be able to produce more health with the same

inputs). Cutler and Llreas-Muney (2010) conclude that knowledge and cognitive ability explain 30

percent, and health insurance, income, and family background account for another 30 percent, of the

education gradient in health. This is consistent with earlier work that concluded that increased health

knowledge explains part but not all of the relationship between education and smoking, alcohol

consumption, and exercise (Kenkel, 1991).

         This study tests a novel hypothesis for the correlation between education and self-reported

health: differential reporting error by education.1 There are many potential sources of reporting error

(see, e.g. Brener et al., 2003; Johnston et al., 2009), some of which may vary by education. For

example, social desirability bias arises from respondents seeking to present a positive image to the

interviewer (Edwards, 1957). As a result, the more stigmatized and negatively sanctioned the health

condition or behavior, the stronger the tendency of respondents to deny it. The better educated may



1
 Our focus in this paper is on self-reported health. Obviously, differential reporting error cannot explain educational
differences in objectively measured health.
                                                            2
have greater awareness of medical recommendations, public health messaging, and the health

consequences of these conditions or behaviors, and thus may be more embarrassed to admit engaging

in unhealthy behaviors and more susceptible to social desirability bias. As a result, the better educated

may underreport risky health behaviors or stigmatized conditions.

       On the other hand, there are reasons to believe that the better educated may report more

accurately.   For example, some reporting error arises because of cognitive issues: failing to

comprehend the question, having a faulty memory, or making mistakes in answering the questions

(e.g. Brener et al., 2003). The better educated may be better able to comprehend and respond to

survey questions and thus be less likely to make those sort of errors. In addition, some misreporting

may be due to poor information, and the better educated may be more knowledgeable about their

health, perhaps because they have greater access to health care or independently monitor their health

more closely. Given these various sources of error, differential reporting error across education

groups could lead to either an overestimate or an underestimate in educational gradients in health.

       We examine a variety of health conditions and behaviors, including smoking, obesity, high

blood pressure, high cholesterol, and diabetes. We examine numerous conditions and behaviors

because the direction and magnitude of reporting error may differ by health condition and behavior.

For example, conditions and behaviors differ in the extent to which they are socially stigmatized. It

may be more embarrassing for a college graduate to report a high weight or to admit smoking than to

report having high blood pressure. They also differ in the extent to which the interviewer can visually

verify the report; respondents may know that they can deny having high cholesterol or high blood

pressure and the interviewer will be none the wiser, but respondents may be cautious in misreporting

their weight given that the interviewer observes their appearance. Conditions also differ in how much

the respondents themselves know. Respondents may be unaware that they have high blood pressure

and high cholesterol because they can be asymptomatic and thus may require diagnosis by a medical

                                                   3
professional. In contrast, respondents know whether they are smokers because that is a conscious act.

Obesity may lie somewhere in between – people may have a vague idea of their weight, but not know

it exactly. A strength of this paper is that it examines a wide range of conditions and health behaviors

in order to determine whether there are consistent patterns of misreporting by education.

         This paper relates to a large literature that measures reporting error in health and how it varies

with education.2 Some research focuses on the accuracy of reporting specific health conditions such

as weight and arthritis. For example, Ljungvall, Gerdtham, and Lindblad (2015) find that women with

higher education report their weight more accurately, and this differential reporting error leads to an

underestimation of the educational disparity in obesity. The generalizability of this is questionable,

as it is based on a sample of residents of two municipalities in southern Sweden. In contrast, Gil and

Mora (2011) find that the self-report bias in BMI is roughly equal among those with the lowest

educational attainment and those with a university degree. Again, this was for a local dataset, in this

case of the Catalan population in Spain. Using data from southeastern Netherlands, Mackenbach et

al. (1996) compared self-reports of lung disease, heart disease, and diabetes against information from

the subjects’ general practitioners and found that reporting error tends to bias downward estimates of

the educational gradient in such conditions. Butler et al. (1987) found in the U.S. Survey of Disability

and Work that those with a high school education (but not those with a college degree) were more

likely than high school dropouts to accurately report having arthritis.

         In contrast to the literature that examines responses regarding specific health conditions, other

research has focused on other types of questions about health. Lindeboom and van Doorslaer (2004)

examine responses to general questions about health to which respondent answers can range from

“very poor” to “very good.” Using data from the Canadian National Population Health Survey, they


2
  This paper also relates to the recent literature on the extent of misreporting of weight and its consequences for bias in
the prevalence of obesity and in econometric models of the consequences and correlates of obesity (see, e.g., Cullinan
and Cawley, 2017; Cawley, Maclean, Hammer, and Wintfeld, 2015; Courtemanche, Pinkston, and Stewart, 2015).
                                                             4
find no evidence that responses differ significantly by education. Bago d’Uva, O’Donnell, and van

Doorslaer (2008) focus on how people of different levels of education differentially rate case vignettes

that describe levels of functioning within health domains. They examine six health domains (mobility,

pain, sleep, breathing, emotional health and cognition) for older individuals in eight European

countries. They find that in six countries the more highly educated individuals are generally more

critical of a given health state (although in two countries the opposite is true) and that failure to correct

for this differential reporting leads to underestimation of health inequalities by education. A related

study (Bago d’Uva, van Doorslaer, Lindeboom, and O’Donnell, 2008) corrects self-reported health

based on differential rating of hypothetical case vignettes and concludes that better educated people

overreport their health in Indonesia and India, but underreport their health in China; as a result,

correcting for reporting heterogeneity reduces the educational disparities in health in Indonesia and

India but increases them in China. It should be noted that in all of these countries, the highest category

of education is relatively low; the equivalent of high school graduate or better. Dowd and Todd (2011)

conduct a similar study of differential responding by education to anchoring vignettes in the U.S.

Health and Retirement Study.

        Other research on reporting error in health has focused on the role of other aspects of

socioeconomic status than education. Johnston, Propper, and Shields (2009) primarily examine

income gradients in self-reported and measured hypertension in the Health Survey for England, but

also find that the better educated are better informed about their health. Two subsequent studies built

on this work. Suziedelyte and Johar (2013) estimate socioeconomic gradients in both self-reported

and administratively documented major surgeries in New South Wales, Australia, and find that the

gradients are unbiased by differential misreporting by education. Mosca et al. (2013) estimate

socioeconomic gradients in hypertension and high cholesterol using data from Ireland; odds ratios for



                                                     5
educational categories were not significantly different when one used self-reports as opposed to

objectively measured health, in models that controlled for an extensive set of covariates.

Finally, Banks et al. (2006) document educational gradients in chronic conditions in both self-

reported data and biological measures of health in the National Health and Nutrition Examination

Surveys (NHANES) 1999-2002 and the Health Survey for England for 2003.

       This paper contributes to the literature in the following ways. First, it examines a wide range

of health behaviors and conditions: smoking, high blood pressure, high cholesterol, diabetes, and

obesity. This is useful because the direction and magnitude of reporting error, and its correlation with

education, may differ by health condition and behavior because they vary in the extent to which they

are known by the respondent, are socially stigmatized, or are observable by the interviewer.

Examining a diverse set of health conditions and behaviors allows us to examine whether there are

robust patterns of misreporting by education. Second, this paper verifies subject responses using the

results of lab tests, medical examinations, and measurements taken by medical professionals. Third,

it studies not only the accuracy of self-reports when compared to objective measures but also the

direction of the reporting error (such as false negative or false positive reports) to examine the

possibility of social desirability bias in reporting some of the stigmatized behavior or conditions.

Fourth, it examines the extent to which education is associated with refusal to take the medical exam,

refusal to answer the survey questions, and answering that one doesn’t know. Fifth, it examines the

extent to which these educational differences in accuracy are explained by differential access to, and

utilization of, health care. Finally, it calculates the magnitude of the bias in health disparities across

education when using self-reports rather than objective measures; in other words, it examines how

the use of self-reports biases estimates of educational disparities in health. This is done using a recent,

large, nationally representative dataset for the U.S., which facilitates generalizability.



                                                    6
        We find evidence of differential reporting error across education categories; specifically, those

with a college degree are more likely to accurately report behaviors and conditions such as smoking,

diabetes, and high blood pressure. We find some evidence consistent with the hypothesis of greater

social desirability bias among the better educated; specifically, college graduates are more likely to

give false negative reports regarding obesity and high total cholesterol. Only a small percentage of

these differences are explained by differential access to, and utilization of, health care.


    2. Data: National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 1999-2012

        We examine the data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES)

Continuous for 1999-2012. The NHANES is sponsored by the National Center for Health Statistics

of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and surveys a nationally representative sample of

the U.S. civilian non-institutionalized population that is selected using a complex, stratified,

multistage probability cluster sampling design.3 NHANES is well-suited for our research question

because it is nationally representative and contains both self-reported measures and lab and

examination results for an extensive set of health behaviors and conditions, including current smoking

status, weight, high blood pressure, cholesterol, and diabetes.

        Individuals answer questions about their health behaviors and conditions during the household

component, and are tested and examined during a subsequent medical examination component, which

takes place in mobile examination centers. 95.5% of the respondents to the household survey also

participate in the examination component of the survey; hemophiliacs and those who received

chemotherapy within the last 4 weeks are not included in the lab component.

        Our sample is restricted to those who have completed both interview and examination

components of NHANES and who are 25 years of age or older and are thus likely to have completed


3
 For information on the NHANES sampling frame and data collection methods, see National Center for Health
Statistics (2015).
                                                        7
their schooling. We exclude respondents who have missing values for education and those whose

home interviews were conducted with a proxy respondent. For regression models of obesity, we also

exclude: 1) the 1999-2002 data because during those years the NHANES did not indicate whether the

weight or height variables were reported by a proxy; and 2) those who, in any survey year, refused to

change into an examination gown when measuring their weight or did not stand up straight or remove

their shoes during the measurement of height.

         Most questions about health behaviors and conditions are asked in the household interview;

the exception is smoking status, which is asked at the mobile examination center.4 Individuals are

asked whether they have ever been diagnosed with specific conditions; e.g. “Has a doctor or other

health professional ever told you that you had (high blood pressure/diabetes/high cholesterol)?” (The

full text of question wording is provided in Table 1.) For our purposes, the wording is not ideal

because the person may have been diagnosed long ago and the condition resolved. However, we

assume that the extent of any such changes does not differ by education.

         Smoking status is verified by a urine test for serum cotinine. Cotinine is a metabolite of

nicotine, has a half-life of approximately 20 hours, and can be detected for a few days after tobacco

use. (The NHANES asks whether the individual used cigarettes or other nicotine products during the

past 5 days, which matches the cotinine test much better than asking about smoking in the past 30

days or year.) The level of cotinine in the blood is proportional to the amount of exposure to tobacco

smoke (Florescu et al., 2009). The medical literature does not agree on the appropriate cotinine

threshold to define a smoker, so we use the two most common thresholds: 15ng/ml (Florescu et al.,

2009) and 3ng/ml (Benowitz et al., 2009).




4
  The fact that smoking is asked just prior to the medical exam may lead respondents to report it more accurately than
the questions asked earlier, during the household interview.
                                                           8
       Weight is measured by health professionals using a calibrated scale after subjects change into

paper examination gowns and remove their shoes. High blood pressure is measured by health

professionals. Total cholesterol level is measured from blood specimens. LDL cholesterol level is

also measured but only for those who are examined in the morning. Diabetes is assessed two ways:

1) blood glycohemoglobin level; and 2) fasting plasma glucose (FPG) levels. The FPG test is

conducted only for those who participated in the morning examination sessions, who were asked in

advance to fast; fasting status was verified with a questionnaire before the exam. Table 1 lists, for

each health behavior and condition, the relevant NHANES survey question, the relevant NHANES

examination or test, and any special restrictions on the sample stemming from the nature of the

question or exam.

       Based on the results of the medical examinations and tests, we classify individuals as having

each condition based on the relevant clinical guidelines. The NIH defines high blood pressure as

systolic of 140 or higher or diastolic of 90 or higher (CDC, 2015a). The NHANES survey question

about high cholesterol does not distinguish whether the subject was diagnosed with high total

cholesterol or high LDL cholesterol, so we examine each; the threshold for high total cholesterol is

240mg/dL and that for high LDL cholesterol is 160mg/dL (CDC, 2015b). Recall that there are two

NHANES tests for diabetes: hemoglobin A1c (HbAIC) and fasting plasma glucose level. A diagnosis

of diabetes is associated with HbA1c of 6.5 or greater or fasting plasma glucose of 126mg/dL or

greater (CDC, 2015c). Obesity is defined as a body mass index (defined as weight in kilograms

divided by height in meters squared) of 30 or higher (US DHHS, 2010).

        One possible form of differential social desirability bias is that the better educated are more

likely to perceive that the exam will check their self-reported answers, and they may wish to report

more accurately to avoid being caught misreporting. This may lead reporting error to vary with

education in the NHANES in a way that it would not in a survey that was conducted without an

                                                  9
accompanying examination. However, the medical examination is not scheduled (and consent not

sought) until the end of the home interview (Zipf, 2013), so in general respondents may not be

thinking during their interview about a subsequent exam. In addition, the gap in time between the

interview and exam (two weeks on average) means that there will be no instantaneous embarrassment

from misreporting, and the guarantees of confidentiality of health data mean that the interviewer

present for the household interview will not find out the exam results.

       For several reasons, we ultimately decided not to report results for sexually transmitted

infections (STI). First, the samples were smaller because only a subset of ages (14-49) were tested.

Second, the correlations between self-reported and measured values were very low, presumably

because STIs may have been contracted (and cured) long before the interview. In contrast, high blood

pressure and high cholesterol tend to arise later in life and be more chronic conditions.

   3. Empirical strategy

       We test whether reporting error varies by education by estimating regression models of the

following form:

Yit = α +β Educationit+ γ Xit + εit

where Yit is a measure of reporting error or accuracy for person i observed at time t. Educationit is a

vector of indicator variables for education category (less than high school, some college, and college

graduate, with high school graduate as the excluded reference category). Xit is a vector of indicator

variables for respondent characteristics: gender (we pool men and women because we fail to reject

the equality of education coefficients across gender), race (non-Hispanic black, Hispanic, and other

race, with non-Hispanic white is the omitted reference category), age, and year of interview. We also

control for whether the respondent is a U.S. citizen and whether English is the primary language used

at home because language and cultural background may affect comprehension of the survey

questions. The NHANES records the age in months of the respondent at the interview screener and

                                                  10
at the examination; we control for the difference between these two ages in our regression models as

a means of controlling for the length of time between the self-report and the objective measurement.5

However, age at exam is not provided in the 2011-12 NHANES data, so we must drop these years

from the regression analysis (although these years are still used in the unconditional analyses). For

models of smoking behavior, we also control for the presence of any smokers in the household,

because the cotinine test reflects both own smoking and secondhand smoke. We exclude income from

the model to allow for differences in income associated with education to be reflected in the

correlation of education with the outcomes; we also re-estimated our models controlling for income

and found very similar results.


        We examine a series of dependent variables that measure the extent of reporting error. The

first set measures accuracy regardless of the direction of any reporting error. These dependent

variables equal 1 if the measured value matches the self-reported value for a specific health behavior

or condition. One legitimate reason that a reported diagnosis might be paired with a negative test

result is if the individual is taking medication for the condition; e.g. statins for high cholesterol. The

NHANES contains information about prescribed medications, so for those who report being

diagnosed with high blood pressure, cholesterol, or diabetes but test negative for it, we code them as

accurately reporting the condition if they are currently taking medication for that condition.

        The next set of dependent variables takes into account the direction of the error. The

dependent variable for false negative reporting is missing for those who are truly negative according

to the objective test (because someone who is truly negative is not at risk of giving a false negative

report); for those that are truly positive according to the objective test (and thus at risk of giving a




5
 The NHANES does not provide the exact dates of interview or the exam. In the authors’ personal communication
with the CDC administrators, we were told that the average gap between the interview and examination is 2 weeks (also
see Zipf et al., 2013) and the average gap between the interview screener and the interview is 10 days.
                                                         11
false negative report) the false negative variable equals 1 if the respondent says he does not have the

condition and 0 if he says he does have the condition.

        Analogously, the dependent variable for false positive reporting is missing for those who are

truly positive according to the objective test (because someone who is truly positive is not at risk of

giving a false positive report); for those that are truly negative according to the objective test (and

thus at risk of giving a false positive report) the false positive variable equals 1 if the respondent says

he does have the condition and 0 if he says he does not have the condition.

        Dependent variables for false negative and false positive reports are created for each health

behavior and condition. The regressions for false negative reporting are particularly informative

because they will indicate whether better educated people are over-reporting their health, and thus

whether differential reporting error by education explains some of the education gradient in health.

        Probit models are estimated, from which we report marginal effects.                        Regressions are

weighted using the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommended algorithm to

construct multi-year survey weights (CDC, 2015d).

        Clearly, education and health may affect each other; education may improve health, and

individuals may invest in greater education when they perceive that they will be alive for additional

periods for the education investment to pay off. However, the goal of this paper is not to estimate the

causal effect of education on health6, but to determine whether reporting error in health differs by

education and whether that explains the educational gradient in health.

    4. Results

The Educational Gradient in Self-Reported Health




6
 For recent estimates of the causal effect of education on health, see Clark and Royer (2013), McCrary and Royer
(2011), de Walque (2007), and Lleras-Muney (2005).
                                                         12
       Figure 1 displays the gradient of self-reported health over education in the NHANES, which

follows the usual pattern: the better educated report better health. The prevalence of self-reported high

blood pressure, high cholesterol, and diabetes decreases monotonically with education. For example,

the prevalence of self-reported high blood pressure decreases from 39.0% among high school

dropouts to 25.1% among college graduates. The prevalence of self-reported diabetes decreases from

17.3% among high school dropouts to 5.3% among college graduates.

       Self-reported smoking and obesity (based on self-reported weight and height) are negatively

correlated with education, but not monotonically. Smoking is actually less common among high

school dropouts (25.2%) than among high school graduates (33.7%), but it is least common among

college graduates (13.3%). Obesity has a similar prevalence among high school dropouts, high school

graduates, and those with some college (all of which are in the range of 32.7% to 34.8%) but the

prevalence of obesity is much lower among college graduates (22.9%). Figure 2 shows that these

patterns are relatively similar by gender, with the exception that decreases in unhealthy behaviors and

health conditions tend to be less monotonic across education categories for men than women.

Accuracy of Self-Reported Health

       We first examine the accuracy of self-reported health in general, before turning to how that

accuracy varies with education. Table 2 lists the unconditional correlations between the self-reported

value and the measured value for each behavior and condition. The correlations tend to be high,

ranging from .58 for high total cholesterol to over .90 for smoking. Table 3 presents descriptive

statistics for the accuracy measures that are the dependent variables in the regression models. On

average, most respondents accurately report their health; accuracy ranges from 80.3% for high total

cholesterol to over 95% for both measures of diabetes and both measures of smoking.

       The lower panels of Table 3 provide summary statistics for false negative and false positive

reports. False negatives are most common for diabetes (ranging from 21.9% when the A1c test is used

                                                   13
to verify to 32.5% when the plasma glucose test is used) and are rarest for smoking (4.2% for the

higher threshold and 6.5% for the lower threshold). These patterns make sense; smoking is a

conscious act and respondents are aware of it, so false negatives should be low. Conversely, high

blood pressure and high cholesterol can be asymptomatic, and diabetes may be undiagnosed.

       False positives are generally quite low (on the order of 1 to 3 percent) except for high blood

pressure (8.2%) and both measures of high cholesterol (21.4% for high LDL cholesterol and 20.2%

for high total cholesterol). This may be due to respondents being diagnosed long ago with high blood

pressure or high cholesterol, which has since been resolved. Within each condition or behavior, false

negative reports tend to be more common than false positive reports; the exception is high cholesterol.

Education and the Accuracy of Self-Reported Health

       We next examine how the accuracy of self-reported health varies with education. Figure 3

shows that, for each measure of health, the likelihood that the self-report matches the objective test is

higher for college graduates than for high school dropouts. In most cases, the accuracy rises

monotonically with education category.

       Table 4 presents marginal effects from probit regressions of the accuracy of self-reported

health, regardless of direction of error. The dependent variable equals 1 if the self-report matches the

test result and 0 if it does not. The results indicate that college graduates are significantly more likely

to accurately report smoking (for both of the two cotinine thresholds), obesity, high blood pressure,

and diabetes (by both tests). For example, the college-educated report smoking 0.7 to 1.0 percentage

points (0.7% to 1.0%) more accurately (for the cotinine thresholds of 15 and 3 ng/ml respectively),

obesity 1.3 percentage points (1.4%) more accurately, high blood pressure 1.6 percentage points

(1.8%) more accurately, and diabetes 0.8 to 1.6 percentage points (0.8% to 1.7%) more accurately

(based on the A1c and plasma glucose test respectively), than high school graduates.



                                                    14
       There is very limited evidence of a correlation of education with accuracy at lower levels of

educational attainment than college completion.         Individuals with some college education are

significantly more likely to accurately report smoking (for the lower cotinine threshold only) than

high school graduates. Overall, though, there does not seem to be a monotonic relationship between

attained schooling and accuracy of self-reported health; instead, there is a substantial nonlinear

increase in accuracy with college completion.

       Next we examine the association between education and the accuracy of reporting health,

taking into consideration the direction of error. Table 5 presents marginal effects from probit models

of false negative reporting (i.e. reporting that one does not have the condition when the test indicates

that one does). Despite the earlier results showing that college graduates report more accurately

overall, college graduates are significantly more likely to give a false negative report for obesity and

high total cholesterol. Specifically, among obese individuals, college graduates are 2.9 percentage

points (18.9%) more likely than high school graduates to report their weight and height in such a way

that the resulting BMI is a false negative for obesity. Among respondents with high total cholesterol,

college graduates are 3.9 percentage points (20.9%) more likely than high school graduates to give a

false negative report for high total cholesterol. This is striking given both the overall greater accuracy

of reports by the college graduates, and the fact that college graduates may have better information

about their health, something we examine in greater detail later in this paper.

       In two cases lower levels of educational attainment than college graduation are associated

with a significantly lower probability of giving a false negative report; those with some college are

1.5 percentage points (9.7%) less likely than high school graduates to give a false negative report of

smoking, and those with less than high school are 5.7 percentage points (26.0%) less likely than high

school graduates to give a false negative report of diabetes (when validated using the A1c test).



                                                   15
       We next examine the correlates of false positive reporting – i.e. reporting that one has a

condition when the test indicates that one does not. Table 6 lists the marginal effects from probit

regressions for false positives. College graduates are less likely than high school graduates to submit

false positive reports for smoking (lower cotinine threshold only), obesity, high cholesterol (both LDL

and total) and diabetes (measured by plasma glucose only). High school dropouts are more likely to

provide false positive reports for obesity and total cholesterol, but less likely to provide false positive

reports for smoking (both cotinine thresholds) compared to high school graduates.

Implications for the Education Gradient in Health

       We next explore how the differential reporting error by education influences perceptions of

the educational gradient in health. There are several comparisons across educational category that

could be made; we choose to compare those with a high school diploma or less to those with some

college or more. In Table 7 and Figure 4, we show the health discrepancy between these two

education categories based on self-reports and objective measurement. For most health conditions

and behaviors, the use of self-reports results in underestimates of the true (measured) health disparities

across education. For example, the difference in smoking prevalence between the two education

categories is 11.3 percentage points when calculated using self-reports, but is 12.2 percentage points

when one uses cotinine tests (with a 15 ng/ml threshold) to determine smoking status. Thus, use of

self-reports leads one to underestimate the extent to which the better educated are less likely to smoke

by 0.9 percentage points or 7.4%.         In some cases, use of self-reports leads to a very large

understatement of health differences (e.g. 28% for diabetes, 25% for high blood pressure). In contrast,

use of self-reports leads to overestimates of the educational disparities in high LDL and high total

cholesterol; however, these raw reports have not been adjusted to account for the fact that some people

who report having been diagnosed but test negative because they are taking medication for high



                                                    16
cholesterol.7 Across all behaviors and conditions that we examine, use of self-reports results in an

overestimate of the true educational gradient in health by an average of 3.035%.

Extension 1: The Role of Health Insurance and Health Care Utilization

          One explanation for why college graduates exhibit greater overall accuracy in self-reported

health is that they have greater access to, and utilization of, health care. This could result from their

higher income or because of a greater demand for health (Grossman, 1972), and this increased access

and utilization may result in them being more likely to have been diagnosed with conditions,

conditional on having them. In the literature on measurement of health disparities, this is known as

diagnosis bias (see, e.g. Burgard and Chen, 2014). This is not relevant for smoking, for which no

diagnosis from a doctor is needed, but may be very relevant for asymptomatic conditions such as high

blood pressure or cholesterol. Subjects with greater health care utilization may even have better

information about their weight, which can be measured at home but is routinely measured at doctor

visits.

          We investigate whether health insurance and health care utilization explain the correlation

between education and self-report accuracy by re-estimating the models of the paper adding controls

for health insurance coverage and type (private insurance, Medicare, Medicaid/SCHIP, with

uninsured as the omitted reference category) 8 and the number of doctor visits 9 and an indicator

variable for whether the respondent was hospitalized in the past year.

          Table 8 presents the marginal effects from probit regressions of accuracy of self-reported

health, regardless of the direction of error. The results follow the same pattern as in Table 4 but the

point estimates tend to be slightly smaller. Even controlling for health insurance and health care


7
  Likewise, the reports for high blood pressure and diabetes have also not been adjusted to account for use of
medications for those conditions.
8
  We also control for indicator variables for missing values of health insurance variables.
9
  The NHANES records categories, not the exact number, of doctor visits and inpatient stays. We control for a full set
of indicator variables for categories of use, with 0 the omitted reference category.
                                                          17
utilization, college educated individuals report their smoking status 0.6 percentage points (0.6%) and

0.9 percentage points (0.9%) more accurately (for the cotinine thresholds of 15 and 3 ng/ml

respectively), report obesity 1.1 percentage points (1.2%) more accurately, and report diabetes

roughly 0.7 percentage points (0.7%) and 1.4 percentage points (1.5%) more accurately (based on

A1C and plasma glucose test respectively) than high school graduates. The point estimate suggests

that college graduates report high blood pressure more accurately as well, but it is no longer

statistically significant. On the whole, the finding that college graduates report their health more

accurately is robust to inclusion of controls for health insurance and health care utilization.

       We also examine how controlling for health insurance and health care utilization affects

estimates of the association of education with the direction of reporting error. Table 9 presents the

marginal effects from probit models of false negative reporting and Table 10 presents the marginal

effects from probit models of false positive reporting. The results for college graduates are very robust;

even controlling for access and utilization, college graduates are significantly more likely to give false

negative reports for obesity and total cholesterol and less likely to give false positive reports for

smoking (lower cotinine threshold only), obesity, high cholesterol (both LDL and total) and diabetes

(plasma glucose test only). Those with some college remain less likely to give false negative reports

of smoking (both cotinine thresholds), and high school dropouts remain less likely to give false

positive reports of smoking (both cotinine thresholds) and more likely to give false positive reports

of obesity. In summary, differences in access and utilization do not explain these educational

disparities in misreporting of health.

       Extension 2: Role of Refusals and Don’t Knows

       Measurement error can also arise from subjects refusing to participate in the examination,

refusing to answer the survey question or saying that they don’t know. As an extension, we test



                                                   18
whether the probability of participating in the examination and the probability of giving such

responses varies with subject education.

       Table 11 lists the percent of the sample that refused to answer each question or said they didn’t

know the answer. The main conclusion from the table is that very few respondents refuse to answer

or say they don’t know the answers to these health questions. For almost all questions the refusal rate

is 0 or very close to 0; the exception is weight (0.03% refusals). We estimate probit models of refusing

to answer the weight question and find that education is not significantly correlated with the

probability of refusal (see Table 12).

       The percentages of respondents who say they don’t know are greater than those for refusals,

but still very small. The highest percentages saying they don’t know are for weight (0.94%), height

(1.41%) and high cholesterol (0.75%). Probit models for responding don’t know, which are listed in

Table 12, indicate that those with some college and college graduates are 0.3 percentage points

(46.2%) less likely than high school graduates to say they don’t know whether they were diagnosed

with high cholesterol. In addition, high school dropouts are 0.3 percentage points (60%) more likely,

and college graduates are 0.2 percentage points (40) less likely, to say they don’t know their weight,

relative to high school graduates. High school dropouts are also more likely to report that they do not

know their height by 0.2 percentage points (33.3%) than high school graduates. For both height and

weight, high school dropouts are more likely to report that they do not know even when we control

for health insurance status and health care utilization variables.

       A very high percentage (95.5%) of the NHANES respondents participate in both interview

and examination parts of the survey, but it is possible that better educated individuals are more likely

to refuse to complete the examination due to social desirability bias or a higher opportunity cost of

time. To test this, we estimate probit models of refusing to complete the examination as a function

of education and other regressors as in the earlier model. Table 12 shows that college graduates are

                                                   19
0.9 percentage points (17.3%) more likely than high school graduates to refuse the examination. This

could reflect greater social desirability bias or a higher opportunity cost of time.

        Robustness Check 1: Role of Recent Measurements

        One possible explanation for why college graduates tend to report more accurately is that they

tend to have more recent (and thus more accurate) information about their health. In this section, we

investigate that possibility.

        In certain years, the NHANES also contains information about whether respondents had a

blood pressure reading by a doctor or health professional in the past year (1999-2004), whether the

respondent took their own blood pressure reading at home in the past year (2009-12), and whether

the respondent had their cholesterol checked in the past year (1999-2012). To investigate whether

better educated individuals are more likely to have recent information, we estimate models in which

each of those variables is the dependent variable, and regress it on education as well as the other

demographic information.

        The results (in Table 13) indicate that high school dropouts are less likely to have had their

blood pressure checked by a doctor in the past year, and less likely to have checked their own blood

pressure at home in the past year. College educated individuals are more likely to have had their

blood pressure checked than high school graduates in the past year. This could suggest that college

graduates are more likely to visit the doctor's office to check blood pressure, checkup or for other

conditions. Once we control for, health care utilization and insurance status, education is not

significantly correlated with likelihood of having a blood pressure reading by a doctor within the past

year. However, after taking into account respondent's health care utilization and insurance status,

college educated individuals are less likely to have blood pressure reading at home within the year.

Otherwise, education is not significantly correlated with the variable reflecting recent information on

cholesterol levels.

                                                   20
       When we add to the models of accuracy, false negative reports, and false positive reports

controls for whether the respondent’s blood pressure was measured in the past year by a doctor (Table

14), we find that it is associated with a lower probability of false negative reports and a higher

probability of false positive reports. The coefficient on the indicator variable for college graduates

indicates that college graduates remain more likely to report accurately overall, are more likely to

give a false negative report for high blood pressure, but also less likely to give a false positive report

for high blood pressure. Once we control for health insurance and health care utilization, education

is not significantly related to false negative and false positive reporting of high blood pressure but

individuals with some college education remain significantly more likely to accurately report high

blood pressure.

       When we instead control for whether the respondent has taken their blood pressure at home

in the past year (Table 15), we find that college graduates remain significantly more likely to give an

accurate report and significantly less likely to give a false positive report, but they are no longer

significantly more likely to give a false negative report, although this may be due to the smaller

sample size because this question was only asked in a subset of years; the point estimate for college

graduates remains relatively large (4.3 percentage points or 20%). Results for false positive reporting

holds true when we control for health insurance and health care utilization status.

       The earlier findings concerning high cholesterol are robust to the control for whether the

respondent had their cholesterol checked in the past year; college graduation remains significantly

associated with a higher probability of a false negative report of high total cholesterol and a lower

probability of a false positive report of high LDL cholesterol or high total cholesterol. These results

are available upon request.

       Overall, we find little evidence that the tendency of college graduates to report their health

more accurately is due to them having more recent information.

                                                   21
       Robustness Check 2: Controls for Family History of Disease

       Another possibility is that people in different educational categories have a differing

probability of having a family member with the disease, and those who have family members with

the disease either have better health information or are more likely to recall their own condition.

       We are able to investigate this possibility, but only for diabetes and high blood pressure. The

NHANES asks whether the respondent had any biological relatives (including grandparents, parents,

or siblings) who had been diagnosed with diabetes; this was asked in all years (although grandparents

were only included in the list of relevant relatives for 1999-2004). A similar question was asked

about high blood pressure but it was phrased as “high blood pressure or stroke before the age of 50”

so it is not specific to high blood pressure, and it was only asked for a subset of years (1999-2004)

(Appendix Table 14 for further details).

       As a robustness check, we re-estimate the models for diabetes controlling for whether the

respondent had any biological relatives who were diabetic. The results, in Table 16, are very

consistent with the earlier results: college graduates are more likely to provide accurate reports of

diabetes (for both the A1c and plasma glucose tests) and are less likely to give false positive reports

of diabetes (plasma glucose test only) (Table 16).

       We also re-estimate the models for high blood pressure controlling for whether there was a

family history of high blood pressure or stroke. Because the family history of high blood pressure

was asked only in a subset of years, we estimate the model using this new sample both including and

excluding the family history variable. The results are virtually unchanged by controlling for family

history; college graduates remain more likely to report high blood pressure accurately and are less

likely to give a false positive for high blood pressure. These results are available upon request.

       As another related robustness check, we add to the models regarding high cholesterol a control

for whether someone in the respondent’s family had a heart condition; adding this control has little

                                                  22
impact on the results (Table 17): college graduates continue to be more likely to give false negative

reports for high total cholesterol and less likely to give false positive reports for high LDL or high

total cholesterol. Overall, the results of these additional models suggest that the original results are

not due to differential likelihood across education of having a family member with that condition.

       Additional Robustness Checks

       We conducted a number of other robustness checks. For example, we investigated the

possible role of depression, which may vary across education groups and also affect the accuracy of

recall or reporting. Although questions related to depression are asked annually of NHANES

respondents, the question is only asked for half-sample of examination participants of ages 20 to 39

for the earlier waves (1999-2004). From 2005, participants from age 18 and older responded to the

questions on depression. Thus, when we control for depression, sample sizes are reduced. This is

particularly an issue for models of false negatives, because it is estimated using only people verified

as having the condition (only they are at risk of giving a false negative report). Despite the smaller

sample size, we continue to find that college graduates remain significantly more likely to give

accurate reports of smoking (lower cotinine threshold only) and diabetes (A1c test only), and less

likely to give false positive reports of obesity (see Appendix Tables 1, 2, and 3).

       Over time in the U.S., cigarette smoking has become far less common and the prevalence of

obesity has risen dramatically. As a result, the stigma associated with smoking may have risen and

that associated with obesity may have fallen, and this may result in changes over time in social

desirability bias and the extent of false negative reports by education. The years covered by our data

(1999-2012) preclude us from examining long-run trends, but to investigate this possibility we create

an indicator variable for the second half of the panel (2005-2012) and control for it as well as its

interaction with each education category. The interactions of education and time do not provide

evidence of trends in misreporting by education categories, and some of the main educational effects

                                                  23
are statistically significant (e.g. college graduates are more likely to accurately report smoking and

high blood pressure, and are less likely to give false positive reports of smoking and high total

cholesterol) (see Appendix Table 4, 5, and 6).

       For smoking, those who are occasional smokers or very light smokers who do not use

cigarettes regularly may less likely to report that they are smokers.        The NHANES provides

information on the number of cigarettes smoked on the day that respondents smoked during the past

30 days. We defined "light smokers" as those smoking less than 5 cigarette per day during the past

month, following the definition of Schane, Ling and Glantz (2010). We re-estimate the same probit

models of accurate, false negative and false positive reporting of smoking excluding the respondents

who reported smoking fewer than 5 cigarettes in a month. The results for accurate, false negative,

and false positive reporting of smoking are very similar to the baseline results for both cotinine

thresholds and some coefficients have a larger magnitude in these robustness regressions (Appendix

Table 7).

       Another questionnaire in the NHANES can serve as a proxy for defining an intermittent or

occasional smoker. The question asks whether the respondents smoke cigarettes now with 3 response

categories: every day, some days, not at all (very few choose don't know or refuse to answer).

Appendix Table 8 shows the re-estimated probit models of accurate, false negative and false positive

reporting of smoking excluding the sample who reported they smoke "some days". For both of these

robustness regressions excluding light or occasional smokers, we find similar results as in the baseline

specification: college graduates are more likely to provide accurate reports of smoking (both

thresholds) and are less likely to provide false positive reports of smoking compared to high school

graduates (Appendix Tables 7 and 8).

       We also sought to investigate whether the educational disparities in accuracy could be due to

the better educated being diagnosed earlier in life with their conditions. The NHANES asks about age

                                                  24
of diagnosis for diabetes and high blood pressure, but using these variables has two drawbacks: 1) it

exists only for those who reported having the condition, so one cannot estimate models of false

negative reports (those who said they were never diagnosed were not asked age of diagnosis) or

overall accuracy (because false negatives are omitted); and 2) the question for age of first diagnosis

of high blood pressure was only asked in the later waves of the NHANES (2007-2010), which

considerably reduces the sample sizes. When we estimate models of whether a positive self-report

of diabetes was verified by the test (that is, whether the report is a true positive versus false positive),

we find that college graduates are less likely to have given an accurate report whether or not one

controls for self-reported age of first diagnosis. We find similar results for high blood pressure: among

those who report having high blood pressure, college graduates are less likely to have given an

accurate report (true positive report) whether or not one controls for self-reported age of first diagnosis

(Appendix Table 9).       This is consistent with the better-educated experiencing greater social

desirability bias.

        As a robustness check, we re-estimate our models for high cholesterol and diabetes using only

the sample of respondents who had non-missing values for both tests for each condition. To clarify,

only those who had NHANES medical exams in the morning (not those in the afternoon) were

administered a test for high LDL cholesterol and the fasting plasma glucose test. Tests for high total

cholesterol and A1c were administered in both the morning and afternoon exams. To better compare

results across the two tests, we limit the sample to those with non-missing values for both tests for a

given condition. For high cholesterol, the point estimates remain similar to the main results, although

some are no longer statistically significant given the smaller samples (Appendix Table 10). College

graduates remain less likely to give false positive reports of high LDL cholesterol. For diabetes, the

results are quite robust: college graduates provide significantly more accurate reports and are

significantly less likely to give false positive reports of diabetes (Appendix Table 11).

                                                    25
       One issue with false negative reporting is that it can be observed only for respondents who

test positive for the condition; we cannot observe whether a truly negative person would have

misreported if they were truly positive. Johnston et al. (2009) choose to estimate a censored model

for this reason. As a robustness check, we estimate a model of false negative reports for the entire

sample (not just those who test positive) using STATA’s heckprobit command. As before, we find

that the college graduates are significantly more likely to give false negative reports of high total

cholesterol, but the censored model also finds that college graduates are significantly more likely to

give false negative reports of smoking (of roughly 1.2 percentage points or 18.5%) (Appendix Table

12).

       Finally, we estimate seemingly unrelated regression models of accuracy for all conditions and

behaviors, using the sample of respondents who had valid data for each regression. These results too,

indicate that college graduates report their health more accurately; this is true for smoking (both

cotinine levels), obesity, and diabetes (both tests) (Appendix Table 13).



   5. Conclusion

   This paper improves our understanding of one of the most robust findings in health economics –

the positive correlation between education and health. It does so by testing a novel hypothesis for the

positive correlation between education and health: differential reporting error by education. We

hypothesized that the better educated may be less likely to report socially stigmatized health behaviors

like smoking and excess weight, with the consequence of exaggerating true differences in health

across education categories. We do in fact find that college graduates are more likely to give false

negative reports for obesity and high total cholesterol. However, they are also significantly less likely

to provide false positive reports for smoking, obesity, high cholesterol, and diabetes. Given that there

are more truly negative individuals at reduced risk of giving a false positive report than there are truly

                                                   26
positive individuals at higher risk of giving a false negative report, college graduates tend to report

significantly more accurately overall (for smoking, obesity, high blood pressure, and diabetes).

    It is striking that this difference in accuracy is found for conscious acts (smoking), characteristics

that are easily measured at home (weight), and asymptomatic conditions that would need to be

diagnosed by a doctor (high blood pressure). It is also found for conditions that are partially

observable to the interviewer (weight) as well as those that are unobservable by the interviewer (high

blood pressure, diabetes). The consistency of this pattern across conditions and behaviors suggests

that the mechanisms may be substantially cognitive – that college graduates are better able to

comprehend the questions and give accurate answers. The increased likelihood of false negative

reporting by college graduates for obesity and high total cholesterol is consistent with social

desirability bias being greater for college graduates.

    The overall greater accuracy exhibited by college graduates does not appear to be due to them

having greater access to and utilization of health care; the finding is robust to controlling for whether

the respondent has health insurance (and its type), number of doctor visits and whether they have

been hospitalized in the past year.

    Likewise, we do not find evidence that the pattern is due to college graduates having more recent

information; controlling for whether respondents had a blood pressure reading by a doctor in the past

year or measured their own blood pressure at home in the past year had little effect on the result that

college graduates more accurately report having high blood pressure. This is consistent with earlier

research that finds that differential information explains little of the educational gradient in health (se,

e.g. Cutler and Lleras-Muney, 2010). Controlling for family history of the disease likewise had little

impact on the finding that college graduates significantly more accurately report blood pressure and

diabetes.



                                                    27
       One possible reason that the better educated may report more accurately is that they better

understand the questions. The NHANES asks respondents whether they have ever been diagnosed by

a doctor or health professional with the condition. It is possible that less-educated individuals

misinterpret the question as whether they currently have the condition and report no if they are on

medication to control the condition. However, to address that specific possibility we do not code a

response as a false negative if the person reports that they do not have the condition when the objective

test says that they do, as long as they also report taking medication for the condition (this is relevant

for high blood pressure, high cholesterol, and diabetes). Although that particular cognitive error

cannot explain the patterns we find, it remains possible that college graduates may be more likely to

understand the questions or be more likely to give a precisely accurate response.

   Although we find some evidence consistent with greater social desirability bias among the better-

educated (specifically, that college graduates are more likely to give false negative responses for

obesity and high total cholesterol), it is possible that the better educated experience greater social

desirability bias for all conditions and behaviors, but that in most cases it is outweighed by increased

accuracy from cognitive factors. All we observe is the net of these various possible influences on

accuracy, false negatives, and false positives, we cannot distinguish the contribution to each from

each source of misreporting.

   Although we robustly find that college graduates report their health more accurately, we do not

find evidence of a monotonic increase in accuracy with completed education. Instead, accuracy seems

to be statistically indistinguishable between those with less than high school educations, high school

but no college, and some college. Although with these data we cannot investigate why accuracy is

higher for college graduates but not for those with some college (relative to high school graduates),

it is consistent with the literature in education which finds that the labor market return to individual

years of schooling is small relative to the substantial “sheepskin effects” of college graduation (e.g.

                                                   28
Jaeger and Page, 1996). A direction for future research is to estimate the causal relationship between

education and differential reporting error of health behaviors and conditions; that is, does increasing

education have the causal effect of increasing one’s accuracy in reporting health or answering surveys

generally?

   This paper complements the literature on reporting error in health (e.g. Johnston et al., 2009; Bago

d’Uva et al., 2008; Lindeboom et al., 2004) by demonstrating that differential reporting error by

education can bias estimates of the educational gradient in health, using data on widely varied health

conditions and behaviors for a large, nationally representative dataset. It also finds evidence of

increased social desirability bias among the high-educated for certain conditions (i.e. that college

graduates are more likely to provide false negative reports of obesity and high cholesterol).

   A limitation of our study is that respondents are asked whether they have ever been diagnosed

with specific conditions, whereas the tests indicate whether respondents currently have the condition;

subjects may have been diagnosed long ago, the condition resolved, and the respondent is no longer

on medication. We assume that any such discrepancies do not differ by education, but it is possible

that they do, for example due to educational differences in management of chronic disease. However,

such discrepancies would bias the results towards finding that the less educated reported more

accurately (because they are more likely to still have the chronic disease), whereas our results indicate

the opposite. Thus, any such bias implies that the better educated report their health even more

accurately relative to the less educated than our results suggest.

       The extent of misreporting of health underscores the importance of collecting objective

measures of health behaviors and conditions in surveys. To clarify, the problem lies not with

researchers - when both measurements and self-reports are available, researchers tend to use the

measurements – but with datasets, which frequently include only self-reports. Data producers should



                                                   29
carefully consider the cost-effectiveness of including measurements of health and objective

verification of health behaviors and conditions in their datasets.

       Data producers can also take steps to maximize the accuracy of responses to interview

questions on health. This could take the form of selecting the mode of survey to encourage more

accurate reporting (see, e.g., Brener et al., 2003) or offering rewards for accurate reporting for a subset

of the sample that has their answers verified (see, e.g., Philipson, 1997, 2001). Such strategies may

reduce the average reporting error, even if not the educational differences in it.




                                                    30
                                            Works Cited

Bago d’Uva, T., O’Donnell, O., & van Doorslaer, E. 2008. Differential health reporting by education
     level and its impact on the measurement of health inequalities among older Europeans.
     International Journal of Epidemiology, 37, 1375e1383.
Bago d'Uva, T., Van Doorslaer, E., Lindeboom, M., & O'Donnell, O. (2008). Does reporting
     heterogeneity bias the measurement of health disparities? Health Economics, 17(3), 351-375.
Banks, J., Marmot, M., Oldfield, Z. & Smith, J.P. 2006. Disease and Disadvantage in the United
     States and in England. JAMA, 295: 2037-2045.
Benowitz, N. L., Bernert, J. T., Caraballo, R. S., Holiday, D. B., & Wang, J. (2009). Optimal serum
     cotinine levels for distinguishing cigarette smokers and nonsmokers within different racial/ethnic
     groups in the united states between 1999 and 2004. American Journal of Epidemiology, 169(2),
     236-248.
Benowitz, N. L., Dains, K. M., Dempsey, D., Herrera, B., Yu, L., & Jacob, 3., Peyton. (2009). Urine
     nicotine metabolite concentrations in relation to plasma cotinine during low-level nicotine
     exposure. Nicotine & Tobacco Research : Official Journal of the Society for Research on
     Nicotine and Tobacco, 11(8), 954-960.
Brener, N. D., Billy, J. O. G., & Grady, W. R. (2003). “Assessment of factors affecting the validity
     of self-reported health-risk behavior among adolescents: Evidence from the scientific literature.”
     Journal of Adolescent Health, 33, 436-457.
Burgard, S. A., & Chen, P. V. (2014). Challenges of health measurement in studies of health
     disparities. Social Science & Medicine (1982), 106, 143-150.
Butler, J. S., Burkhauser, R. V., Mitchell, J. M., & Pincus, T. P. (1987). Measurement error in self-
     reported health variables. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 69(4), 644-650.
Cawley, J., Maclean, J.C., Hammer, M., Wintfeld, N. 2015. “Reporting Error in Weight and its
     Implications for Estimates of the Economic Consequences of Obesity.” Economics and Human
     Biology, 19: 27-44.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 2015.
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/tutorials/nhanes/SurveyDesign/Weighting/intro.htm Accessed June 2, 2015.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 2015a.
http://www.cdc.gov/bloodpressure/measure.htm Accessed June 3, 2015
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 2015b.
 http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/databriefs/db92.pdf Accessed June 3, 2015
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 2015c.
http://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/pdfs/data/2014-report-national-diabetes-statistics-report-data-
     sources.pdf Accessed June 3, 2015
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 2015d. National Center for Health Statistics
     (NCHS). National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey Questionnaire (or Examination
     Protocol, or Laboratory Protocol). Hyattsville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human
     Services,         Centers         for        Disease       Control       and          Prevention,
     http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nhanes/pe.pdf Accessed June 3, 2015.
Clark, D., & Royer, H. (2013). The effect of education on adult mortality and health: Evidence from
     britain. The American Economic Review, 103(6), 2087-2120.
Connor Gorber S, Tremblay M, Moher D, Gorber B. 2007. A comparison of direct vs. self-report
     measures for assessing height, weight and body mass index: a systematic review. Obesity
     Reviews, 8: 307-326.
Courtemanche, C., Pinkston, J.C., Stewart, J. 2015. "Adjusting body mass for measurement error with
     invalid validation data," Economics & Human Biology, 19: 275-293.
                                                  31
Cullinan, J., J. Cawley. 2017. “Parental Misclassification of Child Overweight/Obese Status: The
     Role of Parental Education and Parental Weight Status.” Economics & Human Biology, 24: 92-
     103.
Cutler, D. M., & Lleras-Muney, A. (2010). Understanding differences in health behaviors by
     education. Journal of Health Economics, 29(1), 1-28.
Cutler, D. M., Huang, W., & Lleras-Muney, A. (2015). When does education matter? The protective
     effect of education for cohorts graduating in bad times. Social Science & Medicine (1982), 127,
     63-73. doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2014.07.056
Dowd, Jennifer Beam, and Megan Todd. 2011. “Does Self-reported Health Bias the Measurement of
     Health Inequalities in U.S. Adults? Evidence Using Anchoring Vignettes From the Health and
     Retirement Study.” J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci, 66B(4): 478-489.
Flood, V., Webb, K., Lazarus, R., & Pang, G.. (2000). Use of self-report to monitor overweight and
     obesity in populations: Some issues for consideration. Australian and New Zealand Journal of
     Public Health, 24(1), 96-99.
Florescu, A., Ferrence, R., Einarson, T., Selby, P., Soldin, O., & Koren, G. (2009). Methods for
     quantification of exposure to cigarette smoking and environmental tobacco smoke: Focus on
     developmental toxicology. Therapeutic Drug Monitoring, 31(1), 14-30.
Gil, J., Mora, T.: 2011. The determinants of misreporting weight and height: the role of social norms.
     Econ. Hum. Biol. 9: 78–91.
Grossman, M. (1972). On the concept of health capital and the demand for health. Journal of Political
     Economy, 80(2), 223-255.
Grossman, M. (1982). The demand for health after a decade. Journal of Health Economics, 1(1), 1-3.
Grossman, M., & Kaestner, R. (1997). Effects of education on health. In J. Behrman, & N. Stacey
     (Eds.), The social benefits of education (pp. 69–123). Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Grossman, M. (2008). The relationship between health and schooling. Eastern Economic
     Journal, 34(3), 281-292.
Jaeger, David A. and Marianne E. Page. 1996. “Degrees Matter: New Evidence on Sheepskin Effects
     in the Returns to Education.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 78(4): 733-740.
Johar, M., & Suziedelyte, A. (2013). Can you trust survey responses? Evidence using objective health
     measures. Economics Letters, 121(2), 163-166.
Johnston, D. W., Propper, C., & Shields, M. A. (2009). Comparing subjective and objective measures
     of health: Evidence from hypertension for the income/health gradient. Journal of Health
     Economics, 28(3), 540-552.
Kenkel, D. S. (1991). Health behavior, health knowledge, and schooling. The Journal of Political
     Economy, 99(2), 287-305.
Lindeboom, M., van Doorslaer, E., 2004. Cut point shifts and index shift in self-reported health.
     Journal of Health Economics 23, 1083–1099.
Lleras-Muney, A. (2005). The relationship between education and adult mortality in the United
     States. The Review of Economic Studies, 72(1), 189-221.
Ljungvall, Asa, Ulf G. Gerdtham, and Ulf Lindblad. 2015. “Misreporting and misclassification:
     implications for socioeconomic disparities in body-mass index and obesity.” European Journal
     of Health Economics, 16: 5-20.
Mackenbach, J. P., Looman, C. W., & van der Meer, J. B. 1996. Differences in the misreporting of
     chronic conditions, by level of education: The effect on inequalities in prevalence
     rates. American Journal of Public Health, 86(5), 706-711.
McCrary, J., & Royer, H. (2011). The effect of female education on fertility and infant health:
     Evidence from school entry policies using exact date of birth. American Economic
     Review, 101(1), 158-195.
                                                 32
Mosca, I., Ni Bhuachalla, B., & Kenny, R. A. (2013). a new look at the socio-economic health
     gradient: Objective and subjective measures of cardiovascular health. Age and Ageing, 42(2),
     S71(1).
National       Center      for     Health       Statistics.    2015.      NHANES           2011-2012.
     http://wwwn.cdc.gov/nchs/nhanes/search/nhanes11_12.aspx Accessed January 22, 2015.
Philipson, Tomas, 1997. "Data Markets and the Production of Surveys," Review of Economic Studies,
     64(1): 47-72.
Philipson, T. (2001), “Data markets, Missing Data, and Incentive Contracting.”, Econometrica,
     69(4):,1099-1111.
Royer, H., & McCrary, J. (2011). The effect of female education on fertility and infant health:
     Evidence from school entry policies using exact date of birth. The American Economic
     Review, 101(1), 158-195.
Schane, R. E., Ling, P. M., & Glantz, S. A. (2010). Health Effects of Light and Intermittent Smoking:
     A Review. Circulation, 121(13), 1518–1522.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2010. The Surgeon General’s Vision for a Healthy
     and Fit Nation. Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the
     Surgeon General.
Zipf G, Chiappa M, Porter KS, et al. 2013. National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey: Plan
     and operations, 1999–2010. National Center for Health Statistics. Vital Health Stat 1(56).




                                                 33
Figure 1. Prevalence (%) of Self-Reported Health Behaviors and Conditions by Education
  0.6


                                                    0.491
  0.5
                                                       0.445

                               0.39                         0.388
  0.4
                                                                0.358                            0.348
            0.337                 0.345
                                                                                             0.327     0.345
                                      0.314
  0.3            0.276
         0.252                            0.251
                                                                                                        0.229

  0.2                                                                   0.173
                     0.133
                                                                            0.092
  0.1                                                                           0.084
                                                                                    0.053


   0
             Smoking          High blood pressure   High cholesterol        Diabetes             Obesity

                    Some high school     High school graduate     Some college     College graduate

Data: pooled Continuous NHANES 1999-2012 data
Note: Sample includes those who are 25 or older, completed both interview and examination components, and excludes
those who have missing values for education and those who reported any of the survey data by a proxy respondent. For
obesity, we exclude the data before 2003 cycle because it is uncertain whether any of the weight or height variables are
reported by a proxy. Also, we exclude individuals who refused to change into examination gown or did not stand up
straight or wore shoes when examining weight and height.




                                                            34
Figure 2. Prevalence (%) of Self-Reported Health Behaviors and Conditions by Education and
Gender
 0.6


 0.5


 0.4


 0.3


 0.2


 0.1


   0
         Female      Male       Female       Male      Female       Male      Female       Male      Female          Male
              Smoking           High blood pressure      High cholesterol          Diabetes               Obesity
                  Some high school           High school graduate           Some college          College graduate


Data: pooled Continuous NHANES 1999-2012 data
Note: Sample includes those who are 25 or older, completed both interview and examination components, and excludes
those who have missing values for education and those who reported any of the survey data by a proxy respondent. For
obesity, we exclude the data before 2003 cycle because it is uncertain whether any of the weight or height variables are
reported by a proxy. Also, we exclude individuals who are pregnant, who refused to change into examination gown or
did not stand up straight or wore shoes when examining weight and height.




                                                           35
Figure 3. Accuracy (%) of Self-Reported Health Behaviors and Conditions by Education
  1
 0.9
 0.8
 0.7
 0.6
 0.5
 0.4
 0.3
 0.2
 0.1
  0
           Smoking        High blood pressure    High cholesterol         Diabetes                Obesity

                 Some high school     High school graduate     Some college    College graduate

Data: continuous NHANES 1999-2012 (pooled).
Note: Sample includes those who are 25 or older, completed both interview and examination
components, and excludes those who have missing values for education and those who reported any
of the survey data by a proxy respondent. For obesity, we exclude the data before 2003 cycle
because it is uncertain whether any of the weight or height variables are reported by a proxy. Also,
we exclude individuals who are pregnant, who refused to change into examination gown or did not
stand up straight or wore shoes when examining weight and height.




                                                       36
Figure 4. Health Disparities across Education Groups
(comparing high school graduate or less vs. some college or college graduates)

 Diabetes (plasma glucose test)                                              0.057
                                                                 0.041

           High blood pressure                                                                            0.096
                                                                                       0.072

            Diabetes (A1c test)                                     0.045
                                                                 0.041

             Smoking (3ng/ml)                                                                                              0.124
                                                                                                                  0.113

            Smoking (15ng/ml)                                                                                             0.122
                                                                                                                  0.113

                       Obesity                                        0.048
                                                                           0.056

          High LDL Cholesterol                                                     0.064
                                                                                                  0.082

         High total cholesterol                                          0.052
                                                                                                  0.082

                                  0          0.02         0.04              0.06           0.08           0.1     0.12             0.14

                                  Disparity in measured values           Disparity in self‐reported values

Data: continuous NHANES 1999-2012 (pooled).
Note: Sample includes those who are 25 or older, completed both interview and examination
components, and excludes those who have missing values for education and those who reported any
of the survey data by a proxy respondent. For obesity, we exclude the data before 2003 cycle
because it is uncertain whether any of the weight or height variables are reported by a proxy. Also,
we exclude individuals who are pregnant, who refused to change into examination gown or did not
stand up straight or wore shoes when examining weight and height.




                                                                 37
Table 1. Information on Self-Reported and Objectively Measured Health Data
       Health                   Survey Question                      Objective Tests                        Notes (eligible sample, exclusion
 Behavior/Condition                                                                                                    criteria etc.)
 Smoking               During the past 5 days, did              Measured by serum cotinine levels in       Question on recent tobacco use
                       [respondent] use any product             urine tests. We examine two cotinine       asked at the mobile examination
                       containing nicotine including            cutoffs to define smoking status:          center where various lab tests and
                       cigarettes, pipes, cigars, chewing       15ng/ml, 3 ng/ml respectively              examinations are conducted
                       tobacco, snuff, nicotine patches,
                       nicotine gum, or any other product
                       containing nicotine?
 Weight and height     How much do you weigh without            Measured by health professionals           We examine waves after 2001
                       clothes or shoes (lbs)?                  using calibrated scale, tape measure       because earlier waves did not
                       How tall are you without shoes                                                      indicate whether proxies responded
                       (inches)?                                                                           to the questionnaires
                                                                                                           We exclude respondents who were
                                                                                                           flagged for not standing up straight,
                                                                                                           removing their shoes, or changing
                                                                                                           into examination gown during
                                                                                                           measurements
 High blood pressure   Have you ever been told by a doctor or   Measured by health professionals.          Exclusion criteria: presence of the
                       other health professional that you had   After the participant rests quietly in a   following on both arms: rashes,
                       high blood pressure?                     sitting position for 5 minutes, three      gauze dressings, casts, edema,
                                                                consecutive blood pressure readings        paralysis, tubes, open sores or
                                                                are obtained (4th measurement is           wounds, withered arms, a-v shunts,
                                                                obtained if a blood pressure               or if blood has been drawn from arm
                                                                measurement is interrupted or not          within the last week.
                                                                complete). Averaged 4 measurements
                                                                of systolic and diastolic pressures.




                                                                 38
Table 1. Information on Self-Reported and Objectively Measured Health Data (continued)
       Health                   Survey Question                      Objective Tests                     Notes (eligible sample, exclusion
 Behavior/Condition                                                                                                 criteria etc.)
 LDL cholesterol       Have you ever been told by a doctor or   Measured with blood test: High LDL     Test conducted only for those with
                       other health professional that your      (“bad”) cholesterol defined as 160     morning examination times
                       blood cholesterol was high?              mg/dL or higher
 Total cholesterol     Have you ever been told by a doctor or   Measured with blood test: High total
                       other health professional that your      cholesterol defined as 240 mg/dL or
                       blood cholesterol was high?              higher
 Diabetes              Other than during pregnancy, have you    Measured with blood test. Diabetes
 (glycohemoglobin      ever been told by a doctor or health     defined as glycohemoglobin (AIC %)
 test)                 professional that you have diabetes or   of 6.5 or greater
                       sugar diabetes?
 Diabetes (plasma      Other than during pregnancy, have you    Measured with blood test. Diabetes     Test conducted only for those with
 glucose test)         ever been told by a doctor or health     defined as plasma glucose level of     morning examination times
                       professional that you have diabetes or   126mg/dL or greater
                       sugar diabetes?


Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS). National Health and Nutrition
    Examination Survey Questionnaire (or Examination Protocol, or Laboratory Protocol). Hyattsville, MD: U.S. Department of Health
    and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nhanes/pe.pdf Accessed June
    3, 2015.




                                                                 39
Table 2. Unweighted Correlation Between Self-Reported and Objective Measures
                                                Correlation Between Self-Report and
       Health Behavior or Condition                        Measurement
 Smoking (test : cotinine >=15ng/ml)                           0.904
 Smoking (test : cotinine >=3ng/ml)                            0.918
 Obesity                                                        0.83
 High blood pressure                                           0.701
 High LDL cholesterol                                          0.595
 Total cholesterol                                             0.579
 Diabetes (A1C test)                                           0.786
 Diabetes (Glucose test)                                       0.751

Data: continuous NHANES 1999-2012 (pooled).
Note: Sample includes those who are 25 or older, completed both interview and examination components, and excludes those who have
missing values for education and those who reported any of the survey data by a proxy respondent. For obesity, we exclude the data
before 2003 cycle because it is uncertain whether any of the weight or height variables are reported by a proxy. Also, we exclude
individuals who are pregnant, who refused to change into examination gown or did not stand up straight or wore shoes when examining
weight and height.




                                                                 40
Table 3. Descriptive Statistics
 Accurate reporting of:                 Mean         SD       N
 Smoking (cotinine >=15ng/ml)           96.6%        0.18   20125
 Smoking (cotinine >=3ng/ml)            97.1%        0.17   20125
 Obesity                                93.2%        0.25   13822
 High blood pressure                    86.8%        0.34   21860
 High cholesterol (LDL cholesterol)     80.7%        0.39    7513
 High cholesterol (total cholesterol)   80.3%        0.4    16140
 Diabetes (A1c)                         96.6%        0.18   21576
 Diabetes (plasma glucose)              95.5%        0.21   10539
 False negative reporting of:
 Smoking (cotinine >=15ng/ml)           4.2%          0.2    4441
 Smoking (cotinine >=3ng/ml)            6.5%         0.25    4855
 Obesity                                15.3%        0.36    4962
 High blood pressure                    23.7%        0.43    8478
 High cholesterol (LDL cholesterol)     14.5%        0.35    2402
 High cholesterol (total cholesterol)   18.7%        0.39    5838
 Diabetes (A1c)                         21.9%        0.41    2554
 Diabetes (plasma glucose)              32.5%        0.47    1414
 False positive reporting of:
 Smoking (cotinine >=15ng/ml)           3.2%         0.18   15684
 Smoking (cotinine >=3ng/ml)            1.6%         0.12   15270
 Obesity                                2.4%         0.15    8860
 High blood pressure                    8.2%         0.27   13382
 High cholesterol (LDL cholesterol)     21.4%        0.41    5111
 High cholesterol (total cholesterol)   20.2%         0.4   10302
 Diabetes (A1c)                         1.8%         0.13   19022
 Diabetes (plasma glucose)              1.5%         0.12   9125


                                                41
Data: continuous NHANES 1999-2010 (pooled) Note: Sample includes those who are 25 or older, completed both interview and
examination components, and excludes those who have missing values for education and those who reported any of the survey data by a
proxy respondent. For obesity, we exclude the data before 2003 cycle because it is uncertain whether any of the weight or height
variables are reported by a proxy. Also, we exclude individuals who are pregnant, who refused to change into examination gown or did
not stand up straight or wore shoes when examining weight and height.




                                                                 42
     Table 4. Probit Models of Accurate Reporting
                             Smoking             Obesity               High Blood          High Cholesterol                     Diabetes
                                                                        Pressure
VARIABLES              Cotinine         Cotinine                                       High LDL        Total          A1C test          Plasma
                      >=15ng/ml         >=3ng/ml                                                     Cholesterol                        glucose
Mean of Dep Var
                         0.966            0.971           0.932           0.868           0.807         0.803           0.966              0.955
Less than high
school                   0.002            -0.005          -0.015          -0.007          0.015        -0.026          -0.003            0.002
                       (0.005)           (0.006)         (0.009)         (0.011)         (0.021)       (0.017)         (0.004)          (0.006)
Some college             0.005           0.006*           -0.003           0.002          0.017         0.007          -0.001            0.007
                       (0.004)           (0.003)         (0.006)         (0.008)         (0.013)       (0.009)         (0.002)          (0.005)
College graduate       0.007**          0.010***         0.013**         0.016**          0.016         0.016         0.008***         0.016***
                       (0.003)           (0.003)         (0.006)         (0.007)         (0.016)       (0.011)         (0.003)          (0.005)
Observations            18,946           19,040           13261           20,801          7,098        15,277          20,099            9,827

     Standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. [Data: Continuous NHANES 1999-2010 (pooled)]
     Notes: All regressions control for indicator variables for survey year, gender, age, race/ethnicity, citizenship status, whether English is
     the primary language spoken at home, and education categories (omitted category: high school graduate, other race), and the difference
     between age in months at screening and at examination. For smoking regressions, we control for whether anyone in the household
     smokes to account for second hand smoking. Cotinine cutoff for smoking status: 15ng/ml, 3 ng/ml respectively.

     This table reports marginal effects from probit models. Regression sample includes those who are 25 or older, completed both interview
     and examination components, and excludes those who have missing values for education and those who reported any of the survey data
     by a proxy respondent. Because age at examination is not provided for 2011-12 wave and data from this wave is excluded from the
     regression sample. For obesity, we exclude the data before 2003 cycle because it is uncertain whether any of the weight or height
     variables are reported by a proxy. Also, we exclude individuals who refused to change into examination gown or did not stand up straight
     or wore shoes when examining weight and height.




                                                                          43
Table 5. Probit Models of False Negative Reporting
                              Smoking            Obesity        High Blood           High Cholesterol                      Diabetes
                                                                 Pressure
 VARIABLES         Cotinine         Cotinine                                    High LDL         Total          A1C test        Plasma glucose
                  >=15ng/ml         >=3ng/ml                                                   Cholesterol

 Mean of Dep
 Var
                    0.042               0.065       0.153         0.237           0.145           0.187          0.219                0.325
 Less than high
 school             0.002               0.021       0.003         -0.006          -0.000          0.026         -0.057**              -0.095
                    (0.008)         (0.014)        (0.020)       (0.022)         (0.034)         (0.028)        (0.028)               (0.000)
 Some college     -0.015***         -0.012          0.004        -0.002          -0.015           0.022         -0.025                -0.063
                    (0.005)         (0.009)        (0.015)       (0.016)         (0.022)         (0.017)        (0.025)               (0.000)
 College
 graduate           -0.005              0.007      0.029*         0.020           0.004         0.039**          -0.020               -0.011
                   (0.007)          (0.011)        (0.016)       (0.018)         (0.024)         (0.018)        (0.030)               (0.000)
 Observations
                    4,191           4,694          4,864          7,692           2,221           5,474            2,394          1,298
Standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. [Data: Continuous NHANES 1999-2010 (pooled)]
Notes: All regressions control for indicator variables for survey year, gender, age, race/ethnicity, citizenship status, whether English is
the primary language spoken at home, and education categories (omitted category: high school graduate, other race), and the difference
between age in months at screening and at examination. For smoking regressions, we control for whether anyone in the household
smokes to account for second hand smoking. Cotinine cutoff for smoking status: 15ng/ml, 3 ng/ml respectively

This table reports marginal effects from probit models. Regression sample includes those who are 25 or older, completed both interview
and examination components, and excludes those who have missing values for education and those who reported any of the survey data
by a proxy respondent. Because age at examination is not provided for 2011-12 wave and data from this wave is excluded from the
regression sample. For obesity, we exclude the data before 2003 cycle because it is uncertain whether any of the weight or height
variables are reported by a proxy. Also, we exclude individuals who refused to change into examination gown or did not stand up straight
or wore shoes when examining weight and height.




                                                                     44
Table 6. Probit Models of False Positive Reporting
                          Smoking            Obesity                High              High Cholesterol                      Diabetes
                                                                    Blood
                                                                   Pressure
 VARIABLES          Cotinine        Cotinine                                    High LDL          Total          A1C test         Plasma
                   >=15ng/ml        >=3ng/ml                                                    Cholesterol                       glucose

 Mean of Dep
 Var                  0.032           0.016           0.024         0.082          0.214           0.202           0.018           0.015
 Less than high
 school              -0.007*        -0.007***       0.020***         0.012         -0.025         0.037*           0.003            0.001
                     (0.004)         (0.002)         (0.007)        (0.012)       (0.029)         (0.022)         (0.003)          (0.003)
 Some college         -0.002          -0.002          0.001          0.003        -0.021          -0.021           0.002           -0.001

                     (0.004)         (0.003)         (0.003)        (0.008)       (0.015)         (0.012)         (0.002)          (0.002)
 College
 graduate             -0.005        -0.006**       -0.011***        -0.013        -0.035*        -0.040***         -0.002         -0.005**

                      (0.004)        (0.002)         (0.004)       (0.008)        (0.019)          (0.014)          (0.002)       (0.002)
 Observations         13,819         12,389           7,780        13,109          4,860            9,803           16,500         7,620
Standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. [Data:Continuous NHANES 1999-2010 (pooled)]
Notes: All regressions control for indicator variables for survey year, gender, age, race/ethnicity, citizenship status, whether English is
the primary language spoken at home, and education categories (omitted category: high school graduate, other race), and the difference
between age in months at screening and at examination. For smoking regressions, we control for whether anyone in the household
smokes to account for second hand smoking. Cotinine cutoff for smoking status: 15ng/ml, 3 ng/ml respectively

This table reports marginal effects from probit models. Regression sample includes those who are 25 or older, completed both interview
and examination components, and excludes those who have missing values for education and those who reported any of the survey data
by a proxy respondent. Because age at examination is not provided for 2011-12 wave and data from this wave is excluded from the
regression sample. For obesity, we exclude the data before 2003 cycle because it is uncertain whether any of the weight or height
variables are reported by a proxy. Also, we exclude individuals who refused to change into examination gown or did not stand up straight
or wore shoes when examining weight and height.


                                                                     45
Table 7. Health Disparities Across Education: (High School Graduate or Less) vs. (Some College or More)
 Health Conditions/Behaviors               Disparity in        Disparity in             % point                      % difference
                                       self-reported values   measured values          difference
 High total Cholesterol                           0.082                   0.052                    0.030                  57.692
 High LDL Cholesterol                             0.082                   0.064                    0.018                  28.125
 Obesity                                          0.056                   0.048                    0.008                  16.667
 Smoking (cotinine>=15 ng/ml)                     0.113                   0.122                   -0.009                  -7.377
 Smoking (cotinine>=3ng/ml)                       0.113                   0.124                   -0.011                  -8.871
 Diabetes (AIC test)                              0.041                   0.045                   -0.004                  -8.889
 High blood pressure                              0.072                   0.096                   -0.024                 -25.000
 Diabetes (Glucose test)                          0.041                   0.057                   -0.016                 -28.070
 Average                                                                                                                   3.035
Data: continuous NHANES 1999-2012 (pooled)
Note: Sample includes those who are 25 or older, completed both interview and examination components, and excludes those who have
missing values for education and those who reported any of the survey data by a proxy respondent. For obesity, we exclude the data
before 2003 cycle because it is uncertain whether any of the weight or height variables are reported by a proxy. Also, we exclude
individuals who refused to change into examination gown or did not stand up straight or wore shoes when examining weight and height.
Reports and measures of high cholesterol, high blood pressure, and diabetes are not adjusted to account for fact that some individuals are
taking medications for those conditions (the accuracy measures that serve as dependent variables in the regression models do take
medication use into account).




                                                                    46
Table 8. Probit Models of Accurate Reporting
(controlling for health insurance, any doctor’s visit, any hospitalization last year)
                              Smoking           Obesity      High blood             High Cholesterol                       Diabetes
                                                               pressure
 VARIABLES               Cotinine    Cotinine                                    High         Total               A1C test       Plasma
                       >=15ng/ml >=3ng/ml                                        LDL       Cholesterol                           glucose

 Mean of Dep Var           0.966        0.971       0.932          0.868            0.807           0.803          0.966          0.955
 Less than high
 school                    0.003        -0.003     -0.012          -0.001          0.014            -0.023          -0.002         0.003
                          (0.005)      (0.005)     (0.009)        (0.011)         (0.022)          (0.017)          (0.004)       (0.005)
 Some college              0.005        0.005*     -0.004          -0.001          0.018            0.006           -0.001         0.007
                          (0.004)      (0.003)     (0.006)        (0.008)         (0.013)          (0.010)          (0.002)       (0.005)
 College graduate         0.006*      0.009*** 0.011*               0.010          0.017            0.014          0.007***      0.014***
                          (0.003)      (0.003)     (0.006)        (0.007)         (0.016)          (0.011)          (0.003)       (0.005)
 Observations             18,933        19,027     13,253         20,783           7,093           15,269           20,083         9,818
Standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. [Data:Continuous NHANES 1999-2010 (pooled)]
Notes: All regressions control for indicator variables for survey year, gender, age, race/ethnicity, citizenship status, whether English is
the primary language spoken at home, and education categories (omitted category: high school graduate, other race), and the difference
between age in months at screening and at examination. For smoking regressions, we control for whether anyone in the household
smokes to account for second hand smoking. Cotinine cutoff for smoking status: 15ng/ml, 3 ng/ml respectively

This table reports marginal effects from probit models. Regression sample includes those who are 25 or older, completed both interview
and examination components, and excludes those who have missing values for education and those who reported any of the survey data
by a proxy respondent. Because age at examination is not provided for 2011-12 wave and data from this wave is excluded from the
regression sample. For obesity, we exclude the data before 2003 cycle because it is uncertain whether any of the weight or height
variables are reported by a proxy. Also, we exclude individuals who refused to change into examination gown or did not stand up straight
or wore shoes when examining weight and height.




                                                                     47
Table 9. Probit Models of False Negative Reporting
(controlling for health insurance, any doctor’s visit, any hospitalization last year)
                            Smoking               Obesity      High Blood           High Cholesterol                        Diabetes
                                                                 Pressure
  VARIABLES          Cotinine      Cotinine                                     High LDL        Total             A1C test         Plasma
                    >=15ng/ml >=3ng/ml                                                      Cholesterol                            glucose

  Mean of Dep
  Var                  0.042          0.065          0.153           0.237           0.145          0.187           0.219              0.325
  Less than
  high school           0.003         0.020          0.002          -0.008           0.009          0.026          -0.045          -0.097
                       (0.008)       (0.013)        (0.019)         (0.021)         (0.035)        (0.029)         (0.030)         (0.000)
  Some college       -0.015***       -0.014*         0.008           0.004          -0.013          0.024          -0.029          -0.061
                       (0.004)       (0.008)        (0.015)         (0.017)         (0.021)        (0.017)         (0.025)         (0.000)
  College
  graduate             -0.006         0.004         0.033**          0.020           0.005          0.042**           -0.025        -0.032
                       (0.006)       (0.011)        (0.016)         (0.018)         (0.024)          (0.019)         (0.029)        (0.000)
  Observations          4,188         4,691          4,861           7,684           2,220            5,472           2,389          1,295
Standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. [Data:Continuous NHANES 1999-2010 (pooled)]
Notes: All regressions control for indicator variables for survey year, gender, age, race/ethnicity, citizenship status, whether English is
the primary language spoken at home, and education categories (omitted category: high school graduate, other race), and the difference
between age in months at screening and at examination. For smoking regressions, we control for whether anyone in the household
smokes to account for second hand smoking. Cotinine cutoff for smoking status: 15ng/ml, 3 ng/ml respectively

This table reports marginal effects from probit models. Regression sample includes those who are 25 or older, completed both interview
and examination components, and excludes those who have missing values for education and those who reported any of the survey data
by a proxy respondent. Because age at examination is not provided for 2011-12 wave and data from this wave is excluded from the
regression sample. For obesity, we exclude the data before 2003 cycle because it is uncertain whether any of the weight or height
variables are reported by a proxy. Also, we exclude individuals who refused to change into examination gown or did not stand up straight
or wore shoes when examining weight and height.




                                                                     48
Table 10. Probit Models of False Positive Reporting
(controlling for health insurance, any doctor’s visit, any hospitalization last year)
                                  Smoking             Obesity     High Blood             High Cholesterol                       Diabetes
                                                                  Pressure
 VARIABLES                  Cotinine     Cotinine                                     High         Total                 A1C          Plasma
                           >=15ng/ml >=3ng/ml                                         LDL       Cholesterol              test         glucose


 Mean of Dep Var
                               0.032         0.016         0.024          0.082          0.214             0.202           0.018        0.015
 Less than high school       -0.009**     -0.007*** 0.018***              0.006         -0.024             0.034           0.001        -0.001
                              (0.004)       (0.002)       (0.006)        (0.011)        (0.029)           (0.021)        (0.002)        -0.002
 Some college                 -0.001        -0.002         0.001          0.003         -0.021            -0.020           0.001           0
                              (0.004)       (0.003)       (0.003)        (0.008)        (0.015)           (0.013)        (0.002)        -0.002
 College graduate             -0.004       -0.005**      -0.009**        -0.009        -0.036*          -0.038***         -0.001       -0.004*
                              (0.004)       (0.002)       (0.003)        (0.008)        (0.020)           (0.014)        (0.002)       (0.002)
 Observations                 13,809        12,382         7,776         13,099          4,856             9,797          16,490        7,616
Standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. [Data:Continuous NHANES 1999-2010 (pooled)]
Notes: All regressions control for indicator variables for survey year, gender, age, race/ethnicity, citizenship status, whether English is
the primary language spoken at home, and education categories (omitted category: high school graduate, other race), and the difference
between age in months at screening and at examination. For smoking regressions, we control for whether anyone in the household
smokes to account for second hand smoking. Cotinine cutoff for smoking status: 15ng/ml, 3 ng/ml respectively

This table reports marginal effects from probit models. Regression sample includes those who are 25 or older, completed both interview
and examination components, and excludes those who have missing values for education and those who reported any of the survey data
by a proxy respondent. Because age at examination is not provided for 2011-12 wave and data from this wave is excluded from the
regression sample. For obesity, we exclude the data before 2003 cycle because it is uncertain whether any of the weight or height
variables are reported by a proxy. Also, we exclude individuals who refused to change into examination gown or did not stand up straight
or wore shoes when examining weight and height.




                                                                     49
Table 11. Percent of respondents who refused to answer or reported “don’t know”
 Health Conditions / Behaviors       % Refused         % Don't know         Refusals (N)              Don’t know (N)      Total sample size
 Smoking                                      0                    0                      0                     0                 21114
 High blood pressure                          0                  0.15                     0                    34                 23019
 High Cholesterol                             0                  0.75                     1                   129                 17183
 Diabetes                                     0                  0.06                     0                    14                 22717
 Weight                                     0.03                 0.94                     5                   150                 15930
 Height                                     0.01                 1.41                     1                   224                 15894
Data: continuous NHANES 1999-2010 (pooled)
 Note: Sample includes those who are 25 or older, completed both interview and examination components, and excludes those who have
missing values for education and those who reported any of the survey data by a proxy respondent. For obesity, we exclude the data
before 2003 cycle because it is uncertain whether any of the weight or height variables are reported by a proxy. Also, we exclude
individuals who refused to change into examination gown or did not stand up straight or wore shoes when examining weight and height.
Reports unweighted percents (%).




                                                                   50
     Table 12. Probit Models for Refusing, Saying Didn’t Know
Variables               Refused entire       Refused to report                Don’t know                  Don’t know              Don’t know
                         examination              weight                       (weight)                    (height)            (high cholesterol)
Mean of Dep Var             0.052                 0.0002                        0.005                       0.006                  0.0065

                       Probit       Probit      LPM        LPM        Probit        Probit       Probit         Probit      Probit      Probit
Less than high
school                    0.008       0.007      -0.000     -0.000      0.003**      0.002**       0.002*        0.001*       0.002       0.001
                         (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.003)     (0.003)
Some college                                                                                                      -0.000
                          0.002       0.002      -0.000      0.000        0.000       -0.000        -0.000                   -0.003**    -0.003**
                         (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.000)    (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.001)     (0.001)
College graduate         0.009**     0.010**     -0.000     -0.000     -0.002***     -0.001*       -0.000*       -0.000       -0.003*     -0.002
                         (0.005)     (0.004)     (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.002)     (0.002)
Control for health          N           Y           N          Y            N           Y             N             Y            N           Y
insurance and health
care utilization

Observations            24,357      24,328      15,048      15,038      13,217        13,208        14,521         14,512      12,245      12,240
    Standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. [Data:Continuous NHANES 1999-2010 (pooled)]
    Notes: All regressions control for indicator variables for survey year, gender, age, race/ethnicity, citizenship status, whether English is
    the primary language spoken at home, and education categories (omitted category: high school graduate, other race), and the difference
    between age in months at screening and at examination. For smoking regressions, we control for whether anyone in the household
    smokes to account for second hand smoking. Cotinine cutoff for smoking status: 15ng/ml, 3 ng/ml respectively

     Sample includes those who are 25 or older, completed both interview and examination components, and excludes those who have
     missing values for education and those who reported any of the survey data by a proxy respondent. Because age at examination is not
     provided for 2011-12 wave and data from this wave is excluded from the regression sample. For obesity, we exclude the data before
     2003 cycle because it is uncertain whether any of the weight or height variables are reported by a proxy. Also, we exclude individuals
     who refused to change into examination gown or did not stand up straight or wore shoes when examining weight and height. Report
     Marginal effects from Probit models except for linear probability models of weight refusals (due to very few positive refused responses
     probit models do not converge). DV=1 if respondent only participated in the interview but not the examination component and 0
     otherwise, DV=1 if refused to respond (or report don’t know) for survey questionnaires and 0 otherwise)

                                                                         51
Table 13. Probit models of recent measurements of blood pressure and cholesterol
 Dependent Variables              Recent blood pressure reading Took blood pressure reading at                 Blood cholesterol recently
                                      by a doctor or health          home in the past year                    checked by a doctor or health
                                           professional                                                               professional

 Mean of Dep Var                                  0.855                                 0.233                              0.611
                                    Probit            LPM                 Probit            Probit          Probit             Probit
 Less than high school                 -0.044*           -0.015              -0.065**          -0.057*          -0.015             -0.003
                                       (0.022)           (0.015)              (0.025)          (0.027)         (0.020)            (0.021)
 Some college                            0.014             -0.003             0.001            -0.002            -0.013            -0.015
                                        (0.012)           (0.008)            (0.016)           (0.017)           (0.014)           (0.014)
 College graduate                      0.031***            0.010             -0.031            -0.040*           -0.001            -0.005
                                        (0.010)           (0.009)            (0.025)           (0.023)           (0.012)           (0.014)
 Control for health insurance
 and health care utilization               N                 Y                  N                Y                 N                  Y
 Observations
                                        10,226             10,215           4,255              4,253              16,134           16,124
Standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. [Data:Continuous NHANES 1999-2010 (pooled)]
Notes: All regressions control for indicator variables for survey year, gender, age, race/ethnicity, citizenship status, whether English is
the primary language spoken at home, and education categories (omitted category: high school graduate, other race), and the difference
between age in months at screening and at examination. Report Marginal effects from Probit models except for columns that says LPM
(Linear probability model)

Sample includes those who are 25 or older, completed both interview and examination components, and excludes those who have
missing values for education and those who reported any of the survey data by a proxy respondent. Because age at examination is not
provided for 2011-12 wave and data from this wave is excluded from the regression sample.
DV (first and third column)=1 if respondent reported that they had their blood pressure or cholesterol checked less than a year ago and 0
if checked more than 1 year ago. DV (second column, blood pressure reading at home) =1 if the respondent took the measurement at
home in the past 12 months, and 0 if not.




                                                                     52
Table 14. Probit models of Accurate, False Negative and False Positive reporting of high blood pressure (controlling for whether
the respondent had a blood pressure reading by a doctor within the past year)
                                                                               High blood pressure
 Dependent Variables                          Accuracy                         False negative                         False positive
 Mean of Dep Var                                0.868                              0.237                                  0.082
                                   Probit           LPM             Probit             LPM                Probit              LPM
 Less than high school                  0.015            0.022            -0.028             -0.021             -0.005             -0.014
                                       (0.013)          (0.015)          (0.031)            (0.029)            (0.013)             (0.015)
 Some college                          0.020*           0.020*           -0.018             -0.013              -0.016             -0.017
                                       (0.010)          (0.011)          (0.024)            (0.021)            (0.011)             (0.013)
 College graduate                      0.019*            0.017           0.047*               0.031            -0.022*             -0.022
                                       (0.011)          (0.011)          (0.027)            (0.023)            (0.012)             (0.014)
 Blood pressure reading by a
 doctor within the past year            0.015            0.025         -0.465***          -0.190***           0.036***              0.011
                                       (0.013)          (0.020)          (0.032)            (0.063)            (0.008)             (0.012)
 Control for health insurance
 and health care utilization              N                Y                 N                  Y                  N                  Y
 Observations
                                        9,635            9,624             3,627              3,623              5,953              6,001
Standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. [Data:Continuous NHANES 1999-2010 (pooled)]
Notes: All regressions control for indicator variables for survey year, gender, age, race/ethnicity, citizenship status, whether English is
the primary language spoken at home, and education categories (omitted category: high school graduate, other race), and the difference
between age in months at screening and at examination. Report Marginal effects from Probit models except for columns that says LPM
(Linear probability model)

Sample includes those who are 25 or older, completed both interview and examination components, and excludes those who have
missing values for education and those who reported any of the survey data by a proxy respondent. Because age at examination is not
provided for 2011-12 wave and data from this wave is excluded from the regression sample.




                                                                    53
Table 15. Probit models of Accurate, False Negative and False Positive reporting of high blood pressure (controlling for whether
the respondent checked the blood pressure at home within the past year)
                                                                       High blood pressure
 Dependent Variables                     Accuracy                     False negative                       False positive
 Mean of Dep Var                           0.868                           0.237                               0.082
                                Probit         Probit         Probit             Probit        Probit              Probit
 Less than high school             -0.009          0.000           -0.047           -0.048            0.017               0.005
                                       (0.018)         (0.016)             (0.034)         (0.030)            (0.020)             (0.014)
 Some college                          -0.000          -0.003              -0.002           0.015             -0.003              -0.002
                                       (0.011)         (0.012)             (0.023)         (0.025)            (0.012)             (0.012)
 College graduate                      0.020*           0.012               0.043           0.053           -0.029***           -0.025***
                                       (0.011)         (0.013)             (0.032)         (0.036)            (0.008)             (0.008)
 Blood pressure reading at
 home within the past year              0.003          -0.002             -0.175***       -0.151***         0.079***             0.073***
                                       (0.009)         (0.011)              (0.017)         (0.018)          (0.021)              (0.021)
 Control for health insurance
 and health care utilization              N               Y                  N                Y                 N                    Y
 Observations
                                        4,066           4,064             1,395             1,395              2,578               2,576
Standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. [Data:Continuous NHANES 1999-2010 (pooled)]
Notes: All regressions control for indicator variables for survey year, gender, age, race/ethnicity, citizenship status, whether English is
the primary language spoken at home, and education categories (omitted category: high school graduate, other race), and the difference
between age in months at screening and at examination. Report Marginal effects from Probit models.
Sample includes those who are 25 or older, completed both interview and examination components, and excludes those who have
missing values for education and those who reported any of the survey data by a proxy respondent. Because age at examination is not
provided for 2011-12 wave and data from this wave is excluded from the regression sample.




                                                                     54
Table 16. Probit models of Accurate, False Negative and False Positive reporting of diabetes (controlling for respondent's family
history of diabetes)
                                             Diabetes (A1C test)                           Diabetes (plasma glucose test)
 Dependent Variables            Accuracy      False negative    False positive    Accuracy      False negative      False positive
 Mean of Dep Var                  0.966           0.219             0.018           0.955            0.325              0.015

 Less than high school                -0.003           -0.057*             0.002            0.002             -0.087              -0.000
                                      (0.003)          (0.029)            (0.002)          (0.006)           (0.000)             (0.002)
 Some college                         -0.001            -0.030             0.000            0.007            -0.064               -0.001
                                      (0.002)          (0.024)            (0.002)          (0.004)           (0.000)             (0.002)
 College graduate                    0.007***           -0.031            -0.001          0.013***           -0.029              -0.004*
                                      (0.002)          (0.030)            (0.002)          (0.005)           (0.000)             (0.002)
 Family or close relative
 diagnosed with diabetes             -0.019***        -0.200***           0.015***        -0.021***          -0.201             0.011***

                                      (0.002)          (0.027)            (0.002)          (0.003)           (0.000)             (0.002)
 Observations
                                      19,684            2,326             16,175            9,612              1,265              7,268
Standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. [Data:Continuous NHANES 1999-2010 (pooled)]
Notes: All regressions control for indicator variables for survey year, gender, age, race/ethnicity, citizenship status, whether English is
the primary language spoken at home, and education categories (omitted category: high school graduate, other race), and the difference
between age in months at screening and at examination. Report Marginal effects from Probit models.
Sample includes those who are 25 or older, completed both interview and examination components, and excludes those who have
missing values for education and those who reported any of the survey data by a proxy respondent. Because age at examination is not
provided for 2011-12 wave and data from this wave is excluded from the regression sample.




                                                                     55
Table 17. Probit models of Accurate, False Negative and False Positive reporting of high cholesterol (controlling for respondent's
family history of heart attack or angina before the age of 50)
                                              High LDL cholesterol                             High total cholesterol
 Dependent Variables               Accuracy     False negative  False positive    Accuracy      False negative      False positive
 Mean of Dep Var                     0.807           0.145          0.214           0.803            0.187               0.202

 Less than high school                 0.008            -0.000             -0.016          -0.028            0.024                0.042*
                                      (0.022)          (0.035)            (0.029)          (0.018)          (0.028)               (0.022)
 Some college                          0.010            -0.008             -0.015           0.004            0.025                 -0.018
                                      (0.013)          (0.023)            (0.015)          (0.010)          (0.018)               (0.012)
 College graduate                      0.015             0.002            -0.034*           0.015           0.039**             -0.038***
                                      (0.016)          (0.024)            (0.019)          (0.012)          (0.019)               (0.014)
 Family or close relative had a
 heart condition                       0.014          -0.062***            0.017            0.004          -0.071***             0.031**
                                      (0.016)          (0.020)            (0.022)          (0.010)           (0.012)             (0.015)
 Observations
                                       6,892            2,151              4,724            14,849             5,316              9,533
Standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. [Data:Continuous NHANES 1999-2010 (pooled)]
Notes: All regressions control for indicator variables for survey year, gender, age, race/ethnicity, citizenship status, whether English is
the primary language spoken at home, and education categories (omitted category: high school graduate, other race), and the difference
between age in months at screening and at examination. Report Marginal effects from Probit models.
Sample includes those who are 25 or older, completed both interview and examination components, and excludes those who have
missing values for education and those who reported any of the survey data by a proxy respondent. Because age at examination is not
provided for 2011-12 wave and data from this wave is excluded from the regression sample.




                                                                     56
