NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RELAXING MIGRATION CONSTRAINTS FOR RURAL HOUSEHOLDS
Cynthia Kinnan
Shing-Yi Wang
Yongxiang Wang
Working Paper 21314
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21314
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2015

We thank Dr. Ou Wang at the Chinese Ministry of Agriculture, who provided invaluable assistance
with the NFP dataset. This paper has benefitted from comments from or conversations with Santosh
Anagol, Rachel Heath, Rob Jensen, Melanie Khamis, Adriana Kugler, Annemie Maertens, John Matsusaka,
Kaivan Munshi, Laura Schechter and seminar participants at the Chicago-Northwestern development
mini-conference, MWIEDC, Stockholm Institute of Transition Economics, the World Bank and the
BREAD pre-conference. Ashutosh Agrawal, Maria Cecilia Peluffo, Zhiwen Xie and Teng Zhong provided
outstanding research assistance. We acknowledge financial support from the China National Science
Foundation and the Australian Research Council. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Cynthia Kinnan, Shing-Yi Wang, and Yongxiang Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Relaxing Migration Constraints for Rural Households
Cynthia Kinnan, Shing-Yi Wang, and Yongxiang Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 21314
July 2015, Revised September 2015
JEL No. O15
ABSTRACT
This paper exploits two unique features of China's history to study the effects of access to internal
migration: reforms to the household registration (hukou) system, and historical migration flows. We
show that temporary migration due to a government policy called the “sent-down youth” (SDY) program
created lasting inter-province links, so that decades later, hukou reforms in cities which sent SDY
increased migration in provinces where those SDY temporarily resided. Using this variation, we find
that improved access to migration leads to higher consumption levels and lower consumption volatility
for rural households. Furthermore, household production shifts into high-risk, high-return activities.
Cynthia Kinnan
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
c-kinnan@northwestern.edu
Shing-Yi Wang
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
was@wharton.upenn.edu

Yongxiang Wang
Marshall School of Business
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089
Yongxiang.Wang@marshall.usc.edu

1

Introduction

Migration offers a key form of arbitrage: especially for the poor, human capital may represent a large
share of wealth, and migration allows this human capital to receive a higher return.1 While much of
the focus of the economic literature on migration has been on the impact of migration on migrants and
on workers in receiving communities, the impact of migration opportunities on sending households and
communities is less understood but extremely important for policy-makers in developing countries who
are interested in reducing rural poverty and regional inequality. Using a novel identification strategy,
our paper addresses the question of how the relaxation of constraints on internal migration affects the
economic choices and outcomes of agricultural households in communities sending the migrants.
We exploit two unique features of China’s economic environment to understand how opportunities
for internal migration affect agricultural households: China’s hukou (household registration) system
and historical patterns of urban-to-rural migration during the “sent-down youth” (SDY) campaign.
A key feature of the Chinese context that we leverage is recent variation in the ease of migration
generated by province-level reforms in the hukou system that allowed some migrants to register and
receive social services in urban areas.2 As discussed in Section 3.1, several other papers have also
used variation in the hukou system to study migration; to our knowledge ours is the first to use its
interaction with ties created by the SDY program. This allows us to use cross-province variation
while relaxing the assumption that timing of hukou reforms in a province is orthogonal to economic
conditions in that province.
The second feature of the Chinese context that we use is the SDY program, wherein the government mandated the temporary resettlement of roughly 18 million urban youth to rural areas.3 Our
strategy builds on previous papers that use historical flows to instrument for migration ( Munshi 2003,
Hanson and Woodruff 2003, Hildebrandt and McKenzie 2005, Mckenzie and Rapoport 2007), but there
are two key advantages to our analysis in the Chinese context. First, the decision to migrate and the
locations associated with the SDY were not choices of the migrating individuals; instead, the routes of
this involuntary migration were chosen by government planners. In previous papers that use historical
flows, it may be more difficult to separate out persistent correlations in preferences or characteristics
that draw people from one place to another. In our setting, we exploit a natural experiment where
the government determined the migration paths of urban youth. Moreover, the fact that we interact
1

Indeed, the potential income gains from rural-to-urban migration are substantial; the rural-urban wage gap is estimated to be 10% in China and as high as 45% in India (Munshi and Rosenzweig 2013).
2
See Section 3.1 and Chan and Zhang (1999) for details on the hukou system.
3
See Section 3.2 and Bernstein et al. (1977) for details on the SDY program.

2

historical SDY flows with time-varying hukou reforms allows us to absorb time-invariant correlations
between sending and destination areas and recover causal estimates of the impact of access to migration.4 To our knowledge, we are the first to demonstrate that the large-scale movements associated
with the SDY program created lasting linkages between provinces that sent and received SDY.5
Using detailed panel data on production activities of rural households from the Chinese Ministry of Agriculture, our paper is among the first that analyzes the effect of access to migration on
outcomes related to agricultural production decisions of rural households. There are several reasons
that we might expect production decisions to change when households have better access to migration
opportunities. One mechanism is a wealth effect, where migrants’ earnings increase relative to what
they would have earned in the absence of migration and this income is shared with households via
remittances. On one hand, the wealth effect may lead to an increase in leisure and a corresponding
decline in total production. Alternatively, a negative wealth effect is possible, due to the cost of
migration itself or the loss of a productive household member (if that member’s wages are not fully
shared with the nonmigrating household members). A second possible mechanism is an insurance
effect: the migrants are exposed to different shocks than the agricultural households that they left,
and this insurance allows households to shift into riskier activities (Rosenzweig and Binswanger 1993).
Alternatively, migration itself may be risky (Bryan et al. 2014), so rural households’ portfolios could
shift away from risky activities.
Our results indicate that increased access to migration leads to an increase in the level of rural
households’ consumption and a decrease in the variability of consumption. Agricultural production
decisions also change, with a shift towards riskier activities including animal husbandry and fruit
farming. These results are consistent with a positive wealth effect or with insurance derived from
having a migrant working outside of the household. We also see a substantial fall in assets without
a corresponding fall in income or labor. Similar to the findings of Kabowski and Townsend (2011)
where an expansion of credit in Thailand corresponds with a fall in assets, the results on assets in our
setting are consistent with the interpretation that households decrease their buffer stock savings in
response to improved access to insurance via migration.
The results are consistent with prior research suggesting an insurance mechanism related to
migrants. Rosenzweig and Stark (1989) show that in rural India, internal migration for the purpose
4
Other previous work on migration has attempted to overcome the associated selection problems using various strategies: controlling for observable differences (Adams 1998), propensity score matching (e.g., Acosta 2011), natural experiments (e.g., Clemens 2010, McKenzie et al 2010), randomized experiments (e.g. Bryan et al 2014), or using instrumental
variable strategies based on exogenous factors such as shocks at the migration destination (e.g., Yang 2008).
5
Our findings are related to Burchardi and Hassan (2013), who show that interpersonal relationships persist over time
and can be an important driver of economic growth.

3

of marriage facilitates consumption smoothing by spreading family networks over locations with less
covariate weather shocks. Using Tanzanian panel data, de Weerdt and Hirvonen (2012) find that
migrants insure non-migrants, but not the other way around. Giles and Yoo (2007) use long lags of
rainfall to instrument for the size of the migrant network, and show that households with a larger
migrant network engage in less precautionary savings. More recently, Morten (2013) uses a structural
model to examine the interaction between internal migration and insurance in rural India. Our setting
is novel, however, in that we have detailed data on the productive decisions of rural households, and
can examine how these decisions change due to improved access to migration.
In addition to the production outcomes that we examine, we are able to offer a new perspective
on the impact of migration on the well-being of remaining households. Our panel data set spans
eight years, and the relatively long time frame allows us to look at measures of wellbeing, such as
consumption smoothing, which are difficult to study in shorter panels. Prior research has demonstrated
that remittances received from migrants correspond with an increase in remaining household members’
income, asset ownership and consumption of normal goods including education and health.6 However,
other research suggests that migration may generate negative impacts on sending families stemming
from the loss of a family member and household laborer.7 Prior papers also find ambiguous effects on
children’s education (Antman 2012, Cox-Edwards and Ureta 2003, Yang 2008, McKenzie and Rapoport
2007) and adult employment of remaining members (Funkhouser 1992, Yang 2008, Amuedo-Dorantes
and Pozo 2006). Relatedly, Gibson, McKenzie and Stillman (2011) find that in the short-run, in
Tongan households in which a member won a lottery to migrate to New Zealand, income falls as does
asset ownership and access to finance, suggesting that migration is costly to remaining households in
the short run.
Finally, we contribute to the growing literature on internal migration (E.g., Beegle, de Weerdt
and Dercon 2011, Bryan et al. 2014, Bazzi et al. 2014). While there exists a larger literature on
international migration, there are many reasons to believe that impacts for international migration
cannot be simply extrapolated to internal migration. Internal migration is more often short-term and
over smaller physical distances, so the ease of and incentives for remitting may be greater, potentially
yielding greater benefits for non-migrating household members. On the other hand, income differentials
are likely smaller for internal than international migration, and the correlation between earnings of
migrants and their sending households may be higher.8 Questions related to internal migration are
6

See Rapoport and Docquier (2006) for a good review on this literature.
There are also other potential difficulties associated with split families including problems with hidden income
(Joseph, Nyarko and Wang 2015).
8
The extent of potential negative effects on non-migrants, such as divorce, isolation between parents and children, and
7

4

highly relevant: of an estimated 1 billion migrants worldwide, almost 75% are internal migrants
(UNDP 2009). Moreover, the form of internal migration we study, inter-provincial migration, is highly
relevant in China: according to 2010 Census data, 50% of internal migrants were inter-provincial
migrants (Liang 2012).

2

Conceptual framework

There are several channels through which the improved access to migration might affect rural households. This paper focuses on two possible channels: wealth effects and insurance effects.
If migrants provide remittances to household members who remain in the origin, this increase
in wealth can lead to more consumption by the rural households. If households were not credit
constrained prior to migration, because leisure is a normal good, income earned by rural household
members and their corresponding investment in agricultural production may fall. If households were
credit constrained prior to migration, the hours worked and earnings of rural household members may
rise as the migrant may be able to finance higher investment; if, moreover, investment exhibits fixed
costs or nonconvexities, nondurable consumption may fall.9 If households exhibit decreasing absolute
risk aversion, such as in the commonly-used constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) utility function,
an increase in wealth will be associated with increased investment in high-risk, high-return assets. On
the other hand, if the remittances sent by the migrant are less than the amount that the migrant
contributed to household earnings before migration, migration may cause a negative wealth effect for
households and a corresponding decline in their consumption and risk-taking.
In addition to a wealth effect, there may be an insurance effect from migration given that migrants’ income will typically be uncorrelated or less correlated with the income of the remaining
household members; in other words, the overall portfolio of household activities becomes more diversified when a member migrates.10 If migrants can provide state-contingent remittances, gifts or loans
(de Weerdt and Hirvonen 2012), this increases the household’s ability to insure risk associated with
their income. The insurance from having a migrant, in turn, may lead to increased investment in
high-return, risky activities, if the household was not previously able to insure income risk fully (see
Binswanger and Rosenzweig 1993 and Karlan et al. 2014). On the other hand, insurance provided
negative spillovers on villages due to the loss of prime-aged workers, may also differ between international and internal
migration.
9
Banerjee, Karlan and Zinman (2105) show how access to credit may cause consumption to fall if nondivisible investment increases; the effect of remittances is similar.
10
Giles (2006) shows that expanding access to off-farm labor markets lowers consumption variability for rural Chinese
households.

5

by migrants may reduce households’ investment due to a reduction in buffer-stock savings (Giles and
Yoo 2007, Kaboski and Townsend 2011). Moreover, migrants’ income may itself be risky (Bryan et al.
2014). Rural households may be exposed to the risk faced by migrants either directly, because they
provide transfers to migrants, or indirectly, because they receive reduced remittances from migrants
when migrants’ income is low. If households are exposed to risks faced by migrants in a way that
increases the total risk they face, they may reduce the riskiness of their own production activities,
potentially at the cost of accepting lower average returns.
The preceding discussion was framed in terms of the effect of migration; however, anticipation
of the ability to send a migrant in the future may cause rural households to change their behavior
even before sending a migrant. If migration is a valuable ex post smoothing strategy (Morten 2013),
households can increase investment in risky assets and/or liquidate buffer stocks even before sending a
migrant. On the other hand, if households need to save up for migration, they may reduce consumption
and/or increase labor supply prior to sending a migrant. For these reasons, our empirical analysis will
focus on the effect of access to migration rather than the effect of migration per se.
Given the theoretically ambiguous effects of access to migration on investment, consumption, and
welfare of rural households, empirical evidence is needed. The remainder of the paper will attempt to
shed light on the mechanisms that are relevant in the context of agricultural households in China.

3

Institutional background

3.1

Hukou system

China’s hukou, or household registration system, was set up in 1950s as a system of monitoring population flows (Chan and Zhang 1999). After the implementation of the Communist Party’s economic
plan called the Great Leap Forward (1958-60), the hukou system was repurposed to control rural-tourban migration given the government’s desire to keep food prices low and provide welfare benefits
for urban residents. While the first constitution of the People’s Republic of China (PRC), issued in
1954, guaranteed citizens the freedom to migrate and settle in the area of their choice, the subsequent
issuance of “Hukou Registration rules of the PRC,” issued in January 1958, began the dual-hukou
system which divided people into those holding a rural hukou and those with an urban hukou. This
essentially voided the “freedom to migrate” specified by the first constitution.11
Individuals’ hukou determines their eligibility for jobs, schooling, housing, and other rationed
goods in a specific city or county. In particular, an individual with a rural hukou cannot legally work
11

To justify this system, the first constitution was revised in 1975 and the “freedom to migrate” clause was deleted.

6

for a state-owned enterprise or the government or receive state services in an urban area. Thus, most
rural hukou holders can only work in the city as “temporary workers” (linshi gong), and do not get
insurance, retirement benefits, housing subsidies or other allowances and are not subject to the same
labor protections as urban hukou holders.
Initially, it was impossible for the holder of a rural hukou to convert to an urban hukou. However,
in July 1985, the Ministry of Public Safety issued the “temporary regulation on the town and city hukou
registration system,” which allowed conversions of rural to urban hukou (nongzhuanfei ); however, the
circumstances were very limited.12 The annual quota (zhibiao) for nongzhuanfei was miniscule at
0.02%.13 In other words, a city with 10,000 city hukou holders could allow 2 rural people to get a
hukou in their city. However, starting in the early nineties, provinces began to open the conversion
process to more people. The nature and timing of these relaxed conditions varied across provinces
and across time, providing a key source of variation that we exploit.
Several previous papers have inferred the effects of the hukou system on labor mobility using
aggregate data (Bosker et al. 2012, Whalley and Zhang 2007) but have not used cross-province
variation to address potentially confounding aggregate trends. An exception is Sun, Bai and Xie
(2011) who code and use variation across provinces and time in reforms of the system, as we do; they
find that hukou reforms adopted by a province correspond to an increase in intra-provincial migration
within that province. Unlike Sun, Bai and Xie (2011), the identification strategy in our paper does not
rely on the exogeneity of within-province hukou reforms.14 Rather, we show and exploit the idea that
hukou reforms in a province which historically sent SDY to another (recipient) province correspond
to subsequent increases in migration rates between the provinces in the reverse direction of the SDY
flow. In a paper building on an earlier national hukou reform, de Brauw and Giles (2012) exploit
differences in the timing of access to national identification cards; they argue that these cards make it
easier for rural residents to temporarily work in urban areas. Their strategy relies on the assumption
of that the timing of access to identification cards is exogenous to other economic conditions within
provinces that affect migration. We compare our findings to theirs in Section 8.
12

Furthermore, a worker who successfully obtains an urban hukou cannot necessarily get the same for their spouse or
dependents.
13
See http://www.mps.gov.cn/n16/n1252/n1657/n2107/96328.html (Accessed February 2015).
14
Indeed, we demonstrate that the timing of a province’s hukou reforms is correlated with other characteristics of the
province.

7

3.2

The sent-down youth policy

Between 1962 and 1978, nearly 18 million urban youth, mainly aged 16 to 20, were sent to rural
areas to live and work. These youth were referred to as “sent-down youth” (zhiqing). The policy’s
official goal was to promote rural development and to have urban bourgeois youth learn from living
in rural poverty; an underlying objective appears to have been to address high urban unemployment
(Bernstein et al. 1977, Gu 1997). Some sent-down youth were sent to rural areas near their home
city, but others, especially those from large cities, were sent to other provinces. In total, 1.5 million
sent-down youth were sent outside their home provinces. Some sent-down youth stayed only a year
or two, while others stayed for more than a decade before the policy was discontinued in 1979. On
average, they stayed 3 to 4 years and performed manual, agricultural labor (Bernstein et al. 1977).
While some of the sent-down youth stayed in the rural areas that they were sent to, the vast majority
(over 90%) returned to the urban areas from which they came (Zhou and Hou 1999).
We investigate the possibility that receiving sent-down youth (SDY) from a large city may create
personal connections and knowledge about that city which may persist over time and increase the
desirability/salience of that city as a possible migration destination. For instance, Yunnan received
56,600 SDY from Shanghai, which may have created connections and reduced barriers (other than the
hukou system) for Yunnanese people to migrate to Shanghai. Marriage rates between local residents
of the rural areas and SDY from urban areas provide some suggestive evidence that the SDY formed
strong bonds with locals during their stay; data from a government conference report on the SDY in
1978 suggests that about 7% of the sent-down youth remaining in rural areas in 1978 were married to
local individuals in the rural areas (Gu 2009). In addition, there is anecdotal evidence that ties due
to SDY flows persisted over time. For example, Nie Zhai, a novel written by a former SDY, Xin Ye,
and later adapted into a television series, depicts the persistence of sent-down youth ties. The novel
and show focus on children of SDY who remained in rural areas, and who later went to Shanghai to
look for their relatives.
While previous economic research has examined parental choices over which child to send-down
(Li, Rosenzweig and Zhang 2010) and the impact on being sent down on the outcomes of the individuals
directly experiencing the migration (Fan 2015, Meng and Gregory 2002, Zhou 2014), to our knowledge,
we are the first to explore the extent to which migration patterns associated with the sent-down
movement generated lasting connections between rural and urban regions.

8

4

Data

4.1

National Fixed Point Survey

Our primary data source is the National Fixed Point (NFP) Survey, a panel survey collected by the
Research Center of Rural Economy (RCRE) of the Chinese Ministry of Agriculture, beginning in 1986.
We use annual waves of data between 1995 to 2002 for data comparability as the questions and the
structure of the survey changed substantially in 1995 and again in 2003. The data set used in our
analysis covers over 14,000 households from 234 villages in 19 provinces.15
NFP villages were selected for representativeness based on region, income, cropping pattern,
population, and non-farm activities. The NFP contains detailed information on household agricultural
production, consumption, asset accumulation, employment, and income. Benjamin et al. (2005)
provide a detailed description of the data and show evidence that the data are of good quality. Its
particular advantages for our purposes are its long panel structure and detailed data on household
production decisions.
Over the period 1995 to 2002, the data only include household-level information. In other words,
with the exception of a few characteristics of the household head (e.g., age and education), the data
do not include individual-level characteristics. For example, we do not know the gender and education
of each member of the household, but we know the number of household members, the number that
are male and the number in each bin of education. Thus, if a household has four members, two of
which are male and two that completed primary school, we do not know if the males were the ones
to complete primary schooling. One major implication of this lack of individual-level information is
that we do not know the individual identity of the household member who migrates. While we do
not know the characteristics of the migrant, we do know whether or not any household members have
migrated. We also do not know where exactly migrants go, or what kind of work they are engaged
in.16 Finally, we do not have a good measure of remittances that the household receives.
The summary statistics for the NFP data are presented in Table 1, where there is one observation
per household, corresponding to the first year that the household appears in the data. We present
levels in the summary statistics for ease of understanding the magnitudes but the regressions use log
measures.17 We drop the top and bottom 1% of values to deal with outliers; however, the results
15

The provinces are Chongqing, Gansu, Guangxi, Guizhou, Hebei, Heilongjiang, Henan, Liaoning, Ningxia, Qinghai,
Shandong, Shanghai, Shanxi, Sichuan, Tianjin, Xinjiang, Yunnan, Xizang (Tibet) and Zhejiang.
16
To address the limitation that we do not know the destination of the migrant in the main NFP data, we supplement
our analysis of the 1995 to 2002 NFP data with two data sets in which migrants report both their origin and destination
provinces: the China Household Income Project (CHIP) in 2002 and the NFP from 2010 to 2012.
17
Given that some values of assets, consumption and income may be zero, the log measures are all measured as the

9

in the paper are very similar if we do not address outliers. To address the issue that household size
changes mechanically with migration, we examine most outcomes in per capita terms.
Our key measure of migration is a binary indicator of whether a household member spent time
working in a different county. While our identification strategy focuses on cross-province migration, we
do not observe the exact location of migrants’ work in our primary data set so we cannot distinguish
migration within the province from migration across provinces or international migration.18 While
this adds noise to our measure of migration, it does not invalidate our identification strategy. It is
important to note that the rate of inter-provincial migration is fairly high. According to the 2010
Census data, inter-provincial migrants constitute 50% of internal migrants in China (Liang 2012).19
The base rate of migration in this population is not trivial: in the first year that they appear in
the 1995 to 2002 data, about 16% of households have a migrant working away from home. Households
experience on average 30 days of a migrant working away from home. This includes the 84% of
households who reported zero days of migration. Conditional on reporting positive days of migration,
the mean is 184 days.20
Over the course of the year, households are required to keep daily diaries of their consumption
and the measures represent annual aggregate consumption of the household. Total consumption is 508
RMB (or USD$64 at market exchange rates) per person in the base year.21 We have several measures
of household consumption in RMB and we divide these measures by household size to get per capita
values. One sub-category of total consumption is food consumption. Food consumption represents
about 50% of total consumption. If households consume their own animal products or agricultural
output, this is included using procurement (quota) prices. Food consumption is broken down into
staple and non-staple, where staple food includes corn, wheat, rice and beans and non-staple food
includes vegetables, meat, seafood, oil, sugar, wine and condiments. About 56% of the value of food
consumption is on these non-staple items.
Agricultural income includes products that the household consumes; they are asked to estimate
the value of based on the quota price of the products. The average per capita agricultural income
in the sample (in the base year) is 2847 RMB per year. This is about USD$356 at market exchange
log of the variable plus one. The results are all very similar if we use the inverse hyperbolic sine instead of the log.
18
Section 4.2 uses two other Chinese data sets that provide information on the origin and destination provinces of
migrants to demonstrate the validity of the identification strategy.
19
The corresponding figure for the 2010-2012 waves of the NFP is 45%.
20
While partial-household migration is relatively common, total-household migration, as measured by attrition from
our dataset, is very rare at 0.81% per year. If an entire family migrates in this period, they risk losing their land in the
village, which may explain why this is a rare event.
21
This figure is likely to be a significant underestimate of true consumption because the survey used quota prices
(which are much lower than market prices) to value agricultural products that are both produced and consumed by the
household. See Benjamin et al. (2005) for a discussion of this issue.

10

rates. Agricultural income makes up about 46% of the total income earned by these households.22
Non-agricultural income averages 3346 RMB per year.
Agricultural labor input is measured as the number of days that all of the members of the
household and hired labor work in agricultural production divided by the number of workers in the
household. The average for the sample is 167 person-days. The number of household laborers averages
2.4 workers in the family. This measure does not include the migrant if the household has a migrant
who is away from home at the time of the survey.
Non-productive assets are durable goods that are not primarily used for production, including
bicycles, furniture and electronics.23 Non-productive assets do not include the value of real estate.
The average household owns about 1080 RMB of non-productive assets per worker. Productive assets
refer to durable goods that are used primarily for production. Productive assets are divided into
agricultural assets and industrial assets. Agricultural assets includes the value of agricultural animals
and medium and large farm equipment. The average household owns 470 RMB of agricultural assets
per worker. Industrial assets are assets that are used for industrial production; an example of this is
a cotton gin. On average, households have 98 RMB of industrial assets per worker.
We denote by “fruits” a bundle of items, including orchard fruits, pods and tea.24 About 22% of
households spent positive labor days on orchard fruits, pods and tea in the base year. Conditional on
participating in these production activities, the number of days per worker that are spent on fruits is
29 days per year. Unconditional on participation, this number drops to 5.6 days per worker per year:
at baseline, investment in this activity is low. Income from fruits includes earned income as well as
the estimated procurement value of fruit products consumed by the household. Households earn an
average of 120 RMB per worker per year in this category.
Households spend more days working in animal husbandry than in fruits. A majority (71%) of
households worked in animal husbandry in their first year in the survey. Conditional on participation
in these activities, households spend an average of 56 days per worker in this category. Unconditional
on participation, the corresponding average is 42 days. Again, the procurement value of any products
consumed by the household are included in the measure of income. Corresponding to the patterns in
labor, households earn substantially more on average from animal husbandry than from fruits, pods
and tea; they earned 699 RMB per worker from animal husbandry. Nonetheless, in an absolute sense
investment in this activity–which, like fruits, is risky–is low in the base period.
Finally, education in an indicator variable for whether the head of household has a middle
22

This includes income from crops and plantation as well as from animal husbandry and fruits, pods and tea.
To be included, a durable asset must have at least two years of life and be valued above 50 RMB, or about USD$6.
24
As we show in Table 12, this activity as well as animal husbandry are relatively risky.
23

11

school education or higher. Approximately half (47.5%) of household heads have at least this level of
education.

4.2

Sent-down youth flows

For data on inter-province sent-down flows, we use data in the publication, “Statistics on sent-down
youth in China,” compiled by the Sent-down Youth Office of the State Council of China in 1983. We
collect inter-province sent-down information for all of the provinces in our sample. We use the total
number of people sent from one province to another across time: in other words, our measure of SDY
flows is time-invariant. Appendix Table A.2 shows the total sent-down youth flows to the provinces
in the NFP dataset aggregated over the sent-down youth period.
Our identification strategy relies on the idea that historical migration flows associated with the
temporary relocation of urban youth to rural areas created lasting linkages across provinces. These
lasting linkages can occur for several reasons, including the maintenance of networks created during
the sent-down period and the transmission of information or attitudes about particular provinces.
In this section, we use aggregated data to examine whether the sent-down flows between provinces
predict interprovincial migration several decades later.
We analyze this using two separate data sets. One is the 2002 China Household Income Project
(CHIP). The advantage of this wave of the CHIP data is that it deliberately targets rural-to-urban
migrants. Of the 5327 households surveyed, 1674 have individuals who have moved across provinces.
The survey was conducted in 12 provinces, and interprovincial migrants are from 29 different origin
provinces. The second data set we use is the NFP over the waves 2010 to 2012.25 Unlike the main
NFP data set used in this analysis that spans 1995 to 2002, the three years from 2010 to 2012 include
information on the destination province of the migrant.26
We estimate the following equation:
Yps = β0 + β1 Xsp + δs + γp + sp

(1)

where each observation is a province s-province p pair such that s 6= p.27 The dependent variable, Yps ,
25

We were able to use a representative sub-sample of 45,960 person-year observations to calculate aggregate migration
flows. We see 4192 cross-province migrants (and their corresponding origins and destinations) and 4993 intra-province
migrants.
26
The NFP survey is quite different in the 2010-2012 waves as compared to 1995-2002. The later waves do not include
all of the variables used in the main analysis and for topics that do overlap, the phrasing of the question can be quite
different. Moreover, the full microdata are not readily available to outside researchers yet. For these reasons, we do not
use these waves in our main analysis.
27
Within province analyses are not possible because the aggregate data on sent-down flows do not include data on

12

is a measure of the migration flows from province p to province s; this is aggregated to the provincepair level from the household data sets as the logarithm of one plus the total number of migrants from
p to s. The key regressor is Xsp , a measure of the historical aggregate flows of sent-down youth from
province s to province p based on data published by the Sent-down Youth Office of the State Council
of China (1983). Xsp is the logarithm of the total number of youths sent from s to p (plus one). The
regressions also include fixed effects for origin and destination provinces, which control for the general
attractiveness of a destination or the general migration propensity of individuals from an origin. The
standard errors are clustered two-ways at both the origin province and at the destination province to
allow for arbitrary correlations of the error term within both origin and destination provinces.
The results are displayed in Table 2. Column 1 suggests that each additional 10,000 people that
the government sent down from s to p in the 1960s and 1970s increases migration flows in the reverse
direction by 11% in 2002 as measured in the CHIP data. The corresponding estimate in the NFP
2010-2012 data shown in column 2 is a 5.7% increase. Both estimates are significant at the 5% level or
higher. These results are supportive of the idea that the program of sent-down youth created lasting
inter-province linkages.

4.3

Hukou reforms

For our main analysis, we focus on hukou reforms that occur in the provinces from which the sentdown youth originated. To compile data on the timing of each province’s hukou reforms, we used an
algorithm with specific combinations of keywords to methodically search through several databases that
cover local laws and regulations in China. We focused on city-level reforms that would affect migrants
from rural areas.28 See Appendix A for more details on our algorithm for coding these reforms.
Chinalawinfo, maintained by the Law School of Peking University, provides the most comprehensive
coverage of local laws and regulations, covering about half a million local laws and regulations in China
since 1949. We cross-checked two other main data sources for local laws and regulation rules in China,
Law-lib and Law-star, for completeness. Table A.1 details the reforms.
To check the quality of our hukou coding strategy, we cross-check our coding of the reforms by
comparing the results of our algorithm with reforms identified in Sun, Bai and Xie (2011). They code
the hukou reforms using Baidu (a Chinese search engine similar to Google), and one of the databases
that we use, Chinalawinfo. Over the period of our main analysis, 1995 to 2002, and for the provinces
that overlap between their coding and ours, our algorithm yields 100% of the provincial reforms that
intra-province relocations.
28
Thus reforms that targeted a very narrow population, such as individuals with PhDs, were omitted.

13

they identify. We find eight additional reforms; in other words, their algorithm for coding the reforms
yields 74% of the ones that we identify.
Our identification strategy relies on the assumption that the hukou reforms facilitated the migration of individuals into the reforming provinces. We exploit the NFP 2010-2012 data to examine
whether a hukou reform in province s corresponds to an increase in migrants whose destination is
province s.29 More specifically, we estimate:
f lowsst = β0 + β1 Ref ormT allyst + δsp + δt + sp

(2)

where f lowsst is the logarithm of the total number of migrants arriving in province s in year t. The
variable Ref ormT allyst is the accumulated number of reforms in province s by year t. For example, if
a province has a hukou reform in 2010 and another in 2011, for that province, Ref ormT allyst equals
1 in 2010, and 2 in 2011 and 2012. We also include fixed effects for each origin-destination province
pair and year fixed effects. We cluster the standard errors at the origin-destination province pair level.
The results are presented in Table 3 where the dependent variable is the logarithm of the number
of migrants arriving from other provinces in column 1, and the total number of migrants including
intra-provincial migration in column 2. For both outcomes, each additional reform increases migration
flows into a province by about 32%, implying that hukou reforms are an important determinant of
migration into and within provinces. These estimates are significant at the 10% level or better.
4.3.1

Excludability of the Hukou Reforms

We examine whether the timing of the hukou reforms may be capturing other characteristics of the
provinces linked through the SDY program rather than the relaxation of requirements for migration in
Panel A of Table 4. The estimates show that characteristics of province p are not related to the timing
of hukou reforms in provinces, denoted by s, that are linked to p via SDY flows. More specifically,
Panel A shows that having a reform in the preceding year in province s is not significantly related in
the level or growth rate of GDP per capita in province p.
An alternative strategy would be to use hukou reforms in a household’s own province to examine
intra-province, rural-to-urban migration patterns. However, Panel B of Table 4 suggests that the
decision of when to pass a reform in a province moves significantly with GDP per capita in that
province. This is perhaps not surprising; areas with more economic activity may have a greater
demand for labor in urban areas and this motivates the passing of hukou reforms within the province.
29

We cannot use the 1995-2002 NFP data to do this because we do not observe the destination of migrants.

14

5

Identification and estimation

Our identification isolates exogenous variation in access to migration from province p using hukou
reforms in provinces s which had previously sent SDY to province p. We define fsp to be the historical
level of SDY flows from urban areas in province s to rural areas in province p. Note that we are
focusing on hukou reforms that occur in province s. We define hst as an indicator for a hukou reform
at time t in province s. The variable Z represents an interaction between the historical SDY flows
from s to p and the contemporaneous hukou reforms in provinces s. In other words, the main source
identifying variation is defined as:
Zpt =

X

fsp hst .

(3)

s

Thus Zpt is a cumulative weighted sum of all the hukou reforms that have occurred in provinces linked
to p via SDY flows up until t, where the weights are the historical SDY flows from the reforming
province to p. Consider the simplest case, when there is only one reform in year n ≤ 2002 (where 2002
is the last year in our main dataset) among the provinces s that are linked by historical flows to p.
Then the variable is equal to the quantity of SDY flows from s to p for the period from n to 2002 and
0 for the periods t < n. Now consider that case where in period m > n, there is a reform in another
province s0 that is also linked by SDY flows to p. In this scenario, in periods m and thereafter, the
value of Z is the sum of the SDY flows from provinces s and s0 . The key idea is that a reform in
province s has a larger effect on the decision of households in province p to migrate to s if there were
greater flows of SDYs, and hence stronger historical ties, between s and p.
Because our identification exploits the interaction of time variation resulting from hukou reforms
in SDY-sending provinces and cross-sectional variation resulting from the fact that SDY-recipient
provinces received SDY in different magnitudes and from different destinations, we are able to include
both province- and year-fixed effects in our estimates. These allow us to flexibly control for many
potential confounds. For instance, time-invariant ties between an SDY recipient province and its
sending province(s) will be absorbed into the fixed effect for the recipient province.30 If a hukou reform
in a particular province makes migration generally more attractive to migrants from all destinations,
this will be be absorbed by year-fixed effects.
30
Thus, our identification strategy does not rely on random assignment of SDY to destinations. While we do not need
this assumption, the destinations of SDY were determined by which locations were prepared to accept SDY at different
points in time and are likely to have been orthogonal to ties between sending and destination province.

15

5.1

Example: Shanxi

To make the construction of the identifying variation more concrete, we discuss the case of Shanxi, a
province in Northwestern China. The SDY flows to Shanxi and hukou reforms in the corresponding
sending provinces are detailed in Panel A of Table 5.
Shanxi received SDY from Beijing and Tianjin: 41,300 from Beijingi and 7,300 from Tianjin.
The reform and SDY interaction for Shanxi, ZShanxi,t will equal 0 until 1998, when it will take the
value 41,300, representing the SDY flows received from the Beijing, which implemented a reform in
1998. No additional reforms are implemented in provinces that sent SDY to Shanxi until 2002, so
ZShanxi,t remains at 41,300 until 2002. In that year Beijing implements another reform, so ZShanxi,t
increases to 82,600 (41, 300 × 2).
Tianjin did not implement any hukou reforms over the 1992 to 2002 time period, so the SDY flows
from Tianjin to Shanxi do not enter into the construction of our instruments. Any time-invariant effects
on Shanxi due to its historical ties with Tianjian will be absorbed into the fixed effect for households
in Shanxi.

5.2

Heterogeneity in reforms’ impact by requirements

The reforms enacted by provinces vary in the requirements specified to obtain a hukou in that province.
The characteristics fell into three broad categories: job-based requirements, where the reform stipulated that the worker needed to have a formal urban job, wealth-based requirements, where the
reform requires the purchase or rental of property in the urban area, and skill-based requirements,
requiring particular skills. A few reforms did not specify particular conditionalities (e.g., the reform
simply increased the quota of rural-to-urban conversions without specifying particular groups who
were eligible); we code these as “unspecified.” The cases where the requirements are unspecified are
relatively rare and do not necessarily imply no requirements but that the provincial office may have
more discretion in their evaluation of applications. Thus, we can separate the hukou reforms that
occurred from 1995 to 2002 into three indicator variables, hjst , where j ∈ {unspecif ied, job, wealth}.31
We also make use of household-level characteristics that are likely to affect a household’s exposure
to the reform. For reforms that have a requirement that the migrant purchases or rents property in
the city, we look at whether the household’s initial assets in year 1995 were above the median in the
data.32 Households with higher levels of initial assets are more likely to be able to afford the cost of
31

As we will discuss later, the requirements associated with reforms in the later period are different. Unlike in the
2010-2012 sample, no skill-based reforms occurred in SDY-sending provinces during the period 1995 to 2002.
32
The assets measure is defined as the value of fixed assets for production, including animals, large-medium sized

16

renting or purchasing property. For reforms that have a job-related requirement, we look at whether
the education of the head of household was above the median in year 1995, since more educated
households may be more likely to have a formal job offer. In other words, for j ∈ {job, wealth}, we
also examine:
j
Zipt
= mji ×

X

fsp hjst

(4)

s

where i denotes the household and mi is an indicator for whether household i has above the median
value of assets or education in the initial period of the data. This exploits the fact that the different
types of requirements associated with some reforms creates heterogeneity across households in the
likelihood of migration.

6

Reforms’ Impact on Migration

We begin by estimating the following equation of the impact of the interaction between hukou reforms
in province s interacted with SDY links from provinces s to p on migration:
migrantipt = α + βZpt + γi + δt + ipt

(5)

where migrantipt is a binary variable for whether the household has a migrant in the past year, γi are
a household fixed effects, δt are year indicators, and εipt is the error term, clustered at the province
level.33 This provides the relationship between the reforms interacted with SDY flows and migration.
Note that SDY flows are re-scaled by their conditional-on-positive mean so that a one-unit change in
the key regressor corresponds to a reform in a sending province that sent the mean amount of SDY
to the recipient province.34
To test the validity of the variation in Z, we examine the requirements associated with the hukou
reforms interacted with the corresponding SDY flows:
unspecif ied
job
wealth
migrantipt = α + β1 Zpt
+ β2 Zpt
+ β3 Zpt
+ γi + δt + ipt

(6)

wooden and metal farm tools, machinery, industrial equipment, transportation tools, factory sites and other; plus the
value of fixed assets for non-productive purposes, including real estate and durable goods.
33
Using the log transformation or the inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS) of migration days rather than the migration indicator
gives very similar first stage results (Appendix Table A.3) as well as second stage results. The inverse hyperbolic sine
transformation is sin−1 (x) = ln[x + (x2 + 1).5 ]. Its properties are similar to log(x) (Burbidge et al. (1988)), but is defined
for all x including zero.
34
The mean is 9,874, i.e., roughly 10,000 SDY on average were sent to the provinces in our sample.

17

where the variables are defined by equation 3. Finally, to further test the validity of the identifying
variation in Z, we include a triple interaction of the reforms based on wealth and jobs with the baseline
assets and education of the household, respectively:
unspecif ied
job
wealth
migrantipt = α + β1 Zpt
+ β2 mwealth
× Zipt
+ β3 mjob
i
i × Zipt + γi + δt + ipt

(7)

where the variables are defined by equation 4.
Table 6 shows the results of these regressions. Column 1 corresponds to equation 5. At a mean
level of SDY connections, a reform that relaxed the constraints for an individual to get an urban hukou
in a place in which a household may have connections from the SDY program increases the probability
of migration by 0.6%. This effect is significant at the 1% level.
Column 2 allows the effect of reforms to differ according to the conditions of the reforms. There
is no significant effect of a reform with a job-based requirement or no requirement clearly specified on
the probability of migration. A reform with a wealth requirement corresponds with a 2.7% increase
in the probability of migration, and this estimate is significant at the 5% level.35
In column 3, we examine whether households with certain characteristics are more responsive to
certain reforms as given by equation 7. If the correlation between migration and reforms is causal,
households whose characteristics make them more likely to be eligible for a given reform should be
more responsive to that reform. The hypothesis is that households with above-median initial assets
should be more responsive to wealth-based reforms, while households with above-median education
should be more responsive to job-based reforms. We find that those with high initial assets exhibit a
differential migration response of 0.5 percentage points when a wealth-linked reform is implemented
(significant at the 1% level). While those with high initial education exhibit a differential and positive
migration response when a job-linked reform is implemented, this is not significant at standard levels.
Overall, the results of column 3 provide additional support for the idea that the hukou reforms are
relaxing migration constraints for some households; wealthier households are more likely than others
to migrate in response to hukou reforms with asset requirements.
35

As discussed above, in most cases renting an apartment qualifies; i.e. the household need not buy property, and the
property may be located in a town peripheral to the city in question. Moreover, we show below that the reforms are
associated with significant liquidation of assets, which may in part be used to finance the rental or purchase of peri-urban
or urban property.

18

6.1

Origin-Destination Flows

As discussed before, one limitation of our main dataset is that we do not observe the destination
of migrants in that sample. This means that the estimates presented in Table 6 demonstrate that
migration from provinces linked by SDY flows increases after reforms in SDP sending provinces, but
we cannot test whether migration increases specifically to the province where the reform occurred.
Using the 2010-2012 NFP data, which contains information on migrants’ origin and destination,
we can test whether hukou reforms in a given province s are associated with a particular migration
response from migrants originating in a province p that received SDY from s in the past. Thus, over
a sample where each observation is a origin-destination-year, we estimate:
f lowsspt = β0 + β1 Ref ormT allyst + β2 Ref ormT allyst × SDYsp + δsp + δt + spt

(8)

where f lowsspt is the logarithm of the total number of migrants arriving in province s from p in year t.
Ref ormT allyst is the accumulated number of reforms that occurred between the years 2010 to 2012
in province s by year t. We also include an interaction between Ref ormst and SDYsp , the historical
SDY flows from s to p. The regression also includes origin-destination fixed effects and year fixed
effects. We cluster the standard errors at the origin-destination province pair level.
Following equation 6, we also allow the effects of the hukou reforms to vary by their requirements.
The requirements for the reforms in this later period are somewhat different. Three types of reforms
occur over the 2010-2012 period in provinces that sent SDY to NFP provinces: unspecified; skill-based;
and those requiring both a job and the purchase or rent of property, which we call “job and wealth.”
The results are presented in Table 7 where the dependent variable in is the logarithm of the
number of migrants arriving from province p to province s in year t. Column 1 shows that, while
hukou reforms increase in-migration from provinces without historical SDY ties by about 25%, each
additional 10,000 SDY who were sent from s to p increase the response by a further 42%. These
estimates are significant at the 10% and the 1% level, respectively. That is, the response to hukou
reforms is significantly greater for migrants coming from provinces with historical ties to the reforming
province. In column 2, we examine whether the effect is differential by reform type. In the absence
of SDY flows, none of the reform types is significantly predictive of inter-provincial flows, though this
may be an issue of power. All three reform types are associated with differentially higher responses
from provinces that received SDY flows from the reforming province (significant at 1%), indicating
that all three types of reforms are particularly attractive to migrants from a province with historical
ties.
19

6.2

Robustness Check: Distance and SDY Flows

One concern is that the variation in the sent-down youth flows is correlated with the distance between
provinces. If the cost of moving urban youth to the rural countryside was a key determinant of of the
rural location to which sent-down youth were assigned, then the greatest flows would also minimize
the distances between provinces.36 To examine the possibility that variation in sent-down flows is
simply reflecting distances, we include the interaction between distance and the hukou reforms in the
first stage regression (equation 5).
We measure the distances between provinces using three measures of the distance between the
provincial capitals. One measure is great circle distance (collected from Google Maps), which is
essentially a measure of shortest (i.e., “as the crow flies”) distance between two points. The second
measure is road distance (based Google maps in 2015). The final measure is based on road distance
as measured by Poncet (2003). The three measures are highly correlated with correlation coefficients
exceeding 97%.
The results are presented in Table 8. Using the NFP data from 1995 to 202, the sample is
limited to province-pairs for which there are positive SDY flows.37 The coefficient on the interaction
between the distances between provinces and the hukou reforms is positive and significant with all
three measures of distance. However, the impact of the interaction between hukou reforms and the
sent-down flows remains positive and significant with the inclusion of the distance controls. The results
provide reassurance that variation in the sent-down youth flows is not simply capturing inter-province
distances.

7

Main Results

To examine the impact of access to migration on the consumption, income and investment of nonmigrating household members, we estimate specifications of the form:

yipt = α + βZpt + γi + δt + ipt

(9)

where yipt is an outcome of interest, as before γi and δt are household- and year-fixed effects, respectively, and Zpt is the reform tally weighted by SDY flows.38
36

It seems unlikely that transportation costs were a primary determinant of where people were sent. As shown in
Figure A.1, the distances that individuals were moved were often quite large.
37
Thus, column 1 of Table 8 is the sub-sample that corresponds to the first column of Table 6.
38
We trim the bottom and top 1% of outliers of the dependent variables. The results are all very similar without
trimming the outliers. These are available upon request from the authors.

20

We focus on these reduced-form estimates, rather than instrumental variables estimates, because
there is the potential for effects stemming from hukou reforms that operate through the expectation
of migrating in the future. For example, a household anticipating the ability to use migration as an
ex-post risk smoothing activity in the future (as in Morten 2013) might begin to reduce precautionary
buffer stocks or increase risky, high-return investments in advance of actually sending a migrant. There
could also be knowledge spillovers from migrants to other households in their community. There may
also may be effects of sending a migrant that persist after the migrant has returned, due, e.g. to
changes in wealth or information. Such effects would invalidate using the reforms as instruments
for contemporaneous migration as the exclusion restriction would fail. The reduced form effects will
capture expectation and spillover effects as well as the direct effects of migration; these reduced form
effects capture the effect of reduced migration restrictions and increased access to migration.

7.1

Consumption

We begin by considering the impact of increased access to migration39 on the level and variability of
consumption. Panel A of Table 9 examines effects on the log consumption. Column 1 indicates that
total consumption increases by 0.8 percent in response to increased access to migration. However,
the effect is not significant. Food consumption also increases by 0.8 percent, and this is statistically
significant at the 5% level (column 2). Non-staple food consumption increases by a similar magnitude,
however the effect is is not significant (column 3).
For risk-averse households, the level of consumption is not a sufficient statistic to describe the
effect on welfare: households also care about the variability of consumption. Panel B of Table 9
shows effects on consumption variability, defined as the absolute change relative to the previous year,
|log(cit ) − log(ci,t−1 )|. The variability of total log consumption falls, but the effect is not significant.
However, when we turn to log food consumption (a category of consumption that households may
particularly value smoothing), there is a significant reduction in variability associated with access to
migration: year-to-year consumption changes are reduced in absolute magnitude by 0.6 percent, and
this estimate is significant at the 1% level. Year-to-year consumption changes for non-staple food are
reduced by 0.6 percent, an estimate that is also significant at the 1% level.
The ability to migrate ex post and/or receive remittances from migrants may be especially
important in response to significant negative shocks, when marginal utility is particularly high. In
Panel C of Table 9, we examine whether access to migration reduces the likelihood of large consumption
39

Throughout, the coefficient estimates the effect of one additional reform in a s province that sent the mean amount
of SDY to province p; however for ease of exposition we refer to this as the effect of “increased access to migration.”

21

drops (greater than 20%). Column 1 shows that large drop in total consumption is 0.4% less likely
when households have increased access to migration. Column 2 shows that a large drop in food
consumption is 0.9% less likely, and column 3 shows that a large drop in non-staple food is 0.6% less
likely. The reductions in large consumption drops are all significant at 1%.

7.2

Income, labor and assets

The positive effects on per-capita consumption levels, and negative effects on consumption variation
and risk of large consumption drops are consistent with non-migrants receiving transfers from migrants.
However, the effects could also be coming through changes in the level of income earned by nonmigrants or changes in household composition. Table 10 examines these outcomes. Column 1 reports
the effect of access to migration on log agricultural income: the effect is small in magnitude and not
significantly different from zero. Column 2 shows a similar small and insignificant effect on log nonagricultural income. These estimates allow us to rule out a drop in total income of more than 0.5%
with 95% confidence, which is informative about the marginal return to household assets, a point we
return to below.
Column 3 examines the effect of access to migration on agricultural labor inputs, defined as
the number of days that all of the members of the household and hired labor work in agricultural
production divided by the number of workers in the household. This is a measure of the intensity
of labor inputs, scaled by the worker population of the remaining household. The magnitude of the
estimated effect is small (0.1%) and not significant. Finally, column 4 tests whether migration has an
effect on the number of household laborers, excluding those working as migrants, in levels. There is a
small negative, but insignificant, effect associated with access to migration.
Table 11 examines effects of migration opportunities on assets. We examine non-productive
assets (such as televisions and bicycles), agricultural assets (such as animals and farm equipment) and
non-agricultural assets (such as a cotton gin). All three categories of assets exhibit significant declines.
Non-productive assets fall by 2.2%, agricultural assets fall by 2.4% and non-agricultural assets fall by
1.6%, all significant at the 1% level. The significant drop in productive assets, combined with the fact
that we do not observe a corresponding fall in income, suggest that the liquidated assets were earning
a low or zero return. We do not see an increase in labor use, which suggests that the fall in assets
is not explained by a shift away from capital-intensive activities towards labor-intensive activities.
Thus, households may be holding these low-return assets as buffer stocks (Deaton 1991, Anagol,
Etang and Karlan 2014), which do not contribute significantly to household productivity but could

22

be liquidated in response to a negative shock that could not otherwise be smoothed. Households may
then optimally liquidate these assets when they gain access to the insurance and/or liquidity provided
by access to migration. Alternatively, the fall in assets may be a cause rather than a consequence of
migration; migration may be costly and financed by the liquidation of low-yielding assets. We next
consider whether some of the proceeds from the liquidated low-return assets may be used to increase
investment in high-risk, high-return activities.

7.3

Investment in risky activities

A corollary of households receiving better access to smoothing strategies through insurance or liquidity
with increased access to migration opportunities is that the household can move along the risk-return
frontier to invest in assets and activities that have a higher expected return, but are riskier. We
examine two high-risk activities: growing fruits (orchard fruits, pods and tea), and raising animals.
Tea and orchard fruits are typically cash crops (Qian 2008), subject to fluctuations in the market
price. Animals can also be expected a priori to be risky, as they are frequently sold at variable market
prices and are subject to disease risk (Cai et al. forthcoming).
We also directly confirm in our NFP data that these activities are high risk; this implies that they
must yield high returns to be held in the household portfolio alongside lower-risk investments.40 Table
12 shows the coefficient of variation (CV) for total agricultural income, non-agricultural income, fruit
income and animal income. Panel A shows unconditional CVs and Panel B shows within-household
CVs.41 Unconditionally, fruit and animal income have CVs of 6.2 and 6.7, respectively, compared to
1.3 for total agricultural income and 3.4 for non-agricultural income. Looking within households, the
CVs fall because cross-household variation is removed, but the pattern remains the same: fruit income
has a CV of 1.9 and animal income a CV of 1.2, while for total agricultural income the figure is 0.64
and for non-agricultural income it is 0.76. Thus, both measures suggest that there is at least twice
at much income volatility in the fruit and the animal production categories as compared with total
agricultural production and non-agricultural activities.
Table 13 shows that households increase their investment in these high-risk activities. We observe
investment of labor in the form of person-days spent working on each type of activity. Because both the
extensive margin (moving into or out of an activity) and the intensive margin (scaling investment up or
40

We cannot directly estimate returns for these activities because we do not observe capital for animals and fruits
separately.
41
Whether the cross-sectional or the within-household estimates is more informative for the amount of risk households
face depends on whether persistent variations across households are ex ante forecastable. If not, these represent risk
and the unconditional CV is informative, while if persistent variations are forecastable, the within-household CV is more
informative (see Ligon 2011).

23

down) may be important, we consider each separately, and examine a composite measure combining
both margins. Column 1 shows that migration leads to a significant increase of 0.7 percent in the
fraction of households reporting positive days worked in animal husbandry, significant at the 1% level.
Column 2 shows that, among the sample with positive days worked in animal husbandry, the
log number of days worked increases by 0.013. This implies a 1.3% increase in days worked on the
intensive margin (significant at the 1% level). Combining the extensive and intensive margin effects,
column 3 shows that log(days + 1) increases significantly, corresponding to a 4.8% increase in days
worked in animal husbandry (also significant at the 1% level).
Columns 4 through 6 show the corresponding results for fruits. The probability of working
positive days in fruits increases by 0.6 percentage points, and this is significant at the 5% level. The
effect on the intensive margin is also positive and significant, corresponding to a 9.9% increase in
days worked in fruit cultivation among households already cultivating fruit. When the two margins
are combined there is a significant effect on log(days + 1), corresponding to a 2.3% increase in days
worked.
Finally, in Table 14, we examine the effect of migration on income from animal husbandry and
fruits. We consider log(income + 1) to capture both intensive and extensive margins. Consistent with
the positive effects on days worked in animal husbandry, we see a significant increases in income from
animal husbandry of 7.1% in column 1. The effect on income from fruits in column 2 is 3.0%, also
significant at the 5% level. Thus, both investment in and income from high-risk activities increase due
to access to migration, consistent with households reallocating their portfolios toward these activities
in response to the insurance provided by the option of sending migrants.

7.4

Labor market frictions as an alternative explanation

Another possible mechanism through which having a migrant affects the production decision of households is through the loss of a laborer. This may be important if rural labor markets are incomplete
and households cannot hire labor to fully replace the lost labor supply of the migrant. However,
the fact that we do not see a significant drop in labor used in households with a migrant (Table 10,
columns 4 and 5) suggests that this mechanism is not first order in our setting. Of course, there is the
possibility that the units of labor used (in worker days or in workers) doesn’t reflect the fact that the
labor that replaces the migrant is different in terms of quality if not quantity. However, the lack of a
significant drop in earnings corresponding to migration (Table 10, columns 1 and 2) suggests that the
labor quality is not much lower.

24

7.5

Instrumental variables and OLS estimates

Estimates of the treatment effects of the relaxation of the hukou constraints in areas connected through
the SDY program for households in which an individual migrates may also be of interest. We present
instrumental variables estimates of the form:
yipt = α + βmigrantipt + γi + δt + ipt

(10)

where migrantipt , the indicator for sending a migrant, is instrumented with Zpt . This relies on the
assumption that all of the effects of the hukou reforms in areas with SDY connections operate through
the migration of a household member. As discussed above, this assumption will fail if anticipation
or spillover effects are present; as such the IV estimates are likely to be upward-biased to the extent
they attribute all effects of migration access to household-year observations when a household sends
a migrant. The corresponding estimates are presented in Appendix Tables A.4-A.8. As expected, the
coefficients are larger than in magnitude than the reduced form estimates, but the sign and significance
are quite similar.
Given that selection on unobservables into migration is often a concern, we also compare our IV
estimates of the effect of migration obtained from estimating equation 10 with the corresponding OLS
estimates obtained by including migration as an exogenous regressor in the regression. Note that the
specifications contain household fixed effects, so any bias will be due to time-varying unobservables.
The OLS results are presented in Appendix Tables A.9 through A.13. The OLS effects are broadly
of similar sign to the IV estimates, but much smaller in magnitude and in some cases not significant.
This pattern of downward bias in the OLS results may suggest that households migrate in response
to negative shocks in income and consumption (as in Morten 2013).42

8

Discussion and conclusion

Our results suggest that, on net, increased access to internal migration is beneficial for rural households.
Consumption increases and becomes less variable. The findings rule out a negative wealth effect
from having a migrant and rule out the possibility that the total consumption risk a household faces
increases as a a result of having a migrant. Furthermore, the results suggest that low-yielding assets
42
Another possible explanation is classical measurement error in migrant status. The OLS estimates will also be
downward-biased to the extent that positive spillovers or expectation effects are present, since some household-year
observations in which the household does not send a migrant will be “indirectly treated” (Angelucci and De Giorgi
2009).

25

are liquidated. The proceeds of the liquidation of the assets, potentially combined with net positive
transfers from migrants, serve to increase households’ cash on hand. The increased cash on hand may
fund the observed increase in food consumption and the observed increase in investment in high-risk,
high-return assets. An alternative interpretation of the liquidation of low-yielding assets is that they
were used to finance the costly migration of a household member.
The finding of an increase in consumption following migration, an event that increases the ability
of households to smooth their consumption, echoes the results of Kaboski and Townsend (2011) who
study the response of Thai households to increased access to formal credit. These findings contrast
with de Brauw and Giles (2012), who do not find evidence of liquidation of buffer stock assets.43 While
they find, as we do, increases in consumption associated with migration, they find income effects that
are as large or larger than consumption effects. They also do not find robust evidence of effects on
productive investment. One possible explanation for the diverging findings lies in the different sources
of variation. de Brauw and Giles exploit the timing of access to national identification cards which
make it easier for rural residents to temporarily work in urban areas. It is likely that the identification
card instrument induces more short-distance migration whereas the variation we use increases access
to long-distance, inter-provincial migration. Shorter migration distances reduce the insurance value,
as the shocks will be more correlated (Rosenzweig and Stark 1989).
Our finding that access to improved consumption smoothing increases investment in risky activities echoes the literature on income smoothing in developing countries (e.g., Rosenzweig and Binswanger (1993), Karlan et al. (2014), Carter et al. (2015), Cole et al. (2014), and Emerick et al.
(2014)). Moreover, the shock to consumption smoothing that we study here, internal migration, is
notable in that there appears to be large demand for rural-to-urban migration, whereas other candidate smoothing policies such as crop or weather insurance, formal savings and credit often appear to
suffer from low demand (Banerjee et al. (2015), Cole et al. (2013), Dupas et al. (2014)). Nonetheless,
previous evidence suggests that temporary, partial-household, internal migration appears to be suboptimally low (Bryan et al. (2014)). In our particular setting, the sub-optimal level of rural-to-urban
migration may reflect government restrictions on mobility in China, including the hukou policy. Our
results suggest that efforts to promote internal migration are likely to benefit agricultural households.
43

They examine the impact of migration in the Chinese RCRE data for 1986 to 2002 for 8 provinces: Anhui, Jilin,
Jiangsu, Henan, Hunan, Shanxi, Sichuan and Zhejiang.

26

A

Hukou Reform Coding

We collect information on hukou reforms from several databases, each of which covers local and national
laws, rules and regulations in China. We search the following electronic databases that have information about local and national laws, rules and regulations: Xihu Law Library (www.law-lib.com), Peking
University Yinghua Technology PKULAW (www.pkulaw.cn), Beijing Zhongtian Nuoshida Technology
Company (www.law-star.com) and Zhengbao Online Education Company’s database (www.chinalawedu.com).
We use the following algorithm in each of the four databases to compile our data on hukou reforms
across provinces and time. We used all combinations of the following two keywords for hukou and
reform or administration in Chinese and searched the whole body (not just the title) of these records.
The words for the hukou system used are hukou and huji. The words for reform or administration are:
gaige and guanli
We then examine the written description of the laws and regulations carefully to determine
whether the record refers to a hukou reform that was issued for the first time. We focus on reforms
that apply to a wide group of individuals and are likely to be relevant for the rural households in
our sample. Thus, we exclude any policies that only allow a very restricted group of individuals
to obtain a new hukou. If the document refers to a change that only targets PhDs, PhDs from
Western universities or owners of very high asset firms, we exclude these from our coding.44 In some
cases, the local government issued documents that discuss general principles of hukou reforms without
implementing actual reform measures. These are also excluded from our analyses.45

44

For example, in 2002, the city of Beijing city issued a policy document, titled ”A notice on four measures to
implement ¡rules on opening further to domestic and further developing Beijing economy”, that allows senior managers
of large state-owned business groups and firm owners who invested at least 30 million RMB in Beijing to apply for Beijing
hukou.
45
For example, Sichuan provincial government issued a document in 1998 called “A note on solving several important
problems in the Hukou system.” The document indicates that Sichuan provincial government was thinking of doing some
hukou policy experiment in a few cities. However, the document doesn’t specify which places and when these experiments
would be implemented.

27

References
(1983): Statistics on Sent-down Youths in China, Sent-down Youth Office of the State Council of
China, Beijing.
Amuedo-Dorantes, C. and S. Pozo (2006): “Migration, remittances, and male and female employment patterns,” American Economic Review, 222–226.
Anagol, S., A. Etang, and D. Karlan (2014): “Continued Existence of Cows Disproves Central
Tenets of Capitalism?” Tech. rep., Working paper.
Angelucci, M. and G. De Giorgi (2009): “Indirect Effects of an Aid Program: How Do Cash
Transfers Affect Ineligibles’ Consumption?” The American Economic Review, 486–508.
Antman, F. M. (2012): “Gender, educational attainment, and the impact of parental migration on
children left behind,” Journal of Population Economics, 25, 1187–1214.
Banerjee, A., E. Duflo, R. Glennerster, and C. Kinnan (2010): “The miracle of microfinance?
Evidence from a randomized evaluation,” Centre for Micro Finance working paper.
Banerjee, A., D. Karlan, and J. Zinman (2015): “Six Randomized Evaluations of Microcredit:
Introduction and Further Steps,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7, 1–21.
Bazzi, S., A. Gaduh, A. Rothenberg, and M. Wong (2014): “Skill Transferability, Migration,
and Development: Evidence from Population Resettlement in Indonesia,” .
Beegle, K., J. deWeerdt, and S. Dercon (2011): “Migration and economic mobility in Tanzania:
Evidence from a tracking survey,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 93, 1010–1033.
Beijing Lawstar Tech Limited Company (2011): “China Local Law Library,” .
Benjamin, D., L. Brandt, and J. Giles (2005): “The evolution of income inequality in rural
China,” Economic Development and Cultural Change, 53, 769–824.
Bernstein, T. P. (1977): “Up to the mountains and down to the villages: The transfer of youth
from urban to rural China.” .
Bonnin, M. (2013): The lost generation: The rustication of Chinese youth (1968-1980), Chinese
University of Hong Kong.
Bosker, M., S. Brakman, H. Garretsen, and M. Schramm (2012): “Relaxing Hukou: Increased
labor mobility and Chinas economic geography,” Journal of Urban Economics, 72, 252–266.
Bryan, G., S. Chowdhury, and A. M. Mobarak (2014): “Underinvestment in a profitable technology: The case of seasonal migration in Bangladesh,” Econometrica, 82, 1671–1748.
Burbidge, J. B., L. Magee, and A. L. Robb (1988): “Alternative transformations to handle
extreme values of the dependent variable,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 83,
123–127.
Burchardi, K. B. and T. A. Hassan (2013): “The Economic Impact of Social Ties: Evidence
from German Reunification,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128, 1219–1271.
Cai, H., Y. Chen, H. Fang, and L.-A. Zhou (forthcoming): “The effect of microinsurance on economic activities: evidence from a randomized field experiment,” Review of Economics and Statistics.
28

Carter, M. R., R. Laajaj, and D. Yang (2015): “Raising Returns, Managing Risk: A Randomized
Experiment on Combining Input Subsidies with Financial Services Interventions,” .
Chan, K. and L. Zhang (1999): “The Hukou system and rural-urban migration in China: Processes
and changes,” China Quarterly, 818–855.
Clemens, M. (2010): “The Roots of Global Wage Gaps: Evidence from Randomized Processing of
U.S. Visas,” Center for Global Development working paper 212.
Cole, S., X. Giné, J. Tobacman, R. Townsend, P. Topalova, and J. Vickery (2013): “Barriers to household risk management: evidence from India,” American Economic Journal. Applied
Economics, 5, 104.
Cole, S., X. Giné, and J. Vickery (2014): “How does risk management influence production
decisions? Evidence from a Field Experiment,” HBS WP.
De Brauw, A. and J. Giles (2012): “Migrant labor markets and the welfare of rural households in
the developing world: Evidence from China,” Working Paper.
Deaton, A. (1991): “Saving and Liquidity Constraints,” Econometrica, 59, 1221–1248.
deWeerdt, J. and K. Hirvonen (2012): “Risk sharing and migration in Tanzania,” .
Dupas, P., S. Green, A. Keats, and J. Robinson (2014): “Challenges in banking the rural poor:
Evidence from Kenya’s western province,” in African Successes: Modernization and Development,
University of Chicago Press.
Edwards, A. C. and M. Ureta (2003): “International migration, remittances, and schooling:
Evidence from El Salvador,” Journal of Development Economics, 72, 429–461.
Emerick, K., A. de Janvry, E. Sadoulet, and M. H. Dar (2014): “Risk and the modernization
of agriculture,” Mimeo.
Fan, Y. (2015): “Does Adversity Affect Long-Term Consumption and Financial Behaviour? Evidence
from China’s Rustication Programme,” LSE working paper.
Funkhouser, E. (1992): “Migration from Nicaragua: Some recent evidence,” World Development,
20, 1209–1218.
Gibson, J., D. McKenzie, and S. Stillman (2011): “The impacts of international migration
on remaining household members: Omnibus results from a migration lottery program,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 93, 1297–1318.
Giles, J. (2006): “Is life more risky in the open? Household risk-coping and the opening of China’s
labor markets,” Journal of Development Economics, 81, 25–60.
Giles, J. and K. Yoo (2007): “Precautionary behavior, migrant networks, and household consumption decisions: An empirical analysis using household panel data from rural China,” Review
of Economics and Statistics, 89, 534–551.
Gu, H. (2009): Chinese Educated City Youth: The Whole Story [Zhongguo Zhishi Qingnian ShangShan Xiaxiang Shimo], People’s Daily Publishing House.
Gu, S., ed. (1997): The origins and consequences of Sending-down Youths in China, China Procuratorial Press, Beijing.
29

Hangzhou Fatu Tech Limited Company (2011): “Legal Star and Regulations Database,” .
Hanson, G. H., R. Robertson, and A. Spilimbergo (2002): “Does border enforcement protect
US workers from illegal immigration?” Review of Economics and Statistics, 84, 73–92.
Hanson, G. H. and C. Woodruff (2003): “Emigration and educational attainment in Mexico,”
Tech. rep.
Hildebrandt, N., D. J. McKenzie, G. Esquivel, and E. Schargrodsky (2005): “The effects
of migration on child health in Mexico [with comments],” Economia, 257–289.
Joseph, T., Y. Nyarko, and S.-Y. Wang (2014): “Asymmetric Information and Remittances:
Evidence from Matched Administrative Data,” NBER Working paper.
Kaboski, J. P. and R. M. Townsend (2011): “A Structural Evaluation of a Large-Scale QuasiExperimental Microfinance Initiative,” Econometrica, 79, 1357–1406.
Karlan, D., R. Osei, I. Osei-Akoto, and C. Udry (2014): “Agricultural Decisions after Relaxing
Credit and Risk Constraints,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129, 597–652.
Law School of Peking University (2011): “Chinalawinfo - legal retrieval system,” .
Li, H., M. Rosenzweig, and J. Zhang (2010): “Altruism, Favoritism, and Guilt in the Allocation
of Family Resources: Sophie’s Choice in Mao’s Mass Send-Down Movement,” Journal of Political
Economy, 1–38.
Liang, Z. (2012): “Recent Migration Trends in China: Geographic and Demographic Aspects and
Development Implications,” in UN Expert Group Meeting on New Trends in Migration: Demographic
Aspects.
Ligon, E. (2011): “Measuring Risk by Looking at Changes in Inequality: Vulnerability in Ecuador,”
Mimeo.
McKenzie, D. and H. Rapoport (2007): “Network effects and the dynamics of migration and
inequality: Theory and evidence from Mexico,” Journal of Development Economics, 84, 1–24.
——— (2011): “Can migration reduce educational attainment? Evidence from Mexico,” Journal of
Population Economics, 24, 1331–1358.
McKenzie, D., S. Stillman, and J. Gibson (2010): “How Important is Selection? Experimental
vs. Non-Experimental Measures of the Income Gains from Migration,” Journal of the European
Economic Association, 8, 913–945.
Meng, X. and R. G. Gregory (2002): “The Impact of Interrupted Education on Subsequent
Educational Attainment: A Cost of the Chinese Cultural Revolution,” Economic Development and
Cultural Change, 935–959.
Morten, M. (2013): “Temporary Migration and Endogenous Risk Sharing in Village India,” Working
paper.
Munshi, K. (2003): “Networks in the modern economy: Mexican migrants in the US labor market,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 549–599.
Munshi, K. and M. Rosenzweig (2013): “Networks and misallocation: Insurance, migration, and
the rural-urban wage gap,” Working paper.
30

Poncet, S. (2003): “Measuring Chinese domestic and international integration,” China Economic
Review, 14, 1–21.
Qian, N. (2008): “Missing Women and the Price of Tea in China: The Effect of Sex-Specific Earnings
on Sex Imbalance,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123, 1251–1285.
Rajbanshi, R., M. Huang, and B. Wydick (2012): “Measuring Microfinance: Cognitive and
Experimental Bias with New Evidence from Nepal,” .
Rapoport, H. and F. Docquier (2006): “The economics of migrants’ remittances,” Handbook of
the Economics of Giving, Altruism and Reciprocity, 2, 1135–1198.
RCRE (1993-2002): National Fixed Point Survey, Research Center of Rural Economy, Ministry of
Agriculture.
Rosenzweig, M. and H. Binswanger (1993): “Wealth, weather risk and the composition and
profitability of agricultural investments,” Economic Journal, 103, 56–78.
Rosenzweig, M. and O. Stark (1989): “Consumption smoothing, migration, and marriage: Evidence from rural India,” Journal of Political Economy, 905–926.
Sun, W., C. Bai, and P. Xie (2011): “The impact of Hukou reforms on rural labor migration in
China,” Economic Research Journal, 28–41.
Whalley, J. and S. Zhang (2007): “A numerical simulation analysis of (Hukou) labour mobility
restrictions in China,” Journal of Development Economics, 83, 392–410.
Yang, D. (2008): “International migration, remittances and household investment: Evidence from
Philippine migrants’ exchange rate shocks,” Economic Journal, 118, 591–630.
Zhou, W. (2014): “How Does A Hard Manual Labor Experience During Youth Affect Education and
Income? The Long-term Impact of the Send-down Program during the Chinese Cultural Revolution,” Mimeo.
Zhou, X. and L. Hou (1999): “Children of the Cultural Revolution: The state and the life course
in the People’s Republic of China,” American Sociological Review, 12–36.

31

Table 1: Summary Statistics

Migrant (0/1)
Migration (Days)
Migration (Days, not including zeros)
Year
Total Consumption (per person)
Food Consumption (per person)
Non-Staple Food Consumption (per person)
Agricultural Income (per worker)
Non-Agricultural Income (per worker)
Agricultural Labor Inputs (per worker)
Household Laborers
Non-Productive Assets (per worker)
Agricultural Assets (per worker)
Non-Agricultural Assets (per worker)
Positive Days on Fruits (0/1)
Days on Fruits (per worker, not including zeros)
Days on Fruits (per worker)
Income from Fruits (per worker)
Positive Days on Animal Husbandry (0/1)
Days on Animal Husbandry (per worker, not including zeros)
Days on Animal Husbandry (per worker)
Income from Animal Husbandry (per worker)
High Education (middle school degree or higher)

Mean
0.162
29.78
184.0
1995.6
508.4
262.4
145.8
2846.5
3345.5
166.9
2.420
1079.8
470.5
98.42
0.220
29.09
5.579
120.1
0.710
55.90
42.08
699.3
0.475

Std Dev
0.368
79.24
102.1
1.691
428.2
150.9
131.4
2328.9
5160.8
97.91
0.978
1532.9
689.2
1059.3
0.414
44.65
17.52
494.2
0.454
45.08
40.61
970.2
0.499

N
14014
14014
2268
14016
13794
13687
13704
11459
11461
11441
11322
11497
11428
11324
14015
2820
11462
11434
14015
9051
11470
11435
14012

Notes: The table presents summary statistics of the NFP data where each observation refers to the first period that a
household appears in the data.

Table 2: Historical Sent-Down Flows and Subsequent Inter-Province Migration
CHIP
2002
(1)
0.111**
(0.027)
234
1.292

Sent Down Flows
N
LHS Variable Mean

NFP
2010-2012
(2)
0.057***
(0.007)
300
0.402

Notes: The dependent variable is the log of inter-province migration flows. Regressions also include destination province
fixed effects and origin province fixed effects. The dependent variable is the log of inter-province migration flows plus
1. Robust standard errors clustered two ways by origin province and by destination province in parentheses. *, **, ***
denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

32

Table 3: Hukou Reforms and Incoming Migration

Reform Tally
N

Log Inter-Province
Migration Flows
(1)
0.323**
[0.162]
144

Log Total
Migration Flows
(2)
0.326*
[0.186]
159

Notes: Log total migration flows includes inter-province and intra-province flows. The variable Ref ormT ally for province
s in t is the accumulated number of reforms in s by year t; see Section 4.3 for details. Each observation is an origindestination- year. The data set used is the NFP 2010-2012. The regressions include year indicators and a constant term.
The standard errors are clustered at the origin-destination province pair level. *, **, *** denotes significance at the 10%,
5% and 1% levels, respectively.

Table 4: Pre-Reform Differences in the Level and Growth of GDP per Capita

Panel A: Sent Down Flow Provinces
I(Ref ormt−1 )
N
Panel B: Own Province Reforms
I(Ref ormt−1 )
N

Log GDP per Capita
(1)

Growth Rate
(2)

−0.021
[0.033]
105

0.002
[0.017]
92

0.056*
[0.022]
112

−0.011
[0.012]
112

Notes: The data for log GDP per capita is from the National Bureau of Statistics. Panel A displays the relationship
between a hukou reform in the province last period and the level and growth rate of GDP per capita in the current
period. Panel B displays the relationship between having a reform in any of provinces that sent SDY last period and the
level and growth rate of GDP per capita in the current period.

Table 5: SDY flows and Hukou reforms affecting Shanxi
Panel A: Provinces sending SDY to Shanxi and reform dates
Sending province
SDY to Shanxi
Hukou reform dates
Beijing
41,300
1998, 2002
Tianjin
7,300
None
Panel B: Measure of Access to Migration for Shanxi
Year
ZShanxi,t
Source
1995
0
1996
0
1997
0
1998
41,300
Beijing
1999
41,300
2000
41,300
2001
41,300
2002
82,600
Beijing

33

Table 6: The Impact of Hukou Reforms Interacted with SDY Flows on Migration
(1)
0.006***
(0.002)

Reform Tally × SDY Flows
Unspecified Reform Tally × SDY Flows
Wealth Reform Tally × SDY Flows
Job Reform Tally × SDY Flows

(2)

(3)

-0.023
(0.016)
0.027**
(0.012)
-0.013
(0.015)

-0.023
(0.015)
0.021
(0.013)
-0.013
(0.016)
0.005***
(0.001)
0.000
(0.001)
91163
18.94017
1.32e-06

Wealth Reform Tally × SDY Flows × High Assets
Job Reform Tally × SDY Flows × High Education
N
F-statistic on instruments
p-value

91163
11.64285
.0031067

91163
6.968441
.0026133

Notes: The dependent variable is a binary measure of whether the household has a migrant. The regressions include
household fixed effects, year indicators and a constant term. The variable Ref ormT ally for s in t is the accumulated
number of reforms in provinces that sent SDY to s by year t; see Section 5 for details. The standard errors are clustered
at the province level. *, **, *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

Table 7: The Impact of Hukou Reforms Interacted with SDY Flows on Migration Path Flows
(1)
0.278*
[0.155]
0.424***
[0.140]

Reform Tally
Reform Tally × SDY
Unspecified Reform Tally
Unspecified Reform Tally × SDY
Skills Reform Tally
Skills Reform Tally × SDY
Job&Wealth Reform Tally
Job&Wealth Reform Tally × SDY
N

144

(2)

0.403
[0.282]
0.284***
[0.0527]
0.327
[0.242]
1.604***
[0.141]
0.0901
[0.209]
2.055***
[0.374]
144

Notes: The dependent variable is the log of inter-province migration flows. Each observation is an origin-destination-year.
The data set used is the NFP 2010-2012. The regressions include year indicators and a constant term. The variable
Ref ormT ally for s in t is the accumulated number of reforms in provinces that sent SDY to s by year t; see Section 5
for details. The standard errors are clustered at the origin-destination province pair level. *, **, *** denotes significance
at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

34

Table 8: Robustness Check: The Impact of the Hukou Reforms Interacted with SDY Flows with
Distance Controls

Reform Tally × SDY Flows

(1)
0.008***
(0.001)

Reform Tally × Circle Distance

(2)
0.006***
(0.002)
0.004**
(0.002)

Reform Tally × Road Distance

(3)
0.006***
(0.002)

0.004**
(0.002)

Reform Tally × Poncet Distance
N

(4)
0.006***
(0.002)

59993

59993

59993

0.003**
(0.001)
59993

Notes: The dependent variable is a binary measure of whether the household has a migrant. The regressions include
household fixed effects, year indicators and a constant term. The variable Ref ormT ally for s in t is the accumulated
number of reforms in provinces that sent SDY to s by year t; see Section 5 for details. The standard errors are clustered
at the province level. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

Table 9: Reduced Form Estimates of Migration on the Level and Change in Consumption
Log Total
Log Food
Consumption
Consumption
(1)
(2)
Panel A: Level of Consumption
Reform Tally × SDY flows
0.008
0.008**
(0.005)
(0.004)
N
87468
87506
Panel B: Variability of Consumption (First Differences)
Reform Tally × SDY flows
-0.003
-0.006***
(0.003)
(0.002)
N
74244
74244
Panel C: Variability of Consumption (Indicator for Drops > 20%)
Reform Tally × SDY flows
-0.004***
-0.009***
(0.001)
(0.001)
N
75929
75929

Log Non-Staple
Food
(3)
0.008
(0.006)
87488
-0.009***
(0.002)
74233
-0.006***
(0.001)
75929

Notes: The dependent variables are per capita measures of consumption. The regressions include household fixed effects,
year indicators and a constant term. The variable Ref ormT ally for s in t is the accumulated number of reforms in
provinces that sent SDY to s by year t; see Section 5 for details. The standard errors are clustered at the province level.
*, **, *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

35

Table 10: Reduced Form Estimates of Migration on Income and Labor

Reform Tally × SDY flows
N

Log
Agricultural
Income
(1)
0.007
(0.007)
72535

Log NonAgricultural
Income
(2)
0.007
(0.008)
72469

Log
Agricultural
Labor Inputs
(3)
0.001
(0.005)
72539

Number of
HH Laborers
(4)
-0.002
(0.005)
72623

Notes: The regressions include household fixed effects, year indicators and a constant term. The variable Ref ormT ally
for s in t is the accumulated number of reforms in provinces that sent SDY to s by year t; see Section 5 for details.
The standard errors are clustered at the province level. *, **, *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels,
respectively.

Table 11: Reduced Form Estimates of Migration on Assets

Reform Tally × SDY flows
N

Log Non
Productive
Assets
(1)
-0.022***
(0.004)
72581

Log Agricultural
Assets
(2)
-0.024***
(0.009)
72747

Log NonAgricultural
Assets
(3)
-0.016***
(0.005)
34408

Notes: The regressions include household fixed effects, year indicators and a constant term. The variable Ref ormT ally
for s in t is the accumulated number of reforms in provinces that sent SDY to s by year t; see Section 5 for details.
The standard errors are clustered at the province level. *, **, *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels,
respectively.

36

Table 12: Coefficient of Variation by Income Categories

Agricultural Income
(1)
Panel A: Unconditional CV
Coefficient of Variation
1.335
N
91193
Panel B: Within Household CV
Coefficient of Variation
0.641
N
12163

Non-Agricultural
Income
(2)

Fruit Income
(3)

Animal Income
(4)

3.415
91193

6.189
91193

6.723
91193

0.758
12207

1.855
5341

1.213
11144

Notes: The coefficient of variation is the standard deviation divided by the mean. In Panel A, it is calculated using the
unconditional mean and standard deviation across all observations in the data. In Panel B, it is calculated using the
mean and standard deviation within households for households that have at least two years of positive income in the
category.

Table 13: Reduced Form Estimates of Migration on Labor in High-Risk Activities

Reform Tally × SDY flows
N

Animal Husbandry (Days)
Fruits (Days)
Extensive Intensive Log(Y+1) Extensive Intensive Log(Y+1)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.007*** 0.013*** 0.048***
0.006**
0.099*
0.023***
(0.002)
(0.004)
(0.009)
(0.003)
(0.053)
(0.008)
89387
51183
72405
89387
14515
71971

Notes: The regressions include household fixed effects, year indicators and a constant term. The variable Ref ormT ally
for s in t is the accumulated number of reforms in provinces that sent SDY to s by year t; see Section 5 for details.
The standard errors are clustered at the province level. *, **, *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels,
respectively.

Table 14: Reduced Form Estimates of Migration on Income from High-Risk Activities

Reform Tally × SDY flows
N

Log Income
Animal
Husbandry
(1)
0.071***
(0.016)
72319

Log Income
Fruits
(2)
0.030***
(0.011)
71924

Notes: The regressions include household fixed effects, year indicators and a constant term. The variable Ref ormT ally
for s in t is the accumulated number of reforms in provinces that sent SDY to s by year t; see Section 5 for details.
The standard errors are clustered at the province level. *, **, *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels,
respectively.

37

Figure A.1: Direction of Sent-Down Youth Flows

Source of Map: Bonnin 2013

38

39

2001

2000

1993

2002

2001

1995

2002

1998

1994

2002

2000

1998

2002

1998

Reform Year

Description
A migrant can get hukou in pilot satellite
cities of Beijing if she buys an apartment and
has a stable job.
A migrant can get hukou in 14 satellite
cities and 33 towns if she has∗ an apartment
and a stable job.
A migrant can get hukou in Hangzhou City,
the capital of Zhejiang Province, if she
buys an apartment and has a stable job Hangzhou.
A migrant can get hukou in most cities in
Zhejiang province (entry conditions are not
specified in great detail).
A migrant should get hukou in most cities
if she has∗ an apartment and also a stable job.
A migrant can get a temporary Shanghai
hukou if she has∗ an apartment and a stable
job.
A revision of the 1994 law by decreasing the
entry bar further.†∗
A migrant can apply for <Shanghai Resident
Permit> if he has special skills, and this Permit
allows the holder to enjoy most benefits a
Shanghai citizen has.
A migrant can get a temporary city hukou
if she has∗∗ an apartment in Nanjing City.
A migrant can get a city hukou if she has∗ an
apartment or a stable job.
A migrant can get a city hukou if she has∗ an
apartment or a stable job in most cities
in Jiangsu province.
A migrant can get hukou in Yingkou City if
she buys an apartment.
A migrant can get a city hukou in Shangdong
if she has∗ an apartment in most small and
medium size cities.
A migrant can get a city hukou in Shangdong
Province if she has∗ an apartment and a stable
job. This is a further reform with respect to
the 2000 reform.
LuZhengFa[2001] No.107

October 10, 2001

January 14, 2000

December 1993

Yingkou Lanyin hukou Guanli Zanxing Guiding
LuZhengFa[2000] No.7

November 22, 2002

April 30, 2001

June 14, 1995

April 30, 2002

SuZhengFa[2002] No. 142

XuZhengFa[2001] No. 38

NingZhengBanFa[1995] No. 79

HuFuFa[2002] No. 122

October 25, 1998

February 1, 1994

Shanghai LanYin hukou Guanli Zanxing Guiding
HuFuFa[1998] No.47

March 29, 2002

September 1, 2000

ZheZhengBanFa[2002] No. 12

ZheZheng[2000] No.7

September 20, 1998

September 23, 2002

JingZhengFa[2002] No.25

HangZhengBan[1998] No.31

December 31, 1997

Issue Date

JingZhengBanFa[1997] No.74

Document Name

∗∗

Renting or buying an apartment are allowed.
Employer-provided dormitories are included.
†
In the 1994 reform, if one wants to buy an apartment to obtain a Shanghai hukou, she has to buy at least 100 square meters; in 1998 this number was decreased
to 70 square meters for Puxi and 65 square meters for Pudong. Also in 1998 Puxi was redefined to include several more remote areas: Jiading, Minhang, Baoshan,
Jinshan, Songjiang, Nanhui, Fengxian, Qingpu and Chongming.

∗

Shandong

Jiangsu

Shanghai

Zhejiang

Beijing

Province

Table A.1: City-Level Hukou Reforms: 1993-2002

40

Liaoning
0.11
0.29
0
0.06
0
0
0
0
0

Heilongjiang
10.4
6.7
0
16.98
0
5.82
0
0
0.4

0.45
0.2
0
0
0
0.18
0
0
0

Ningxia
0
0
0
3.2
0
0
0
0
0

Zhejiang
1.4
11.87
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Hebei
4.13
0.73
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Shanxi
0.84
0
0
5.56
0
0
0
0
4.1

Yunnan

0
0
0
1.06
0
0
0
0
0

Guizhou

0
1.19
0
0
0
0
0.72
0
0

Gansu

0
0.91
0
10
1.7
0.49
0
0.8
0

Xinjiang

Note: The table presents is the total number of educated youth sent down from one province to another. The units are 10,000 people.

Sent down to:
Sent from:
Beijing
Tianjin
Hebei
Shanghai
Jiangsu
Zhejiang
Shandong
Hubei
Sichuan

Table A.2: Interprovince Sent-Down Flows

0
0
0
0
0
0
0.74
0
0

Qinghai

Table A.3: Impact of the Hukou Reforms Interacted with SDY Flows on Other Measures of Migration

Reform Tally × SDY Flows
N
F-statistic on instruments
p-value

Log
(1)
0.018**
(0.008)
91163
4.996524
.0383093

IHS
(2)
0.022**
(0.009)
91163
5.588313
.0295272

Notes: The dependent variable is the logarithm or inverse hyperbolic sine (see text for details) of the days that a migrant
was working away from the remaining household. The regressions include household fixed effects, year indicators and a
constant term. The variable Ref ormT ally for s in t is the accumulated number of reforms in provinces that sent SDY
to s by year t; see Section 5 for details. The standard errors are clustered at the province level. *, **, *** denotes
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

Table A.4: IV Estimates of Migration on the Level and Change in Consumption
Log Total
Log Food
Consumption
Consumption
(1)
(2)
Panel A: Level of Consumption
Migrant
1.362*
1.354**
(0.819)
(0.585)
N
87466
87504
Panel B: Variability of Consumption (First Differences)
Migrant
-0.692
-1.465**
(0.545)
(0.716)
N
74244
74244
Panel C: Variability of Consumption (Drops > 20%)
Migrant
-0.977***
-2.376**
(0.309)
(0.952)
N
75929
75929

Log Non-Staple
Food
(3)
1.431
(0.949)
87486
-2.230**
(0.989)
74233
-1.540**
(0.744)
75929

Notes: The dependent variables are per capita measures of consumption. The regressions include household fixed effects,
year indicators and a constant term. The variable Ref ormT ally for s in t is the accumulated number of reforms in
provinces that sent SDY to s by year t; see Section 5 for details. The standard errors are clustered at the province level.
*, **, *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

Table A.5: IV Estimates of Migration on Income and Labor

Migrant
N

Log
Agricultural
Income
(1)
1.129
(1.087)
72534

Log NonAgricultural
Income
(2)
1.124
(1.361)
72468

Log
Agricultural
Labor Inputs
(3)
0.126
(0.778)
72538

Number of
HH Laborers
(4)
-0.300
(0.831)
72622

Notes: The regressions include household fixed effects, year indicators and a constant term. The variable Ref ormT ally
for s in t is the accumulated number of reforms in provinces that sent SDY to s by year t; see Section 5 for details.
The standard errors are clustered at the province level. *, **, *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels,
respectively.

41

Table A.6: IV Estimates of Migration on Assets

Migrant
N

Log Non
Productive
Assets
(1)
-3.773***
(1.377)
72580

Log Agricultural
Assets
(2)
-3.775**
(1.825)
72746

Log NonAgricultural
Assets
(3)
-2.537***
(0.915)
34408

Notes: The regressions include household fixed effects, year indicators and a constant term. The variable Ref ormT ally
for s in t is the accumulated number of reforms in provinces that sent SDY to s by year t; see Section 5 for details.
The standard errors are clustered at the province level. *, **, *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels,
respectively.

Table A.7: IV Estimates of Migration on Labor in High-Risk Activities

Migrant
N

Animal Husbandry (Days)
Fruits (Days)
Extensive Intensive Log(Y+1) Extensive Intensive Log(Y+1)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
1.283***
2.010*
7.607***
1.086*
-4.646*
3.800*
(0.342)
(1.108)
(1.956)
(0.601)
(2.810)
(2.156)
89386
51182
72404
89386
14514
71970

Notes: The regressions include household fixed effects, year indicators and a constant term. The variable Ref ormT ally
for s in t is the accumulated number of reforms in provinces that sent SDY to s by year t; see Section 5 for details.
The standard errors are clustered at the province level. *, **, *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels,
respectively.

42

Table A.8: IV Estimates of Migration on Income from High-Risk Activities

Migrant
N

Log Income
Animal
Husbandry
(1)
11.169***
(3.843)
72318

Log Income
Fruits
(2)
4.951*
(2.911)
71923

Notes: The regressions include household fixed effects, year indicators and a constant term. The variable Ref ormT ally
for s in t is the accumulated number of reforms in provinces that sent SDY to s by year t; see Section 5 for details.
The standard errors are clustered at the province level. *, **, *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels,
respectively.

Table A.9: OLS Estimates of Migration on the Level and Change in Consumption
Log Total
Log Food
Consumption
Consumption
(1)
(2)
Panel A: Level of Consumption
Migrant
0.001
0.038***
(0.011)
(0.012)
N
87466
87504
Panel B: Variabiliity of Consumption
Migrant
-0.009
-0.001
(0.006)
(0.005)
N
74244
74244

Log Non-Staple
Food
(3)
0.067***
(0.025)
87486
-0.018
(0.012)
74233

Notes: The dependent variables are per capita measures of consumption. The regressions include household fixed effects,
year indicators and a constant term. The variable Ref ormT ally for s in t is the accumulated number of reforms in
provinces that sent SDY to s by year t; see Section 5 for details. The standard errors are clustered at the province level.
*, **, *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

43

Table A.10: OLS Estimates of Migration on Income and Labor
Log Total
Income
(1)
-0.066**
(0.032)
72534

Migrant
N

Log
Agricultural
Income
(2)
0.270***
(0.045)
72468

Log
Agricultural
Labor Inputs
(3)
0.037
(0.028)
72538

Number of
HH Laborers
(4)
0.061***
(0.023)
72622

Notes: The regressions include household fixed effects, year indicators and a constant term. The variable Ref ormT ally
for s in t is the accumulated number of reforms in provinces that sent SDY to s by year t; see Section 5 for details.
The standard errors are clustered at the province level. *, **, *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels,
respectively.

Table A.11: OLS Estimates of Migration on Assets

Migrant
N

Log Non
Productive
Assets
(1)
0.024
(0.016)
72580

Log Agricultural
Assets
(2)
0.006
(0.026)
72746

Log
Industrial
Assets
(3)
-0.066***
(0.012)
34408

Notes: The regressions include household fixed effects, year indicators and a constant term. The variable Ref ormT ally
for s in t is the accumulated number of reforms in provinces that sent SDY to s by year t; see Section 5 for details.
The standard errors are clustered at the province level. *, **, *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels,
respectively.

44

Table A.12: OLS Estimates of Migration on Labor in High-Risk Activities

Migrant
N

Animal Husbandry (Days)
Fruits (Days)
Extensive Intensive Log(Y+1) Extensive Intensive Log(Y+1)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.041***
0.043**
0.199***
0.014
-0.036
0.016
(0.012)
(0.022)
(0.053)
(0.014)
(0.047)
(0.052)
89386
51182
72404
89386
14514
71970

Notes: The regressions include household fixed effects, year indicators and a constant term. The variable Ref ormT ally
for s in t is the accumulated number of reforms in provinces that sent SDY to s by year t; see Section 5 for details.
The standard errors are clustered at the province level. *, **, *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels,
respectively.

Table A.13: OLS Estimates of Migration on Income from High-Risk Activities

Migrant
N

Log Income
Animal
Husbandry
(1)
0.353***
(0.075)
72318

Log Income
Fruits
(2)
0.037
(0.082)
71923

Notes: The regressions include household fixed effects, year indicators and a constant term. The variable Ref ormT ally
for s in t is the accumulated number of reforms in provinces that sent SDY to s by year t; see Section 5 for details.
The standard errors are clustered at the province level. *, **, *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels,
respectively.

45

