NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MANDATORY DISCLOSURE AND FINANCIAL CONTAGION
Fernando Alvarez
Gadi Barlevy
Working Paper 21328
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21328

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2015

First draft May 2013. We thank the editor Daron Acemoglu and four anonymous referees. We also
wish to thank Ana Babus, Marco Bassetto, Russ Cooper, Gary Gorton, Simon Gilchrist, Bengt Holmström,
Matt Jackson, Charles Kahn, Nobu Kiyotaki, Peter Kondor, Jennifer La’O, Andreas Lehnert, H.N.
Nagaraja, Ezra Oberfield, Guillermo Ordoñez, Alessandro Pavan, Tarik Roukny, Alp Simsek, Tom
Sargent, Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, Carl Tannenbaum, Venky Venkateswaran, Juan Xandri, and Pierre
Olivier Weill for their comments, as well as participants at various seminars and conferences. We
thank Phillip Barrett, Roberto Robatto, and Fabrice Tourre for excellent research assistance. The views
in this papers are solely those of the authors and not the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, the Federal
Reserve System, the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21328.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Fernando Alvarez and Gadi Barlevy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Mandatory Disclosure and Financial Contagion
Fernando Alvarez and Gadi Barlevy
NBER Working Paper No. 21328
July 2015
JEL No. G01,G18,G33
ABSTRACT
This paper explores whether mandatory disclosure of bank balance sheet information can improve
welfare. In our benchmark model, mandatory disclosure can raise welfare only when markets are frozen,
i.e. when investors refuse to fund banks in the absence of balance sheet information. Even then, intervention
is only warranted if there is sufficient contagion across banks, in a sense we make precise within our
model. In the same benchmark model, if in the absence of balance sheet information investors would
fund banks, mandatory disclosure cannot raise welfare and it will be desirable to forbid banks to disclose
their financial positions. When we modify the model to allow banks to engage in moral hazard, mandatory
disclosure can increase welfare in normal times. But the case for intervention still hinges on there being
sufficient contagion. Finally, we argue disclosure represents a substitute to other financial reforms
rather than complement them as some have argued.

Fernando Alvarez
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
f-alvarez1@uchicago.edu
Gadi Barlevy
Economic Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 South LaSalle
Chicago, IL 60604
gbarlevy@frbchi.org

Introduction
In trying to explain how the decline in U.S. house prices evolved into a full-blown financial crisis
during which trade between financial intermediaries collapsed, economists have singled out the role of
uncertainty about which entities incurred the bulk of the losses associated with the housing market.
For example, in his early analysis of the crisis, Gorton (2008) argues
“The ongoing Panic of 2007 is due to a loss of information about the location and size of
risks of loss due to default on a number of interlinked securities, special purpose vehicles,
and derivatives, all related to subprime mortgages... The introduction of the ABX index
revealed that the values of subprime bonds (of the 2006 and 2007 vintage) were falling
rapidly in value. But, it was not possible to know where the risk resided and without
this information market participants rationally worried about the solvency of their trading
counterparties. This led to a general freeze of intra-bank markets, write-downs, and a spiral
downwards of the prices of structured products as banks were forced to dump assets.”1
Policymakers seem to have adopted this view as well, as evidenced by the Federal Reserve’s decision
to release the results of its stress tests of large US banks. These tests required banks to report their
expected losses under stress scenarios and thus the losses they were vulnerable to. In contrast to the
confidentiality usually accorded bank examinations, these results were made public. Bernanke (2013a)
argued that disclosing this information played an important role in stabilizing financial markets:
“In retrospect, the [Supervisory Capital Assessment Program] stands out for me as one of the
critical turning points in the financial crisis. It provided anxious investors with something
they craved: credible information about prospective losses at banks. Supervisors’ public
disclosure of the stress test results helped restore confidence in the banking system and
enabled its successful recapitalization.”
In fact, the disclosure of stress-test results was viewed so favorably that policymakers subsequently
argued for conducting stress tests and releasing their results routinely, e.g. as in Bernanke (2013b):
“The disclosure of stress-test results, which increased investor confidence during the crisis,
can also strengthen market discipline in normal times.”
This paper investigates whether forcing banks to disclose their balance sheet information is indeed
desirable in both crisis and normal times. One question that motivates our analysis is why intervention
is necessary at all: If disclosure is so useful, why don’t banks hire auditors or directly release the
information they provide bank examiners? Although in the crisis banks problems with rating agencies
may have cast doubts on private monitoring as a whole, incentive problems for private monitors could
1

Similar views were voiced by non-academics. In February 24, 2007, before the crisis unfolded, the Wall Street Journal
attributed the following to former Salomon Brothers vice chairman Lewis Ranieri, the “godfather” of mortgage finance:
“The problem ... is that in the past few years the business has changed so much that if the U.S. housing market takes
another lurch downward, no one will know where all the bodies are buried. ‘I don’t know how to understand the ripple
effects through the system today,’ he said during a recent seminar.”

1

presumably be resolved contractually. An argument for ongoing intervention requires explaining why
banks fail to release information even though doing so enhances welfare.
We show that there may be scope for mandatory disclosure if there is a possibility of contagion, i.e.
if shocks to some banks can lead to indirect losses at other banks. For example, in the recent crisis
banks with minimal exposure to subprime mortgages still appeared vulnerable to losses because of the
actions of banks that heavily invested in subprime mortgages. When contagion is severe, in a sense we
can make precise, requiring banks to disclose information can improve welfare. Intuitively, contagion
implies information about individual banks is systemically important, since one bank’s performance
matters for the health of other banks. Banks will not take into account the systemic value of the
information they reveal about themselves, so they tend to disclose less than is socially optimal.
At the same time, our model does not imply disclosure is always desirable, even in the presence of
contagion. To the contrary, in our benchmark model not only is disclosure sometimes undesirable, but it
may be optimal to force banks to keep information hidden. This is because secrecy can sustain socially
beneficial risk-sharing between banks. The notion that opacity is desirable for sustaining insurance
dates back to Hirshleifer (1971), and has been recently applied to explain the tendency towards secrecy
in the banking sector by Goldstein and Leitner (2013), Faria-e Castro, Martinez, and Philippon (2015),
Dang et al. (2014). As in these papers, our benchmark model implies mandatory disclosure cannot
improve welfare in normal times, in contrast to the view advocated in Bernanke (2013b).
To be fair, the argument for mandatory disclosure during normal times that appears in Bernanke’s
speech rests on a need for market discipline, a feature absent from our benchmark model. We therefore
modify our model to allow banks to engage in moral hazard. In this case, mandatory disclosure
can raise welfare in normal times, not by stimulating trade but by preventing socially wasteful trade
with insolvent banks. However, in this case contagion is still necessary for disclosure to raise welfare.
Essentially, when agents accrue the gains from revealing information, they have a strong incentive to
disclose on their own. If they choose not to, it is because they find the costs of disclosure exceed its
benefits, and forcing them to disclose makes them worse off.
While our discussion is focused on stress tests and banks, our analysis would extend to any setting
in which because of contagion agents have access to systemically important information. One example
is sovereign debt crises in which default by one sovereign prompts runs on debt issued by others.
The analog to our results on the release of stress tests would be international agreements that force
more transparency about sovereign financial positions.2 Another example concerns the regulation of
derivative trading. Some have argued trade in derivatives ought to be shifted from over-the-counter
(OTC) to centralized exchanges because OTC trading often involves chains of indirect exposure to
counterparty risk (i.e. balance sheet contagion).3 Our results suggest mandatory disclosure may be a
partial substitute to migration to exchanges by addressing some of the shortcomings of OTC markets.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Below we discuss the related literature. We
then lay out the information structure and the economic environment of our model in Sections 1 and
2

For an early survey on contagion and sovereign debt, see Kaminsky, Reinhart, and Vegh (2003). On the lack of
transparency by fiscal authorities, see Koen and van den Noord (2005).
3
For a discussion, see Duffie and Zhu (2011) and Duffie, Li, and Lubke (2010) and the references therein.

2

2, respectively. In Section 3, we analyze strategic interaction in our model, i.e. how bank disclosure
decisions affect others. Our key results are in Section 4, where we derive conditions under which no
information is disclosed in equilibrium but mandatory disclosure can improve welfare. We introduce
moral hazard in Section 5 to show that mandatory disclosure may be welfare enhancing in normal times,
but only with sufficient contagion. In Section 6 we discuss a model of balance-sheet contagion that
provides micro foundations for our model. We use this setup to show how our measure of contagion
can be shaped by economic forces. Section 7 concludes.

Related Literature
Our paper is related to several literatures, specifically work on (i) financial contagion and networks,
(ii) disclosure, (iii) market freezes, and (iv) stress tests.
The literature on financial contagion is quite extensive. We refer the read to Allen and Babus (2009)
for a survey. Our analysis mostly relies on a reduced-form model for contagion, while most papers in
the literature focus on specific channels for contagion. However, we discuss in some detail an example
based on balance sheet contagion that occurs when banks that suffer shocks to their balance sheet
default on other banks. This idea was originally developed in Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), Allen and
Gale (2000), and Eisenberg and Noe (2001) and more recently explored in Gai and Kapadia (2010),
Battiston et al. (2012), Acemoglu, Ozdaglar, and Tahbaz-Salehi (2015), and Elliott, Golub, and Jackson
(2015). These papers are largely concerned with how the pattern of obligations across banks affects the
extent of contagion, and whether certain network structures can reduce the extent of contagion. We
instead focus on how disclosure policies can be used to mitigate the fallout from contagion for a fixed
network structure. We also discuss contagion due to fire sales. A recent example of such a model that
can be easily captured in our framework is Greenwood, Landier, and Thesmar (2015).
Our model is also closely related to the work on disclosure. Verrecchia (2001) and Beyer et al.
(2010) provide good surveys of this literature. A key result in this literature, established by Milgrom
(1981) and Grossman (1981), is an “unravelling principle” which holds that all private information will
be disclosed because agents with favorable information want to avoid being pooled with inferior types
and receive worse terms of trade. Beyer et al. (2010) summarize the various conditions subsequent
research has established as necessary for this unravelling result to hold: (1) disclosure must be costless;
(2) outsiders know the firm has private information; (3) all outsiders interpret disclosure identically,
i.e. outsiders have no private information (4) information can be credibly disclosed, i.e. information
is verifiable; and (5) agents cannot commit to a disclosure policy ex-ante before observing the relevant
information. Violating any one of these conditions can result in equilibria where not all relevant
information is conveyed. In our model, non-disclosure can be an equilibrium outcome even when all
of these conditions are satisfied. We thus highlight a distinct reason for the failure of the unravelling
principle that is due to informational spillovers.
Ours is not the first paper to explore disclosure in the presence of informational spillovers. One
predecessor is Admati and Pfleiderer (2000). Their setup also allows for informational spillovers and
gives rise to non-disclosure equilibria, although these equilibria rely crucially on disclosure being costly.
3

When disclosure is costless in their model, all information will be disclosed. Our framework allows for
non-disclosure even when disclosure is costless because it allows for informational complementarities
that are not present in their model. Specifically, in our model determining a bank’s equity requires
information about other banks, a feature with no analog in their model. However, Admati and Pfleiderer (2000) also show that informational spillovers can make mandatory disclosure welfare-improving.4
Another difference between our model and theirs is that they assume agents commit to disclosing information before learning it, while in our model banks can make their disclosure state-contingent.
Beyond the papers that explicit discuss disclosure, there is also a literature on the social value of
information in the presence of externalities, e.g. Angeletos and Pavan (2007). However, such papers
are less directly related to ours, not only because they abstract from disclosure but also because they
assume recipients of information wish to coordinate their actions, a feature missing in our framework.
Our paper is also related to the literature on market freezes. The existing literature emphasizes
the role of informational frictions. Some papers emphasize asymmetric that makes agents reluctant
to trade for fear of being exploited by more informed agents. Examples include Rocheteau (2011),
Guerrieri, Shimer, and Wright (2010), Guerrieri and Shimer (2012), Camargo and Lester (2011), and
Kurlat (2013). Others have focused on uncertainty concerning each agent’s own liquidity needs and
the liquidity needs of others which encourages liquidity hoarding. Examples include Caballero and
Krishnamurthy (2008), Diamond and Rajan (2011), and Gale and Yorulmazer (2013). Our framework
combines private information about a bank’s own balance sheet with uncertainty about the health of
other banks. Moreover, unlike these papers, we assume information is verifiable and can be disclosed.
Finally, there is a literature on stress tests. On the empirical front, Peristian, Morgan, and Savino
(2010), Bischof and Daske (2012), Ellahie (2012), and Greenlaw et al. (2012) look at how the release of
stress-test results in the US and Europe affected bank stock prices. These results are complementary
to our analysis by establishing stress test results are informative. Several papers examine stress tests
theoretically, e.g. Shapiro and Skeie (2012), Spargoli (2012), Bouvard, Chaigneau, and de Motta (2013),
Goldstein and Leitner (2013), Goldstein and Sapra (2014), and Faria-e Castro, Martinez, and Philippon
(2015). Some of these argue disclosure can be harmful, especially in normal times when markets aren’t
frozen. The benchmark version of our model shares this implication, for similar reasons to Goldstein
and Leitner (2013) and Faria-e Castro, Martinez, and Philippon (2015). However, we show that if banks
can engage in moral hazard, disclosure can be useful in normal times. In addition, our paper differs in
focusing on the question of why banks must be compelled to disclose information they could reveal on
their own. The above papers sidestep this question by assuming banks cannot disclose directly.

1

Information Structure

Our model features a banking system with n banks indexed by i = 1, . . . , n. We begin by describing
the information structure of our economy, i.e. what each of the n banks knows. In the next section, we
4

Foster (1980) and Easterbrook and Fischel (1984) also argue that spillovers may justify mandatory disclosure, although
these papers do not develop formal models to study this.

4

describe the strategic choices banks make and how banks interact with other agents in the model.5
Each bank can be one of two types, good and bad. For now, we do not need to assign an economic
interpretation to what these types mean. Eventually, we will assume that a bank’s type reflects its
previous investment decisions, so a good bank is one whose investments proved profitable ex-post.
Let Ω denote the set of all possible type profiles for the n banks. Since each bank can assume
two types, |Ω| = 2n , i.e. Ω contains 2n distinct elements. For any state ω ∈ Ω, we can summarize
each bank’s type with an n-dimensional vector S (ω) where Si (ω) = 0 if bank i is bad in state ω and
Si (ω) = 1 if bank i is good in state ω. In what follows, we will sometimes suppress the explicit reference
to ω and simply refer to S and Si as if S were the state. Let π (ω) denote the probability of state ω, i.e.
P
π (ω) ≥ 0 and ω∈Ω π (ω) = 1. This probability distribution is common knowledge across all agents.

Each bank i knows its type but not the types of any of the other n − 1 banks in the system. That

is, when the true state is ω ∈ Ω, each bank i knows the true state belongs to the set Ωi (ω) ⊂ Ω where
Ωi (ω) ≡ {x ∈ Ω | Si (x) = Si (ω)}

(1)

Note that Ωi contains 2n−1 elements, although some of these may be assigned zero probability under
π (ω). If all banks were to reveal their information, i.e. if each bank i announced that the true ω lies
in the set Ωi (ω), the state of the banking system would be revealed, since for any ω ∈ Ω,
n
\

Ωi (ω) = {ω}

i=1

Put another way, since bank i knows the i-th element of an n-dimensional vector, the information of all
n banks perfectly reveals the underlying state ω. If bank i knew only that the true ω was confined to
the set Ωi , it would assign 0 probability to any ω ∈
/ Ωi and to states ω ∈ Ωi it would assign probability
Pr(ω | ω ∈ Ωi ) = P

π(ω)
x∈Ωi π(x)

It is worth comparing this information structure to the global games literature associated with
Carlsson and van Damme (1993) and Morris and Shin (1998). Those papers assume there is an aggregate
state ω and that each agent i observes a private signal si ≡ ω + εi where εi are i.i.d. across agents
and independent of ω. In this formulation as well as in ours, collecting the signals of all agents reveals
ω, although in the former this requires the number of agents to tend to infinity. In addition, in both
frameworks agents receive a mix of idiosyncratic and aggregate information. This is clear in the global
games literature, where signals combine aggregate and idiosyncratic terms. In our setup, it might seem
as if agents receive a purely idiosyncratic signal about their own type. However, each agent can deduce
from his respective signal that the aggregate state ω ∈
/ Ω\Ωi (ω). Depending on the distribution π(ω),
5

In distinguishing the information structure and the strategic game agents play, we are following Gossner (2000),
Lehrer, Rosenberg, and Shmaya (2010) and Bergemann and Morris (2013). These papers study how changes in the
information structure affect the set of equilibria in the game agents subsequently play. In our setup, the key strategic
interaction involves what to disclose. Thus, the equilibrium of our game determines the information structure rather than
be determined by it. This information matters for decisions taken after the game, but in a straightforward way.

5

beliefs about ω may be quite different if Si = 0 and Si = 1. Thus, the signal agents receive in our
model can be informative about ω. At the same time, our information structure differs in an important
way from the global games setup. Specifically, in our setup agents can tell whether their idiosyncratic
term is high or low, while in the global games setup individuals observe the sum ω + εi and have no
idea whether their respective εi is high or low. This is important, since in our setup agents who know
their idiosyncratic term is high may want to communicate this fact to others, an issue that does not
arise in the global games setup.
So far, we have imposed no restrictions on the distribution π(ω). However, for analytical tractability
it will be convenient to assume the distribution is appropriately symmetric. Formally, we say that a
vector S ′ is a permutation of vector S if there exists a one-to-one mapping φ : {1, . . . , n} → {1, . . . , n}
such that Si′ = Sφ(i) for all i ∈ {1, . . . , n}. The symmetry condition we impose requires that any two
states whose vector representations are permutations must be equally likely:
A1. Symmetric likelihood: For any ω, ω ′ ∈ Ω, if S (ω) is a permutation of S (ω ′ ), then π (ω) =
π (ω ′ ).
To interpret A1, let B (ω) denote the number of bad banks in state ω, i.e. B (ω) ≡
Since all elements of S (ω) are either 0 or 1, S (ω) is a permutation of S
i.e. if the number of bad banks is the same in ω and

ω′.

(ω ′ )

Pn

if and only if

i=1 (1− Si (ω)).
B (ω) = B (ω ′ ),

Hence, A1 implies that if we knew there were

exactly b bad banks, any collection of b banks would be equally likely to be those that are bad. But
A1 imposes no restrictions on the distribution of bad banks, as formalized in the following Lemma:
P
Lemma 1: A1 holds iff there exist numbers {qb }nb=0 where qb ≥ 0 and nb=0 qb = 1 such that
π (ω) = qB(ω)



−1
n
B (ω)

(2)

Note that qb in (2) corresponds to Pr (B (ω) = b), i.e. the probability that there are exactly b bad
banks. In words, A1 implies we can think of first drawing the number of bad banks b according to
a general distribution {qb }nb=0 and then choosing which of the banks will be bad uniformly among all
banks. To rule out uninteresting cases, we henceforth assume q0 < 1, i.e. banks are not all good with
certainty. But we impose no other restrictions on π(ω).
We conclude our discussion of the information structure by observing how disclosure of bank j’s
type would alter beliefs about bank i 6= j. Consider the unconditional probability that bank i is good
and the probability bank i is good given bank j 6= i is good. Under A1, neither probability depends on
which i and j we choose. Hence, this comparison reflects informational spillovers between any pair of
banks. The unconditional probability that bank i is good is given by
X

Pr (Si = 1) =

{x|Si (x)=1}

6

π (x)

(3)

while the probability that bank i is good given bank j is good is given by

Pr (Si = 1|Sj = 1) =

P

π (x)

{x|Si (x)=1 ∩ Sj (x)=1}

P

(4)

π (x)

{x|Sj (x)=1}

The next few examples show A1 does not restrict how (3) and (4) can be ranked.
Example 1: Suppose π (ω) = (1 − q)B(ω) q n−B(ω) for some q ∈ (0, 1). This corresponds to the
case where bank types are independent and each bank is good with probability q, i.e. Pr (Si = 1) = q.
Learning that bank j is good has no effect on beliefs about bank i, and (3) and (4) will be identical. 
Example 2: Suppose π (ω) = (1 − q)B(ω) q n−B(ω) as in Example 1, but now suppose q is drawn from
a nondegenerate distribution independently of ω. Although the case where q has a Beta distribution is
especially convenient analytically, to fix ideas consider the simple case where q is equal to either qL or
qH where 0 ≤ qL < qH ≤ 1. It can be shown that
Pr (Si = 1) = E[q] < Pr(Si = 1|Sj = 1)
Intuitively, learning that one bank is good raises the odds that q = qH and thus increases the odds that
each of the remaining banks is good. 
Example 3: Pick some b ∈ {1, ..., n − 1} and suppose π (ω) =

n−1
b

for any ω such that B (ω) = b

and π (ω) = 0 otherwise. This corresponds to the case where there are exactly b bad banks with
certainty, but their identity is uncertain. In this case, Pr (Si = 1) = 1 −
Pr (Si = 1|Sj = 1) = 1 −

b
n−1 .

b
n,

which is larger than

Intuitively, learning that one bank is good implies that the b bad banks

are concentrated among the remaining n − 1 banks, reducing the likelihood that each is good. 
The above examples compare the effect of revealing bank j is good to a benchmark of no prior
information about banks. More generally, we want to consider how disclosing information affects
beliefs about other banks for different priors. Consider an observer who knows the true ω lies in some
set Ω0 ⊂ Ω where Pr (ω ∈ Ω0 ∩ Sj (ω) = 1) > 0, i.e. the fact that the true ω lies in Ω0 is compatible
with bank j being good.6 We will say there are positive informational spillovers if, for any set Ω0 such
that Pr (ω ∈ Ω0 ∩ Sj (ω) = 1) > 0,
Pr (Si = 1|Sj = 1 ∩ ω ∈ Ω0 ) ≥ Pr (Si = 1|ω ∈ Ω0 )
and there exists at least one set Ω0 for which this inequality is strict. Positive spillovers imply that
learning one bank is good increases the likelihood that other banks are good. Analogously, we will say
that there are negative informational spillovers if for any set Ω0 such that Pr (Sj = 1 ∩ ω ∈ Ω0 ) > 0,
Pr (Si = 1|Sj = 1 ∩ ω ∈ Ω0 ) ≤ Pr (Si = 1|ω ∈ Ω0 )
6

Note that under A1, if Pr(ω ∈ Ω0 ∩ Sj = 1) > 0 for some j, it is positive for all j. Thus, which j we choose to verify
this condition is irrelevant.

7

with strict inequality for some Ω0 . In this case, learning one bank is good decreases the likelihood that
other banks are good. Finally, we will say that there are no informational spillovers if for any set Ω0
such that Pr (ω ∈ Ω0 ∩ Sj (ω) = 1) > 0,
Pr (Si = 1|Sj = 1 ∩ ω ∈ Ω0 ) = Pr (Si = 1|ω ∈ Ω0 )
Technically, our definitions correspond to global spillovers since they require the direction of spillovers
be the same for all relevant information sets Ω0 . We will omit the term global for the sake of brevity,
although A1 allows informational spillovers to be positive for some Ω0 and negative for others.
As Examples 1, 2, and 3 suggest, our framework is compatible with positive, negative, and no
informational spillovers. It is worth pointing out now that we will introduce another spillover in Section
2 that reflects real linkages between banks rather than an informational linkage. Unlike informational
spillovers, this spillover will work in an unambiguous direction: A bank will be (weakly) worse off the
more bad banks there are in the system. Thus, in our model each bank will be better off when there
are more good banks in the system, but it need not be better off if more banks announce they are good.
For example, with negative informational spillovers as in Example 3, outside observers may be more
inclined to believe bank i is bad when other banks announce they are good, making bank i worse off.
In essence, informational spillovers govern how the number of banks that revealed themselves as good
affects beliefs about other banks’ types, while the real spillovers we introduce below govern how the
actual number of good banks in the system affects other banks’ outcomes.

2

Economic Environment

We now turn to the strategic aspects of our economy. We begin with an overview. Per our earlier
comments, we assume that what distinguishes good and bad banks is that the latter incur ex-post
losses on past investments. However, we want to allow for the possibility that good banks can incur
losses because of their exposure to bad banks, a phenomenon known as contagion. This is the spillover
across banks we alluded to above. We model this in a reduced form way by assuming contagion operates
thorough endowments, i.e. good banks are endowed with less equity whenever certain other banks are
bad. We then argue this simplification can capture several underlying mechanisms for contagion.
The reason a bank’s equity endowment matters in our model is that we assume banks face a debt
overhang problem as in Myers (1977). That is, all n banks, regardless of their equity, can undertake
profitable projects that require external finance. However, banks’ existing liabilities cannot be renegotiated and must be senior to any new debt obligations of banks. As a result, the investors that banks
need to finance projects may be reluctant to trade, knowing that if a bank is bad or is exposed to bad
banks it must surrender any returns from the project to senior debt holders. Good banks thus have an
incentive to reveal their type and mitigate concerns about their equity. However, we assume disclosure
is costly, so banks may not always be willing to incur the cost of disclosure. Moreover, if good banks
can be exposed to bad banks, unilateral disclosure may not be enough to induce outsiders to invest.
It is therefore possible that no bank opts to disclose its type, and that in the absence of information

8

outsiders invest in none of the banks. We refer to this outcome as a market freeze.
Formally, the timeline of our economy is as follows. First, nature chooses ω ∈ Ω according to the
distribution π (ω). Each bank i then learns its type Si (ω). Next, banks participate in a disclosure game
in which they simultaneously choose whether to reveal their types, and any bank that discloses its type
incurs a cost. After banks make their disclosure decisions, outside investors observe what information
was disclosed and choose which banks to invest in, if any. Banks that raise funds undertake their
projects and distribute their earnings. The remainder of this section fleshes this timeline in more
detail.

2.1

Equity Endowments and Contagion

The key attribute of a bank is its equity endowment. Let ei (ω) denote bank i’s endowment of equity
in state ω. In general, ei (ω) can be positive or negative, where a negative equity value implies the
bank’s existing liabilities exceed the value of its assets. We will sometimes refer to ei (Si , S−i ), where
S−i = {Sj }j6=i , to emphasize that a bank’s equity can depend on both its own type and the types of
the remaining n − 1 banks. The dependence on a bank’s own type captures the idea that bad banks
may haver lower equity because they undertook projects in the past that failed. The fact that a bank’s
equity can depend on other banks’ types captures the idea of contagion. It might seem unsatisfactory
to assert that bank i’s equity will be low when some bank j is bad without an explicit reason as to why.
However, our results do not depend on the exact reason for contagion, and below we show that our
model can be understood as the reduced form of models in which the channel for contagion is explicit.
Note that a bank initially knows its type but not its equity, since the latter depends on ω.
We now impose some assumptions on how the equity of different banks ei (ω) varies with the state
ω. The first restriction involves symmetry. In principle, we can appeal to an analogous condition to
A1, i.e. assume that the equity of bank i depends on the total number of other banks that are bad.
However, this form of symmetry implies banks must be equally exposed to all banks.7 To avoid this
implication, we appeal to the following weaker notion of symmetry:
A2. Symmetric equity: ei is such that for each pair (i, j) from {1, ..., n}, there exists a one-to-one
mapping Tij : Ω → Ω where, for each ω ∈ Ω,
i. S (Tij (ω)) is a permutation of S (ω)
ii. Sj (Tij (ω)) = Si (ω)
iii. ei (Si (ω) , S−i (ω)) = ej (Sj (Tij (ω)) , S−j (Tij (ω)))
In words, A2 requires that for each state ω ∈ Ω, we can find a corresponding state ω ′ = Tij (ω)
such that (1) the number of bad banks is the same in states ω and ω ′ , i.e. B (ω) = B (ω ′ ); (2) bank
j’s type in state ω ′ is the same as bank i’s type in state ω; and (3) bank j’s equity in state ω ′ is the
7

To put it another way, A1 amounts to an anonymity condition that implies a bank’s identity does not affect the
distribution for its type. Although we want banks to be similarly vulnerable to contagion, we want identities to potentially
matter for equity, e.g. a bank may be more exposed to certain banks than to others.

9

same as bank i’s equity in state ω. The requirement that Tij be one-to-one implies that each ω will
map into a distinct ω ′ . As an illustration of how we can satisfy A2, consider the case where ei exhibits
rotational symmetry.8 That it, for any state (S1 , ..., Sn ) ∈ {0, 1}n , bank 1’s equity when the state is
(S1 , S2 , ..., Sn−1 , Sn ) is the same as bank 2’s equity when the state is (Sn , S1 , S2 , ..., Sn−1 ), the same as
bank 3’s equity when the state is (Sn−1 , Sn , S1 , ..., Sn−2 ), and so on. In this case, bank i’s equity can
be more sensitive to the equity of consecutive banks than those further away.9
Since A2 requires the number of bad banks to be the same in states ω and Tij (ω), it follows from
A1 that ω and Tij (ω) are equally likely. This implies that the distribution of equity at banks i and j
must be the same, which we state as a lemma.
Lemma 2: Suppose A1 and A2 hold. Then for any x, Pr (ei = x) and Pr (ei = x|Si ) must be the
same for all i.
Our next assumption on ei (ω) stipulates that bad banks have significantly negative equity. In
particular, further below we will allow banks to undertake a project with a gross return of R. We
assume that the equity of bad banks is sufficiently negative that investing in the project could not
restore them to positive equity even if they could retain all of the returns from the project, i.e.,
A3. Negative equity at bad banks: ei (0, S−i ) ≤ −R for all S−i .
Next, we assume the equity of good banks satisfies a weak monotonicity condition with respect to
the number of good banks in the system:

′ > S , then e S , S ′
A4. Monotonicity: For all Si , if S−i
−i
i
i
−i ≥ ei (Si , S−i ).

A4 is the assumption that allows for contagion, since if the inequality were ever strict, bank i’s
equity would fall when some other bank is bad.10 While this approach assumes contagion without
explaining it, we now show that our model can be understood as a reduced form of existing models of
contagion in which bad banks take actions that harm good banks. The first example are models of fire
sales. In these models, bad banks sell their assets to marginal buyers who value these asset less (and
hence did not own them originally). Good banks that hold the same assets then suffer. Shleifer and
Vishny (1992) were among the first to offer a formal analysis of this narrative.11 The next example
shows how a model of fire sales can be captured within our framework.
Example 4 (Fire Sales): Consider the following adaptation of the Greenwood, Landier, and
Thesmar (2015) model of fire sales. At some initial date, banks borrow to purchase assets. Banks can
buy two types of assets. Bad banks own both types and good banks own one. If the realized return
8

Rotational symmetry is stronger than A2, i.e. it implies A2 but A2 need not imply rotational symmetry.
Beside allowing for differential exposure to different banks, our weaker notion of symmetry allows the equity of good
banks to depend on how bad banks are distributed within the system when there are multiple bad banks. For example,
our specification allows the equity of good banks to depend on whether bad banks are located consecutively or not. As
such, even when the number of bad banks is fixed, the number of affected good banks can be stochastic.
10
In principle, a good bank’s equity could be higher when other banks are bad. For example, a good bank may attract
more business if its rivals suffer. In imposing A4, we are implicitly assuming these considerations are not enough to
overturn the underlying force of contagion.
11
Shleifer and Vishny (1992) argue that when agents in distress sell their assets, other agents who would naturally buy
their assets may be unlikely to do so because of debt overhang. As will become clear in our description, debt overhang
features prominently in our model as well.
9

10

on the asset uniquely held by bad banks were sufficiently negative, bad banks would have to liquidate
their assets. Greewood, Landier, and Thesmar assume the price of an asset declines linearly in the
amount of the asset bad banks sell. But we could equally assume the price falls only when the amount
sold exceeds a threshold. The non-linearity captures the idea that there must be enough good banks to
absorb the assets sold by bad banks for the price not to fall. We can represent this in our framework
by setting ei (0, S−i ) ≤ −R for all S−i and
ei (1, S−i ) =

(

e if B (ω) ≤ b∗
e

if B (ω) > b∗

where e ≤ −R < 0 < e and b∗ is the threshold at which the valuation of the marginal buyer falls. 
The next example illustrates that our model can also capture balance-sheet contagion. In this theory,
banks are financially linked and bad banks default on their obligations to good banks, impairing the
latter’s balance sheets. Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), Allen and Gale (2000), and Eisenberg and Noe
(2001) were among the first to model this mechanism.
Example 5 (Balance Sheet Contagion): Consider the Caballero and Simsek (2012) model of
balance sheet contagion in which n banks are organized along a circle and each bank is obligated to
the next consecutive bank modulo n. There is a single bad bank that defaults, triggering a domino
effect in which the next k banks are unable to pay their obligations in full even though they are good.
Our model can capture this if we set π (ω) = 1/n when B (ω) = 1 and 0 otherwise, and if we set
ei (0, S−i ) ≤ −R for all S−i and
ei (1, S−i ) =

(

e

if Sj = 1 for all j s.t. (i − j) mod[n] ∈ {1, 2, ..., k}

e(S−i ) if Sj = 0 for some j s.t. (i − j) mod[n] ∈ {1, 2, ..., k}

where e > 0 and e(S−i ) ≤ −R for all S−i . Note that e depends on S−i because how negative bank i’s
equity position is depends on how far away it is from the bad bank. 
We impose one last assumption on ei (Si , S−i ), although later we discuss how this assumption can be
relaxed. Specifically, we assume that no bank be marginal in the sense that its ability to meet obligations
depends on whether it undertakes a project that promises a return of R we introduce later. That is,
either a bank has enough equity to discharge all its obligations or its equity is sufficiently negative that
its earnings from operating a project would never be enough to render it solvent. Formally:
A5. No Marginal Banks: Either ei (Si , S−i ) ≥ 0 or ei (Si , S−i ) ≤ −R for all (Si , S−i ).
Assumption A5 allows us to analyze each bank without knowing whether other banks were funded.
This is because how bank j affects bank i entirely depends on bank j’s initial equity: If bank j has a
positive endowment it must have been able to pay its obligation to bank i in full, but if its endowment
is negative it will be forced to default on bank i in full even if it raised funds. While this restriction
ignores interesting questions about whether encouraging outsiders to invest in banks can mitigate the
extent of contagion, these questions are irrelevant for our main results which concern extreme degrees
of contagion. In Section 5, we show that we can replace A5 with a different assumption that is equally
11

tractable to work with but does not require the distribution of equity to feature a gap.

2.2

Trade between Outsiders and Banks

Now that we described how each bank’s equity endowment depends on ω, we can turn to the question
of why equity is relevant. The idea is that equity is essential for inducing outsiders to trade with banks.
Thus, a bank’s equity matters, as do the beliefs outsiders have about each bank’s endowment.
Suppose each bank can earn a gross rate of return of R > 1 if it invests a single unit of resources,
regardless of its type. We assume that bank equity is not available for this investment, i.e. the assets it
owns are illiquid, so banks must borrow funds to finance these investments. At the same time, there is a
group of outside investors who can earn a gross return of r < R on their own and who collectively own
more resources than banks can invest. Thus, there is scope for gains from trade between outsiders and
banks. However, we assume that the banks have already committed to make their outstanding liabilities
senior to any new obligations it takes on. If outsiders believe a bank’s initial equity is negative, they
would be reluctant to invest in it, knowing that the returns to the project would go to others. This
is the debt overhang problem introduced by Myers (1977). Without it, a bank could always finance
its project by pledging its returns. Although we do not explicitly model why original debt holders
were given seniority that cannot be renegotiated, previous work such as Hart and Moore (1995) offers
conditions in which such a contract can be optimal even though it may lead to debt overhang.
In what follows, we restrict outsiders to only offering debt contracts, i.e. they provide bank i
with 1 unit of resources and demand a fixed repayment of ri . Since equity contracts are junior to debt
obligations, allowing these would not change our results. We assume all investors simultaneously offer a
contract to each bank and banks choose among the contracts offered. Investors thus engage in Bertrand
competition. Although a complete description of equilibrium would specify the contracts investors offer,
we will only refer to equilibrium terms rather than what investors do. Thus, if outsiders knew the initial
equity of each bank, in equilibrium only banks with positive equity would receive funding and each
would be charged r. If outsiders knew nothing about ω other than the prior π(ω), by symmetry all
banks generically receive the same terms. If outsiders had partial information about ω, banks would
generally receive different terms. In what follows, we let information about ω emerge endogenously by
letting banks choose whether to reveal their types in a disclosure game before outsiders invest.12 We
now describe the disclosure game and then the investment decisions of outsiders.

2.3

The Disclosure Game

We begin with the disclosure game. Each bank i must decide whether to disclose its type after observing
Si but before observing S−i . Disclosure involves hard information, i.e. announcements are verifiable
and banks can only report truthfully. Disclosure is costly, reflecting the fact that information is costly
12
Other papers have also studied disclosure games that precede decisions, e.g. Alonso, Dessein, and Matouschek (2008),
Hagenbach and Koessler (2010) and Galeotti, Ghiglino, and Squintani (2013). However, these papers are interested in
economies where agents want to coordinate with one another but disagree on what action to coordinate on. By contrast,
in our model agents communicate to an outside party rather than to other players, are not trying to coordinate. Players
care what others disclose only because of spillovers.

12

to produce or communicate. For simplicity, we model disclosure costs as as a utility cost c > 0 that
is only incurred if Si is disclosed. This allows us to ignore the cost when we account for each bank’s
resources. Note that this specification equates the private and social costs of disclosure. This is not
too restrictive, since differences between the two can be folded into the payoff to disclosure. That is,
the cost of disclosure can equally be represented as a benefit from non-disclosure. Indeed, for reasons
that will become clear below, the private and social benefits from disclosure will differ in our model.13
Bank i’s strategy can be summarized as a rule σi : Si → [0, 1] that assigns probability of disclosure σi
when its type is Si . The outcome of the disclosure game is a vector of announcements A = {A1 , . . . , An },
where Ai = Si if bank i announces its state and Ai = ∅ if bank i fails to announce. Given the true state
ω and the strategy profile σ = (σ1 , . . . , σn ), we can determine the distribution of announcements A
that will be observed in that state, Pr(A|ω, σ). Outsiders, however, face the opposite problem: Given a
vector of announcements and knowing the equilibrium strategy profile σ, they assign probabilities over
the true state ω, Pr(ω|A, σ).14 It will be convenient to also introduce a vector that summarizes which
banks disclosed, as distinct from what they disclosed. Thus, define α = (α1 , . . . , αn ) where αi = 1 if
Ai ∈ {0, 1} and αi = 0 if Ai = ∅. Since disclosure is costly, we must subtract cαi from bank i’s payoff.
Investment Decisions.

After banks decide whether to disclose their type or not, outside investors

observe A and decide whether to make offers to any of the banks and at what terms. Let Ii (A) be a
variable that is equal to 1 if bank i obtains funding from some investor in equilibrium and 0 otherwise,
and let ri (A) denote the rate bank i is charged in equilibrium.
Our first observation is that ri (A) cannot exceed R, since if it did bank i would never agree to
borrow. To solve for ri (A), note that under A5, initial equity at each bank is either nonnegative or
below −R. Since ri ≤ R, a bank will repay its debt in full if its endowment ei (Si , S−i ) ≥ 0 and nothing
if ei (Si , S−i ) ≤ −R. The expected payoff to an outside investor in bank i in equilibrium will equal
Pr (ei ≥ 0 |A, σ ) ri (A)

(5)

Outsiders will agree to finance bank i if (5) is at least r. Bertrand competition among outsiders ensures
the equilibrium expected return from lending is r, i.e.
ri (A) =

r
Pr (ei ≥ 0 |A, σ )

(6)

Since ri (A) cannot exceed R, then we know that after observing the announcements A, outsiders will
not finance a bank i for which
Pr (ei ≥ 0 |A, σ ) <

r
R

Hence, equilibrium investment Ii (A) will be given by
13

In general, the net private benefit from disclosure can be higher or lower than the net social benefit. If disclosing
information erodes the rents banks earn, the private cost of disclosure will exceed the social cost. But if disclosure prevents
risk-sharing its social cost will exceed its private cost. Our model features the latter but not the former.
14
Since σ represents the strategies outsiders believe banks use, these expressions are undefined if Pr(A|σ) = 0, i.e. when
outsiders observe announcements they should not given their beliefs. We define equilibrium in Section 4 in a way that
restricts beliefs in these cases.

13

Ii (A) =


r

1 if Pr (ei ≥ 0 |A, σ ) ≥


R


 0 if Pr (e ≥ 0 |A, σ ) < r
i
R

(7)

Equations (6) and (7) together fully characterize the terms each bank would receive given vector of
announcements A. Since bank i retains the equity that remains after discharging its debts, and incurs
a cost c if it chooses to disclose, its payoff in state ω if banks announce A is equal to
max {0, ei (ω) + [R − ri (A)] Ii (A)} − c αi

(8)

This completes the description of the disclosure game. To recap, the timeline of events and actions
is as follows: (1) nature moves, deciding ω; (2) each bank i observes Si (ω); (3) banks make disclosure
decisions σi , resulting in a vector of disclosures A; (4) outside investors offer contracts {Ii (A), ri (A)};
(5) banks choose contracts, invest if they can, and pay back outside investors if they can. In choosing
whether to disclose, banks compare the cost of disclosure c to the expected benefit of revealing their type
and potentially improving their terms of trade. That is, given the strategy profile σ−i , if bank i chooses
σi , it can determine the probability Pr(ω, A|Si , σ) that the true state is ω and that A will be announced
and it will receive terms {Ii (A), ri (A)}. Using these probabilities to weigh the payoffs in (8), a bank can
compute its optimal response to other banks’ disclosure rules. Although this discussion suggests a static
game, our setup is in fact a dynamic game of incomplete information in which investors make offers,
and the equilibrium terms {Ii (A), ri (A)} banks accept represent the outcome of the continuation game
after banks choose whether to announce their types. However, since the equilibrium of the continuation
game is standard, we find it easier to discuss our model as if it were a static game.

2.4

Implications of Debt Overhang in our Model

Before digging into the details of the disclosure game we just described, we step back to offer some
perspective on the resource allocation problem that underlies our model. Banks in our model have a
fixed capacity for carrying out investment projects. Hence, any bank that fails to raise funds represents
a lost opportunity for society to earn the return R. An unconstrained planner would thus want all banks
to obtain funding. But contractual frictions may dissuade outsiders from going along with this.15
In principle, a planner can overcome these contractual frictions by transferring resources to banks
that cannot raise funds, then redistributing their earnings. Philippon and Schnabl (2013) pursue this
line in a general equilibrium model of debt overhang related to our model. They allow the planner to
tax agents and transfer the resources it collects to banks. They find such an intervention can increase
welfare.16 Indeed, part of the policy response during the crisis involved capital injections into banks.
15

The optimal policy prescription here is similar to what optimal policy would dictate if banks were merely illiquid,
even though banks with negative equity in our model are insolvent given A5. The reason it is optimal to keep insolvent
banks operating is that they are still uniquely able to create surplus other banks cannot.
16
The simplest way to enact this transfer is a cash injection to banks, coupled with a lump-sum tax on banks that is
senior to all other claims. Philippon and Schnabl (2013) discuss various transfer schemes that have been used in practice,
e.g. capital injections in which a bank promises to pay dividends in exchange for the resources it receives; asset purchases

14

However, in what follows we only consider interventions that involve information disclosure. This allows
us to analyze the virtue of disclosing information on banks separately from the role this information
might play in determining which banks ought to receive capital injections. If the goal of stress-tests
was simply to lay the groundwork for capital injections, there would be no need to publicly disclose this
information once it was collected. Yet as we discussed in the Introduction, policymakers have argued
that public disclosure is beneficial in and of itself, as well as in normal times when there is no prospect
of transfers to banks, and it is this proposition we aim to investigate.
How can a planner use information to maximize the number of banks that receive funding? This
depends on what happens when banks disclose no information. If outsiders refuse to invest in banks
absent such disclosure, revealing some information will allow outsiders to identify some banks that are
worth investing in, improving welfare. But if outsiders are willing to fund banks even without disclosure,
disclosure may discourage outsiders from investing in banks revealed to have negative equity. Disclosure
is thus sometimes desirable and sometimes not, a recurring theme in our analysis.
We should note that in Section 5 we introduce a moral hazard problem in which banks can divert
funds to private uses that are socially costly. In this case it will be no longer desirable to fund all banks,
and mandatory disclosure that reveals which banks will engage in moral hazard may be desirable.

3

Strategic Interaction in the Disclosure Game

Before we tackle the equilibria of our game and deduce what information is disclosed and whether
intervention is warranted, we first explore how strategic interaction operates in our model to better appreciate its features. We focus on two questions. First, would one bank’s decision to disclose encourage
outsiders to trade with other banks? This question concerns externalities, i.e. whether disclosure by
one bank benefits other banks by facilitating trade. These externalities drive our main welfare result
in Section 4. Second, would one bank’s decision to disclose encourage other banks to also disclose their
types? This question concerns the possibility of strategic complementarities, i.e. whether multiple equilibria and asymmetric equilibria are possible. Since we find that disclosure decisions are not strategic
complements, our main welfare result should not be interpreted as correcting a coordination failure.
While the results we derive here provide useful intuition, they are not essential for deriving our key
welfare results in Section 4, and the uninterested reader can skip to the next section.
We begin with an observation that helps to simplify our discussion:
Lemma 3: If Si = 0 so bank i is bad, not disclosing is a dominant strategy.
Intuitively, a bad bank gains nothing from disclosure: Given Assumption A3, no outsider would
want to invest in a bank knowing it was bad. If disclosure is at all costly, a bad bank would be better
off not disclosing. The implication of Lemma 3 is that we can reduce the strategy of a bank to the
single number σj ≡ σj (1), the probability that bank j discloses its type if it learns it is good. It also
implies that in equilibrium we would observe Aj ∈ {∅, 1} but not Aj = 0.
where the bank sells its assets; and loan guarantees, where a bank is assessed a fee based on how much the bank borrows
and in turn new borrowers are guaranteed to be repaid.

15

In studying strategic interaction between banks, it will be useful to distinguish between the effect
of a bank’s announcement – observing Aj = 1 and learning bank j is good – and the effect of a
bank’s strategy – knowing bank j chose to disclose its type if good with probability σj . The two are
obviously related: A higher σj increases the odds we observe Aj = 1. But a higher σj also changes the
informational content of observing Aj = ∅, since a higher σj leads outsiders to assign higher probability
bank j is bad if they observe Aj = ∅. While a higher σj is a commitment by bank j to disclose its
type when good with higher frequency, it is best to interpret a higher σj as a more informative signal
about bank j regardless of its type. This interpretation will help to understand some of our results.

3.1

The Effect of Announcements

We begin with the effect of announcements: How does news that Aj = 1 affect bank i 6= j? Let us
refer in this section to the investment in bank i as Ii (Ai ; Aj ) as opposed Ii (A1 , . . . , An ), even though
investment depends on all bank announcements. This notation highlights our focus on the effect of
bank j’s announcement holding the announcements of any remaining banks fixed.
Not surprisingly, the effect of announcements is closely related to the notion of informational
spillovers we introduced in Section 1. We begin with the case where informational spillovers are positive
or absent and then turn to the case of negative informational spillovers.
Positive or absent informational spillovers.

In this case, news that one bank is good makes it

easier for remaining banks to raise funds. Intuitively, if outsiders observe that Aj = 1, they would
assign a higher probability that both bank i and any banks that bank i is exposed to are good, making
them more likely to invest in bank i. This is confirmed in the following proposition:
Proposition 1: Suppose informational spillovers are positive or absent. Then Ii (∅; 1) ≥ Ii (∅; ∅)
and Ii (1; 1) ≥ Ii (1; ∅), i.e. news that bank j is good encourages outsiders to fund bank i for any Ai .
Proposition 1 implies banks will be better off when another bank is revealed to be good. It does
not tell us whether such news will encourage or discourage a bank to disclose its own type. To some
extent, this is a moot question given our setup: By the time Aj is revealed, banks would have already
made their disclosure decisions. However, banks choose their disclosure strategy anticipating what
announcements will be made by others. The question of what a bank’s preferred action would be if
certain other banks announced they were good is therefore relevant.
It turns out that whether news that another bank is good would have encouraged or discouraged
other banks to disclose their own type depends on whether a bank can raise funds when its type is
uncertain. Our next result shows that if a bank expects not to raise funds if it does not reveal its type,
then if some other bank is revealed to be good it will increase the gains to the bank had it disclosed.
Proposition 2: Suppose informational spillovers are positive or absent. If Ii (∅; ∅) = Ii (∅; 1) = 0,
then the gain to bank i from disclosure is weakly higher when Aj = 1 than when Aj = ∅.
Intuitively, if a bank cannot raise funds when outsiders are unsure of its type, disclosure may help it
attract funds from outsiders. Since news that some other bank is good makes outsiders more optimistic
about all banks, a good bank that reveals its type will earn higher profits if it attracts funds.
16

Proposition 2 tells us that if bank i cannot raise funds when its type is not known to outsiders,
news that more banks are good would encourage bank i to disclose. However, Proposition 1 implies
that as more banks are revealed to be good, bank i is more likely to obtain funding even if outsiders do
not know its type. We now show that if bank i can raise funds even without revealing its type, news
that more banks are good discourages bank i from disclosing.
Proposition 3: Suppose informational spillovers are positive or absent. If Ii (∅; ∅) = Ii (∅; 1) = 1,
then the gain to bank i from disclosure is weakly lower when Aj = 1 than when Aj = ∅.
Intuitively, when a bank can raise funds even without disclosing its type, the gain from disclosure
comes from reducing the interest it pays outside investors. But with positive informational spillovers,
when others banks announce they are good, banks are charged lower rates. The more banks announce
they are good, the lower the interest charges a bank can save by disclosing it is good.
Propositions 2 and 3 suggest banks may prefer to disclose if only a few banks are revealed as good
but not to disclose if a large number of banks are revealed as good.17 This suggests disclosure decisions
cannot be characterized as either strategic complements or substitutes, since what a bank prefers
depends on how many banks it expects will reveal themselves as good. We confirm this below when we
show that the choices of σi cannot be generically described as either substitutes or complements.
Negative informational spillovers.

In this case, there is no analog to Propositions 1 and 2. To

see why, consider Example 5 above. In this case, if a bank in {n − k + 1, n − k + 2, ..., n} is revealed
to be good, outsiders will have more incentive to invest in bank 1; but if a bank in {2, 3, ..., n − k} is
revealed to be good, they will have less incentive. Similarly, whether some other bank is revealed to
be good makes bank 1 wish it had disclosed its own type when it is unable to raise funds depends on
which bank is revealed as good. This reflects an important difference between negative and nonnegative
informational spillovers. With nonnegative spillovers, news that some bank is good will be beneficial
for bank i regardless of which bank it is: Outside investors raise their assessment that bank i is good as
well as any banks that bank i is exposed to. With negative informational spillovers, which bank reveals
itself to be good matters. As a result, with negative informational spillovers there is no general result
as to whether news that another bank is good is beneficial, nor would this news generally encourage or
discourage other banks from disclosing their types.
However, we can still establish an analogous result to Proposition 3 when informational spillovers are
negative, i.e. news that a bank is good will have unambiguous implications when a bank of unknown
type can raise funds. The effect is now the opposite of what we found for nonnegative information
spillovers, i.e. news that other banks are good encourages other banks to disclose:
Proposition 4: Suppose that informational spillovers are negative. If we have Ii (∅; ∅) = Ii (∅; 1) =
1 then the gain to bank i from disclosure is weakly higher when Aj = 1 than when Aj = ∅.
17

Propositions 2 and 3 omit case which Ii∗ (∅; ∅) = 0 and Ii∗ (∅; 1) = 1 (the case where Ii∗ (∅; ∅) = 1 and Ii∗ (∅; 1) = 0
is ruled out by Proposition 1). We show in the Appendix that in this case the gain to disclosure rises by no more than it
would if Ii∗ (∅; 1) = 0 and falls no more than it would if Ii∗ (∅; ∅) = 1.

17

Intuitively, if a bank can raise funds without disclosing its type, the gain from disclosure comes
from reducing the interest it has to pay. With negative spillovers, news that another bank is good will
make outsiders more concerned that bank i is good. If they are still willing to invest in bank i, they
will charge it a higher rate, and so the bank stands to gain more from disclosure.

3.2

The Effect of Disclosure Strategies

So far, we have described the effect of news that a bank is good on other banks. This is a natural way
to frame the discussion of how banks interact given it involves observables. But recall that the strategy
bank j chooses is the probability σj it will announce its type if it is good. It might seem as if the effect
of increasing σj is similar to the effect of news that Aj = 1, since a high σj is just a promise to replace
Aj = ∅ with Aj = 1 when bank j is good. However, the two are not the same, since a commitment to
a higher σj also changes the informativeness of a bank making no announcement.
Let us revisit our first question about externalities: Does a higher σj encourage outsiders to trade
with banks i 6= j? Above we showed that if bank j is revealed to be good, outsiders will be more likely
to trade with bank i 6= j if informational spillovers are nonnegative, but they may be less like to trade
with bank i if informational spillovers are negative. We might therefore expect that increasing the σj
will encourage trade with bank i only when informational spillovers are nonnegative. We now show that
increasing σj encourages trade with other banks regardless of the nature of informational spillovers.
To see this, let us define Gi (σ) as the ex-ante gains from trade with bank i that outsiders expect
given the strategies σ ≡ (σ1 , . . . , σn ), i.e. before A is revealed. Since competition ensures outsiders earn
no more than their outside option r, we cannot learn much about the propensity of outsiders to trade
with bank i based on their expected returns. However, the gains from trade that outsiders expect tells
us whether outsiders view trade as more rewarding, even if they ultimately do not reap those rewards.
Thus, Gi (σ) is a good indicator of the incentive to trade. To compute it, note that if outsiders invest
in bank i, they together with bank i would earn a return of R instead of r if bank i has positive equity,
but a return of 0 if bank i’s equity is negative. Hence,


Gi (σ) = E 1{ei ≥0} (R − r) Ii | σ
X
=
Pr(ei ≥ 0|A, σ) (R − r) Ii (A) Pr(A|σ)

(9)

A∈{∅,1}n

Our next result shows that outsiders expect to be more gains from trade with bank i when σj is higher,
regardless of the nature of informational spillovers.
Proposition 5: Gi (σ) is weakly increasing in σj for all j 6= i, i.e. the gains from trade outsiders
expect to achieve are always weakly increasing in the probability that banks j 6= i discloses its type.
The fact that Proposition 5 holds even when informational spillovers are negative may seem surprising at first. If news that some other bank is good causes outsiders to infer that bank i is more
likely to be bad, why wouldn’t an increase in the probability that bank j announces it is good similarly discourage trade? The reason is that even though an announcement of Aj = 1 may discourage
outsiders from trading with bank i, a higher σj will cause an announcement of Aj = ∅ to encourage
18

trade. Essentially, outsiders want to trade with bank i only when its equity is positive, and a higher
σj helps outsiders identify when bank i is likely to be able to repay and when it is not.
We next turn to our second question about strategic interactions: Does a higher σj encourage other
banks to disclose their own type? Above we argued that our results for announcement effects suggest
disclosure is not in general a strategic substitute or complement. We now offer a numerical example
in which bank i’s incentive to disclose, after i learns that is a good bank, is non-monotonic in σ ∗ , even
more dramatically than suggested by our results for announcement effects.
Example 6: Consider our previous Example 4 above, with n = 10 banks. Suppose types are
independent and that each bank is good with probability 0.9. We set b∗ = 0, meaning a good bank
defaults if even one bank in the system is bad. The returns to outsiders and banks are r = 1 and
R = 2.55, respectively. These parameters ensure that if no other bank discloses its type, outsiders
would not trade with a bank even if it disclosed its type. This is because outsiders know they will
be paid only if all remaining 9 banks are bad, which occurs with probability (0.9)9 = 0.387, and
(0.9)9 × 2.55 = 0.99 < r. At the same time, if all other banks disclose, outsiders would trade with a
bank of uncertain type since 0.9 × 2.55 = 2.30 > r. We set c = 0.5, but its value is irrelevant.
Since bank types are independent, there are no informational spillovers. Our results for announcement effects suggest that in this case disclosure would initially encourage disclosure, but that this effect
should taper off as more banks disclose and a bank can raise funds even without disclosing its type.
Suppose all banks other than bank i disclose with a common probability σ ∗ . Figure 1 plots how the
gain bank i realizes from disclosing it is good when outsiders expect it not to announce varies with
σ ∗ . Bank i indeed gains less from disclosure when σ ∗ = 0 than when σ ∗ = 1. Moreover, the gains to
disclosure seem to generally rise faster with σ ∗ at low values of σ ∗ . But as σ ∗ ranges from 0 to 1, the
gains to disclosure rise and fall multiple times. This is because as we increase σ ∗ , outsiders grow more
reluctant to invest in bank i unless enough other banks announce they are good. The threshold number
of banks that must announce depends on whether bank i reveals it is good or not. The local minima in
Figure 1 occur at values of σ ∗ for which the threshold number jumps when bank i fails to disclose. 
To recap, we find that when one bank chooses a higher σj , other good banks are better off because
their scope for achieving gains from trade with outsiders rise. However, it has ambiguous effects on
whether other banks choose to disclose. To anticipate some of our results below, note that expected
gains from trade for outsiders rise in part because outsiders can avoid investing in banks with negative
equity. While this is privately optimal for outsiders and good banks, it may not be socially optimal
given the goal of funding all banks. Hence, this positive externality of disclosure on other good banks
need not make more disclosure desirable. In addition, since disclosure decisions are not inherently
complementary, it will not generally be true that good banks will agree to disclose if they could only
coordinate among themselves. These insights will prove useful later for interpreting our results.

4

Equilibrium of the Disclosure Game

We now characterize the equilibrium of the disclosure game at the heart of our model. We first need to
discuss the appropriate notion of equilibrium for our model. We use the notion of sequential equilibria
19

in Kreps and Wilson (1982) in which each player’s strategy is optimal given the others’ strategies, and
off-equilibrium beliefs coincide with the limit of beliefs from a sequence in which players choose all
strategies with positive probability but the weight on suboptimal actions tends to zero. This restriction
on beliefs rules out off-equilibrium path beliefs that are arguably implausible. For example, suppose
bank i sets σi = 0 in equilibrium. If it deviated, outsiders could believe anything after observing bank
i show it was good, including in states of the world for which π (ω) = 0. Outsiders might also change
their beliefs about banks j 6= i even though bank i knows nothing about these types.18 By contrast,
sequential equilibria require beliefs to conform with objective features of our information structure.
Although we focus on disclosure decisions, recall that outsiders are also strategic players, and so the
requirement that strategies are optimal in equilibrium applies to them as well.
Given Lemma 3, we can describe the disclosure game as each bank choosing a probability σi of
revealing its type if it were good. To confirm that a strategy profile σ constitutes an equilibrium, we
need to verify that each σi is optimal given what σ−i implies about the distribution of announcements
A = {A1 , . . . , An }. Since the terms {Ii (A), ri (A)} offered to bank i are functions of A, we can compute
the expected payoffs to bank i if it discloses its type as well as if does not discloses it.
Our model potentially admits multiple equilibria. However, given our interest in mandatory disclosure, we are primarily interested in equilibria with partial disclosure, since only in these equilibria is
there scope to compel banks to reveal more information than they would on their own. Even if there is
an additional equilibrium with full disclosure, focusing on an equilibrium with partial disclosure is still
useful since it tells us what a policymaker should do if the economy ever gets stuck in such an equilibrium. For simplicity, we first focus on equilibria in which there is no disclosure, i.e. where σi = 0 for all
i. Specifically, we derive conditions under which no disclosure is an equilibrium, and then ask whether
forcing all banks to disclose their types in this case raises welfare. We then turn to the possibility of
equilibria with disclosure, i.e. where σi > 0 for some i.

4.1

Existence of a Non-Disclosure Equilibrium

We begin with conditions for non-disclosure to be an equilibrium. We need to verify that if bank i
expects banks j 6= i not to disclose, it would be willing to not disclose its type. Given A1 and A2, the
choice of i is irrelevant: If this result holds for one bank, it will hold for any bank. We now show that
a non-disclosure equilibrium exists if either the cost of disclosure or the degree of contagion are large.
To determine whether bank i will agree not to disclose that it is good when σj = 0 for j 6= i, we
need to know what outsiders would do if bank i did and did not disclose its type when good. Suppose
bank i disclosed its type. Since information is verifiable, outsiders know bank i is good. In addition,
given our restriction to sequential equilibria, even if outsiders expected bank i not to disclose, if bank
i did reveal its type it would have no effect on what outsiders believe about other banks. Hence, the
probability outsiders assign to bank i repaying them when only bank i discloses its type is just
pg ≡ Pr(ei ≥ 0|Si = 1)
18

This is referred to by Fudenberg and Tirole (1991) as signalling something you don’t know.

20

(10)

As will soon become clear, pg can be interpreted as a measure of contagion and plays a key role in our
 n−b−1
P∗
(1−q)b
analysis. It can be readily calculated given π(ω) and ei (ω). For example, pg = bb=0 n−1
b q
in Example 4 and pg = 1 −

k
n−1

in Example 5.19 Outsiders will invest in bank i only if
pg ≥

This is because if pg were lower than

r
R,

r
R

outsiders would have to charge bank i more than R to ensure

a return of r. Hence, when only bank i discloses, we have Ii (A) = 0 if pg <

r
R

and Ii (A) = 1 if pg ≥

r
R.

Next, suppose bank i opts not to disclose its type. The beliefs of outsiders will now depend on
bank i’s strategy σi . From Lemma 3, we know a bank will not disclose if it is bad. Hence, if outsiders
observe Ai = ∅, the likelihood they assign that bank i would be able to repay them is given by
Pr(ei ≥ 0|Ai = ∅) =

Pr(ei ≥ 0|Si = 1) Pr(Si = 1)(1 − σi )
Pr(Si = 0) + Pr(Si = 1)(1 − σi )

(11)

This expression is maximized when σi = 0 when it equals pg Pr(Si = 1).20 Hence, if
pg <

1
r
,
Pr(Si = 1) R

bank i will not be able to raise funds when on bank discloses that it is good i.e. Ii (∅, . . . , ∅) = 0.
In short, when no other bank discloses its type, whether bank i is funded depends on its own
disclosure decision and the value of pg as defined in (10). When pg < Rr , outsiders will not invest in
r
R < pg
r
1
Pr(S1 =1) R ,

r
1
Pr(S1 =1) R ,

bank i whether it discloses or not. When

<

type but not if it does not. When pg >

outsiders invest in bank i if it discloses its type, and

outsiders invest if bank i discloses its

may invest if it does not. We use these insights to determine when non-disclosure is an equilibrium.
If pg <

r
R,

non-disclosure is an equilibrium for any c > 0: Disclosure does not induce outsiders to

invest but is costly. Note that non-disclosure is an equilibrium even if c = 0.
If

r
R

< pg <

r
1
Pr(S1 =1) R ,

bank i will be able to raise funds from outsiders only if it discloses its

type. Non-disclosure is an equilibrium only if a bank cannot expect to gain from revealing its type.
Revealing its type would secure the bank an expected profit of pg R − r and incur a cost of c. Hence,
non-disclosure is an equilibrium if the disclosure cost is sufficiently large, i.e. only if c > pg R − r.
For pg > Pr(S1i =1) Rr , bank i will be able to raise funds if it discloses its type. If it does not reveal its
type, whether outsiders trade with bank i depends on their beliefs about bank i’s strategy σi . However,
in a non-disclosure equilibrium, outsiders would correctly anticipate that σi = 0. In this case, outsiders
would invest in bank i even if they did not know its type. For non-disclosure to be an equilibrium, bank
i must not expect to gain from revealing its type. By disclosing its type, it reduces the interest rate
ri it pays from

r
pg Pr(Si =1)

to

r
pg .

Since it borrows one unit of resources, and since it only earns profits

19

For circular networks as in Example 5, Barlevy and Nagaraja (2015) derive results that can be used to compute pg in
terms of k and n under morePgeneral conditions, e.g. whenPthe number of banks is allowed to be random.
n
20
b
b
Note that Pr(Si = 1) = n
b=0 (1 − n )qb , where qb was defined in Lemma 1.
b=0 (1 − n ) Pr(B(ω) = b) =

21

with probability pg , these gains reduce to

Pr(Si =0)
Pr(Si =1)

r. These must be less than the cost c for bank i to

be willing not to disclose its type.
We collect these results together as the following Proposition:
Proposition 6: A non-disclosure equilibrium exists iff one of the following conditions is satisfied:
1. pg <
2. pg ∈
3. pg >

r
R

h

r
R

,

r
1
Pr(Si =1) R

r
1
Pr(Si =1) R

i

and c > pg R − r

and c >

Pr(Si =0)
Pr(Si =1)

r

Moreover, in cases (1) and (2) no bank is funded in equilibrium, while in case (3) all banks are funded.
Figure 2 plots the region in (pg , c)-space in which a non-disclosure equilibrium exists. Non-disclosure
is an equilibrium when either c is large or pg is small.21
Non-disclosure equilibrium and contagion.

The fact that non-disclosure is an equilibrium when

disclosure is costly, i.e. when c is large, is not surprising. The more novel finding is the connection
between non-disclosure and pg . This statistic can be naturally interpreted as a measure of contagion,
since pg = Pr(ei ≥ 0|Si = 1) represents the likelihood that a good bank can avoid default despite
exposure to other banks. When pg → 1 contagion is insignificant, since a good bank will be able to
repay almost regardless of what happens at other banks. When pg → 0 contagion is severe, since a
good bank will default in most states. Proposition 6 thus reveals that non-disclosure is an equilibrium
if either disclosure is costly or contagion is severe.22 Note that pg fully summarizes contagion, i.e. any
additional information about the distribution of states or endowments is redundant given pg . The fact
that contagion can be reduced to a single statistic this way is a particularly convenient feature of our
setup.23 Although pg depends on π(ω) and ei (ω) which we take as primitives, note that ei (ω) should
be understood as the outcome a process whereby bad banks take actions that affect good banks. Since
these are endogenous, we should expect pg to vary with the underlying economic environment. We will
return to this theme in Section 6, but for now we treat pg as a primitive feature.

4.2

Mandatory Disclosure and Welfare

We next ask whether when a non-disclosure equilibrium exists, forcing all banks to disclose their type
can improve welfare relative to this equilibrium outcome. We do not claim this policy is optimal.
21

When c = 0, our model satisfies all of the conditions Beyer et al. (2010) identify under which equilibrium should
involve full disclosure, highlighting the novelty of our explanation. Costless disclosure also implies unravelling in Admati
and Pfleiderer (2000) . Our result is probably closest to Example 4 in Okuno-Fujiwara, Postlewaite, and Suzumura (1990),
in which agents’ choices are at a corner and so disclosure has no effect on actions.
22
Empirically, one could try to deduce pg from default premia or spreads on credit default swaps for banks that are
known not to have made bad investments. The idea of measuring contagion with conditional distributions is reminiscent
of the CoVaR measure proposed by Adrian and Brunnermeier (2011). However, they consider bank outcomes conditional
on other banks being in distress, while we condition on those banks having avoided bad investments.
23
Note that without symmetry, the object that corresponds to pg would generally vary across banks. This is the reason
we choose to work with a symmetric environment.

22

However, showing that mandatory disclosure improves welfare is sufficient to justify intervention. We
focus on the policy of forcing all banks to disclose both because it is easier to analyze and because it
has been used in practice, i.e. stress test results are disclosed for all systemically important banks.
We begin with the case where pg <

r
R.

From Proposition 6, we know that in this case no disclosure

is an equilibrium for all c ≥ 0 and that no bank receives funding in equilibrium. If we instead forced all
banks to disclose, banks revealed to have positive equity would attract investment while the rest would
not. The unconditional probability that a bank will be able to raise funds is just Pr(ei ≥ 0), and so
the expected surplus that we could generate by forcing all banks to disclose their types is
n [Pr(ei ≥ 0)(R − r) − c]

(12)

Using the fact that Pr(ei ≥ 0) = pg Pr(Si = 1), we infer that (12) is positive iff
c ≤ pg Pr(Si = 1)(R − r)
Hence, as long as disclosure isn’t too costly, forcing disclosure can raise welfare.
Next, suppose pg >
equilibrium exists only

r
1
Pr(Si =1) R . From Proposition 6 we
Pr(Si =0)
if c > Pr(S
r and that all banks
i =1)

know that in this case a non-disclosure
are funded in equilibrium. Mandatory

disclosure is then strictly welfare reducing, since it incurs disclosure costs c n but if anything only
reduces the number of banks that undertake projects by revealing which banks have negative equity.24
i
h
The remaining case is when pg ∈ Rr , Pr(S1i =1) Rr . From Proposition 6, we know that in this case

a non-disclosure equilibrium exists only if c ≥ pg R − r and that in equilibrium no bank is funded.
The expected gain from forcing all banks to disclose is thus equal to (12), which is positive only if
c ≤ pg Pr(Si = 1)(R − r). Mandatory disclosure improves upon the equilibrium outcome if these two
restrictions on c are compatible. We analyze this in the Appendix. The results imply the following:
Theorem 1: Suppose a non-disclosure equilibrium exists. Then

(i) ∃ p∗g ∈ Rr , 1 such that for all pg ∈ (0, p∗g ), forced disclosure improves welfare relative to the
non-disclosure equilibrium if c is not too large.

(ii) If pg >

r
1
Pr(Si =1) R

so all banks can raise funds when no information is revealed, mandatory

disclosure cannot increase welfare for any c ≥ 0.
Figure 3 provides a graphical interpretation of Theorem 1 in (pg , c)-space. The region in which
a non-disclosure equilibrium exists, depicted in light gray, is the same as in Figure 2. The region in
which mandatory disclosure is superior to no trade is depicted in dark gray. The intersection of the
two regions, depicted in blue, corresponds to parameter values for which it we can improve on the nondisclosure equilibrium. For severe degrees of contagion, intervention is warranted as long as disclosure
costs are not too high. For intermediate degrees of contagion, intervention is warranted when disclosure
costs are neither too high nor too low, since at low costs non-disclosure cannot be an equilibrium.
r
Our results when pg > Pr(S1i =1) R
are reminiscent of Jovanovic (1982) and Fishman and Hagerty (1989). They also
consider models in which disclosure is costly and yields private gains but no social surplus and is thus undesirable.
24

23

Theorem 1 is the key result in our paper. Part (i) establishes that severe contagion is a necessary
condition for intervention to be beneficial. Intuitively, contagion implies a bank’s information will
be useful for inferring ω and facilitating trade between banks and outsiders, a spillover banks fail to
internalize in contemplating disclosure. When the degree of contagion is small, banks internalize most
of the benefits of their disclosure. If a bank chose not to disclose its type in that case, the cost of
disclosure must have exceeded the benefit, and forcing it to disclose would make it worse off.25
Part (ii) of Theorem 1 establishes that as the model is specified, mandatory disclosure can only be
justified when markets are frozen, i.e. when outsiders fail to invest in any of the banks. If banks could
raise funds when none of them disclose their types, mandating disclosure can only do harm. This is
related to our discussion in Section 3, where we argued that if disclosure encourages outsiders to trade
with banks by helping outsiders avoid funding banks with negative equity, as must be true if banks can
already secure funding, then mandatory disclosure will benefit good banks but will reduce total surplus.
This result contradicts the argument cited in the Introduction that stress test results should be released
routinely rather than during crises, and is consistent with what others such as Goldstein and Leitner
(2013) and Faria-e Castro, Martinez, and Philippon (2015) have found. That said, our model abstracts
from various forces that may favor disclosure in normal times. We confirm this in Section 5 when we
introduce moral hazard in the model and show mandatory disclosure can be desirable in normal times.
However, the case for intervention still hinges on contagion. Essentially, without contagion, if disclosure
was worth undertaking banks would choose to disclose on their own.

4.3

Equilibria with Disclosure

So far, we have only considered non-disclosure equilibria. We now consider other equilibria, focusing
on two questions. First, if the conditions for a non-disclosure equilibrium to exist in Proposition 6 fail,
will there exist an equilibrium with disclosure, and can we say anything about it? Second, if a nondisclosure equilibrium exists and can be improved upon, must there also be equilibria with disclosure,
so intervention is merely selecting an equilibrium agents could have coordinated to on their own?
Consider first the case where non-disclosure equilibria do not exist. Per Proposition 6, this occurs
when pg > Rr and c is sufficiently small. In this case, good banks will be too tempted to reveal their
type and improve their terms of trade. Standard existence results ensure that our game always admits
an equilibrium. Hence, there must be an equilibrium with some disclosure, i.e. σi > 0 for some i. We
now show that it may be possible to improve upon this equilibrium. However, the relevant intervention
in this case is not to force more information out, but to prevent information from being disclosed.
To see this, suppose
pg Pr(Si = 1) >

r
R

(13)

As we showed in Proposition 6, this condition ensures that if no bank discloses its type, outsiders would
invest in all banks. We write the condition in a way that highlights that neither pg nor Pr(Si = 1) can
25

The reason mandatory disclosure cannot improve welfare for even small degrees of contagion, i.e. when pg is close to
but less than 1, is that mandatory disclosure forces both good and bad banks to disclose their types. While the private cost
to a good bank of disclosing its type is c, expected disclosure costs per good bank exceeds c under mandatory disclosure.

24

be too small, i.e. contagion must be low and banks are likely to be good. In this case, we have
Proposition 7: If pg >

r
1
Pr(Si =1) R

and c <

Pr(Si =0)
Pr(Si =1) r,

at least one bank in equilibrium discloses its

type with positive probability. In this case, forcing all banks to set σi = 0 weakly improves welfare.
Note the difference between Proposition 7 and Theorem 1. The latter states that under (13), if
we start with an equilibrium in which no information is disclosed, forcing banks to release information
cannot improve welfare. Proposition 7 states that under (13), if we start with an equilibrium in which
some information is disclosed, forcing banks to remain secretive can raise welfare. Theorem 1 argues
that there is no justification for mandatory disclosure, while Proposition 7 argues for requiring opacity.
Proposition 7 reaffirms that even though our model offers a justification for mandatory disclosure, it
does not imply disclosure is always inherently desirable. We view this as an advantage, since empirically
banks have had a long tradition of secrecy. For example, Gorton and Tallman (2015) document that
prior to the establishment of the Federal Reserve, bank clearing houses went to great lengths to restrict
what information was available about their member banks. The tendency to secrecy has continued into
the modern era. For example, Prescott (2008)) observes that banks that do well on regulatory exams
are forbidden from releasing their results. He argues this custom can be optimal if banks have discretion
on what to report to regulators, since disclosure may lead banks to volunteer less information. In our
model, the virtue of opacity is instead due to the fact that it allows for insurance across banks. In
particular, if banks collude to hide their types, outsiders will fund all banks. Effectively, high equity
banks insure low equity banks by paying higher rates. This channel is similar to recent work Goldstein
and Leitner (2013) and Dang et al. (2014) on opacity in banking.
Proposition 7 is concerned with situations in which non-disclosure equilibria do not exist. We now
turn to the case where such equilibria exist. Specifically, if such equilibria can be improved upon, we
want to know whether equilibria in which banks disclose information must also exist.
In some cases, additional equilibria with disclosure necessarily exist. For example, suppose disclosure
were costless, i.e. c = 0. In this case, a good bank never suffers from revealing its type. The only
reason not to disclose is that it achieves nothing, e.g. if pg <

r
R

and no other bank choose to reveal. In

this case, banks could coordinate on their own to disclose, since none is ever made worse off disclosing.
Nevertheless, our next example shows this is not true more generally. That is, when c > 0, nondisclosure can be the unique equilibrium and mandatory disclosure will still improve welfare.
Example 7: Consider an environment similar to Example 6 in which bank types are independent
and a good bank will default as long as even one bank is bad. Set the number of banks n to 3. As
before, each bank is good with probability 0.9 and b∗ = 0. The returns to outsiders and banks are
given by r = 1 and R = 1.22, respectively. These parameters ensure that if the other two banks choose
σi = 0, a good bank will not be able to raise funds by revealing its type, since
pg R = (0.9)2 × 1.22 = 0.99 < 1 = r
Hence, non-disclosure is an equilibrium. We set c = 0.16. This ensures mandatory disclosure is

25

preferable to the non-disclosure equilibrium where no bank is funded, since
(0.9)3 × 3(1.22 − 1) = 0.481 > 0.48 = 3c
We can verify numerically that a bank will be better off not disclosing its type for all values of σ−i .
As an illustration, consider bank 1’s best response when (σ2 , σ3 ) ∈ {(0, 0), (0, 1), (1, 1)}. When neither
bank discloses, bank 1 will prefer not to disclose since revealing its type is costly but will not convince
outsiders to invest. When the two other banks both disclose if good, bank 1 will be able to raise funds
even without disclosing when both other banks are good. Since the cost of disclosure exceeds the gain
from better terms, bank 1 again prefers not to disclose. When only one bank commits to disclosure,
bank 1 must disclose its type to attract investment, but given the odds it prefers not to disclose. The
gain from disclosure for any pair (σ2 , σ3 ) ∈ [0, 1]2 is also negative. 
The fact that mandatory disclosure can improve welfare even when agents cannot coordinate to a
different equilibrium on their own accords with what we showed in Section 3 that disclosure decisions
are not generally strategic complements. It is therefore not surprising that the argument for disclosure
does not rely on multiple equilibria. The case for intervention instead relies on the fact that disclosure
confers a positive externality on other good banks by encouraging outsiders to trade with them. The
problem is not coordination per se but that externalities lead to too little disclosure.

5

Adding Moral Hazard

The model we presented up to now offers a stark conclusion: Mandatory disclosure can be desirable
when markets are frozen but not when banks can raise funds when no information is revealed. However,
our model abstracts from various frictions that might justify intervention even when markets operate
normally. The quote we cite in the Introduction for routinely disclosing stress tests alludes to this,
citing the need for market discipline which suggests some friction we ignore. We now explore this idea
by allowing banks to engage in a particular form of moral hazard. Our main insight is that mandatory
disclosure can be desirable in normal times, but again only when there is sufficient contagion. A
secondary insight that we obtain by introducing moral hazard is that we can relax assumption A5.
We introduce moral hazard in a particularly simple way by assuming banks can divert new funds
they raise to achieve a private benefit. Diversion is meant to stand in for various actions banks can
undertake that are not in the interest of investors. At the same time, we assume banks cannot divert
the assets they already own, and that these can be seized by outsiders. Initial equity can mitigate
moral hazard problems, since banks that engage in moral hazard can be deprived of their equity.
We modify the model in Section 2 as follows. As before, nature chooses ω, each bank i observes
Si (ω), and then banks play a simultaneous-move disclosure game. Investors observe the outcome
A ≡ {A1 , . . . , An } and offer terms to the different banks. If outsiders invest in banks, they give up the
option to earn r, i.e. there is a time limit on when they can exercise their outside option. After all
investments are made, banks learn their equity ei (ω) if they haven’t yet learned it from A. Define e as

26

the highest possible equity a bank can have, i.e.
e≡

max

{ω:π(ω)>0}

ei (ω)

(14)

In what follows, we maintain assumptions A1-A4. Under A4, if ei (1, S−i ) < e for some S−i , it must be
that some bank j 6= i is bad. Hence, we can interpret this condition as contagion.
Once banks learn their equity, they can decide whether to invest in the project with return R > r
or divert the funds and earn a private benefit v. We assume v is neither too big nor too small:
A6. Binding Moral Hazard: The value of private benefits v satisfies
R − r < v < R − max{r − e, 0}

(15)

The first inequality in (15) implies a bank that knows its equity is non-positive would prefer to
divert funds, since the most it can earn from the project is R − r. The second inequality implies that
if a bank knew its equity is e, it would prefer to initiate the project than divert. Since the interest
rates banks are charged in equilibrium depend on A, each bank will have a threshold level of equity
e∗i (A) ∈ (0, e) as a function of A above which it prefer the project and below which it would divert.
Note that we can interpret the model in Section 2 as a special case of this model in which v = −∞.
After banks decide what to do with any funds they raised, payoffs are realized and banks pay their
obligations. Outsiders who invested in banks but are not paid back can go after the equity banks have.
We continue to assume that outsider claims are junior to any of the bank’s other outstanding liabilities.
Thus, if a bank has negative equity, outside investors will be unable to recover anything from it.
As in the previous section, we can ask whether a non-disclosure equilibrium exists and if so when
mandatory disclosure can improve upon it. Outside investors will expect a bank they fund to default
with probability Pr(ei < e∗i (A)|A, σ), although if 0 < ei (ω) < e∗i (A) outsiders can still seize some of the
bank’s remaining equity. Bank i’s payoff if ei (ω) < e∗i (A) is no longer given by (8) but by
ei (ω) + [v + max{−ri (A), −ei (A)}]Ii (A) − cαi

(16)

For brevity, we will not go through the full analysis of the disclosure game under this new payoff
function. Instead, we begin with an example that illustrates our claim that with moral hazard there
can be a role for mandatory disclosure when markets operate normally, i.e. when outsiders invest in
banks even when no bank is willing to reveal its type.
Example 8: Consider the case where the equity endowment ei (ω) is such that ei (0, S−i ) < 0 for
all S−i and ei (1, S−i ) is either equal to e or negative. This condition is analogous to A5 in that we
can determine whether a bank defaults based on its endowment without having to know whether other
banks are funded. The probability outsiders will paid back if bank i is good still corresponds to pg
as defined in (10), i.e. pg = Pr(ei ≥ 0|Si = 1). By the same logic as in Section 4, we can show that
if pg >

1
r
Pr(Si =1) R ,

when no other banks disclose their type, bank i will obtain funding regardless of

whether it discloses its type or not. Hence, non-disclosure is an equilibrium only if the cost of disclosure
27

exceeds the reduction in interest charges a bank could obtain from disclosure. This is the same as in
the case where v = −∞ we already studied, i.e.
c>

Pr(Si = 0)
r
Pr(Si = 1)

Under (17), non-disclosure is an equilibrium when pg >

r
1
Pr(Si =1) R .

(17)
Can it be improved upon? An

important difference from the case with no moral hazard is that now disclosure prevents outsiders from
investing in banks that divert resources for private gains. When v < r, such diversion is wasteful:
Society would have been collectively better off exercising the alternative option available to outside
investors that earned them r. This interpretation hinges on outsiders giving up the right to exercise
their outside option once they committed their funds to a bank, since it precludes banks renegotiating
with outsiders after learning their equity value. Since the expected fraction of banks that divert is
1 − pg Pr(Si = 1), mandatory disclosure is preferable to the non-disclosure equilibrium where all banks
raise funds if
[1 − pg Pr(Si = 1)](r − v) > c
Combining (17) and (18), we can satisfy both conditions whenever pg <
If this cutoff exceeds

r
1
Pr(Si =1) R ,

1
Pr(Si =1)


1−

(18)

Pr(Si =0) r
Pr(Si =1) r−v .

we can be sure that there exists a nonempty set of values of pg for

which a non-disclosure equilibrium exists in which all banks are funded and yet mandatory disclosure
can make agents better off. This condition can be rewritten as


v
r
Pr(Si = 0) 
1−
< 1−
Pr(Si = 1)
R
r

(19)

Hence, contrary to our results for the case with no moral hazard, we now find it can be desirable to
force all banks to disclose when markets operate normally. Intuitively, when v < r a planner would
want to avoid resources from going to low equity banks. Since good banks do not internalize the value
the information they disclose has in revealing the equity position of others, equilibrium disclosure will
generally be too low and forcing disclosure can improve welfare. 
Example 8 shows that if we modify the model so that it is no longer desirable to keep insolvent banks
operating, mandatory disclosure can improve welfare even when markets aren’t frozen. The benefit of
disclosure in this case is not to stimulate trade, as is the case when markets are frozen, but to discourage
socially wasteful investment. Incorporating moral hazard thus captures the market disciplining role of
disclosure Bernanke (2013b) alludes to in advocating for routine stress test disclosures. However, the
next result shows that the case for intervention still hinges on contagion:
Theorem 2: Suppose A1 - A4, and A6 hold. If a non-disclosure equilibrium exists, then
(i) There exists a cutoff e∗ ∈ (0, e) such that if Pr(ei > e∗ | Si = 1) is sufficiently close to 0 but
strictly positive, mandatory disclosure can improve upon this equilibrium as c → 0.
(ii) If Pr(ei = e | Si = 1) is sufficiently close to 1, mandatory disclosure cannot improve welfare
relative to the non-disclosure equilibrium for any c ≥ 0 .

28

In comparing this result to Theorem 1, recall that we can interpret the model without moral hazard
as a special case of the model with moral hazard but where v = −∞. Imposing A6 allows us to drop
A5, i.e. we no longer need to assume that the distribution of equity across values of ω exhibits a
gap. Avoiding the gap clarifies the role of contagion, since part (ii) of Theorem 2 makes clear that the
condition which rules out a role for mandatory disclosure is that a good bank is not vulnerable to other
banks and its equity is very likely to be at the maximum level e. The necessity of contagion is due to
the fact that when information is valuable, banks have an incentive to reveal it. Contagion ensures that
a bank’s information is systemically important, so that banks fail to fully take the benefits of disclosure
into account. This is not to argue that contagion is the only type of spillover that can justify disclosure.
However, it is noteworthy that even when there is little contagion in the sense of Theorem 2, disclosure
can still exhibit informational spillovers where disclosure by one bank affects what outsiders believe
about other banks. These spillovers cannot on their own justify mandatory disclosure.

6

Balance Sheet Contagion

Up to now, we have assumed contagion operates through endowments ei (ω). While we demonstrated
that our setup represents a reduced form of certain models in which contagion emerges endogenously,
our formulation makes it easy to lose sight that contagion depends on the underlying model. We
therefore conclude our discussion with an extended example to highlight that the measure of contagion
that drives our our results depends on the underlying economic environment. A novel implication of this
example is that it reveals how the justification for mandatory disclosure may vanish once other financial
reforms are instituted. This runs counter to conventional wisdom expressed by some policymakers that
mandatory disclosure complements other proposed financial reforms.
Our example relies on a model of balance sheet contagion in which contagion arises when banks
whose balance sheets are impaired default on other banks whose balance sheets are not directly affected.
Our formulation follows Eisenberg and Noe (2001). Each bank is endowed with e > 0 worth of assets
as well as a series of claims and obligations to other banks. Formally, we let Λ denote the n × n matrix
of obligations between any pair of banks, so that Λij corresponds to the amount bank i owes bank j.
The diagonal terms are all zero. As in Example 5, we assume each bank has zero net position, i.e.
X

Λij =

j6=i

X

Λji

(20)

j6=i

for each i ∈ {1, . . . , n}. We take these claims as given, although in principle banks would choose the
claims the obligations they want to enter in; this line is explored in Zawadowski (2013). To satisfy
A2, we would need to assume the links implied by Λ represent a symmetric network. However, this
assumption is not necessary for the main result we derive.
Of the n banks in the network, we assume a random number B are bad, and given B = b, each of

the nb groups of b banks are equally likely to be those that are bad. What distinguishes bad banks is

that they each incur a loss of magnitude φ > e. The simplest interpretation for φ is that it represents
an obligation to a senior claimant that has priority over any of the banks. Let Si be a variable equal
29

to 1 if bank 1 is bad and equal to 0 otherwise. The state of the network is given by S = (S1 , . . . , Sn ).
Ignoring transfers between banks, a bad bank would see its equity position fall to a negative e − φ.
However, the final equity position of a bank will depend on payments to and from other banks. Let
xij (S) denote the amount bank i pays bank j in state S. Following Eisenberg and Noe (2001), we
define an equilibrium clearing payment as a set of payments xij (S) in which each bank i pays all of his
obligations φ and Λij in full or else pays claims according to prescribed priority, and pays those with
equal priority on a pro-rata basis, i.e. in proportion to its obligations to each of the banks.
Formally, define Λi as the total obligations of bank i to other banks, i.e.
Λi =

n
X

Λij

j=1

The equilibrium payments xij (S) in state S will solve the system of equations
))
(
(
n
X
Λij
xij (S) =
xki (S)
max 0, min Λi , e − φSi +
Λi

(21)

k=1

Hence, the equity position of each bank, before it attracts funds from outside investors, which the bank
may not know, is given by
ei (S) = e − φSi +

n
X

xki (S) −

k=1

n
X

xij (S)

(22)

j=1

The expression in (22) confirms that this model gives rise to a reduced form in which we can assign an
equity endowment to each bank in each state of the world. This endowment ei (S) depends on certain
parameters that influence contagion works. In particular, the amount of equity each bank has depends
on its type Si , the size of the loss φ at bad banks, and the matrix of obligations Λij . To describe this
dependence formally, let us index the matrix of obligations across banks Λ by a scaling factor λ so
that Λ(λ) = λΛ(1). That is, the scalar λ multiplies each entry of the baseline matrix Λ(1). A higher
λ increases obligations between all banks proportionately. The next proposition formalizes the way
equity ei (S) depends on the magnitude of losses at bad banks φ and the magnitude of debt obligations
across banks as scaled by λ.
Proposition 8: For every x ∈ [0, e], Pr(ei ≤ x|Si = 1) is weakly increasing in φ and λ, i.e the
distribution of equity is stochastically decreasing in φ and λ.
As Theorem 2 makes clear, the relevant measure of contagion that matters for the desirability of
mandatory disclosure is the distribution of equity at good banks. Proposition 8 thus reveals what
features exacerbate contagion and may create a role for policy intervention. In particular, contagion
will be more severe the larger the losses φ of bad banks, as well as the greater the debt obligations λ
between banks. The latter implies that restrictions on leverage that place limits on λ may reduce the
need for mandatory disclosure. This implies that reforms such as leverage restrictions can obviate the
justification for mandatory disclosure rules rather than complement these rules.
30

7

Conclusion

One of lessons policymakers seem to have drawn from the recent financial crisis is that mandatory
disclosure of bank balance sheets can be a useful tool. Specifically, a consensus has emerged that the
release of stress test results for large banks played an important role in stabilizing financial markets
in the US. Although the release of stress test results for European did not seem to have the same
salutatory effect, for a variety of reasons, policymakers have continued conducting these tests and
releasing their results. As crisis conditions mitigated in the US, policymakers continued to advocate
for such disclosure, citing it as a naturally complement to existing regulatory policy.
This paper tackled the question of why it might be necessary to compel banks to disclose information
rather than rely on them to disclose the information on their own. We argue that there can be a role for
mandatory disclosure when there is sufficient contagion across banks. This, rather than markets being
frozen or moral hazard problems that can arise with incomplete information, is what proves to be the
decisive factor for whether such a policy can increase welfare. At the same time, even with contagion,
our model does not imply that mandatory disclosure is always and everywhere desirable.
We conclude with a few comments and caveats about our analysis. First and foremost, our model
does not imply mandatory disclosure constitutes an optimal policy. Our results establish conditions
under which mandatory disclosure can increase welfare, but not how optimal disclosure policy ought
to be structured. Goldstein and Leitner (2013) conduct an analysis of the latter, studying how to
optimally release information assuming only the government can commit to such a disclosure rule. Their
results suggest that even in disclosing information, some opacity might be optimal. This coincides with
the fact that historically, the private sector solution implemented by clearinghouses often involved less
transparency during crises, providing just enough information about the system as a whole to encourage
investment in banks without revealing too much about individual banks. Questions about what type
of information bank examiners should release are just as important as when there might be a need to
compel information that isn’t provided by the market.
Second, in our quest for analytical tractability, we have ignored various practical issues involved with
the design of disclosure policy. For example, we invoked symmetry restrictions to simplify the analysis.
But in practice banks differ in important ways, which raises the question of which banks should be forced
to disclose information. Our analysis suggests that banks whose information is the most systemically
important in terms of affecting other banks are those that are most likely to disclose too little. But
demonstrating this requires working with asymmetric environments. Still another question is what type
of information should be collected. Our specification assumes that the only relevant information are
bank balance sheets, since once we know each bank’s type the equity position of each bank is known.
In practice, though, the linkages between banks may also be private information, raising the question
of what optimal disclosure might be when information on both bank types and how banks are linked
is initially private but might be elicited and made public.

31

Gain from Disclosure

-0.45
-0.46
-0.47
-0.48
-0.49

s*
0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Figure 1: Gains from disclosure as a function of σ ∗ chosen by other banks

32











c




NonͲdisclosure
equilibrium
exists





Pr(Si=0)
r
Pr(Si=1)






r
R



1
r
Pr(Si=1) R

pg










Figure 2: Values of (pg , c) for which non-disclosure is an equilibrium









c




NonͲdisclosure
equilibrium
exists






Pr(Si=0)
r
Pr(Si=1)



Fulldisclosure
isbetterthan
notrade






Intervention
improveswelfare

r
R

1
r
Pr(Si=1) R



pg

Figure 3: Values of (pg , c) in which mandatory disclosure improves welfare






33

References
Acemoglu, Daron, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi. 2015. “Systemic Risk and Stability
in Financial Networks.” American Economic Review 105 (2):564–608.
Admati, Anat R and Paul Pfleiderer. 2000. “Forcing Firms to Talk: Financial Disclosure Regulation
and Externalities.” Review of Financial Studies 13 (3):479–519.
Adrian, Tobias and Markus K. Brunnermeier. 2011. “CoVaR.” NBER Working Papers 17454, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Allen, Franklin and Ana Babus. 2009. “Networks in Finance, The Network Challenge: Strategy, Profit,
and Risk in an Interlinked World (Paul R. Kleindorfer, Yoram Wind, and Robert E. Gunther, eds.).”
Allen, Franklin and Douglas Gale. 2000. “Financial Contagion.” Journal of Political Economy 108 (1):1–
33.
Alonso, Ricardo, Wouter Dessein, and Niko Matouschek. 2008. “When Does Coordination Require
Centralization?” American Economic Review 98 (1):145–79.
Angeletos, George-Marios and Alessandro Pavan. 2007. “Efficient Use of Information and Social Value
of Information.” Econometrica 75 (4):1103–1142.
Barlevy, Gadi and H. N. Nagaraja. 2015. “Properties of the Vacancy Statistic in the Discrete Circle
Covering Problem.” Tech. rep., Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.
Battiston, Stefano, Domenico Delli Gatti, Mauro Gallegati, Bruce Greenwald, and Joseph E Stiglitz.
2012. “Default Cascades: When Does Risk Diversification Increase Stability?” Journal of Financial
Stability 8 (3):138–149.
Bergemann, Dirk and Stephen Morris. 2013. “Robust Predictions in Games With Incomplete Information.” Econometrica 81 (4):1251–1308.
Bernanke, Ben S. 2013a. “Stress Testing Banks: What Have We Learned?” Maintaining Financial
Stability: Holding a Tiger by the Tail (conference volume) .
———. 2013b. “Monitoring the Financial System.” 49th Annual Conference on Bank Structure and
Competition .
Beyer, Anne, Daniel A Cohen, Thomas Z Lys, and Beverly R Walther. 2010. “The financial reporting
environment: Review of the recent literature.” Journal of Accounting and Economics 50 (2):296–343.
Bischof, Jannis and Holger Daske. 2012. “Mandatory Supervisory Disclosure, Voluntary Disclosure, and
Risk-taking of Financial Institutions: Evidence from the EU-wide stress-testing exercises.” Tech. rep.,
University of Mannheim.
Blackwell, David. 1953. “Equivalent Comparisons of Experiments.” Annal of Mathematical Statistics
24 (2):265–272.
Bouvard, Matthieu, Pierre Chaigneau, and Adolfo de Motta. 2013. “Transparency in the financial
system: rollover risk and crises.” Tech. rep., McGill University.
Caballero, Ricardo J and Arvind Krishnamurthy. 2008. “Collective risk management in a flight to
quality episode.” The Journal of Finance 63 (5):2195–2230.

34

Caballero, Ricardo J and Alp Simsek. 2012. “Fire Sales in a Model of Complexity.” Tech. rep., Harvard
University.
Camargo, Braz and Benjamin Lester. 2011. “Trading dynamics in decentralized markets with adverse
selection.” Unpublished Manuscript .
Carlsson, Hans and Eric van Damme. 1993. “Global Games and Equilibrium Selection.” Econometrica
61 (5):989–1018.
Dang, Tri Vi, Gary Gorton, Bengt Holmstrm, and Guillermo Ordonez. 2014. “Banks as Secret Keepers.”
NBER Working Papers 20255, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Diamond, Douglas and Raghuram Rajan. 2011. “Fear of Fire Sales, Illiquidity Seeking, and Credit
Freezes.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (2):557–91.
Duffie, Darrell and Haoxiang Zhu. 2011. “Does a central clearing counterparty reduce counterparty
risk?” Review of Asset Pricing Studies 1 (1):74–95.
Duffie, James Darrell, Ada Li, and Theodore Lubke. 2010. “Policy Perspectives on OTC Derivatives
Market Infrastructure.” FRB of New York Staff Report (424).
Easterbrook, Frank H and Daniel R Fischel. 1984. “Mandatory disclosure and the protection of investors.” Virginia Law Review :669–715.
Eisenberg, Larry and Thomas H Noe. 2001. “Systemic Risk in Financial Systems.” Management Science
47 (2):236–249.
Ellahie, Atif. 2012. “Capital Market Consequences of EU Bank Stress Tests.” Tech. rep., London
Business School.
Elliott, Matthew, Benjamin Golub, and Matthew Jackson. 2015. “Financial Networks and Contagion.”
American Economic Review 104 (10):3115–53.
Faria-e Castro, Miguel, Joseba Martinez, and Thomas Philippon. 2015. “Runs versus Lemons: Information Disclosure and Fiscal Capacity.” Tech. rep., working paper, NYU.
Fishman, Michael J and Kathleen M Hagerty. 1989. “Disclosure decisions by firms and the competition
for price efficiency.” The Journal of Finance 44 (3):633–646.
Foster, George. 1980. “Externalities and financial reporting.” The Journal of Finance 35 (2):521–533.
Fudenberg, Drew and Jean Tirole. 1991. “Perfect Bayesian equilibrium and sequential equilibrium.”
Journal of Economic Theory 53 (2):236–260.
Gai, Prasanna and Sujit Kapadia. 2010. “Contagion in financial networks.” Proceedings of the Royal
Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Science 466 (2120):2401–2423.
Gale, Douglas and Tanju Yorulmazer. 2013. “Liquidity Hoarding.” Theoretical Economics 8 (2):291–
324.
Galeotti, Andrea, Christian Ghiglino, and Francesco Squintani. 2013. “Strategic Information Transmission Networks.” Journal of Economic Theory .
Goldstein, Itay and Yaron Leitner. 2013. “Stress Tests and Information Disclosure.” Tech. rep., working
paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.
35

Goldstein, Itay and Haresh Sapra. 2014. “Should Banks’ Stress Test Results be Disclosed? An Analysis
of the Costs and Benefits.” Foundations and Trends(R) in Finance 8 (1):1–54.
Gorton, Gary and Ellis Tallman. 2015. “How Did Pre-Fed Banking Panics End?” manuscript, Yale.
Gorton, Gary B. 2008. “The panic of 2007.” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gossner, Olivier. 2000. “Comparison of Information Structures.” Games and Economic Behavior
30 (1):44–63.
Greenlaw, David, Anil Kashyap, Kermit Schoenholtz, and Hyun Song Shin. 2012. “Stressed Out:
Macroprudential Principles for Stress Testing.” Tech. rep., working paper N 71, Chicago Booth
Paper No. 12-08.
Greenwood, Robin, Augustin Landier, and David Thesmar. 2015. “Vulnerable Banks.” Journal of
Finance .
Grossman, Sanford J. 1981. “The informational role of warranties and private disclosure about product
quality.” Journal of law and economics 24 (3):461–483.
Guerrieri, Veronica and Robert Shimer. 2012. “Dynamic Adverse Selection: A Theory of Illiquidity,
Fire Sales, and Flight to Quality.” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Guerrieri, Veronica, Robert Shimer, and Randall Wright. 2010. “Adverse selection in competitive search
equilibrium.” Econometrica 78 (6):1823–1862.
Hagenbach, Jeanne and Frdric Koessler. 2010. “Strategic Communication Networks.” Review of Economic Studies 77 (3):1072–1099.
Hart, Oliver and John Moore. 1995. “Debt and Seniority: An Analysis of the Role of Hard Claims in
Constraining Management.” American Economic Review 85 (3):567–85.
Hirshleifer, Jack. 1971. “The Private and Social Value of Information and the Reward to Inventive
Activity.” American Economic Review 61 (4):561–74.
Jovanovic, Boyan. 1982. “Truthful disclosure of information.” The Bell Journal of Economics :36–44.
Kaminsky, Graciela L., Carmen M. Reinhart, and Carlos A. Vegh. 2003. “The Unholy Trinity of
Financial Contagion.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 17 (4):51–74.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro and John Moore. 1997. “Credit Chains.” Tech. rep., London School of Economics.
Koen, Vincent and Paul van den Noord. 2005. “Fiscal Gimmickry in Europe: One-Off Measures and
Creative Accounting.” OECD Economics Department Working Papers 417, OECD Publishing.
Kreps, David M and Robert Wilson. 1982. “Sequential Equilibria.” Econometrica :863–894.
Kurlat, Pablo. 2013. “Lemons markets and the transmission of aggregate shocks.” American Economic
Review forthcoming.
Lehrer, Ehud, Dinah Rosenberg, and Eran Shmaya. 2010. “Signaling and mediation in games with
common interests.” Games and Economic Behavior 68 (2):670–682.
Milgrom, Paul R. 1981. “Good news and bad news: Representation theorems and applications.” The
Bell Journal of Economics :380–391.

36

Morris, Stephen and Hyun Song Shin. 1998. “Unique Equilibrium in a Model of Self-Fulfilling Currency
Attacks.” The American Economic Review 88 (3):587–597.
Myers, Stewart C. 1977. “Determinants of corporate borrowing.” Journal of Financial Economics
5 (2):147–175.
Okuno-Fujiwara, Masahiro, Andrew Postlewaite, and Kotaro Suzumura. 1990. “Strategic information
revelation.” The Review of Economic Studies 57 (1):25–47.
Peristian, Stavros, Donald P Morgan, and Vanessa Savino. 2010. The Information Value of the Stress
Test and Bank Opacity. Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Philippon, Thomas and Philipp Schnabl. 2013.
68 (1):1–42.

“Efficient Recapitalization.”

Journal of Finance

Prescott, Edward Simpson. 2008. “Should bank supervisors disclose information about their banks?”
Economic Quarterly (Winter) :1–16.
Rocheteau, Guillaume. 2011. “Payments and liquidity under adverse selection.” Journal of Monetary
Economics 58 (3):191–205.
Shapiro, Joel and David Skeie. 2012. “Information Management in Banking Crises.” Tech. rep., working
paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W Vishny. 1992. “ Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity: A Market
Equilibrium Approach.” Journal of Finance 47 (4):1343–66.
Spargoli, Fabrizio. 2012. “Bank Recapitalization and the Information Value of a Stress Test in a Crisis.”
Tech. rep., working paper, Universitat Pompeu Fabra.
Verrecchia, Robert E. 2001. “Essays on disclosure.” Journal of Accounting and Economics 32 (1):97–
180.
Zawadowski, Adam. 2013. “Entangled financial systems.” Review of Financial Studies 26 (5):1291–
1323.

Proofs
Proof of Lemma 1: Suppose π(ω) is given by (2). In this case, it easy to verify that A1 is satisfied,
since for any pair ω and ω ′ where B(ω) = B(ω ′ )will have π(ω) = π(ω ′ ). In the opposite direction,
suppose A1 holds. For a given state ω, define π ∗ = π(ω). A1 implies that π(ω ′ ) for any ω ′ where
−1
P
Pr(B = b), which pins
B(ω ′ ) = B(ω). Since Pr(B = b) = {ω|B(ω)=b} π(ω), it follows that π ∗ = nb
down the value of π(ω).
Proof of Lemma 3: The lemma follows from the fact that the expected benefit from disclosure for a
bad bank under A3 is negative.
Lemma 4: The scenarios where informational spillovers and positive and absent exhibit the following
properties:

37

(i) When informational spillovers are positive, then for all k = 1, . . . , n and all vectors (sk+1 , . . . , sn ) ∈
{0, 1}n−k for which Pr (Sk+1 = sk+1 , . . . , Sn = sn ) > 0, it must be the case that
Pr (S1 = 1, S2 = 1, . . . , Sk = 1|Sk+1 = sk , . . . , Sn = sn ) > 0
i.e. regardless of what types banks k + 1 through n are, there is a strictly positive probability that the
remaining banks 1 through k are all good.
(ii) Informational spillovers are absent iff Si and Sj are pairwise independent for all i and j, i.e.
Pr (Si = si |Sj = sj ) = Pr (Si = si ).
Proof of Lemma 4: Part (i): Suppose not, i.e.
Pr (S1 = 1, S2 = 1, . . . , Sk = 1|Sk+1 = sk+1 , . . . , Sn = sn ) = 0
We will show that this implies Pr (S1 = 1|Sk+1 = sk+1 , . . . , Sn = sn ) = 0, i.e. if the condition holds,
then no bank can be good. To show this, we first argue that
Pr (S1 = 1, . . . , Sk−1 = 1|Sk+1 = sk+1 , . . . , Sn = sn ) = 0 ,
i.e. if there is zero probability that all banks 1 through k are good, then there also zero probability
that banks 1 through k − 1 are all good.
Let us write Pr ( · |Sk+1 , . . . , Sn ) for Pr ( · |Sk+1 = sk+1 , . . . , Sn = sn ) to conserve on notation. Then
we can write Pr (S1 = 1, . . . , Sk−1 = 1|Sk+1 , . . . , Sn ) as a sum of probabilties that are conditional on
the realized value of Sk :
Pr (S1 = 1, . . . , Sk−1 = 1|Sk = 1, Sk+1 , . . . , Sn ) Pr (Sk = 1|Sk+1 , . . . , Sn ) +
Pr (S1 = 1, . . . , Sk−1 = 1|Sk = 0, Sk+1 , . . . , Sn ) Pr (Sk = 0|Sk+1 , . . . , Sn )
Since we supposed that
Pr (S1 = 1, S2 = 1, . . . , Sk = 1|Sk+1 , . . . , Sn ) = 0,
then Pr (S1 = 1, . . . , Sk−1 = 1|Sk = 1, Sk+1 , . . . , Sn ) must also equal zero. Hence, the first term above
is zero, and Pr (S1 = 1, . . . , Sk−1 = 1|Sk+1 , . . . , Sn ) equals
Pr (S1 = 1, . . . , Sk−1 = 1|Sk = 0, Sk+1 , . . . , Sn ) Pr (Sk = 0|Sk+1 , . . . , Sn )
Consider the first term,
Pr (S1 = 1, . . . , Sk−1 = 1|Sk = 0, Sk+1 , . . . , Sn ) .
With positive spillovers, we know that Pr (S1 = 1, . . . , Sk−1 = 1|Sk = 0, Sk+1 , . . . , Sn ) is less than or
equal to Pr (S1 = 1, . . . , Sk−1 = 1|Sk = 1, Sk+1 , . . . , Sn ) provided
Pr (Sk = 1, Sk+1 , . . . , Sn ) > 0
Suppose first that Pr (Sk = 1, Sk+1 , . . . , Sn ) > 0. Since we just argued above that
Pr (S1 = 1, . . . , Sk−1 = 1|Sk = 1, Sk+1 , . . . , Sn )

38

(23)

must be zero, it follows that
Pr (S1 = 1, . . . , Sk−1 = 1|Sk = 0, Sk+1 , . . . , Sn ) = 0
and so it follows that Pr (S1 = 1, . . . , Sk−1 = 1|Sk+1 , . . . , Sn ) = 0 as claimed. Next, suppose that
Pr (Sk = 1, Sk+1 , . . . , Sn ) = 0. This implies
Pr (Sk = 1|Sk+1 , . . . , Sn ) = 0.
But A1 implies that Pr (Sj = 1|Sk+1 , . . . , Sn ) = 0 for all j ∈ {1, ..., k}, meaning that
Pr (S1 = 1, . . . , Sk−1 = 1|Sk+1 , . . . , Sn ) = 0 .
This confirms that when informational spillovers are positive, if it is not possible for banks 1 through
k to all be good, then it is impossible for just banks 1 through k − 1 to all be good.
We can proceed inductively to show that it is also not possible for banks 1 through k − 2 to all
be good, for banks 1 through k − 2 to all be good, and so on, until eventually we can establish that
Pr (S1 = 1|Sk+1 , . . . , Sn ) = 0. By the symmetry condition A1, it follows that Pr (Sj = 1|Sk+1 , . . . , Sn ) =
0 for all j ∈ {1, . . . , k}. In other words, if Pr (S1 = 1, S2 = 1, . . . , Sk = 1|Sk+1 , . . . , Sn ) = 0 as we
suppose, then no bank can be good given (Sk+1 , . . . , Sn ).
We now argue that Pr (Sj = 1|Sk+1 , . . . , Sn ) = 0 for all j ∈ {1, . . . , k} is incompatible with positive informational spillovers. Without loss of generality, we can assume that Sj = 1 for all j ∈
{k + 1, . . . , k ∗ } and Sj = 0 for j ∈ {k∗ + 1, . . . , n}, where k∗ is some number between k and n. Since
Pr (Sk+1 , . . . , Sn ) > 0 by assumption, positive informational spillovers imply
Pr (S1 = 1|Sk+1 = 1, . . . , Sn ) ≥ Pr (S1 = 1|Sk+2 , . . . , Sn )
Hence Pr (S1 = 1|Sk+2 , . . . , Sn ) = 0. We can continue this process through k∗ until we conclude
that Pr (S1 = 1|Sk∗ +1 , . . . , Sn ) = 0. Since Sk∗ +1 , . . . , Sn are all equal to zero, we can conclude that
Pr (S1 = 1) = 0. In words, we showed that if S1 had to equal 0 when a subset of banks are zero, then
no bank could ever be good.
Finally , we reached a contradiction: If all banks are bad with probability 1, then we cannot
have positive informational spillovers, since that requires that there exists some set Ω0 for which the
inequality Pr (Si = 1|Sj = 1, Ω0 ) > Pr (Si = 1|Ω0 ) is strict.
Proof of part (ii): If we set Ω0 = {Sj = 1} for each j 6= i, we can immediately deduce that Si and
Sj are independent. Note that under assumption A1, Si and Sj are not only independent but also
identically distributed.
Lemma 5: Define

n
o
Ω0 ≡ {σj (Sj )}nj=1 , {Aj }j6=2

(24)

Pr (e1 ≥ 0 |S2 = 1, Ω0 ) ≥ Pr (e1 ≥ 0 |A2 = ∅, Ω0 )

(25)

where σj (0) = 0, σj (1) ∈ [0, 1] and Aj ∈ {0, 1} for all j. If informational spillovers are positive, then

This condition also holds when informational spillovers are absent, as long as we impose that Pr(S2 =
1|Ω0 ) > 0.

39

Proof of Lemma 5: Since (25) is undefined when either (i) Pr(A2 = ∅, Ω0 ) = 0 or (ii) Pr(A2 =
1, Ω0 ) = 0, we need to verify these probabilities are both positive for the condition to be meaningful. To
establish (i), recall that we restrict π(ω) to be symmetric and to ensure that Pr(B(ω) = 0) < 1. Hence,
any bank can be bad with positive probability. Given σj (0) = 0, it follows that Pr(A2 = ∅, Ω0 ) >
0. As for (ii), we will show below that positive informational spillovers directly implies (ii). When
informational spillovers are absent, the condition is ensured by our requirement that Pr(S2 = 1|Ω0 ) > 0.
In a slight abuse of notation, we will refer to distributions conditional on the event {S2 = 1, Ω0 }
as being conditional on the event {A2 = 1, Ω0 }. The two events are obviously related: {S2 = 1}
corresponds to knowing that bank 2 is good, while {A2 = 1} corresponds to observing bank 2 announce
it is good. Moreover, A2 is independent of {Sj }j6=2 , so observing it equal to 1 teaches us nothing else
about the underlying state. Formally, {A2 = 1} ⇒ {S2 = 1}. However, if σ2 (1) = 0, it will not be
possible to observe A2 = 1, so conditioning on {A2 = 1} does not yield a well-defined probability
even though we can still condition on {S2 = 1}. Our results would then hold conditional on {S2 = 1}.
Intuitively, our result shows what would happen if agents were given external information that bank 2 is
good. However, since our interest in (25) is motivated by questions about how bank 2’s disclosure might
impact bank 1, it is more natural to frame our results as if bank 2 was the source of the information.
The LHS of (25), Pr (e1 ≥ 0|A2 = 1, Ω0 ), can be written as
Pr (e1 ≥ 0|S1 = 1, A2 = 1, Ω0 ) Pr (S1 = 1|A2 = 1, Ω0 ) +
Pr (e1 ≥ 0|S1 = 0, A2 = 1, Ω0 ) Pr (S1 = 0|A2 = 1, Ω0 )
Assumption A3 implies Pr (e1 ≥ 0 |S1 = 0, Ω0 ) = 0, and so we have
Pr (e1 ≥ 0 |A2 = 1, Ω0 ) = Pr (e1 ≥ 0|S1 = 1, A2 = 1, Ω0 ) Pr (S1 = 1|A2 = 1, Ω0 )
By the same logic,
Pr (e1 ≥ 0 |A2 = ∅, Ω0 ) = Pr (e1 ≥ 0|S1 = 1, A2 = ∅, Ω0 ) Pr (S1 = 1|A2 = ∅, Ω0 )
Consider first the case with no informational spillovers. From part (ii) of Lemma 4, we know the Sj
are independent, and so σi (Si ) is independent of S−j . It follows that
Pr (S1 = 1|A2 = 1, Ω0 ) = Pr (S1 = 1|A2 = ∅, Ω0 ) = Pr(S1 = 1)
Since we are requiring that Pr(S2 = 1|Ω0 ) > 0, it follows that Pr(S2 = 1) > 0. Symmetry then implies
Pr(S1 = 1) > 0. Substituting our expressions into (25) and cancelling Pr(S1 = 1) allows us to rewrite
(25) as
Pr (e1 ≥ 0|S1 = 1, A2 = 1, Ω0 ) ≥ Pr (e1 ≥ 0|S1 = 1, A2 = ∅, Ω0 )
(26)
Let K denote the banks j ≥ 3 that don’t disclose their type, i.e. K ≡ {k ≥ 3 : Ak = ∅}. We can write
Pr (e1 ≥ 0|S1 = 1, A2 = 1, Ω0 ) as a sum over all possible realizations (s3 , . . . , sn ) ∈ {0, 1}n−2 :
Y
X
Pr (Sk = sk |Ω0 )
(27)
1{e1 (1,1,s3 ,...,sn)≥0}
k∈K

(s3 ,...,sn)

where 1{e1 (s)≥0} is an indicator equal to 1 if equity is positive when the state S = s and 0 otherwise.

40

Similarly, we can write Pr (e1 ≥ 0|S1 = 1, A2 = ∅, Ω0 ) as
Y
X
1{e1 (1,1,s3 ,...,sn)≥0} · Pr (S2 = 1)
Pr (Sk = sk |Ω0 ) +
k∈K

(s3 ,...,sn)

X

1{e1 (1,0,s3 ,...,sn)≥0} · Pr (S2 = 0)

Y

Pr (Sk = sk |Ω0 )

(28)

k∈K

(s3 ,...,sn)

Since assumption A4 implies e1 (1, 1, s3 , ..., sn ) ≥ e1 (1, 0, s3 , ..., sn ), it follows that for any vector
(s3 , . . . , sn ), the expression 1{e(1,1,s3 ,...,sn)≥0} is greater than or equal to
Pr (S2 = 1) 1{e(1,1,s3 ,...,sn)≥0} + Pr (S2 = 0) 1{e(1,0,s3 ,...,sn)≥0}
Q
Pr (Sk = sk |Ω0 ) in (27) exceeds the expression multiplying this
Hence, the expression multiplying
k∈K

same term in (28). From this, it follows that (26) holds, which in turn implies condition (25).

We now move to the case of positive informational spillovers. We first need to verify that Pr(S2 =
1, Ω0 ) > 0, i.e. that it is even possible for bank 2 to be good. Here, observe that the event Ω0 may
reveal the types of some banks with certainty (which may include a bank being bad if σj (1) = 1 and
Aj = ∅) and will assign a distribution over the types of remaining banks. But from Lemma 4 part
(i), we know that Pr (S1 = · · · = Sk = 1|Sk+1 = sk+1 , ..., Sn = sn ) > 0 for any (sk+1 , ..., sn ). Hence,
Pr (S1 = · · · = Sk = 1|Ω0 ) > 0, which requires that Pr (S2 = 1|Ω0 ) > 0, and which in turn implies
Pr(S2 = 1, Ω0 ) > 0.
To establish the claim, recall that we can rewrite (25) as
Pr (e1 ≥ 0|S1 = 1, A2 = 1, Ω0 ) Pr (S1 = 1|A2 = 1, Ω0 ) ≥
Pr (e1 ≥ 0|S1 = 1, A2 = ∅, Ω0 ) Pr (S1 = 1|A2 = ∅, Ω0 )

(29)

By the same argument as above, we can appeal to part (i) of Lemma 4 to argue that Pr(S1 = 1|A2 =
1, Ω0 ) > 0 and Pr(S1 = 1|A2 = ∅, Ω0 ) > 0. Hence, (25) follows if we can show that
Pr (e1 ≥ 0|S1 = 1, A2 = 1, Ω0 ) ≥ Pr (e1 ≥ 0|S1 = 1, A2 = ∅, Ω0 )

(30)

Once again, we can write Pr (e1 ≥ 0|S1 = 1, A2 = 1, Ω0 ) as a sum over all possible realizations (s3 , . . . , sn ) ∈
{0, 1}n−2 :
X
1{e(1,1,s,...,sn)≥0} Pr (S3 = s3 , . . . , Sn = sn |S1 = 1, A2 = 1, Ω0 )
(s3 ,...,sn )

Similarly, we can write Pr (e1 ≥ 0|S1 = 1, A2 = ∅, Ω0 ) as
X
1{e1 (1,1,s3 ,...,sn)≥0} Pr (S2 = 1, . . . , Sn = sn |S1 = 1, A2 = ∅, Ω0 ) +
(s3 ,...,sn )

X

1{e1 (1,0,s3 ,...,sn)≥0} Pr (S2 = 0, . . . , Sn = sn |S1 = 1, A2 = ∅, Ω0 )

(s3 ,...,sn )

To show that the first expression above is larger, consider state S = (1, 0, ..., 0). If e1 (S) ≥ 0, then
per assumption A4, we can conclude that e1 (S) ≥ 0 for all S for which Pr (S|S1 = 1) > 0. In this case,
both expressions above are equal to 1 and condition (30) holds trivially.
Finally, if e1 (S) < 0, then we claim that for each state S where e1 (S) ≥ 0, it must be the case that
Pr (S|S1 = 1, A2 = 1, Ω0 ) ≥ Pr (S|S1 = 1, A2 = ∅, Ω0 )
41

To see this, observe that e1 (S) ≥ 0 only if S ≥ S per Assumption A4. Positive informational spillovers
then implies that
Pr (S|S1 = 1, S2 = 1, Ω0 ) ≥ Pr (S|S1 = 1, S2 = 0, Ω0 )
(31)
as long as Pr (S1 = 1, S2 = 1, Ω0 ) > 0, which follows from Lemma 4 part (i). But since Pr (S|S1 = 1, A2 = ∅, ·)
is a weighted average of Pr (S|S1 = 1, S2 = 1, ·) and Pr (S|S1 = 1, S2 = 0, ·), it follows that
Pr (S|S1 = 1, S2 = 1, ·) ≥ Pr (S|S1 = 1, A2 = ∅, ·)
The claim thus follows.
Proof of Proposition 1: Recall that I1 (A1 , . . . , An ) is weakly increasing in Pr (e1 ≥ 0 |A, {σj } ).
But from Lemma 5, we know that
Pr (e1 ≥ 0 |A2 = 1, Ω0 ) ≥ Pr (e1 ≥ 0 |A2 = ∅, Ω0 )
o
for any Ω0 = {σj (Sj )}nj=1 , {Aj }j6=2 . Since we can substitute any vector of announcements, that
would include vectors where A1 = ∅ and A1 = 1 (or, alternatively, S1 = 1 if bank 1 never discloses it
is good). From this, we can deduce that
n

Pr (e1 ≥ 0 |A1 = ∅, A2 = 1, A, {σj } ) > Pr (e1 ≥ 0 |A1 = ∅, A2 = ∅, A, {σj } )
which implies I1 (∅, 1) ≥ I1 (∅, ∅), and
Pr (e1 ≥ 0 |A1 = 1, A2 = 1, A, {σj } ) > Pr (e1 ≥ 0 |A1 = ∅, A2 = ∅, A, {σj } )
which implies I1 (1, 1) ≥ I1 (1, ∅), as claimed.
Proof of Proposition 2: Suppose I1∗ (∅; ∅) = I1∗ (∅; 1) = 0. If bank i disclosed it was good, its
gain from disclosure would correspond to the expected profits is could retain using the funds it raises
minus the cost of disclosure, i.e.
[Pr (e1 ≥ 0|A1 = 1, A2 , ·) R − r] I1 (A1 = 1, A2 , ·) − c

(32)

By Lemma 5, we know that
Pr (e1 ≥ 0|A2 = 1, A2 = 1, ·) ≥ Pr (e1 ≥ 0|A2 = ∅, A2 = ∅, ·)
In addition, Proposition 1 tells us that
I1∗ (1; 1) ≥ I1∗ (1; ∅)
From these two inequalities, we can deduce that the gain (32) is higher conditional on A2 = 1 than on
A2 = ∅.
Proof of Proposition 3: Suppose I1 (∅; ∅) = I1 (∅; 1) = 1. The gain in this case is the reduction
in interest charges bank 1 would pay if it had equity net of the cost of disclosure c, i.e.


r
r
Pr (e1 ≥ 0|A1 = 1, Ω0 )
−
−c
Pr (e1 ≥ 0|A1 = ∅, Ω0 ) Pr (e1 ≥ 0|A1 = 1, Ω0 )
This reduces to




Pr (e1 ≥ 0|A1 = 1, Ω0 )
−1 r−c
Pr (e1 ≥ 0|A1 = ∅, Ω0 )
42

(33)

which is equal to



Pr (e1 ≥ 0|S1 = 1, Ω0 )
−1 r−c
Pr (e1 ≥ 0|A1 = ∅, Ω0 )

(34)

However, since A3 implies Pr (e1 ≥ 0|S1 = 0, Ω0 ) = 0, it follows that
Pr (e1 ≥ 0|A1 = ∅, Ω0 ) = Pr (e1 ≥ 0|A1 = ∅, Ω0 ) Pr (S1 = 1|Ω0 )
Hence,
Pr (e1 ≥ 0|S1 = 1, Ω0 )
Pr (e1 ≥ 0|A1 = ∅, Ω0 )

=

1
Pr (S1 = 1|Ω0 )

If informational spillovers are either positive or absent, then for any set Ω0 , we have Pr (S1 = 1|S2 = 1, Ω0 ) ≥
Pr (S1 = 1|S2 = 0, Ω0 ). From this, it follows that if Pr (S1 = 1|A2 = 1, Ω0 ) is well-defined, we can deduce that
Pr (S1 = 1|A2 = 1, Ω0 ) ≥ Pr (S1 = 1|A2 = ∅, Ω0 )
It follows that the gain from disclosure to bank 1 is lower when A2 = 1 than when A2 = ∅, as claimed.
Change in gain when I1 (∅; ∅) = 0 and I1 (∅; 1) = 1: From the proofs of Propositions 2 and 3,
we can conclude that the gain from disclosure when A2 = ∅ is equal to
[Pr (e1 ≥ 0|A1 = 1, A2 = ∅, Ω0 ) R − r] I1 (1, ∅) − c
and the gain from disclosure when A2 = 1 is equal to


Pr (e1 ≥ 0|A1 = 1, A2 = 1, Ω0 )
−1 r−c
Pr (e1 ≥ 0|A1 = ∅, A2 = 1, Ω0 )
We can use these expressions to compute the change in the gain from disclosure between A2 = ∅ and
A2 = 1. If if I(1; ∅) = 0, the change in gain is equal to


Pr (e1 ≥ 0|A1 = 1, A2 = 1, Ω0 )
−1 r
(35)
Pr (e1 ≥ 0|A1 = ∅, A2 = 1, Ω0 )
and if I(1; ∅) = 1 the change in gain is equal to
Pr (e1 ≥ 0|A1 = 1, A2 = 1, Ω0 )
r − Pr (e1 ≥ 0|A1 = 1, A2 = ∅, Ω0 ) R
Pr (e1 ≥ 0|A1 = ∅, A2 = 1, Ω0 )

(36)

if I(1; ∅) = 1.
In the case of (35), we know from Lemma 5 that the expression is positive, i.e. in this case disclosure
is a strategic complement.
In the case of (36), Recall that for I1 (1; ∅) = 1, it must be the case that
Pr (e1 ≥ 0|A1 = 1, A2 = ∅, Ω0 ) ≥

r
R

Using this inequality, we can deduce that (36) is bounded below by
Pr (e1 ≥ 0|A1 = 1, A2 = ∅, Ω0 )
Pr (e1 ≥ 0|A1 = 1, A2 = 1, Ω0 )
r−
r
Pr (e1 ≥ 0|A1 = ∅, A2 = 1, Ω0 )
Pr (e1 ≥ 0|A1 = ∅, A2 = ∅, Ω0 )
43

This is the change in gain if I1 (∅; ∅) = I1 (∅; 1) = 1. Next, since we are given that I1 (∅, 1) = 1, it
follows that
r
Pr (e1 ≥ 0|A1 = ∅, A2 = 1, Ω0 ) ≥
R
From this, we can conclude that (36) is bounded above by
Pr (e1 ≥ 0|A1 = 1, A2 = 1, ·) R − Pr (e1 ≥ 0|A1 = 1, A2 = ∅, ·) R
which is the change in gain if I(∅; ∅) = I(∅; 1) = 0. Hence, in this case the change in gain is bounded
by the two cases, and can in principle be either positive or negative.
Proof of Proposition 4:
Set i = 1 and j = 2. Suppose I1 (∅; ∅) = I1 (∅; 1) = 1. As in
Proposition 3, the gain from disclosure is given by


1
−1 r−c
Pr (S1 = 1|Ω0 )
Since informational spillovers are negative, we know that
Pr (S1 = 1|A2 = 1, Ω0 ) ≥ Pr (S1 = 1|A2 = ∅, Ω0 )
Hence, the expected gain from disclosure to bank 1 is lower when A2 = 1 than when A2 = ∅.
Proof of Proposition 5: Define Ωig = {ω|ei (ω) ≥ 0}, so Ωig represents the set of states in which
bank i is capable of paying back investors.
Consider a hypothetical decision maker who can either choose to invest in bank i or not. If she
/ Ωig , while if she does not invest she receives r regardless
invests, she receives R if ω ∈ Ωig and 0 if ω ∈
of ω.
The hypothetical decision maker observes a vector of signals A. We first consider the case where
Ai = 1, i.e. where the hypothetical decision maker knows bank i is good. For j 6= i, the signal Aj
is equal to 1 with probability σj if Sj (ω) = 1 and is equal to ∅ otherwise, i.e. with probability 1 if
Sj (ω) = 0 and with probability 1 − σj if Sj (ω) = 1. Let IiD (A) denote the decision maker’s investment
decision after observing the signal A, i.e. IiD (A) is equal to 1 if the decision maker invests.
Since a signal with a value σj′ represents a garbled version of a signal whenever σj > σj′ , by the
Blackwell’s (1953) information criterium, we know the hypothetical decision maker is weakly better off
when σj is higher. Formally, if we define 1{ω∈Ωig } , then the expected payoff to the hypothetical decision
maker is
E[IiD (A)R 1{ω∈Ωig } + (1 − IiD (A))r]
is weakly increasing in σj . Note that the hypothetical decision maker will invest after observing A if
and only if
E[1{ω∈Ωig } |A]R = Pr(ω ∈ Ωi |A)R > r
However, this is the same condition that determines whether in the decentralized market outsiders will
be willing to trade. Hence, the payoff to the hypothetical decision maker is identically equal to the
expected gains from trade Gi (σ).
Proof of Proposition 6: In text
Proof of Theorem 1: The cases where pg < Rr and pg > Pr(S1i =1) Rr are described in the text. Note
that part (ii) follows directly from the analysis fo the latter case supplied in the text. We therefore
44



only need to consider the intermediate case where pg ∈ Rr , Pr(S1i =1) Rr . From Proposition 6, we know
that in this case, a non-disclosure equilibrium involves no trade. The conditions for a non-disclosure
equilibrium to exist and for mandatory disclosure to improve upon no trade can be summarized as
pg Pr(Si = 1)(R − r) ≤ c ≤ pg R − r

(37)

For this inequality to be valid, we need
pg Pr(Si = 1)(R − r) < pg R − r
which after rearranging implies
pg ≤
Define
p∗g

≡ min



r
Pr(Si = 0)R + Pr(Si = 1)r

1
r
r
,
Pr(Si = 1) R Pr(Si = 0)R + Pr(Si = 1)r

(38)


(39)

Note that both expressions on the RHS above are greater than Rr , so p∗g > Rr as claimed. If pg < p∗g ,
then either pg ≤ Rr , in which case a non-disclosure equilibrium exists and can be improved upon for
any c ≥ 0, or else (37) can be satisfied for a nonempty interval of values for c.
Finally, we need to show that p∗g < 1. Since R > r, we know the second expression is less than 1,
which implies the minimum of it and another expression must also be less than 1. This establishes the
claim.
Proof of Proposition 7: We know from Kreps and Wilson (1982) that the dynamic incomplete
information game in which banks choose offers must have a sequential equilibrium. Since Proposition
6 rules out the possibility of a non-disclosure equilibrium, it follows that there exists some i such that
σi > 0.
To show that this equilibrium can be improved upon, note that if we force all banks to set σj = 0,
we can ensure all banks raise funds. Hence, we maximize total resources. In addition, we reduce the
utility cost associated with disclosure, since σj = 0 implies αj = 0. Hence, forcing all agents to hide
their type allows us to make all agents at least as well off and some strictly better off than under the
original equilibrium.
Proof of Theorem 2: To prove part (i), define
e∗ = min e∗i (A)
A

(40)

If ei < e∗ , bank i will be unable to repay his debt regardless of A. As long as the probability of repayment
is less than Rr , there is no scope for trade between outsiders and banks. Thus, non-disclosure will be
an equilibrium for any c ≥ 0, and in this equilibrium no bank will attract funds. The condition for
mandatory disclosure to improve upon no trade is given by
E[Pr(ei ≥ e∗i (S))](R − r) ≥ c

(41)

where E[Pr(ei ≥ e∗i (S))] denotes the expected probability that bank i will have enough equity that
outsiders will trust it to not divert funds. Since by assumption we have Pr(ei > e∗ |Si = 1) > 0, it
follows that Pr(ei > e∗ ) > 0, i.e. there exists a vector of announcements A that can occur with positive
probability such that Pr(ei > e∗i (A)) > 0. But this in turn implies there must exist a state of the world

45

S such that Pr(ei > e∗i (S)) > 0. Hence, E[Pr(ei ≥ e∗i (S))] > 0, and so there exists a nonempty interval
for c such that mandatory disclosure is preferable to no trade. This establishes the claim.
We now turn to part (ii). We consider three different cases, depending on whether none, all, or only
some banks get funded in equilibrium.
Suppose first that in the non-disclosure equilibrium, outsiders invest in none of the banks. If
Pr(ei = e|Si = 1) → 1, then by disclosing its type bank i will be able to attract funds even if no other
bank discloses its type. Hence, a non-disclosure equilibrium to exist with no investment, it must be the
case that the cost of disclosure c exceeds the expected value from disclosing and attracting funds. The
latter is equal to
ρ1 R + (1 − ρ1 )v − r ≤ c
(42)
where ρ1 = Pr(e1 > e∗1 (1, ∅, . . . , ∅)|S1 = 1) is the probability that a good bank will not default given
the interest rate it is charged when it is the only bank that reveals its type (by symmetry, this will be
the same for all banks). In the limit as Pr(ei = e|Si = 1) → 1, it must also be the case that ρ1 → 1.
Next, the condition for mandatory disclosure to improve upon no trade is given by
ρ2 Pr(Si = 1)(R − r) ≥ c

(43)

where ρ2 = E[Pr(e1 > e∗1 (S)|S1 = 1)] is the expected probability that a good bank can be trusted
to undertake the project when all information is revealed. In the limit as Pr(ei = e|Si = 1) → 1, it
must also be the case that ρ2 → 1. In the limit when ρ1 = ρ2 = 1 conditions (42) and (43) are in
contradiction, since Pr(Si = 1) < 1 given our assumption that q0 < 1. Hence, mandatory disclosure
cannot improve upon a non-disclosure equilibrium in the limit, and by continuity it cannot improve
upon a non-disclosure equilibrium when Pr(ei < e|Si = 1) is close to but strictly less than 1.
Next, suppose that in the non-disclosure equilibrium, outsiders invest in all of the banks. In this
case, a bank will get funded whether it discloses or not, and the only benefit of disclosing is to reduce
the interest charges. In equilibrium, the cost of disclosure c must exceed the reduction in interest rates,
i.e.
c≥

Pr(Si = 0)
r
Pr(Si = 1)

(44)

The condition for mandatory disclosure to improve welfare is given by
(1 − ρ2 Pr(Si = 1))(r − v) ≤ c

(45)

where as before ρ2 = E[Pr(e1 > e∗1 (S)|S1 = 1)] is the expected probability that a good bank can be
trusted to undertake the project when all information is revealed. In the limit as Pr(ei = e|Si = 1) → 1,
we still have that ρ2 → 1, and so (45) reduces to Pr(Si = 0)(r − v) > c. Since A6 implies v > R − r > 0
and since Pr(Si = 1) > 0, in the limit (44) and (45) are contradictory. hence, once again mandatory
disclosure cannot improve upon a non-disclosure equilibrium in the limit, nor by continuity when
Pr(ei < e|Si = 1) is close to but strictly less than 1.
Finally, suppose that in the non-disclosure equilibrium some banks receive funding and some banks
don’t, i.e. outside investors are exactly indifferent. Consider the deterministic case where n0 banks
receive no funding and n1 banks do receive funding, where n0 + n1 = n, and banks know whether they
will receive funding or not. The condition for mandatory disclose to improve welfare is now
n0 ρ2 Pr(Si = 1)(R − r) + n1 (1 − ρ2 Pr(Si = 1))(r − v) ≤ nc

(46)

The conditions for the two types of banks to be willing to not disclose are the same as before. Hence,
46

in the limit as Pr(ei = e|Si = 1) → 1, each component in the sum will have to exceed c , and so the
condition cannot be satisfied. This same sort of averaging argument holds in the case where a bank
will be funded with some probability, since then the condition for a non-disclosure equilibrium to exist
is a mixture of (42) and (44).
Proof of Proposition 8: We first define the shortfall Dij in state S as the difference between
what bank i owes bank j and what it actually pays bank j:
Dij = Λij − xij for all i, j ∈ {0, ..., n − 1}

(47)

Note that the RHS of (21) can be interpreted as an operator that maps payments xij into payments.
We can express this operator as an alternative operator F : D → D, where D ⊂ Rn+ is the space of
possible shortfalls given by D = {Dij ∈ [0 , Λij ] , i, j ∈ {0, ..., n − 1}} . This operator is defined by


 

 X
 
Λij
max min Λi ,
(F )ij (D) =
Dmi − e + (1 − Si )φ , 0
(48)


 
Λi
m6=i

The set of fixed points of the shortfall operator corresponds to the set of fixed points of the operator
defined over payments. Either of these can be used to derive equity, and hence the distribution of
equity we wish to characterize.
Our proof now proceeds as follows. First, we show that for each S the shortfall D(S) are weakly
increasing in φ and in λ. Next we argue that this implies that the distribution of equity is stochastically
decreasing with φ and in λ for each S. Then the result follows since the distribution of S does not
depend on (φ, λ).
We use the notation Fφ,λ to emphasize the dependence of the operator on the parameters (φ, λ).
It is easy to show that F is monotone, i.e. Fφ,λ (D ′ ) ≥ Fφ,λ (D) if D ′ ≥ D, where the comparison is
component by component. Thus, by Tarski’s fixed point theorem, there exists a smallest fixed point,
which is obtained as D ∗ (φ, λ) = limn→∞ F n (0). Additionally, F is monotone on (φ, λ), i.e. for each
D ∈ D, Fφ′ ,λ′ (D) ≥ Fφ,λ (D), whenever (φ′ , λ′ ) ≥ (φ, λ). Then it follows that the smallest fixed point
D ∗ (φ, λ) is increasing in (φ, λ).
For any vector of shortfalls D, parameter (φ, λ) and state of the network S the implied equity of
bank i is:


n−1
n−1


X
X
xmi (S)
Λij +
ei (S) = max
0, π − φSi −


m=0
j=0
!)
(
n−1
n−1
X
X
Λmi
Dmi (S) +
= max
0, π − φSi − Λi −
m=0

m=0

= max

(

0, π − φSi −

n−1
X

m=0

)

Dmi (S)

P
where the last equality follows from our assumption that Λi = m Λmi .
Consider the equity corresponding to D = D ∗ (φ, λ). Equity at bank i is given by
)
(
n−1
X
∗
Dmi (φ, λ; S)
ei (φ, λ; S) = max
0, π − φSi −

(49)

m=0

∗ (φ, λ; S) is the amount bank m falls short on bank i for the smallest fixed point for the state
where Dmi

47

S and parameters (φ, λ). Using the monotonicity of D ∗ (φ, λ) it is immediate that ei (φ, λ; S) is weakly
decreasing in (φ, λ) for each S. While we have used the smallest fixed point in the definition (49), by
Theorem 1 in Eisenberg and Noe (2001) every fixed point of Fφ,λ has the same implied equity values
for each bank. Hence, the comparative static of equity must be the same for any fixed point.
Finally, the conditional probability of interest is given by
P
{s∈{0,1}n : si =1} 1{ei (φ,λ;s)≤x} Pr(S = s)
P
(50)
Pr (ei ≤ x | Si = 1) =
{s∈{0,1}n :si =0} Pr(S = s)
Since Pr(S = s) is just constant for each s, it follows that Pr(ei ≤ x|Si = 0) is decreasing in (φ, λ).

48

