NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GOVERNANCE AND THE EFFECTIVENESS OF PUBLIC HEALTH SUBSIDIES
Rebecca Dizon-Ross
Pascaline Dupas
Jonathan Robinson
Working Paper 21324
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21324

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2015

This study was funded by the NICHD (grant P01HD061315-01), the Hellman Fellows Fund, UCLA
and Stanford University. Dupas gratefully acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation
(grant 1254167) and the Sloan Foundation. The study protocols received approval from the Ghana
Ethical Research Committee, the Ugandan National Council for Science and Technology, the Ugandan
Joint Clinical Research Centre, Kenya's Ministry of Science and Technology (research permit office),
the IRBs of MIT, UCLA, UCSC, Stanford, and IPA, and received foreign clearance from the NIH
for the work in Ghana. The Ghana experiment was registered on the AEA RCT Registry (AEARCTR-0000331)
and a pre-analysis plan for it was submitted to the JPAL Hypothesis Registry in December 2011. We
thank Kwame Abrokwa, Jonathan Addie, Liz Schultz, Sarah Green, Catlan Reardon and Ishita Ahmed
for outstanding field research assistance. We are grateful to Francisca Antman, Jessica Cohen, and
Ben Olken for detailed comments and suggestions, as well as to numerous seminar and conference
participants for insightful discussions. We have no financial interest in the issues studies in this paper.
All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Rebecca Dizon-Ross, Pascaline Dupas, and Jonathan Robinson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Governance and the Effectiveness of Public Health Subsidies
Rebecca Dizon-Ross, Pascaline Dupas, and Jonathan Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 21324
July 2015
JEL No. D73,H11,I15,I38
ABSTRACT
Heavily subsidizing essential health products through existing health infrastructure has the potential
to substantially decrease child mortality in sub-Saharan Africa. There is, however, widespread concern
that poor governance and in particular limited accountability among health workers seriously undermines
the effectiveness of such programs. We performed innovative audits on bed net distribution programs
in three countries (Ghana, Kenya and Uganda) to investigate local agency problems and their determinants
in the allocation of targeted subsidies. Overall, agency concerns appear modest. Around 80% of the
eligible receive the subsidy as intended and leakage to the ineligible appears limited, even when the
ineligible have a high willingness to pay. The estimated level of mistargeting only modestly affects
the cost-effectiveness of free distribution.

Rebecca Dizon-Ross
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
rdr@chicagobooth.edu

Jonathan Robinson
Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Cruz
457 Engineering 2
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
jmrtwo@ucsc.edu

Pascaline Dupas
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
pdupas@stanford.edu

A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at:
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/331

1

Introduction

It has been estimated that up to 63 percent of child mortality could be averted through
targeted coverage of inexpensive health products such as iron fortification, point-of-use water
treatment, and insecticide-treated bed nets (Bryce, et al., 2005). While the health returns
to these products are very large both in utero and in childhood, growing evidence suggests
that demand for such products is limited at even low prices among poor, credit-constrained
parents (Cohen and Dupas, 2010; Dupas, 2009, 2014; Meredith et al., 2013; Tarozzi et al.,
2014). Thus, free or highly-subsidized distribution is often advocated as a necessary strategy
for rapidly increasing coverage.
To implement such subsidies, government agencies and other major players must be able
to identify eligible beneficiaries and effectively deliver products to them. The potentially
most cost-effective way to do this is through the existing health infrastructure. This is
particularly true for products for which medical diagnosis is necessary to identify who is
eligible (for example, ARVs or anti-malarials), but substantial cost-savings have also been
documented for other products, like bed nets, where diagnosis is not required (De Allegri et
al., 2010).1
However, a potentially major concern with implementing subsidies through the existing
service delivery infrastructure is that many public service providers are paid a fixed wage
and are hard to fire, and thus likely have little direct incentive to exert the effort needed
to effectively deliver services or products (World Bank, 2004). Indeed, a number of studies
show that service provision in developing countries can be quite poor. For example, a large
proportion of health workers are often simply absent from work (Chaudhury et al., 2006;
Chaudhury and Hammer, 2004; Banerjee, Deaton and Duflo, 2004; Muralidharan et al.
2011). Doctors often spend just a few minutes with patients, providing lower quality care
than they know how to provide, and simultaneously over- and under-treating patients (see
Das, Hammer and Leonard 2008 and Das and Hammer 2013 for reviews). Such low effort
provision may have important health implications. For example, Banerjee et al. (2010) show
that simply increasing the reliability of immunization services in rural Udaipur, India, sufficed
to double immunization rates. In Rwanda, performance incentives for health providers led
to large increases in health care utilization rates and, in turn, child health (Gertler and
Vermeersch, 2012). Björkman and Svensson (2009) show that a community monitoring
program in Uganda reduced health care worker absenteeism, improved child weight, and
reduced child mortality.
1

Even existing efforts to use the private sector for distribution often take a hybrid public-private approach,
for example with the public sector distributing vouchers for redemption at private stores (Sexton, 2011).

2

Petty corruption is another important concern. In a 2011 report, Transparency International writes: “Across Sub-Saharan Africa, corruption is believed to be one of the major
barriers to achieving progress on the [Millennium Development Goals] MDGs. Petty corruption reduces service quality and access, serving as a tax on the poorest. For example, findings
from a seven-country study in Africa – Ghana, Madagascar, Morocco, Niger, Senegal, Sierra
Leone and Uganda – have shown that 44 per cent of the parents surveyed had paid illegal fees
for schools that were legally free for their children” (Azeem et al., 2011).
While there is anecdotal evidence that these types of agency issues also affect subsidized
distribution schemes, causing many governments and international donors to be reluctant to
even try to set them up, it is unclear what the magnitudes of these problems truly are for
targeted health subsidies. For example, many subsidy programs target populations widely
recognized as vulnerable (e.g. pregnant women or young children), and health workers may
feel sufficiently altruistic towards such individuals to be honest and exert effort. Evidence
on this issue is lacking, in part because measuring levels of effort, leakage and extortion is
challenging (Olken and Pande, 2012).
The specific contributions of this paper are to (1) estimate the extent to which agency
problems undermine the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of targeted subsidies for preventative health products in sub-Saharan Africa; and (2) understand which governance features
matter for decreasing agency problems and hence increasing the effectiveness of such subsidies. We do so by auditing a program recommended by the WHO: providing free antimalarial
bed nets to those most vulnerable to malaria – pregnant women and their unborn children –
through antenatal care clinics. Our audit study took place in three countries, Ghana, Kenya,
and Uganda, which vary in perceived corruption levels – out of 178 countries in the 2012
Transparency International Corruptions Index, where the least corrupt country is Denmark
at rank 1 and Somalia, Afghanistan and North Korea tie for last place, Ghana was ranked
64th, Uganda 130th, and Kenya 139th. At the time of data collection, both the Kenya
and Uganda governments were implementing free bed net distribution schemes for pregnant
women enrolling for prenatal care. In Ghana, there was no such government program, but
we set one up, and so could randomize several features to test specific hypotheses.
There are three main ways that health workers may undermine the type of subsidy
programs we consider. First, they may demand under-the-counter payments from eligible
clients – extortion. Second, they may provide the product to ineligible people – leakage.
Leakage may increase the total cost of a subsidy program (if subsidies are given out to
both eligible and ineligible individuals). Possibly more importantly, if the total number of
subsidies is limited by a budget constraint, leakage may crowd out eligible recipients, who
presumably have higher health returns from the subsidy. Third, health workers may provide
3

poor effort generally, for example by failing to attend work or prevent stockouts – shirking.
Our first contribution is to document how prevalent these three behaviors are and to
estimate the extent to which they limit the pass-through of subsidies to their intended
beneficiaries. A key challenge in quantifying extortion, leakage and shirking is measurement
– agents who engage in petty corruption typically do not readily report doing so. To overcome
this challenge, we devised a suite of measures that include audits on health center registers,
back-check surveys with prenatal clients, and decoy visits to communities and health centers.
Together, these measures enable us to get a comprehensive picture of the performance of
health workers in our three study sites.
In sharp relief to much of the previous literature on service delivery in developing countries, we find relatively high performance levels in all three countries. Coverage is fairly high:
close to 80% of eligible subsidy recipients received the subsidy at the clinic (and 76% of them
at their first prenatal visit, as they should have). Extortion is rare: only 1.4% of eligible
subsidy recipients were asked to pay bribes. Leakage is modest: comparing administrative
records of bed net deliveries (available only for Ghana) with our coverage estimates, we estimate an upper bound on the leakage rate at clinics of 15% in Ghana. Our “mystery clients”
(ineligible men making decoy visits) were able to obtain a subsidized net from the health facility in only 4.7% of cases (and in most of these cases, they received the net “benevolently,”
for free). Consistent with this, in informal surveys, less than 10% of community members
thought an ineligible person could obtain a bed net at the local prenatal center. Finally,
shirking appears to be present but less prominent than in the previous literature: clinics were
almost never closed and absence rates were somewhat lower than in other research. While
we only have a few measures of the quality of care provided outside of net distribution, those
also suggest relatively better performance than in other settings: nurses spent an average
of 18 minutes with a patient during their visit (in contrast to, for example, the 3 minutes
doctors spent with patients in Das et al. 2013 or Das and Hammer 2007), and nearly all
women who came in for prenatal care were palpated.
We do see some differences across countries, however. Coverage among the eligible is
lowest in Uganda, due in part to high stockout rates towards the end of the sample period
(the Uganda government appeared to be phasing out the program). Bribe requests from
mystery clients is highest in Ghana, at 5% (interestingly, the least corrupt of the three
countries according to the Transparency International index). On the other hand, benevolent
leakage (free bed nets to the ineligible), as measured by our decoy visits, is larger in Kenya
and Uganda than in Ghana, with, respectively, 9%, 8% and 2% of decoy attempts being
successful. We also look at coverage and extortion for antimalarial drugs, which are supposed
to be free for children under five in Kenya and Uganda. There we find very high coverage
4

rates, but higher rates of extortion: an upper bound estimate of the percent of eligibles who
were asked to make side payments is much higher than for nets, and significantly higher in
Uganda than in Kenya, though it suggests that extortion is still far from systematic, with
upper bounds at 16% in Kenya and 26% in Uganda.
While our study does not directly measure leakage higher in the distribution chain (e.g
before subsidized products reach health facilities), we perform back of the envelope calculations for the public distribution programs in Kenya and Uganda by comparing observed
population coverage rates in our study to publicly available data on the total number of
nets distributed by these programs, and find limited leakage. Overall, the levels of leakage and coverage we estimate imply that agency problems only marginally undermine the
cost-effectiveness of free distribution schemes such as the one we study.
Our second contribution is to examine whether interventions which affect the costs of
corruption affect behavior. Since the research team was behind the implementation of the
program in Ghana, we were able to randomly vary four aspects of the distribution scheme:
(1) whether health workers received bonus pay for implementing the program, (2) whether
health centers were threatened with audits, (3) the size of the initial stock of bed nets received
by clinics, and (4) whether health workers were asked to distribute nets directly or, instead,
distribute vouchers redeemable for free nets at local shops. The purpose of the voucher
scheme was to reduce the effort cost of implementing the program for health workers, as well
as change their ability to charge a markup, under the assumption that clients would be less
likely to pay for a voucher than for a physical net. Unsurprisingly given the high overall levels
of performance observed in their absence, we find that neither the bonus compensation, nor
the threat of audits, nor the stock size had any meaningful impact on performance. However,
the voucher scheme worsened performance on several measures. Eligible women were less
likely to receive a net while mystery clients were more likely to receive one. This could be
due to, first, the fact that health workers’ intrinsic job motivation is undermined by what
they perceive as a lack of “trust” (i.e., the fact that they are not given responsibility for the
subsidized bed nets themselves); and, second, lower community awareness of the (less visible)
voucher scheme. The result that voucher schemes decrease health workers’ performance is
similar to Rasul and Rogger (2015), who find that bureaucrats in Nigeria are less likely to
complete projects if they are given less autonomy.
This study finds much less severe agency problems than is commonly believed among
practitioners and international agencies. This raises the obvious question of why we find
such results. One possible reason is that distributing bed nets to prenatal clients requires
little effort other than identifying a woman and handing her a net. However, this is an
unlikely explanation given the result that health workers performed well on other measures
5

unrelated to the bed net distribution program.
Rich additional survey data we collected suggests three more likely explanations: compared to other professions (such as teachers), the health workers we study are positively
selected with respect to pro-social motivation, have higher levels of intrinsic job motivation,
and feel more accountable (that is, have higher perceived extrinsic incentives). Within our
sample, we find positive correlations between these traits and performance levels.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the theoretical
framework that guided our study design, which we discuss in Section 3. Section 4 describes
the data collection protocols used. Section 5 presents performance results from the three
audit studies and discusses their implication for the cost-effectiveness of free distribution
schemes. Section 6 presents the experimental results from Ghana. Section 7 provides evidence on motivation levels of health workers and how those correlate with performance.
Finally, Section 8 concludes and discusses our contribution to the literature.

2

Theoretical Framework

The theoretical framework underlying our research questions and study design is based on
Becker and Stigler (1974), Banerjee (1997) and Niehaus et al. (2013). We consider three
types of agents: the government, a health worker, and the clients of a health clinic. The
government has a set of publicly provided private health products that the clients need (in
our case, insecticide-treated bed nets). The goal of the government is to allocate these health
products in a way that maximizes social welfare. We assume that the health products are
scarce in the sense that the number of people who need them exceeds the number of products
the government can afford. Individuals vary in their need for the products: we assume that
there is a group of people that value the products more highly, and thus have a higher
willingness to pay for the product (for example, in the case of bed nets, the private health
returns to using a bed net are higher for pregnant women than for the rest of the population).
In a frictionless environment, the market would deliver the efficient outcome that those
who value the product most would get them.2 However, this is not true if there exist
credit constraints, which could create a wedge between willingness and ability to pay for
the credit-constrained (Cohen and Dupas 2010, Tarozzi et al. 2014). Since targeting based
on credit constraints is typically infeasible and/or costly, the government could adopt an
alternative rule of targeting the population with high returns on average (pregnant women)
for a specified subsidy level.
2

The products could also have positive externalities in which case the market outcome would not be
efficient; we ignore these here for simplicity but they do not affect our predictions.

6

The allocation of the health products is the responsibility of the health worker at a health
facility. The health worker has to expend effort to deliver the product, and effort is costly.
Assume that the health worker can observe the eligibility of the person who comes to the
facility (e.g. the health worker can observe if the person is a pregnant woman or not).
However, the government cannot monitor the health worker’s behavior: in particular, the
government observes neither the actual price charged by the health worker for the product,
nor the eligibility of the people to whom the health worker offers (or not) the product.
The utility function of the health worker has four components: a cost of effort, a monetary
payoff, and two types of non-monetary payoffs. The monetary payoff represents the health
worker’s salary plus any income she may obtain from being corrupt on the job. If the
monetary payoff is higher than in alternative jobs available, then the threat of losing the job
generates “extrinsic motivation” to perform well. The first non-monetary payoff represents
the health worker’s satisfaction from helping clients achieve higher health outcomes. The
weight the health worker puts on this non-monetary payoff is a function of her level of prosocial motivation, and the magnitude of this payoff depends on the health workers’ effort
and her beliefs about the health impact of the tasks she has to perform. The second type
of non-monetary payoff represents a psychic payoff from doing one’s job well. This payoff
increases with the level of job-specific intrinsic motivation, which, in turn, increases with the
health worker’s beliefs about the health impacts of her job responsibilities, as well as with
her level of autonomy.3 This psychic payoff goes to zero if the health worker breaks any rule
on the job (i.e., gives the subsidy to an ineligible person or fails to give the subsidy to an
eligible person for the specified price) in order to reduce her effort or increase her monetary
payoff.
In this set-up, the health worker can engage in three forms of corruption, defined broadly
as “incidents where a public employee breaks a rule for private gain” (Olken and Pande,
2013) (note that we take “private gain” here to exclude the non-monetary utility payoffs):
• Extortion—extracting rents from the eligible: having market power over the supply
of the product (since other health facilities distributing the product are far away),
the health worker can charge eligible people a higher price than the official subsidized
price and pocket the difference. Extortion will happen if the resulting increase in the
health worker’s monetary payoff outweighs the reduction in her non-monetary payoff.
Extortion reduces social welfare in two ways: (1) if demand is price-sensitive and there
is imperfect price discrimination, extortion will lower the number of recipients; and
(2) part of the government subsidy is captured by the health worker, for whom the
3

This is motivated by literature in psychology suggesting an important role for both factors in fostering
intrinsic motivation, e.g., Zuckerman et al. (1978).

7

marginal utility of cash is likely lower than for the poor, towards whom the subsidy
was targeted.
• Leakage—diverting the subsidized product to the ineligible: Some ineligible people may
have a higher ability to pay than some eligible people (due for example to credit
constraints). It could then be profit-maximizing for the health worker to allocate some
of the products to ineligible individuals, which could crowd out receipt by the eligible
if the total number of subsidies is limited. Leakage will happen if the resulting increase
in the health worker’s monetary payoff outweighs the potential reduction in her nonmonetary payoff. Leakage reduces social welfare and leads to inefficiency (from a public
health perspective) if there is a wedge between willingness and ability to pay such that
those ineligible individuals who purchase the product have lower health returns to the
product than those eligible individuals who decide not to.
• Shirking—not implementing the program: the health worker may not pay the effort cost
associated with delivering the subsidy to eligible clients, even though it is part of her
job description. This will happen if the health worker’s utility gain from lower effort
outweighs the utility loss coming from the lower non-monetary payoff (and potentially
lower monetary payoff if there is extortion) associated with lower effort. Shirking can
reduce social welfare by reducing coverage rates among the eligible, assuming the social
cost (healthworker effort) of delivering the product is outweighed by the social benefit,
as it should be for products like bednets with large benefits.
Note that in our set-up, pro-socially motivated health workers could break the targeting
rule for public gain – namely, if they have private information on how the health returns of
receiving the product will vary across clients, the health workers may be able to implement
a more efficient targeting rule than the blunt government rule. For example, health workers
may deny the free bed net to pregnant women that are wealthy enough to already have one;
or grant a free bed net to poor ineligible men who have an unprotected child.
This theoretical framework motivates the experimental interventions in Ghana, which
consist of four main treatments:
1. Increasing existing health workers’ compensation can reduce corruption if pro-social
motivation, intrinsic job motivation, or effort have positive income elasticities, or if
payments increase health workers’ pro-social and/or intrinsic job motivation as a form
of gift exchange. Note that there is no selection margin here since we are increasing
compensation after health workers select into the profession.

8

2. Performing a top-down audit (and shutting down the program if it reveals foul play)
can reduce corruption if health workers are sufficiently pro-socially motivated to not
want to deprive the community of the program, if health workers are concerned that
their jobs (and corresponding monetary payoff) would be threatened if they are caught
breaking program rules (extrinsic motivation), or if it is profit-maximizing for health
workers to decrease corruption when the threat of being caught increases.
3. Increasing the (perceived) tightness of the budget constraint by giving out fewer nets
to the clinic might reduce leakage if health workers believe that eligibles have higher
returns (as they should under most targeting rules) and are sufficiently pro-socially
motivated to care whether those people receive the subsidy.
4. A voucher scheme in which health workers give clients a voucher that they can redeem
at a third party for a net, instead of having health workers distribute products directly,
can reduce extortion and leakage if people are less willing to pay a bribe for a voucher
than for the product itself, and can reduce shirking if the effort cost for distributing
vouchers is lower than the effort cost for direct distribution (which is likely since vouchers are small and can be kept conveniently in the visitation room. and so take less
effort to hand over than larger nets which must be retrieved from a storage room). .
To the best of our knowledge, this work performs the first experimental tests of hypotheses 1,
3, and 4.4 Regarding hypothesis 2, Olken (2007) finds that top-down audits reduce corruption
among local officials granting road-construction contracts, but bottom-up monitoring does
not, in part due to information problems. In our context, misconduct by frontline providers is
likely easily observable by the local community since the targeting rule is based on pregnancy
status, so the scope for bottom-up monitoring is higher, potentially reducing the need for
top-down audits.

4

Regarding hypothesis 1, there is some evidence that higher public wages are correlated with lower
corruption, but most of the evidence is cross-sectional (Van Rijckeghem and Weder, 2001; Rauch and Evans,
2000). Dal Bo, Finan and Rossi (2013) provide experimental evidence that higher wages improve selection
into public service, but our experiment differs because it involves increasing the pay of existing health workers
when asking them to take on a new task, thus shutting down the selection margin. Di Tella and Schargrodsky
(2003) provide some evidence that higher-paid procurement officers respond more to corruption crackdowns
in Argentina than lower-paid officers; however, their results could reflect factors other than wages and
could run through channels other than corruption. Regarding hypothesis (3), we know from other contexts
that local officials have and use local information to target scarce publicly-provided goods (See Bardhan and
Mookherjee (2000, 2005, 2006); Niehaus et al. (2013); Alatas et al. (2014); and Basurto, Dupas and Robinson
(2015)), but we do not know whether the quality of targeting increases with (perceived) scarcity. Finally, to
the best of our knowledge, there is no evidence on the fourth hypotheses in the literature. However, despite
the lack of evidence, hypothesis 4 is a standard argument given by voucher proponents (Sexton, 2011).

9

3

Study design

3.1

Study Sites

Our sample consists of 168 rural health facilities (72 in Ghana, 48 in Kenya and 48 in
Uganda). We chose these three countries as follows. First, we picked Ghana as our experimental site since it did not have any bed net distribution program and therefore it was
possible for the research team to implement one with randomized variation in program features. Second, and after observing relatively high performance in Ghana, we picked Kenya
and Uganda because they both had government-led bed net distribution programs through
prenatal clinics, are among the countries perceived as most corrupt according to Transparency International (TI), and because, as we shared our initial Ghana results, we received
anecdotal reports that leakages were high in both these countries. We thus chose two additional countries where the prior was that leakage would likely be on the high side, hence
providing an upper bound for the average costs of corrupt behavior on the part of health
workers, while Ghana, ranking much better on the TI corruption index, was perceived as
possibly providing a lower bound.5
In each country, health facilities were selected for inclusion based on a census conducted
of all of the public and private health facilities in a given region/province.6 Inclusion criteria
for health centers in the study were: (1) having an antenatal care clinic (ANC); and (2)
being rural or semi-rural. For the Ghana sample, we had the following additional criteria:
(3) having no other healthcare facilities within a 2 km radius, no hospitals within a 5 km
radius, and not more than one other ANC within a 5 km radius;7 (4) having no free bed
net distribution program currently in place (which very few had); (5) having at least two
stores within a 2 km radius willing to participate in a voucher scheme (only 6% of clinics
were excluded by this criterion)8 ; and, (6) being accessible for net deliveries (less than 2%
were inaccessible). Our final sample spans 21 districts in Ghana, 10 districts in Kenya, and
5

As rightfully noted by an anonymous reviewer, Uganda and Kenya provide an upper bound among
countries that had distribution programs at the time. If those countries are positively selected on implementation capacity, then that upper bound may not be helpful in thinking about the potential for corruption in
countries that shy away from implementing a program. The fact that Ghana did not have a program but
appears to have fairly high implementation capacity (as per the performance we observe in the program we
set-up) suggests selection on capacity may not be key, but obviously it is only one observation. According to
2013 World Malaria Report, 34 of 44 countries with ongoing malaria transmission in sub-Saharan Africa had
an ITN distribution program through antenatal clinics in place as of 2012, however, so our results remain
relevant and interesting for a large part of the continent.
6
We sampled one of 10 regions in Ghana, one of 8 provinces in Kenya, and one of 4 regions in Uganda.
7
Since the research team had to fund the bed net distribution program in Ghana (see section 3.3 below),
this inclusion criterion was to keep subsidy costs manageable by limiting the potential increase in ANC
attendance in response to the program.
8
The stores did not have to carry LLINs on their own prior to the program.

10

6 districts in Uganda.9
Table 1, Panel A presents average baseline characteristics for the 168 health centers in the
study. They have been operating for 16 years on average and 85% of them are public. Health
centers in the study sample enroll around 28 new ANC patients every month on average,
and receive 63 revisits by existing ANC patients. The average clinic has 2.9 health workers
(trained nurses and/or midwives) in charge of ANC patients and roughly 50% of health
centers conduct outreach visits (i.e., they go to remote communities and provide “mobile”
ANC services there). Only 13% are located within 10 kilometers of a store selling bed nets,
suggesting bed nets are not widely available outside subsidized distribution schemes.
Table 1, Panel B presents some statistics on coverage with insecticide-treated bed nets
(ITNs) in each of the three countries. This data comes from Demographic Health Surveys
conducted a few months prior to our study in Ghana, three years prior and one year after in
Kenya, and two years prior in Uganda, so for these last two countries these are just indicative
and not accurate representations of the situation at the time of our audits. But they suggest
that while the majority of households have access to at least one ITN, they do not have
enough to cover all their members, thus there remains a latent demand for ITNs. As shown
previously (see Dupas 2011 for a review), willingness to pay absent access to credit is very
low, however, thus this latent demand is unlikely to translate into large bribes for ITNs, but
could translate into frequent requests for free ITNs from ineligibles.

3.2

Timeline

The data collection in Ghana took place between October 2011 and April 2012. At the
time, there was no bed net distribution program through antenatal care clinics, nor any
other distribution scheme, although the Ministry of Health in Ghana had done some limited
distributions of bed nets through antenatal care clinics in the past so health workers were
somewhat accustomed to this type of scheme.
In Kenya and Uganda, data collection took place between May and September 2013.
Since 2009, national policy in Kenya is that all pregnant women are provided a free longlasting insecticide treated net (LLIN) at their first antenatal care visit.10 In Uganda, such
distribution is not yet a national policy, but funding from the President’s Malaria Initiative
and USAID enabled such distribution in parts of the country, including our study area,
starting in 2012 and ending in October 2013. Both public and private facilities were included
9

At the time of sampling, the three countries had 170, 208, and 112 districts each, respectively. Ghana
and Kenya have had administrative changes since then.
10
Funding for this distribution program comes primarily from the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, and from the President’s Malaria Initiative.

11

in the distribution program.

3.3

Ghana experiments

The 72 health facilities in the Ghana sample were invited to participate in an NGO program
called SALI (“Saving Lives”). The program mimicked those ongoing in Kenya and Uganda,
and consisted of distributing free Long Lasting Insecticide-Treated Nets (LLINs) to pregnant
women during routine antenatal care visits. The program was approved by the Ghana
Health Service and was implemented by antenatal care clinic staff (most of them midwives
or nurses). We hired and trained SALI staff, whose job was to roll out the distribution
program – namely, to visit health facilities to introduce the program, deliver bales of nets
and train health workers on the eligibility criteria for the free net and on record-keeping.
The SALI staff was completely unaware that an evaluation of the SALI program would be
implemented, as were the health workers.11
The program was rolled out into the 72 clinics over a 7-week period, from mid-October to
early December 2011. The distribution program was announced as a continuous scheme, with
health centers (or shops when applicable) given instructions on how to get a new delivery
of LLINs before their stock ran out. In practice, the program stopped abruptly in all study
health centers in mid-March 2012 when the Ghana Health Service rolled out a separate
(unannounced) free distribution scheme for LLINs. Given this, health centers in our sample
were exposed to the SALI program for up to 150 days, with an average of 109 days.
Prior to rolling out the program, we grouped the 72 clinics into 6 strata with comparable
average characteristics (in terms of size, remoteness, and proximity to district borders).
Within each stratum, we then randomly assigned the clinics into treatment groups that varied
along several dimensions of the program that, as outlined in section 2, were hypothesized to
affect performance.
Distribution mechanism (Direct vs. Voucher): We randomly varied whether the LLINs
were distributed directly through health centers, or indirectly through a voucher scheme
wherein the health workers would distribute vouchers that could then be redeemed for a free
LLIN at a local store. We assigned 48 health centers to “direct distribution” (as in the Kenya
and Uganda government programs), and 24 health centers to a “voucher scheme.” Since the
great majority of health centers did not have any store selling bed nets in their vicinity, we
stocked one or two local stores (located within two kilometers of health center) with LLINs
and instructed shopkeepers to give one free LLIN to anyone who came in with a voucher
11

As such, the protocol involved deception of research subjects (health workers). As per IRB requirement,
health workers were “debriefed” on the true intent of the research study in the Fall 2013, after the study
had been completed.

12

from the local clinic and a corresponding ANC registration card.12
Staff monitoring (Audit vs. No Audit): Half of the clinics were randomly selected for the
introduction of an “audit treatment.” The audit treatment was rolled out in those clinics
during the second through fourth weeks of January 2012. At that time, health workers were
informed that the NGO implementing the program would perform audits, starting within
the next month. How the audits would be performed was not disclosed, but health centers
were warned that, if the audits revealed that either leakage or extortion had occurred after
the audit announcement, the program would be shut down, depriving the local community
of the program.
Pay (Compensation vs. No Compensation): In clinics with direct distribution, where
health workers had the responsibility to manage the LLIN inventory and coordinate with the
SALI project staff to avoid stockouts, we randomly varied whether health workers received
compensation for implementing the program. The compensation was a fixed monthly fee of
100 Ghana cedis (US$60, corresponding to approximately 17% of the median monthly salary
of a nurse or midwife or 25% of the median monthly salary of any healthworker) paid via
direct deposit into health workers’ bank accounts.
Scarcity (Small vs. Large Delivery): Finally, within direct distribution clinics, we randomly varied whether the stock of LLINs delivered to the health center at the onset of the
program was high or low. Since clinics were instructed to call the SALI program officer to
restock the nets whenever they would run out, this variation in the level of the initial stock
should have no effect (besides increasing the potential for early stockouts) unless it affected
the salience of the “budget constraint.”.
Balance Columns (2)-(5) of Table A1 test for balance across our experimental groups in
Ghana, both in terms of baseline characteristics (Panel A) and program implementation
details (Panel B). We regress each dependent variable on a dummy variable for being assigned to the voucher treatment, audit treatment, pay treatment, and large stock treatment.
Columns (2)-(5) present coefficients and standard errors from these regressions. We find no
statistically significant differences.

12

Shops in our program were not permitted to mark up the nets, so testing whether vouchers decrease
stockouts was not a motivation for this treatment, although that could in principle be another advantage of
vouchers.

13

4

Data

In all three countries, we collected data through two completely independent teams unaware
of each other’s existence. The first is a team of “mystery clients” (undercover enumerators)
asked to do decoy visits to health centers and their surrounding communities. The second
is a team of regular surveyors, who administered surveys to ANC clients, health workers,
as well as other professionals. In Ghana, we also have administrative data from the SALI
staff (itself completely independent from the two data collection teams), which kept program
implementation records and also asked health centers to keep a log of program beneficiaries.

4.1

Decoy visits data

We sent undercover enumerators to local communities, who were trained to perform two
types of decoy visits:
(1) “Mystery Client” visits: To identify leakage, we arranged to have undercover enumerators visit clinics (and stores, in the case of the voucher treatment) to try to obtain a
subsidized net. To make this measure clearly interpretable as leakage, we chose to employ
only men as mystery clients (since they are clearly ineligible for the program). After concluding the interaction and once out of sight, mystery clients recorded the details of their
encounter with the local health workers, including whether they were asked to pay a bribe.
To minimize possible suspicion among health workers, mystery clients dressed casually and
never visited the same health center twice. They were not asked to follow a specific script.
Both the order in which mystery clients visited a health center and the timing (across and
within days) were randomized.
In Ghana, we paid the mystery clients 5 GHC (about half the retail price) for any bed
net they were able to bring back from such decoy visits (in addition to a salary of 25 GHC
per day). We scheduled 10 mystery visits per health center, 5 before the audit rollout period
and 5 after. This led to an average of 0.6 mystery visits per health center per week. In
Kenya and Uganda, because the bed nets distributed were from the government programs
rather than our own NGO program, we did not incentivize enumerators to pay bribes for
bed nets. We scheduled 3 mystery visits per health center over the course of two months.
(2) Informal community interviews: In all three countries, enumerators spoke with a
convenience sample of community members about whether bed nets were available in the
area and, if so, where, at what price, what the eligibility criteria were, whether they thought
an ineligible person would be able to obtain a net, and whether they themselves had received
a net at the health center.13 To elicit truthful answers, surveyors posed as visitors and did
13

During each visit, the mystery clients were instructed to speak with three individuals at the local

14

not introduce themselves as enumerators in Ghana and Kenya. In Uganda, we were unable
to obtain an IRB waiver to conduct these visits undercover so they were conducted by the
regular survey team described below in Section 4.2. Again, no enumerator performed this
activity in the same area twice. We polled around 18 community members per health center
in each of the three countries.
An important point to note when interpreting this set of results is that all mystery clients
were male and thus clearly ineligible for the program. Additionally, all the mystery clients
were from areas outside the study area (so that local communities would not realize the true
intent of the decoy visits). If leakage is lower to men than to ineligible women, if health
workers behave differently with strangers than with local community members, or if local
community members under-report leakage to strangers, the leakage we estimate will be a
lower bound on the percent of requests by ineligibles that yield nets. We address this by
estimating an upper bound on the overall leakage rate using the administrative and audit
data described in section 4.3. (Note that the two estimates are not of the same underlying
measure: the latter is an estimate of the percent of nets leaked, whereas the former is an
estimate of the percent of requests by ineligibles yielding nets.) In addition, we examine how
leakage to ineligibles correlates with other performance measures.

4.2

Regular survey data

We use three types of regular survey data.
(1) ANC Client Back-checking surveys: An important outcome is whether eligible clients
received nets. To verify this, we hired regular teams of enumerators to survey ANC clients at
their homes. We sampled the ANC clients to be surveyed as follows. In all three countries,
health workers keep registers of the women who come in for antenatal visits. These ANC
registers include a record of each visit, as well as some rudimentary contact information
(typically just the woman’s name and the area she is from). In each facility, this register
was used to randomly sample 20 pregnant women who had visited the facility for antenatal
care in the previous 4 months.14 The survey team attempted to visit these women at their
market, as well as three households in their homes. The questions about whether the community members
themselves had obtained nets were only asked in Uganda and Kenya.
14
These data are used to estimate coverage and extortion (but not leakage, which is estimated from the
program’s administrative records). From the point of view of our estimation, the threats associated with
this sampling strategy are of two sorts: (a) some women who truly visited the ANC may not have been
listed on the register; (b) some “fake” ANC clients were listed to boost the numbers and justify a smaller
number of nets left in inventory. If those who are not listed are those who are not given a net or are asked for
bribes, then (a) would lead us to overestimate coverage and/or underestimate extortion. Our visits to ANC
clients (and, in particular, the percent of clients not found) allow us to estimate an upper bound on (b).
That said, we consider it very unlikely that health workers in any of the three countries modified how they
fill ANC registers in response to the bed net distribution programs, especially since (1) they likely did not

15

homes and administer a short survey about their experience at the ANC clinic, their bed net
ownership and usage, including whether they received a bed net from the local health center
and at what price. A subset of them were also asked to play a dictator game (so that we have
a basis of comparison for the health workers, see below). The survey team was successful at
reaching the great majority of the women sampled for this survey in Ghana (92%), but less
so in Kenya (71%) and Uganda (66%). The rest could not be traced, typically because ANC
registers contain almost no information on clients’ addresses and therefore tracing women
from outer villages was particularly difficult. The higher attrition rate in Kenya and Uganda
likely reflects the fact that the samples in these two countries included semi-urban health
centers, which have wider catchment areas. In the analysis, in one specification we assume
those that could not be tracked did not receive a net, providing a lower bound on coverage.15
(2) Surveys of Health Workers: Health workers involved with prenatal clients (on average,
3.1 per clinic) were sampled for a survey that measured basic demographics, other-regarding
preferences (including a dictator game) and other personality traits. This survey was administered by our regular surveyor teams and took place after all other data collection exercises
had been completed, since being surveyed on one’s level of intrinsic motivation and altruism
could temporarily affect on-the-job performance. We were not able to survey all health workers involved with prenatal clients due to official leaves, or because some health workers were
too busy for a survey or simply absent. We successfully interviewed 89% of health workers
in Ghana, 74% in Kenya and 70% in Uganda. In Kenya and Uganda, we also recorded
attendance of ANC health workers. One (unannounced) spot check was done per clinic.
(3) Surveys of Other Professionals: To get some sense of how pro-social motivation and
intrinsic and extrinsic job motivation differ between health workers and other people, our
regular survey teams also conducted the same survey modules used with health workers
with non-health workers, in particular, teachers, as well as (in Ghana and Uganda only)
shopkeepers and microfinance agents.

4.3

Ghana administrative data

Since we set-up the distribution scheme ourselves in Ghana, we have administrative data
on bed net deliveries by our SALI teams at each facility (timing and quantities delivered).
expect anyone to use the ANC registers for audit purposes since they were asked to keep alternate records
of bed net recipients, (2) the registers are formatted with one registrant per row (so all revisits are recorded
on the initial row) which makes them very difficult to use for monitoring how many nets the clinic should
have distributed (i.e., the number of eligible clients who visited in a given timeframe). As such, our prenatal
client survey sample is likely a representative sample of the population of prenatal clients.
15
In Uganda and Ghana, 7% of the interviews were conducted with proxies because the sampled respondent was unavailable at the time of interview; in Kenya, 1% of interviews were conducted with proxies.

16

We also have logs kept by health workers, in which they were asked to record some basic
information (name, prenatal card number and address) for each person they gave a bed net
or voucher to. The survey team attempted to visit these individuals at their homes and
administered a short survey identical to the one administered to ANC clients. Surveyors
were successful at reaching 94% of the individuals sampled for this survey. The success rate
in tracing these individuals is in itself an outcome of interest.16

5

Performance Results From Three Countries

We first examine the performance of the standard program (bed net distribution at clinics).
For this we exclude from the analysis the 24 health centers in Ghana with a voucher scheme,
keeping 48 health centers from each of the three countries studied, and we present the overall
mean as well as country-specific means for each outcome, and the p-values for tests of equality
for each country-pair.

5.1

Do the Eligible Receive the Full Subsidy?

We first consider the effectiveness of the bed net subsidy programs in reaching intended
beneficiaries. The results are presented in Table 2. Our interviews with women randomly
sampled from the ANC registers reveal that as many as 76% of intended beneficiaries received
a net at their first prenatal visit as per program protocols (Table 2, column 1), and 80%
received one at some point (column 3).17 When we exclude clinics with reported stockouts
over the sample period, the share of the eligible population receiving the subsidized net at
their first prenatal care visit reaches 81% (column 2). Only 1% of them were asked to pay
something in exchange for the net.
While performance levels are high on average, there is some meaningful heterogeneity
across countries. Coverage is significantly higher in Kenya (90%, column 2) than in the
other two countries (Ghana - 77%; Uganda - 69%). When asked why they did not receive
a bed net, around 9% of the Ugandan women (20% of those who ventured an explanation)
16

As described in Section 5.2, we use these records to estimate an upper bound on the leakage rate. One
reason that it is an upper bound is that health workers could forget to record eligible clients who received
nets, which would cause us to overestimate leakage.
17
These estimates exclude any ANC registrants who were sampled from the registers but we were unable
to track. A very conservative lower bound approach would be to assume all of the registrants who we were
unable to track and interview did not receive nets – note that we believe this is too conservative since the
likelihood of tracking was based on factors that were plausibly orthogonal to likelihood of net receipt (in
particular, we do not think that ANC clients we could not trace are “fake patients”, since facilities have no
incentive to over-report ANC clients in their registers, as discussed in footnote 14). The conservative lower
bound approach would yield a 64% coverage rate for Kenya, 71% for Ghana, and 46% for Uganda.

17

mentioned that it was because they already had a net or were rich enough to afford one,
suggesting that health workers may have been, to some extent, targeting the subsidized nets
to those needing them the most. Extortion is also significantly higher in Uganda, although
the absolute level (3%) is still low.
Errors of exclusion or efficient targeting? In Table 3, we test more formally whether
incomplete coverage represents errors of exclusion (truly poor women who should have received a net) or the outcome of health workers exercising discretion over how to allocate the
subsidy based on their local information. Specifically, we investigate whether, within clinic,
those prenatal clients who have a higher socio-economic status (proxied by education), and
thus are more likely to be able to afford a net on their own, are those less likely to receive a
free net. We find suggestive but weak evidence that more educated women were less likely to
get nets. An additional year of education is associated with 0.7 percentage point reduction in
the likelihood of receiving a net at the first visit (Table 3, panel A, column 1). This implies
that a woman at the 75th percentile in the distribution of years of education (7.5 years) is
3.1 percentage points (13%) less likely to receive a free net at her first visit than a woman at
the 25th percentile (3 years). Unsurprisingly, targeting appears more pronounced in Ghana
(col. 2) and Uganda (col. 4) than in Kenya (col. 3), where the coverage rate was close to
100%.18
To test whether targeting improves when the stock of nets is low, in column 5 we limit
the sample to ANC visits that took place within one month of a stockout. Consistent with
improvements in targeting, the magnitude of the effect increases, but we lack the precision
to distinguish the effects from each other.

5.2

Leakage to the Ineligible

Table 4 shows the results of the decoy health center visits by our “mystery clients” trying to
obtain nets for which they were ineligible. We first note that on 20.5% of the visits in Kenya
and Uganda, the clinic was actually out of stock (we know this from independent visits
made by the survey team – see column 1). Stockouts were not measured independently in
Ghana, but mystery client reports suggest it was rarer (4.6%, column 2). We thus focus on
non-stockout visits to make meaningful comparisons across countries, but we note that the
stockout number used in Ghana is likely an upper bound, since health workers could have
18

Outcomes from the first visit are likely more reflective of health worker targeting than outcomes across
all visits (for example, more-educated people who did not get nets might return to the clinic specifically
for a net). The results across all visits, shown in Panel B of Table 3, are consistent but somewhat weaker,
indicating that there is some “correction” at visit 2.

18

told ineligibles asking for nets that the clinic was out of stock as a way to gently deny their
requests.
Only 4.7% of the 685 non-stockout attempts made across all three countries were successful (Table 4, column 3). This varied from 11% in Uganda to 8.7% in Kenya to only 2.2%
in Ghana. All of the nets leaked to mystery clients in Kenya and Uganda were given out for
free (column 4), which is not surprising since the mystery clients in these two countries were
not incentivized to pay for the (government sponsored) nets. What is more surprising is that
while mystery clients in Ghana had a higher reservation price – recall that we paid them 5
GHC per (NGO sponsored) net they successfully acquired from health centers– they were
less successful at obtaining nets than their counterparts in Kenya and Uganda. Only 1.3%
obtained a net by bribing; and only 0.9% got a net for free (compared to 9% in Kenya and
11% in Uganda). Requests for payments, shown in column 5, were rarer in Kenya (3.6%)
and Uganda (1.1%) than Ghana (5.1%). However, the average amount requested in Ghana
was very high (more than the full price of the net, even after bargaining had happened –
column 6), and actual transactions occurred after only a quarter of the payment requests,
possibly suggesting that some health workers may have been asking for a high price as a way
to get rid of the visitor, or that they intended to replace the leaked net with a purchased net
The informal interviews mystery clients conducted with randomly sampled community
members (columns 8-10 of Table 4) also suggest low levels of leakage. In all three countries,
about 10% of community members thought the male (and so obviously ineligible) mystery
client could get a net from the local facility. When asked if they themselves had acquired a
net, less than 4 percent of men said they had (an upper bound since some may be reporting a
net they legitimately received while taking a pregnant wife or child under five to the facility).
Errors of inclusion or efficient targeting? In Table 5, we investigate the extent to
which the leakage to our mystery clients (especially in Uganda and Kenya, where around
10% of mystery clients obtained free nets) comes from health workers bending the targeting
rule for the public good. In particular, we test whether health workers are more likely to leak
nets to mystery clients whose “narrative” made them appear like they had a higher return
to bed net usage, for example because they had a pregnant wife or vulnerable child. This
analysis is limited by two factors: the choice of strategy was left to the enumerators, and,
possibly owing to differences in training, there were systematic cross-country differences in
the strategies used. In Ghana, mystery clients almost always said that the net would be for
personal use (a few of them mentioned a pregnant wife), while in Uganda and Kenya, some
mystery clients mentioned a sick child at home, though in Kenya they only did so if asked
by health workers. Given this, the regressors in Table 5 vary across countries.
19

The results in Table 5 suggest that mentioning a pregnant wife did not increase the
odds that the mystery client obtained a net, often because health workers responded to such
demands by saying “have your wife come for prenatal care and she will get one.” In contrast,
mystery clients who mentioned a child were significantly more likely to obtain a free net. This
result holds within country (columns 3-4) and also helps explain the cross-country variation
we observe in leakage.19
Of course, to the extent that pretending to have a needy child at home is “cheap talk”,
the fact that health workers respond to it is not necessarily evidence of improved targeting
– the health workers may perceive that they are targeting efficiently when they are not.
Total Local Leakage Rate (Ghana only) Leakage to mystery clients does not allow
us to estimate total volumes leaked since we do not know the volume of requests. To get
a sense of the likely magnitude for the total leakage rate, in this section we estimate an
upper bound using a completely different data source: the administrative records of bed net
deliveries to health centers, as well as the records on beneficiaries kept by health centers,
which we audited. We can do this exercise only in Ghana, the only country for which we
have information on the total number of nets supplied in each clinic (we have this data since
we implemented the program ourselves through the SALI team; it was not possible for us
to obtain detailed governmental records of bed net deliveries to individual health centers in
Kenya and Uganda). Combining all of the available information for Ghana, we estimate an
upper bound for the percent of bed nets unaccounted for as follows: we compare the number
of nets delivered by the program to the facility to the estimated number of nets that reached
an eligible person. To estimate the number of nets that reached an eligible person, we use the
log of beneficiaries kept by health workers at the request of the SALI program, and subtract
invalid entries. Invalid entries were defined in two ways. First, all duplicate entries were
considered invalid. Second, among non-duplicate entries, we estimate the share of invalid
entries using the data from our random audits of the logs. Audited entries were considered
invalid if the person named in the entry could not be found (6.4% of entries), was found and
not eligible (1.5% of entries), or had not received a net (2.7% of entries). This estimate is
an upper bound since some of those not found or not recorded in the administrative ledger
may have been legitimate program beneficiaries, but in our calculation we assume they did
not receive a net.20
19

Again, we view this evidence as suggestive, since the mystery clients’ narratives were not randomly
assigned, so the story used could also be endogenous to the interaction or correlated with other mystery
client characteristics, such as their power of persuasion.
20
Note that we exclude audits where the person was found, eligible, and surveyed, but where the data
about whether the person received a net is missing (most missing data are in surveys conducted with proxies),
so effectively assume missing data is random; if we assume instead that none of the respondents with missing

20

Figure 1A shows the distribution across the clinics of the estimated (upper bound) number
of bed nets unaccounted for. Figure 1B shows the distribution of the estimated share. The
average estimated leakage rate is 14.7%. In the vast majority of clinics, the number of bed
nets unaccounted for was quite low, with a median of 20 and a 75th percentile of 37 nets,
numbers that would not be unreasonable for simple misplacing.21
Leakage Across the Entire Delivery Chain Our results so far suggest that leakage at
the point of distribution (once the nets have reached health facilities) is limited and does
not threaten the cost-effectiveness of subsidy schemes. But what about leakage higher up in
the chain? While such leakage would not contradict our finding that health workers at the
point of distribution are performing well, it would have implications for cost effectiveness.
In this section, we do a simple accounting exercise to estimate the total rate of leakage in
the Uganda and Kenya programs. This exercise suggests that leakage higher up was limited.
In Kenya, 2,800,000 free ITNs were procured for the year 2013, to be distributed to an
estimated eligible population of 2,837,475 eligible pregnant women and children under the
age of one.22 This implies a maximum potential coverage rate of 98%. Our observed coverage
rate of 91% among pregnant women thereforesuggests a total leakage rate of around 7%.
In Uganda, the program we audited reports distributing a total of 268,804 bed nets to
34 districts for the October 2012 to September 2013 period. The total estimated ANC
population over that period is 493,631.23 Thus the program delivered enough bed nets to
cover 55% of eligible pregnant women. Our estimated coverage rate is higher than that, at
66%. This could be because the districts we studied received more bednets per pregnant
woman than average (perhaps because our study area is centrally located), or because women
who registered for ANC for the first time during the program were more likely to receive
nets than women who visited the ANC but had already registered. In any case the numbers
suggest leakage higher up in the chain was likely limited.
To conclude, while corruption higher up in the distribution chain is not the focus of our
data received nets (a very conservative assumption), the total leakage rate would increase to 16.8%. Data
is only available for 47 of the 48 direct distribution clinics because, for one clinic, the survey team lost the
SALI ledger surveys SALI ledger, and so we cannot compute the “% of valid entries” for that clinic.
21
Note that the number can be negative either as a result of sampling error in the estimate of the percent
valid entries (so we may underestimate the number of valid entries), or errors in the records kept by the
SALI program on the number of nets they delivered (though we think this is unlikely); in any case it is
reassuring that only three clinics have negative values, and the value is never less than -15 nets. (For the
one clinic with value less than -5, it is likely due to sampling error, since 100% of the respondents sampled
from the SALI ledger in that clinic were found, eligible, and had received nets.)
22
see
http://www.pmi.gov/docs/default-source/default-document-library/malaria-operationalplans/fy12/kenya_mop_fy12.pdf?sfvrsn=6, Table 4 on p. 18, accessed August 26 2014.
23
See
http://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1860/SMP_Year_5_Annual_ReportFinal_Oct2012-Sep2013.pdf, p. 9, accessed August 26 2014.

21

study, it appears limited in the bed net distribution schemes we studied. Our finding that
local leakage is low thus implies low mistargeting overall. One caveat to the calculations
above, however, is that our estimates of coverage come from a single region in each country,
whereas the supply figures are national.24

5.3

Cost-Effectiveness Implications

Our administrative records from Ghana suggest a conservative upper bound on leakage at
the facility level of around 15%. Leakage higher up in the chain is minimal, according to
the estimates from Kenya and Uganda, suggesting that total leakage is at the most 20%. Is
20% high or low? Clearly, and not surprisingly, this figure is much lower than the high rates
of leakage observed in some studies for cash payments (for example, Reinikka and Svensson
(2004) estimate leakage rates for education grants in Ghana and Uganda of 49% and 87%,
respectively, while Niehaus and Sukhtankar (2013) find leakage of 70% for government wages
in India). In addition to the obvious liquidity advantage of stolen cash over stolen bednets,
the difference could come from the observability of the program – indeed, once schools and
parents knew about cash grants for education in Uganda, Reinikka and Svensson’s estimate
of leakage dropped to 18% (Reinikka and Svensson, 2011). Our estimated leakage rate is
comparable to the lower bound of 18% found by Olken (2005) for leakage of food in a food
relief program in Indonesia, and on par with recent evidence on the allocation of government
transfer benefits in Indonesia (Alatas et al. 2013).
While 20% thus falls in the left tail of existing estimates of leakage for other sectors,
maybe a better way to gauge whether it is small or large is to estimate its implication for the
cost-effectiveness of free distribution programs. Assuming no positive health impacts from
leakage (so counting leakage as a pure deadweight loss –a strong assumption), 20% leakage
implies an increase in the price per bed net delivered to an eligible person by 0.2/(1-0.2)=25%
with no change in total health benefits. As shown in detail in Table IX of Cohen and Dupas
(2010), the cost effectiveness of bednets depends on assumptions about the private and social
health returns to bednets among the eligible. Cohen and Dupas estimate costs between $200
and $662 per child life saved depending on assumptions, which would increase to $250-$827
with 20% leakage. These remain orders of magnitude below the cost-effectiveness threshold
of approximately $20,000 per life saved ($241 per disability-adjusted life year saved times 80
24

If the region we study was favored by the government and received more nets per capita than others,
our calculations would be underestimating leakage, as seems to be the case in Uganda. This is less of a
concern in Kenya where the study took place in Western Province, which overwhelmingly favored the loser
in the presidential elections of both 2007 and 2012. A second caveat is that our 48 facilities per country fall
under the jurisdiction of only 10 districts in Kenya and 6 districts in Uganda; therefore our delivery chain
leakage estimates reflect the performance of only 16 agencies.

22

years) suggested by the 1993 World Development Report (World Bank, 1993).

6

Experimental Results from Ghana

We now turn to the effects on performance of the four randomized program features in
Ghana: the voucher scheme, the audit threat, compensation pay, and stock size. Because the
audit threat was rolled out midway through the program, we use a difference-in-differences
specification to determine the effects of audits, comparing the results before and after the
time when audit threats were rolled out at clinics that were vs. were not sampled for the
audit threat. Thus, we estimate regressions of the following form:
yict = α + β1 V oucherc + β2 Auditc × P ostt + β3 P ayc + β4 SmallDeliveryc
+ β5 P ostt + δAuditc + η 0 Xc + uict

(1)

where yict is the outcome of individual i at health center c in period t, Xc is a vector
of health center level controls (specifically: randomization strata fixed effects, the timing of
program introduction, baseline ANC attendance, and ANC staff size), and Auditc , V oucherc ,
P ayc and SmallDeliveryc are treatment dummies. P ostt is a dummy equal to 1 if t is the
post-audit period. We cluster the standard errors at the health center level.
The results are shown in Table 6. We see little effect of most of the experimental treatments, except for the voucher scheme. The voucher scheme did not affect extortion, as
bribe requests were minimal (1%) under both the voucher and direct distribution schemes.
However, surprisingly in the context of both the conventional wisdom and our hypothesis
from Section 2 that vouchers would increase coverage by decreasing effort costs, the first
two columns of Table 6 show that subsidy coverage among the eligible was lower under the
voucher treatment (row 1). Health workers were 16.7 percentage points less likely to deliver
the subsidy to prenatal patients (15.2 percentage points less likely for the first visit).25
One potential explanation comes from awareness: the percent of community members
who were aware of the nets program was 8 percentage points lower (off of a base of 72
percentage points) in the areas surrounding voucher clinics relative to direct clinics (cols
5-6). That voucher schemes might have lower awareness is intuitive: vouchers, which can fit
in a pocket, have lower visibility than bulky bed nets.26 Low awareness could explain the
25

Because vouchers add an extra step to the process (pregnant women have to go to the store to redeem
the voucher), incomplete redemption could also increase the coverage gap between voucher and direct clinics.
In our sample, however, redemption rates are very high (over 95%). Thus, the gap in overall net receipts
(17.3 percentage points) is only a little larger than the gap in product receipt at the clinic.
26
Of course, bed nets were also being distributed by the stores in the voucher scheme, but community

23

lower coverage rate observed among the eligible: unaware women are unlikely to request a
voucher if the health worker does not offer them one.
At the same time, mystery clients were 3.4% more likely to obtain a program net in
voucher clinics than in direct clinics, a large increase relative to the base level of 2% in direct
clinics (and significant at 10%). Lower community awareness in voucher communities could
mean that there was less community monitoring of health workers, which made them feel
more comfortable accepting offers from ineligibles. In terms of the total local leakage rate
estimated using administrative records, it appears that the decrease in awareness/demand
outweighed the increase in leakage conditional on solicitation, as the total leakage rate was
roughly 50% lower in voucher clinics than direct clinics (see appendix table A3).
Besides the reduced awareness effect, the voucher scheme may have performed less well
due to its impact on the intrinsic job motivation of health workers asked to implement
the distribution program. Indeed qualitative evidence provided by the SALI program staff
suggests that the voucher scheme lowered health worker autonomy and morale, because
health workers felt as though they were not trusted. In fact, 2 out of 24 voucher clinics
refused to implement the program at all, while 0 of the 48 direct distribution clinics refused.27
Turning to the other randomized program features, the audit threat did not affect overall
performance.28 Also notable is the fact that the payment treatment had no effect on any
outcomes measured. The reason does not seem to be low power, since we can often rule out
even modest effects (particularly because the sign of the point estimates is often opposite of
the hypotheses laid out in Section 2). For example, our 95% confidence intervals allow us to
reject effects of payments on coverage of eligible as small as 6 percentage points.
Finally, we find inconclusive evidence on whether the small delivery treatment decreased
leakage. The effect on leakage to mystery clients is large and negative (a 1.6 percentage
point decrease off of a base rate of 2%),29 but not statistically significant. In addition, there
awareness of what happens in a few stores may be lower than awareness of what happens in clinics.
27
We thank Kathleen Beegle for pointing out that this morale dampening effect may have been particularly
pronounced in our experiment for the following reason. Health workers knew that we delivered bed nets to
local shops for safekeeping, instead of delivering them to the health center. Therefore health workers likely
perceived the voucher program as an anti-corruption scheme. If we had instead asked health workers to
distribute vouchers for bed nets readily available in the retail sector, the voucher scheme may not have been
perceived this way. In practice, this was not an option we could pursue since 90% of health centers did not
have a shop selling bed nets within 10 kilometers (see Table 1).
28
When we estimate the effects of audits separately for clinics in the voucher scheme, we do find that the
audit threat reduces the tendency of performance to worsen over time in these clinics, but the effect is small
compared to the cost of audits.
29
This could be the reason why we observed more free nets being given to ineligible mystery clients in
Kenya and Uganda than in Ghana (what we call “benevolent leakage”). The Ghana program was implemented by a small NGO at a small scale with unknown quantities of nets to offer, whereas in Kenya and
Uganda where regular deliveries from district headquarters mean that leakage may not increase the risk of
exclusion errors (pregnant women missing out on nets).

24

is a large and significant positive effect on the likelihood that community members refer
mystery clients to the health facility for a bed net.30

7

Discussion

We find markedly higher performance of health workers in Kenya, Ghana and Uganda than
has previously been found among public service providers in developing countries. Consequently, the experimental treatments in Ghana had limited effects. In this section, we
explore possible explanations for the high performance levels of ANC workers in our study
areas. We first document that the high performance we observe was not limited to bed net
distribution. We then document that health workers appear positively selected in terms
of pro-social motivation compared to other professionals, and that they also exhibit higher
levels of job-specific intrinsic and extrinsic motivation. Across clinics, these characteristics
have some, albeit modest, predictive power for performance.

7.1

Performance on other tasks

Table 7 presents data on health worker performance on other tasks. Data from the ANC
patient interviews show that nurses spent an average of 18 minutes with each patient. There
is some heterogeneity across countries, with a minimum of 12 minutes in Ghana (col 1).
Nurses conducted palpation (the key prenatal check that nurses are supposed to perform)
for 96% of the clients, and this is comparable across countries (col 2). While it is difficult
to benchmark these numbers, they are clearly much larger than the 4-8 minutes spent per
patient among doctors in India, Paraguay and Tanzania, or the one question asked per
patient in India reported in Das, Leonard and Hammer (2007). Average wait time for a
checkup is about one hour on average. ANC staff members also seem to engage in good
record-keeping, with 96% of the key identifier fields filled in the registers (col 8).31
In Kenya and Uganda, we also asked about additional services that should be performed
30

The impact of the small delivery treatment on the initial stock was substantial: the initial stock delivery
was 270 nets on average among the direct distribution clinics that were not in the small delivery treatment,
compare to only 140 or so for small delivery clinics. However, 140 nets is still enough for over 1 month of
projected net distribution based on the baseline registration and visit data (see Appendix Table A1: the
average clinic saw 116 patients, including both new registrants and follow-up visits, each month). Thus, it
is possible that the small delivery treatment was not small enough to seriously increase the salience of the
budget constraint. Since delivering enough nets for only one week worth of distribution at a time would have
large financial implications in terms of delivery costs, estimating whether it could improve targeting would
not be policy-relevant, however.
31
The “key fields” are name, registration date, ANC card #, address, # children, and gestational age at
registration. We digitized data from the ANC registers for sampled patients only.

25

at ANC clinics, and again the results are positive: during ANC visits, 84% of women received
intermittent preventive treatment for malaria (IPT, col 4) and 73% received iron tablets (col
5). These figures are broadly similar to the coverage rates from bed net distribution. If
women brought a child into the clinic for malaria treatment, 73% of the time they received
the recommended Artemisinin-based Combination Therapy (ACT) drugs for free, as they
should have (col 6). However, reported payment requests for ACTs are more common than
what we observed for nets – in 19% of visits, women reported that they received the drugs but
had to pay (col 7). Although it is possible that people confused payments for ACTs with other
ancillary fees (e.g., lab tests) associated with malaria visits, another potential explanation
is that health workers are more corrupt with drugs than they are with nets. This could be
because willingness to pay for treatment is typically higher than for prevention (Dupas, 2011;
Cohen, Dupas and Schaner 2015), and therefore extorting for drugs may be more effective
than for bed nets. Interestingly, we observe a positive correlation between payment requests
for ACTs and bribe requests from mystery clients (correlation of 0.34, significant at the 1%
level) at the health facility level. It is reassuring that the high extortion rates for ACTs do
not compromise high coverage (92%), perhaps because health workers can price discriminate.
Figure 2 shows the results of unannounced attendance spot checks conducted at each
clinic in the Kenya and Uganda samples. Of the health workers who were supposed to be
on duty, 8% (=.05/(.05+.61)) were absent in Kenya and 20% (=.13/(.13+.53)) in Uganda,
numbers which leave room for improvement but are much lower than the 35% rate found
across countries and 38% rate found in Uganda by Chaudhury et al. (2012).32,33 Since
clinics in this setting are large enough that health workers can load-share, absenteeism may
not compromise performance: clinics were closed for fewer than 1% of mystery client visits
(Table 7, col 6). Also suggestive that attendance may not directly impact service quality
is the fact that we do not find a correlation between attendance and any of our other
performance measures (see Table A2).

32

Note that our measure follows Chaudhury et al. (2012) and excludes “health workers who might have
been on authorized leave.” As argued by Chaudhury et al. (2012), this measure may overstate attendance if
authorized leaves are over-reported, but we follow the same convention for comparability with their estimates.
33
These attendance rates differ from the survey compliance rates for the healthworker survey for several
reasons: first, 33% of the healthworkers who were present during the surveyors’ first visit were not interviewed
because they were too busy or because surveyors ran out of time; second, some health workers were off duty or
away on official leave; and third, surveyors returned to most clinics on multiple dates to increase completion
rates. The first two would cause compliance rates to underestimate attendance rates; the third would cause
them to overestimate.

26

7.2

Explaining high performance

As discussed in section 2, the likelihood that health workers engage in what we call “corrupt”
behavior may decrease with their level of motivation, either intrinsic or extrinsic. Thus one
reason that we may see relatively high performance of health workers is if they have high
levels of motivation. To study this, tables 8 and 9 presents results from surveys administered
to health workers and other professionals. In Panel A, we present country-level averages
of various motivation measures among health workers. In Panel B, we run the following
regressions:
yi,c = β1 + β2 × T eacheri + β3 × Shopkeeperi + β4 × M F I i + Xi + vc + εic
where yic is the outcome of worker i in country c, and T eacheri , Shopkeeperi and M F I i
are dummy variables equal to 1 if the individual is a teacher, shopkeeper or microfinance
agent, respectively; and vc is a vector of country fixed effects. We present the coefficient
estimates for β2 , β3 and β4 , each representing the difference between the respective profession
and health workers. Xi is a vector of demographic controls (age and gender).
7.2.1

Pro-social Motivation

The great majority of health workers say that they receive personal satisfaction from helping
people and do not expect anything in return (Table 8, Panel A). Within country, health
workers appear much more pro-socially motivated than the other professionals we surveyed
(Table 8, Panel B).
Besides survey responses, which can be subject to social desirability bias, we have an
incentivized measure of other-regarding preferences from a dictator game. We gave players
an envelope with ten bills and told them that the money they left in the envelope would be
delivered to a randomly-selected community member living in their community.34 Interestingly, the share left in the envelope by health workers is identical across all three countries
(26-27%). The detailed results in Figure 3 show that in Kenya and Uganda health workers
leave more money than most other groups surveyed, with employees at microfinance institutions (MFI) in Uganda the lone exception. The situation is different in Ghana, where health
workers appear to be less altruistic than teachers and other professionals, though this result
is to be interpreted with a grain of salt given the timing of data collection.35
34

The 10 bills were each 1 GHC in Ghana, 50 Ksh in Kenya and 1,000 UGX in Uganda. To avoid social
pressure effects, the respondent was told that the surveyors would not open the envelope themselves.
35
In Ghana, the dictator games were played in 2012 with health workers and ANC clients, and in 2014
with the other professionals. In both instances we asked them to split 10 bills of 1GHC each. Given an
inflation rate of approximately 9% over this time period, one concern is that the two rounds of dictator

27

While the evidence so far suggests health workers have higher level of pro-social motivation than others, an important question is whether this directly maps into higher performance. Because we do not have health worker specific performance outcomes (all of our
performance measures are at the clinic level), we can only test for correlations between health
workers values and performance at the clinic level. We do so in Table 10, exploiting both
within- and across-country variation in levels of other-regarding preferences. We find that
the clinic standardized score on an index including our five measures of other-regarding preferences (including the dictator game outcome) is positively correlated with the coverage rate
among the eligible and negatively correlated with leakage to the ineligible. These results are
consistent with Brock, Lange and Leonard (2013), who find a positive correlation between
altruism as measured through the dictator game and effort provided by doctors in Tanzania,
and with Callen et al. (2013), who find that doctors with higher public sector motivation
are less likely to be absent and less likely to falsify reports.
7.2.2

Intrinsic job motivation

Even holding pro-social motivation constant, ANC nurses and midwives could be more intrinsically motivated to perform well on their job than other professions if the perceived
impacts of their effort are higher (e.g., because potential recipients could die if deprived
of essential health products) or if they have more autonomy and satisfaction in their jobs.
Columns 1-5 of Table 9, which has a format identical to that of Table 8, provide suggestive evidence that this may be the case. The great majority of health workers in all three
countries see their jobs as benefiting society, believe their work is appreciated, and have
high levels of job satisfaction. On all these measures the differences with other professions
are significant. Intrinsic job motivation does not appear significantly correlated with our
performance measures (Table 10, row 2), but there has been evidence from other contexts
that improving motivation through simple interventions improves effort (Brock et al., 2013).
The experimental result that providing financial compensation to health workers for
implementing the Ghana program had no effect on performance is consistent with health
workers being sufficiently motivated without it. The relatively poor performance we observed
under the voucher scheme in Ghana, which undermined health workers autonomy, is also
consistent with an important role for intrinsic motivation.

games are not comparable because the stakes differed (though the evidence on this is mixed, see Andersen
et al. 2011 for some recent evidence that stakes may matter in the ultimatum game). This could explain the
apparent negative selection of health workers in terms of altruism in Ghana, inconsistent with the survey
data presented in Table 8.

28

7.2.3

Extrinsic motivation

Table 9, columns 6 to 8, show that health workers are also highly extrinsically motivated.
They generally report high levels of job insecurity, with the majority of health workers
“strongly disagreeing” with the statement that “health worker jobs are very secure” (column
6). This is consistent with surveys we conducted with head nurses in Kenya and Uganda,
which revealed that around 10% of them knew at least one health worker who had lost her
job due to poor performance. In Ghana, no head nurses reported knowing someone who
had lost their job, but they argued it did not mean misconduct would go unpunished – in
equilibrium, the threat of job loss may be enough to deter misconduct. Importantly, health
workers’ perceived level of job security is significantly lower than that of teachers.
The fact that the quality of their performance is easily observable by community members could further increase extrinsic motivation levels among ANC nurses and midwives.
Indeed, the tasks they have to do are fairly standard, and in the specific context of the
bed net distribution schemes we audited, leakage is easily observable since the eligibility
criteria is a commonly observable one (pregnancy). Thus their performance is less subject
to the “credence good” problem that plagues the health care sector more generally (Das and
Hammer, 2014).
Finally, we find that health workers feel very closely monitored by the Ministry of Health,
though relatively less so in Uganda, where they also performed relatively worse overall (Table
9, column 7). Relative to other professions, the level of perceived monitoring is significantly
higher among health workers (Panel B). Since monitoring coupled with lack of job security
foster accountability, the high perceived levels of monitoring could contribute to health workers’ overall high levels of performance. We observe suggestive evidence for this mechanism
in Table 10 – coverage among the eligible was higher in health facilities whose health workers had a higher extrinsic motivation score. Absenteeism was also lower in these facilities,
though the effect is not significant at conventional levels.
The fact that health workers believe they are accountable could explain the experimental
finding that the threat of top-down audits was ineffective at increasing performance in Ghana:
health workers may have expected there to be an audit even before the threats were made.

8

Conclusion

Increasing coverage of life-saving health products in rural sub-Saharan Africa requires distribution at heavily subsidized prices, and the most potentially cost-effective way to do this
is through existing health systems. But whether government health workers can do this

29

effectively is an open question. Will they respect the eligibility rule? Will they demand
bribes? Will they even bother to implement the program? How can we design distribution
schemes to avoid these problems?
We shed some light on these questions by auditing government distribution schemes in
Kenya and Uganda, as well as implementing and auditing a program in Ghana, in which
we randomly varied several features, including bonus pay, the threat of audits, and whether
the distribution is direct or indirect (through vouchers). A key contribution is measuring
performance, extortion and leakage in various unobtrusive ways (e.g., “mystery client” visits).
Our first result is that distribution programs administered through existing health centers
appear more effective than conventionally believed. Overall, across the three countries, 80%
of eligible women received the subsidy, only 1% of eligible women were asked to pay bribes,
and at most 15% of subsidies leaked to ineligible people, most often for free, and more often
when ineligibles mentioned having a needy child. While the relatively low level of leakage
could come from a lack of demand from ineligibles, in Ghana we experimentally “tempted”
health workers by sending ineligible men with a high willingness to pay for the subsidized
product, and we still found almost no leakage.
Since performance in Ghana was already high, it is ex post unsurprising that our experimental results suggest a limited role for further improving performance through the threat
of top-down audits or bonus pay. On the other hand, voucher schemes, which are popular as
a way to reduce health workers’ discretion and which have been implemented in a number
of countries (most notably in Tanzania), appear to reduce program effectiveness.
While our data comes from only three countries, the programs we consider were implemented by different institutions (the government in Kenya and Uganda, vs. an NGO in
Ghana) and audited at very different points in their implementation (after more than a year
in Kenya and Uganda, vs. in the first few months in Ghana), suggesting that our results may
be representative of similar programs in other contexts. An interesting question is whether
the results carry through to distribution schemes for curative products. The answer seems
to be: somewhat, but not fully. We observe higher rates of extortion for anti-malarial drugs
than for bed nets. But there again, compared with anecdotal reports of large-scale diversion,
the glass appears more full than empty, with a great majority of eligible patients receiving
the drugs for free as intended.
The relatively high levels of performance we observe go against the growing conventional
wisdom that service provision in developing countries is universally poor. In fact, permissions
to conduct this study were difficult to obtain, because the main funding agency (NIH for
the Ghana experiment) and the data collection agency (IPA) were very wary of its highly
sensitive nature. Anyone we discussed our study design with ex ante expected us to observe
30

poor performance levels, in particular much higher non-benevolent leakage. Why are our
results different from expectations?
One consideration is that service quality varies from country to country and so far service
provision has only been studied rigorously in a small subset of countries, mostly outside of
sub-Saharan Africa. The seminal Chaudhury et al. (2006) study includes 6 countries, only
one of them in Africa (Uganda), while many others focus on South Asia (i.e. Das and
Hammer, 2007; Banerjee, Deaton and Duflo 2004; Muralidharan et al. 2011). What’s more,
absenteeism is typically considered to be a good proxy for performance (the Chaudhury et al.
2006 study exclusively measured absenteeism), and while this may be an important metric
in contexts where health centers are small enough that absenteeism of one worker means the
health center is closed, absenteeism may not have direct consequences on service in more
common contexts. In our data, health worker absenteeism does not correlate with coverage or
leakage (Table A2). Another important difference is that health workers responsible for the
subsidy programs we consider are nurses and midwives (who staff ANC clinics throughout
Africa), not medical doctors, whose performance has been shown to be low in multiple
contexts (Das and Hammer, 2007; Das, Hammer and Leonard, 2008).
The nascent literature on selection into public service (Ferraz and Finan, 2011; Dal
Bo, Finan and Rossi, 2013) suggests that increasing the pay of bureaucrats leads to better
selection. In our study areas, health workers are paid on average slightly higher than teachers,
while they have comparable years of education (columns 5-6 of Table 8), so this could explain
positive selection into health work. Alternatively, the high observed levels of pro-social
motivation among health workers could reflect treatment, not selection.
One limitation of our results is that we consider a targeting rule that is very easy to
verify, and so makes it harder to hide leakage. So, it could be that leakage rates are higher
for other, less-obvious targeting schemes. While we fully acknowledge that leakage rates
could be different under a different targeting mechanism, many products/subsidies are in
practice targeted at women or other easily identified subgroups such as young children.
Thus, assessing leakage levels for “easy” targeting rules, as we have done, is important as a
standalone research question even if the external validity to other targeting rules is unknown.

31

References
[1] Alatas, Vivi, Abhijit Banerjee, Rema Hanna, Benjamin A. Olken, Ririn Purnamasari
and Matthew Wai-Poi (2013). Does Elite Capture Matter? Local Elites and Targeted
Welfare Programs in Indonesia. NBER Working paper 18798.
[2] Andersen, Steffen, Seda Ertaç, Uri Gneezy, Moshe Hoffman, and John A. List (2011).
Stakes Matter in Ultimatum Games. American Economic Review 101 (7): 3427-39.
[3] Ashraf, Nava, Oriana Bandiera and Scott Lee (2015). Do-gooders and Go-getters: Career Incentives, Selection, and Performance in Public Service Delivery. Working Paper.
[4] Azeem, Vitus A., Linda Ofori-Kwafo, Evelyn Nuvor and Mary Awelana Addah (2011).
Realizing the MDGs by 215: Anti-corruption in Ghana, Transparency International
and Ghana Integrity Initiative.
[5] Banerjee, Abhijit. V. (1997). A Theory of Misgovernance. Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(4), 1289-332.
[6] Banerjee Abhijit, Angust Deaton and Esther Duflo (2004). Health Care Delivery in
Rural Rajasthan. Economic and Political Weekly, 944-949.
[7] Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Rachel Glennerster, and Dhruva Kothari (2010). Improving Immunization Coverage in Rural India: A Clustered Randomized Controlled
Evaluation of Immunization Campaigns with and without Incentives. British Medical
Journal 340:c2220.
[8] Banerjee, Ritwik, Tushi Baul, and Tanya Rosenblat (2013). Does Unethical Behavior
Affect Choice of Profession: Public vs. Private Sector? Working Paper.
[9] Becker, Gary and George Stigler (1974). Law Enforcement, Malfeasance and the Compensation of Enforcers. Journal of Legal Studies 3(1), 1-19.
[10] Björkman, Martina and Jakob Svensson (2009). Power to the People: Evidence from a
Randomized Field Experiment on Community-Based Monitoring in Uganda. Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(2): 735–769.
[11] Brock, Michelle J., Andreas Lange and Kenneth L. Leonard (2013). Generosity Norms
and Intrinsic Motivation in Health Care Provision: Evidence from the Laboratory
and Field. EBRD Working Paper #147.
[12] Bryce J., C. Boschi-Pinto, K. Shibuya, and R. E. Black, WHO CHERG (2005). WHO
estimates of the causes of death in children. Lancet 365, 1147–1152.
[13] Callen, Michael, Saad Gulzar, Ali Hasinain, Yasir Khan, and Arman Rezaee (2013).
Personalities and Public Sector Performance: Experimental Evidence from Pakistan.
Working paper.
[14] Chaudhury, Nazmul and Jeffrey Hammer (2004). Ghost Doctors: Absenteeism in Rural
Bangladeshi Health Facilities. World Bank Economic Review 18 (3): 423-441.
[15] Chaudhury, Nazmul, Jeffrey Hammer, Michael Kremer, Karthik Muralidharan, and F.
Halsey Rogers (2006). Missing in Action: Teacher and Health Worker Absence in
Developing Countries. Journal of Economic Perspectives 20(1): 91-116.
32

[16] Cohen, Jessica and Pascaline Dupas (2010). Free Distribution or Cost-Sharing? Evidence from a randomized malaria experiment. Quarterly Journal of Economics
125(1): 1-34.
[17] Das, Jishnu and Jeffrey Hammer (2005). Which doctor? Combining vignettes and item
response to measure clinical competence. Journal of Development Economics 78 (2):
348-383.
[18] Das, Jishnu, and Jeffrey Hammer (2007). Money for Nothing: The Dire Straits of
Medical Practice in India. Journal of Development Economics 83(1): 1-36.
[19] Das, Jishnu, and Jeffrey Hammer (2014). Quality of Primary Care in Low-Income Countries: Facts and Economics. Annual Review of Economics 6: 525-553.
[20] Das, Jishnu, Jeffrey Hammer and Kenneth Leonard (2008). The Quality of Medical
Advice in Low-Income Countries. Journal of Economic Perspectives 22(2): 93-114.
[21] Das, Jishnu, Alaka Holla, Michael Kremer and Karthik Muralidharan (2013). Quality
and Accountability in Health: Audit Evidence from Primary Care Clinics in India.
Working paper.
[22] De Allegri, M., P. Marschall, S. Flessa, J. Tiendrebéogo, B. Kouyaté, A. Jahn, and O.
Müller (2010). Comparative cost analysis of insecticide-treated net delivery strategies: sales supported by social marketing and free distribution through antenatal
care. Health policy and planning 25(1): 28-38.
[23] Dal Bo, Ernesto, Frederico Finan and Martin A. Rossi (2013). Strengthening State
Capabilities: The Role of Financial Incentives in the Call to Public Service. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 128(3): 1169-1218.
[24] Di Tella, Rafael and Ernesto Schargrodsky (2003). The Role of Wages and Auditing
during a Crackdown on Corruption in the City of Buenos Aires. Journal of Law and
Economics 46: 269-92.
[25] Dupas, Pascaline (2009). What matters (and what does not) in households’ decision to
invest in malaria prevention? American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings
99(2): 224-230.
[26] Dupas, Pascaline (2014). Short-Run Subsidies and Long-Run Adoption of New Health
Products: Evidence from a Field Experiment. Econometrica 82(1): 197-28.
[27] Ferraz, Claudio, and Frederico Finan (2011). Motivating Politicians: The Impacts of
Monetary Incentives on Quality and Performance. Working paper.
[28] Gertler, Paul, and Christel Vermeersch (2012). Using Performance Incentives to Improve
Health Outcomes. World Bank Working Paper.
[29] Guyatt, H.L., M. H. Gotink, S. A. Ochola, R. W. Snow (2002). Free bed nets to pregnant
women through antenatal clinics in Kenya: a cheap, simple and equitable approach
to delivery. Tropical Medicine and International Health 7: 409–420.
[30] Hanna, Rema and Shing-Yi Wang (2013). Dishonesty and Selection into Public Service.
NBER Working Paper No. 19649.

33

[31] Keefer, Philip and Stuti Khemani (2013). Do Informed Citizens Receive More, or Pay
More? The Impact of Radio on the Government Distribution of Public Health
Benefits. Working paper.
[32] Meredith, Jennifer, Jonathan Robinson, Sarah Walker, and Bruce Wydick (2013). Keeping the Doctor Away: Experimental Evidence on Investment in Preventative Health
Products, Journal of Development Economics 105: 196-210.
[33] Muralidharan, Karthik, Nazmul Chaudhury, Jeffrey Hammer Michael Kremer, and F.
Halsey Rogers (2011). Is there a Doctor in the House? Absent Medical Providers in
India. Working paper.
[34] Niehaus, Paul, Antonia Attanassova, Mariane Bertrand and Sendhil Mullainathan
(2013). Targeting with Agents. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5
(1): 206-238.
[35] Niehaus, Paul and Sandip Sukhtankar (2013). Corruption Dynamics: the Golden Goose
Effect. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5 (4): 230-69.
[36] Olken, Benjamin (2005). Corruption and the Costs of Redistribution: Micro Evidence
from Indonesia. Journal of Public Economics 90 (4-5): 853-870.
[37] Olken, Benjamin (2007). Monitoring Corruption: Evidence from a Field Experiment in
Indonesia. Journal of Political Economy 115(2): 200-249.
[38] Olken, Benjamin, and Rohini Pande (2012). Corruption in Developing Countries. Annual
Review of Economics 4: 479-505.
[39] Olken, Benjamin, and Rohini Pande (2013). Governance Review Paper, J-PAL Governance Initiative.
[40] Rasul, Imran and Daniel Rogger (2015). Management of Bureaucrats and Public Service
Delivery: Evidence from the Nigerian Civil Service. Working paper.
[41] Rauch, James E and Peter B. Evans (2000). Bureaucratic Structure and Bureaucratic
Performance in Less Developed Countries. Journal of Public Economics 75(1): 49-71.
[42] Reinikka, Ritva, and Jakob Svensson (2004). Local Capture: Evidence from a Central
Government Transfer Program in Uganda. Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(1):
679–705.
[43] Reinikka, Ritva, and Jakob Svensson (2011). The power of information in public services:
Evidence from education in Uganda. Journal of Public Economics 95(7–8): 956–966.
[44] Sexton, Alexis R. (2011). Best practices for an insecticide-treated bed net distribution
programme in sub-Saharan eastern Africa. Malaria journal 10(1): 157.
[45] Tarozzi, Alessandro, Aprajit Mahajan, Brian Blackburn, Dan Kopf, Lakshmi Krishnan,
and Joanne Yoong (2014). Micro-Loans, Insecticide-Treated Bednets, and Malaria:
Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial in Orissa, India. American Economic
Review 104(7): 1909-41.
[46] Van Rijckeghem, Caroline and Beatrice Weder (2001). Bureaucratic corruption and the
rate of temptation: do wages in the civil service affect corruption, and by how much?
Journal of Development Economics 65(2): 207-331.
34

[47] World Bank (1993). World Development Report 1993: Investing in Health. New York:
Oxford University Press.
[48] World Bank (2004). World Development Report 2004: Making Services Work for Poor
People. Washington DC: The World Bank and Oxford University Press.
[49] Zuckerman, Miron, Joseph Porac, Drew Lathin, and Edward L. Deci (1978). On the
importance of self-determination for intrinsically-motivated behavior. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin 4(3): 443-446.

35

Table 1. Characteristics of health facilities in the sample and DHS data on bed net coverage

Sample Mean [Std. Dev.] for:
Full Sample

Ghana

Kenya

Uganda

2011

2013

2013

16.01

17.25

13.96

16.30

[15.86]

[13.74]

[16.86]

[17.67]

0.85

0.90

1.00

0.60

[0.36]

[0.30]

[0.00]

[0.49]

27.99

25.73

29.64

29.75

[20.06]

[20.31]

[19.31]

[20.50]

63.06

90.22

49.40

35.98

[61.25]

[77.59]

[36.44]

[29.23]

2.93

2.01

4.15

3.08

[2.28]

[1.20]

[3.31]

[1.58]

0.49

0.23

0.92

0.46

[0.50]

[0.42]

[0.28]

[0.50]

0.13

0.10

0.10

0.21

[0.34]

[0.30]

[0.31]

[0.41]

0.82

0.85

0.96

0.63

[0.39]

[0.36]

[0.20]

[0.49]

0.89

0.81

0.94

0.96

[0.32]

[0.40]

[0.24]

[0.20]

0.02

0.04

0.00

0.00

[0.13]

[0.20]

[0.00]

[0.00]

168

72

48

48

2011

2010/2014

2011

4.3

4.4/n.a.

4.9

Share of households with at least one insecticide-treated net (ITN)

0.53

0.48/0.83

0.60

Average number ITNs per household

0.80

0.80/1.80

1.30

0.22

n.a./0.417

0.33

Panel A. Facility characteristics
Survey year
Years since facility is operating
Public facility
# of monthly ANC new registrants

a

# of monthly ANC follow-up visits
# of midwives and nurses for ANC
Facility conducts outreach ANC activities
Nets available for sale within 10km
Has a maternity ward
Accessible during the rainy season
Health worker privately sells nets at facility
Number of Health Facilities
Panel B. Bed net coverageb
DHS Survey year
Average household size

Percentage of households with at least one ITN for every two
persons who stayed in the household last nightc

Notes: For Ghana sample, includes all health facilities/communities, whether sampled for direct or indirect
(voucher) distribution.
a

ANC stands for antenatal care

b

Source: Demographic and Health Surveys. For each country, we show the average for the region included in
our study.
c

This is the DHS definition for universal coverage

36

Table 2. Coverage and extortion among eligibles
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Backcheck surveys with random subset of ANC Clients

Data Source:

If no

Received net
at first ANC
visit

stockouts a :

If offered net
Received net Received net at some visit:

at first ANC at some ANC Was requested
visit
visit
to pay

If not offered net:
Thinks
reason is
stockout

Does not
know why

Thinks
reason is
already
has one

Overall Mean

0.76

0.81

0.80

0.01

0.25

0.50

0.07

Ghana
Kenya
Uganda

0.74
0.90
0.63

0.77
0.90
0.69

0.79
0.91
0.66

0.01
0.01
0.03

0.11
0.66
0.25

0.63
0.17
0.49

0.04
0.06
0.09

Observations
P-value for equality of means:
Ghana = Kenya
Ghana = Uganda
Kenya = Uganda

2,028

1,495

2,028

1,605

473

473

473

0.00***
0.03**
0.00***

0.00***
0.16
0.00***

0.00***
0.01***
0.00***

0.72
0.04**
0.02**

0.00***
0.01***
0.00***

0.00***
0.03**
0.00***

0.69
0.08*
0.54

0
0
0
0
0
Notes: There are 144 health facilities in the sample (48 per country). Ghana sample: Only includes facilities sampled for direct
distribution.
a Clinics with no stockouts during the sampled time period identified using data from attendance checks in Uganda and Kenya,
and from mystery client visits from Ghana.

37

Table 3. Non-coverage among eligibles: Errors of Exclusion or Efficient Targeting?
(1)

(2)

All

Ghana

Panel A. Dependent Variable: Received net - visit 1
Years of education
-0.0068**
-0.0083*
[0.0030]
[0.0044]

Observations
R-Squared
Dep. Var. Mean

Observations
R-Squared
Dep. Var. Mean

(5)

All countries ANC visits in
month preceding
stockout only

Kenya

Uganda

-0.0026
[0.0034]

-0.0065
[0.0065]

-0.0155
[0.0178]

X

X

X

X

X

2,028
0.357
0.762

771
0.274
0.744

671
0.369
0.903

586
0.349
0.625

131
0.686
0.542

-0.0022
[0.0037]

-0.0066
[0.0063]

-0.0099
[0.0151]

Panel B. Dependent Variable: Received net - any visit
Years of education
-0.0046*
-0.0039
[0.0028]
[0.0040]
Health facility Fixed effects

(4)

Backcheck surveys with random subset of ANC Clients

Data Source:

Health facility Fixed effects

(3)

X

X

X

X

X

2,028
0.361
0.796

771
0.285
0.794

671
0.390
0.914

586
0.364
0.664

131
0.711
0.588

Notes: Standard errors in brackets, clustered at the level of the health facility. Ghana sample: Only includes
facilities sampled for direct distribution. Regressions have month fixed effects to control for potential
stockouts, and include controls for registrant age and parity. The mean number of years of education among
clients surveyed is 5 (4.2 in Ghana, 4.6 in Kenya and 6.9 in Uganda, which adopted free primary education
much earlier). Across all countries (column 1), the gap between the 25th and the 75th percentile in terms of
years of education is 4.5 years.

38

Table 4. Leakage to ineligibles: Evidence from mystery client visits and community interviews
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

"Mystery client" (MC) visits

Data Source:

If clinic had nets in
Clinic out of
stock during
MC told
visit
Acquired Acquired
that the
(as measured
program
program
through other clinic is out
net
net for free
of stock
data sources)a

stock

b

Payment
requested
for net

(9)

(10)

Community Interviews
If Payment requested:
Initial amount Final amount
requested as requested as
percent of full percent of full
pricec

pricec

Respondent
Ineligible
Ineligible
thinks that
young man young man
(male)
received net received net
surveyor
(lower
(upper
could get a
d
net at a
bound)
bound)e
health center

Overall Mean

0.205

0.134

0.0467

0.0378

0.0424

0.902

0.745

0.0993

0.00699

0.0381

Ghana
Kenya
Uganda

0.042
0.368

0.046
0.090
0.472

0.022
0.087
0.110

0.009
0.087
0.110

0.051
0.036
0.011

1.070
0.121
0.323

0.882
0.097
0.323

0.092
0.093
0.113

0.025
0.000

0.069
0.007

766

685

687

684

27

27

2,559

143

289

0.19
0.00***
0.00***

0.03**
0.01***
0.59

0.01***
0.00***
0.59

0.51
0.01**
0.24

0.00***
0.00***
0.00***

0.00***
0.00***

0.98
0.31
0.35

0.31

0.00***

Observations
288
P-value for equality of means:
Ghana = Kenya
Ghana = Uganda
Kenya = Uganda
0.15

Notes: Missing coefficients mean that outcome not collected in that country. There are 144 health facilities in the sample (48 per country). Ghana sample: Only
includes facilities sampled for direct distribution.
a Stockout data collected during attendance spot checks done by the research team in Kenya and Uganda.
b Conditional on there not being a stockout (calculated from attendance spot check data for Kenya and Uganda, and from MC reports in Ghana). Upper bound
in Ghana since health workers could have told mystery clients they were stocked out to get rid of them.
c Full price calculated as the wholesale price converted to local currency using exchange rate during the middle of the ANC registration times.
d Lower bound because set to missing when he received net but someone in the household was pregnant or under 5
e Upper bound because includes people who got a net but were in a household that may have been eligible (was reported to have a pregnant woman or child
under 5). Only upper bound if assume percent of eligibles that get nets weakly higher than percent of ineligibles.

39

Table 5. Leakage: Errors of Inclusion or Efficient targeting?
(1)

(2)

Received free net

Dependent Variable:

Requested for child
If asked, said that had child
MC signaled that educated
Healthworker female

Health facility Fixed effects
Observations
R-Squared

(4)

Mystery Client visits

Data Source:

Requested for pregnant woman

(3)

All

Ghana

Kenya

0.012
[0.023]
0.18***
[0.045]
0.11**
[0.047]
0.0077
[0.016]
-0.012
[0.022]

0.011
[0.014]

0.023
[0.14]

0.0077
[0.0090]
-0.012
[0.013]

X

X

X

X

683
0.402

455
0.114

137
0.466

91
0.375

Mean of the Dependent Variable

0.11
[0.075]

Uganda

0.19**
[0.089]

0.0378
0.009
0.087
0.110
Notes: The first three regressors are mutually exclusive indicator variables reflecting the
strategy used by the mystery client when seeking a bed net from the healthworker. The choice
of strategy was left to the mystery clients, and, possibly owing to differences in training, there
were systematic cross-country differences in the strategies they used, hence the regressors vary
across countries in columns 2-4. Standard errors in brackets, clustered at the level of the health
facility. There are 144 facilities in the sample (Ghana sample excludes voucher clinics).

40

Table 6. Ghana: experimental results
(1)

(2)

(3)

Backcheck surveys with random
subset of ANC Clients
Data Source:
Received
Received If offered net
net/voucher net/voucher at some visit:
Dependent Variable:
at first ANC
at some Was requested
to pay
ANC visit
visit

(4)

(5)

(6)

Surveys with
Program Log
beneficiaries

Community Interviews

Listed
beneficiary
ineligible

Respondent
thinks that
Respondent
(male) surveyor aware of net
could get a net distribution
program
at a health
center

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

"Mystery Client" visits

Payment
requested
for net

Acquired Acquired
program
program
net for free
net

Clinic
stocked
out

Effect of:
Voucher
Audit
Small delivery
Health worker payment
Later program period

Observations
R-Squared
Dep. Var. Mean in direct
distribution facilities

-0.152**

-0.167**

-0.002

0.013

-0.065**

-0.077**

0.036

0.034*

0.006

0.056**

[0.068]

[0.065]

[0.008]

[0.012]

[0.026]

[0.036]

[0.026]

[0.018]

[0.008]

[0.026]

0.029

0.065

0.017

-0.032**

-0.057

0.017

0.003

0.010

-0.012

0.009

[0.057]

[0.055]

[0.013]

[0.014]

[0.044]

[0.066]

[0.031]

[0.025]

[0.013]

[0.040]

-0.001

-0.003

-0.009

0.000

0.060***

0.035

-0.015

-0.016

-0.011

0.026

[0.059]

[0.055]

[0.007]

[0.012]

[0.022]

[0.035]

[0.022]

[0.012]

[0.007]

[0.022]

-0.069

-0.065

-0.003

0.010

-0.009

-0.003

0.010

0.001

0.002

0.009

[0.061]

[0.059]

[0.007]

[0.012]

[0.021]

[0.035]

[0.021]

[0.012]

[0.007]

[0.020]

-0.080*

-0.122***

-0.021**

0.003

0.058*

-0.025

-0.046*

-0.036*

0.001

-0.002

[0.042]

[0.041]

[0.010]

[0.008]

[0.029]

[0.051]

[0.025]

[0.019]

[0.011]

[0.031]

1,158
0.094

1,158
0.108

815
0.023

1,229
0.027

1,322
0.030

1,322
0.025

717
0.028

717
0.029

720
0.029

718
0.060

0.744

0.794

0.00873

0.0144

0.0916

0.716

0.0503

0.0209

0.00833

0.0460

Notes: There are 72 health facilities in the sample, all in Ghana. Each column corresponds to an OLS regression with randomization strata fixed effects and three
health-center level controls: timing of program introduction, baseline ANC attendance and ANC staff size. Standard errors clustered at the health facility level.
***,**,* indicates significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent. "Effect of Audit" is the difference in differences coefficient, so the coefficient on AuditXLater program
period, where "later program period" is the period after the initial audit threat in audit clinics, or after the audit threats were conducted at nearby clinics for nonaudit clinics; all regressions also control for the main effect of audits.

41

Table 7. Performance beyond net distribution
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Backcheck surveys with random
subset of ANC Clients

Data Source:

Got free
Was charged
ACT drugs
Avg. minutes
Average
Received
fee for ACT
Palpated by
Received
last time
spent with
iron tablets
wait time
last time
Dependent Variable:
IPT during
nurse during
brought
during
brought child
nurse during
for
ANC visit
ANC visit
child for
for malaria
ANC visit
ANC checkup
checkup
malaria
treatment
treatment
Overall Mean
17.91
0.960
63.70
0.835
0.730
0.729
0.191
Ghana
Kenya
Uganda

12.294
25.249
20.956

0.937
0.985
0.977

57.900
72.374
65.741

N/A
0.932
0.732

N/A
0.660
0.803

N/A
0.777
0.621

N/A
0.158
0.265

(8)

(9)

ANC
Register
Audit

Mystery
Client visits

% of key
fields filled
ina

Clinic closed
during first
visit attempt

0.964

0.00595

0.963
0.965
0.964

0.006
0.000
0.014

Observations
2,283
2,310
2,246
1,180
1,183
424
424
2,617
1,008
P-value for equality of means:
Ghana = Kenya
0.00***
0.00***
0.03**
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
0.84
0.04**
Ghana = Uganda
0.00***
0.00***
0.32
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
0.94
0.41
Kenya = Uganda
0.01***
0.31
0.41
0.00***
0.00***
0.01***
0.05*
0.87
0.15
Notes: Standard errors for regressions clustered at clinic level. There are respondents from 168 health facilities in the sample (Ghana sample includes all
facilities, including those sampled for indirect distribution via vouchers). Results are identical when the voucher facilities are excluded. Columns 4-7: these
questions were only asked in Kenya and Uganda.
a

Key fields are name, reg date, ANC card #, address, # children, and gestational age at registration.

42

Table 8. Pro-social Motivation and Selection into Health Work
(1)

(2)
(3)
Pro-Social Motivation

(4)

(5)
(6)
Job Characteristics

Survey response on a scale from 1 (don't agree) to 5 (strongly agree) to the
statement:
Helping people
brings personal
satisfaction

Panel A. Country-level averages across health workers
Ghana
4.848
1.463
[0.0481]
[0.109]
Kenya
4.898
1.321
[0.0501]
[0.105]
Uganda
4.631
2.403
[0.0482]
[0.135]
Observations
P-value for equality of means:
Ghana = Kenya
Ghana = Uganda
Kenya = Uganda
Overall Mean

My family comes
first, my work
second

Monthly paya

Years of
education

4.939
[0.0288]
5
[0]
4.785
[0.0316]

3.331
[0.105]
3.265
[0.129]
3.295
[0.136]

235.8
[13.99]
387.7
[16.28]
141.2
[7.149]

14.02
[0.228]
15.87
[0.0630]
15.67
[0.127]

If you help someone, It is important to
they should do you a do good things for
favor in return
my community

450

450

449

444

412

449

0.47
0.00***
0.00***
4.791

0.35
0.00***
0.00***
1.731

0.04**
0.00***
0.00***
4.906

0.69
0.83
0.87
3.300

0.00***
0.00***
0.00***
250.7

0.00***
0.00***
0.17
15.13

0.238**
[0.102]
0.963***
[0.130]
0.708***
[0.123]

-33.10**
[12.95]
-106.1***
[17.90]
-155.4***
[12.71]

0.309***
[0.116]
-5.985***
[0.457]
-1.908***
[0.209]

Panel B. Comparisons with other professions (omitted category: health workers)
Teacher
-0.282***
0.473***
-0.114***
[0.0563]
[0.103]
[0.0330]
Shop owner
-0.347***
1.261***
-1.608***
[0.0801]
[0.145]
[0.136]
Microfinance agent
-0.324***
0.961***
-0.163***
[0.0769]
[0.146]
[0.0525]

Observations
1,136
1,138
1,134
1,127
1,094
1,172
Notes: Panel A: Data from surveys with health workers only. Ghana sample only includes workers from facilities sampled for direct distribution.
Panel B: Data from surveys with health workers, shopkeepers, teachers and MFI agents. Regressions control for country FE. Cols (5) and (6) of
panel B also control for worker gender and age. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
a

Winsorized at 99th percentile. Converted to USD using the exchange rate at the time the survey was taken, except for the other profession
salaries (i.e., non-healthworker salaries) in Ghana: since healthworkers in Ghana were surveyed two years before the other professions (2012 vs
2014), the other profession salaries were first converted to 2012 Ghana cedis using inflation rates, then converted to USD using exchange rates at
the time the healthworker surveys were conducted.

43

Table 9. Intrinsic and Extrinsic Job Motivation
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Survey response on a scale from 1 (don't agree) to 5 (strongly agree) to the statement:
Intrinsic Job Motivation
People in
remote areas
do not have
enough
appreciation
for
[profession]

[Profession ]
should be
paid more

4.341
[0.125]
4.081
[0.133]
3.831
[0.0979]

3.135
[0.133]
2.378
[0.163]
3.087
[0.113]

4.710
[0.0734]
4.657
[0.0930]
4.691
[0.0491]

1.288
[0.0726]
1.241
[0.0760]
1.523
[0.0652]

4.834
[0.0609]
4.912
[0.0646]
4.365
[0.0960]

2.276
[0.154]
3.504
[0.165]
4.007
[0.0932]

449

448

447

448

449

448

446

0.12
0.54
0.01**
4.909

0.15
0.00***
0.13
4.094

0.00***
0.78
0.00***
2.890

0.66
0.83
0.74
4.688

0.65
0.02**
0.01***
1.352

0.38
0.00***
0.00***
4.703

0.00***
0.00***
0.01***
3.220

-0.0756
[0.0646]
-0.782***
[0.105]
-0.168**
[0.0759]

0.443***
[0.0763]
N/A

-0.382***
[0.0642]
N/A

-0.152
[0.122]
N/A

0.0823
[0.110]

N/A

N/A

As a

This [work
[profession ], I
I am very
have the
place ] plays a
responsibility very important satisfied with
role in this
my job
to be a role
community
model in my
community
Panel A. Country-level averages across health workers
Ghana
4.909
4.896
[0.0334]
[0.0378]
Kenya
4.912
4.971
[0.0643]
[0.0291]
Uganda
4.879
4.866
[0.0304]
[0.0303]
Observations
450
P-value for equality of means:
Ghana = Kenya
0.96
Ghana = Uganda
0.52
Kenya = Uganda
0.64
Overall Mean
4.900
Panel B. Comparisons with other professions
Teacher
-0.0120
[0.0383]
Shop owner
-0.524***
[0.0797]
Microfinance
-0.524***
[0.0719]

Extrinsic Motivation

(omitted category: health workers)
-0.152***
-0.447***
0.499***
[0.0346]
[0.106]
[0.121]
-1.008***
-0.139
0.458***
[0.111]
[0.114]
[0.150]
-0.330***
-1.026***
0.0481
[0.0571]
[0.146]
[0.144]

[Profession ] jobs
This
are very secure -- This [facility/school] is
[facility/school]
even if a worker closely monitored by
is closely
the Ministry of
does a bad job
monitored by
[Health/Education]
they won't be
local NGOs
fired

Observations
1,138
1,133
1,134
1,126
1,131
997
870
867
Notes: Panel A: Data comes from surveys with health workers at 144 health facilities. Ghana sample only includes workers from facilities sampled for direct
distribution. Panel B: Data from surveys with health workers, shopkeepers, teachers and MFI agents. Each column is a separate regression, with controls for country
FE. Standard errors in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

44

Table 10. Correlations between performance, health worker and clinic characteristics
(1)
Data Source:

(3)

Backcheck surveys with
random subset of ANC Clients

Got
net/voucher
Dependent Variable:
at first visit
to clinic

Healthworker characteristics

(2)

(4)

(5)

Community
Interviews

Respondent
Payment
thinks that
Got
requested for
(male) surveyor
net/voucher
net
could get a net
at any visit
(conditional
at a health
to clinic
on offer)
center

(6)

(7)

(8)

Attendance
checks

"Mystery Client" visits

Payment
requested
for net

(9)

High potential Clinic
Acquired
opportunity
stocked
program net
to acquire net
out

Health
worker was
absent
during spot
check

Pro-social motivation (standardized index)a

0.037*
[0.022]

0.038*
[0.020]

0.0004
[0.004]

0.006
[0.008]

-0.0034
[0.0093]

-0.030***
[0.011]

-0.045**
[0.021]

-0.029
[0.024]

0.0029
[0.039]

Intrinsic job motivation (standardized index)a

0.022
[0.017]

0.015
[0.016]

0.001
[0.003]

0.01**
[0.006]

0.0079
[0.0086]

0.011
[0.0078]

0.023
[0.021]

-0.013
[0.018]

-0.026
[0.022]

Extrinsic job motivation (standardized index)a

0.038*
[0.023]

0.03
[0.021]

-0.003
[0.004]

-0.0006
[0.009]

-0.01
[0.0090]

0.014
[0.012]

0.014
[0.022]

0.016
[0.026]

-0.029
[0.019]

Similarity to local population (standardized index)b

-0.0021
[0.019]

0.0029
[0.017]

-0.0004
[0.003]

-0.008
[0.009]

0.00012
[0.011]

0.012
[0.013]

0.03
[0.020]

0.059***
[0.021]

0.014
[0.017]

-0.046
[0.040]
0.026
[0.077]
0.0089*
[0.0052]
-0.43***
[0.12]
-0.15**
[0.071]

-0.038
[0.037]
0.019
[0.074]
0.011**
[0.0045]
-0.49***
[0.12]
-0.14**
[0.068]

0.008
[0.008]
0.0005
[0.007]
0.0001
[0.0006]
0.002
[0.008]
0.07**
[0.03]

0.03*
[0.02]
0.01
[0.03]
-0.003
[0.003]
0.05
[0.05]
0.06*
[0.03]

-0.0071
[0.015]
0.013
[0.022]
-0.0054**
[0.0023]
-0.043
[0.041]
-0.024
[0.021]

-0.038**
[0.018]
0.014
[0.021]
-0.00087
[0.0017]
-0.063**
[0.024]
-0.026
[0.042]

-0.0019
[0.031]
0.074**
[0.037]
-0.0057
[0.0042]
-0.11*
[0.057]
0.029
[0.074]

0.069*
[0.036]
0.018
[0.049]
-0.0063
[0.0055]
0.078
[0.057]
0.16
[0.11]

-0.02
[0.045]
-0.016
[0.074]
-0.0022
[0.0062]

2028
0.065
0.76

2028
0.073
0.8

1549
0.035
0.01

2559
0.014
0.1

765
0.02
0.041

766
0.043
0.043

762
0.082
0.14

766
0.133
0.13

96
0.242
0.083

Clinic characteristics

Above-median ANC registrants
Clinic accessible in the rainy season
Total number of staff working in ANC
Private facility
NGO facility

Observations
R-squared
Mean of the dependent variable

-0.061
[0.053]

Notes: Each column is a separate regression, with controls for country fixed effects, the experimental treatments in Ghana, and healthworker age and gender. Columns 1 and 2 also control for
whether there were any stockouts in those clinics, as measured by the attendance checking team in Uganda and Kenya (there is no control in Ghana where stockouts were determined by
healthworker effort). Column 9 excludes Ghana where no attendance checks were performed. Standard errors clustered at the level of the health in brackets. ***,**,* indicates significance at 1, 5
and 10 percent. Ghana sample: Direct distribution clinics only.
a

Indexes are averages across standardized variables as grouped in Tables 8 and 9, which are then re-standardized to have a mean of 0 and std dev of 1. The pro-social motivation index also contains
the share left in the dictator game (shown in Fig 3).

b

The similarity index is the average across standardized versions of three variables: (1) percentage of ANC registrants who have the same ethnicity as the health worker; (2) indicator for being born
in same region as clinic; (3) indicator for being born in same district as clinic.

45

Table A1. Ghana experimental sample: Summary statistics on participating health centers and balance check

Coeff. Estimate (s.e) on Treatment Dummy:
Sample Mean
(Std. Dev.)

Voucher

Audit
Threat

Small
Delivery

Health worker
Payment

25.73
(20.24)
90.22
(77.32)
2.01
(1.20)
0.23
(0.42)
17.25
(13.69)

-0.45
(6.33)
11.67
(24.51)
-0.06
(0.43)
-0.05
(0.14)
-3.81
(4.49)

2.56
(4.79)
11.01
(19.41)
-0.42
(0.29)
0.00
(0.11)
-0.43
(3.43)

-1.49
(6.26)
1.56
(22.05)
-0.29
(0.35)
-0.05
(0.13)
-1.12
(4.32)

-1.79
(6.26)
10.40
(22.05)
-0.37
(0.35)
-0.12
(0.13)
-2.69
(4.35)

0.25
(0.43)
0.06
(0.23)
0.85
(0.36)
2.08
(2.91)
0.07
(0.26)
0.81
(0.40)
86.29
(49.43)
0.10
(0.30)
0.04
(0.20)
1.91
(1.48)

0.02
(0.12)
-0.02
(0.06)
-0.02
(0.12)
-0.27
(1.10)
-0.08
(0.08)
-0.08
(0.13)
-1.54
(16.72)
-0.02
(0.11)
0.06
(0.06)
-0.24
(0.49)

0.06
(0.11)
0.00
(0.05)
-0.08
(0.09)
-0.50
(0.70)
0.03
(0.06)
0.11
(0.09)
8.49
(12.77)
-0.03
(0.07)
0.03
(0.05)
0.05
(0.37)

-0.12
(0.13)
0.13
(0.070)*
-0.04
(0.10)
0.96
(0.90)
0.00
(0.08)
0.00
(0.11)
-10.62
(14.34)
0.04
(0.09)
0.04
(0.04)
0.34
(0.42)

0.04
(0.13)
0.13
(0.070)*
-0.04
(0.10)
-0.21
(0.90)
-0.08
(0.08)
0.00
(0.11)
-6.80
(14.34)
0.04
(0.09)
0.04
(0.04)
-0.16
(0.42)

Panel A: Baseline Characteristics of Health Centers
# of monthly ANC new registrantsa
# of monthly ANC follow-up visits
# of midwives and nurses for ANC
Facility conducts outreach ANC activities
Years since facility is operating
Facility is a CHPS compoundb
Public facility
Has a maternity ward
# of other ANC facilities within 10 km radius
Has distributed nets in the past
Accessible during the rainy season
Distance (in km) from region capital
Nets available for sale within 10km
Health worker privately sells nets at facility
ANC client Dictator Game: Amount given (out of 10 GHC)
Panel B: Program Implementation Details
Phase-in Rank (1 to 6)

3.50
0.40
-0.06
-0.62
0.54
(1.71)
(0.54)
(0.41)
(0.51)
(0.51)
Initial stock of nets delivered
184.03
2.08
12.50
-129.17
8.33
(146.24)
(34.13)
(32.48)
(43.800)***
(43.80)
Total # of staff who attended training
4.59
-0.58
-0.73
0.21
0.20
(2.16)
(0.81)
(0.52)
(0.63)
(0.63)
Share of ANC staff trained on SALI program
0.81
-0.16
-0.05
0.17
-0.02
(0.28)
(0.080)**
(0.07)
(0.080)**
(0.08)
In-Charge present for training
0.68
-0.10
0.08
0.13
-0.29
(0.47)
(0.13)
(0.11)
(0.14)
(0.140)**
Duration of program (days)
109.06
-8.73
-0.89
2.96
3.04
(22.39)
(7.80)
(5.74)
(4.23)
(4.23)
Number of Health Facilities with Treatment
Total N=72
24
24
24
24
Notes: Each row corresponds to one OLS regression. Standard errors in brackets. ***,**,* indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10% levels.
a

ANC stands for Antenatal Care.
in remote areas.

b

CHPS stands for Community and Health Planning Services, these are community-based services

46

Table A2. Correlations between performance measures and absenteeism
(1)

Data Source:

(2)

(3)

Backcheck surveys with
random subset of ANC Clients

Payment
Got
Got
requested for
net/voucher at net/voucher at
Dependent Variable:
net
first visit to
any visit to
(conditional
clinic
clinic
on offer)

Healthworker characteristics
Share absent

Clinic characteristics

Above-median ANC registrants
Clinic accessible in the rainy season
Total number of staff working in ANC
Private facility
NGO facility

0.0015
[0.091]

0.00028
[0.088]

-0.006
[0.008]

(4)

(5)

Community
Interviews
Respondent
thinks that
(male) surveyor
could get a net
at a health
center

(6)

(7)

(8)

"Mystery Client" visits

Payment
Acquired
requested for
program net
net

-0.03
[0.03]

-0.025
[0.023]

0.0041
[0.063]

High potential
opportunity to
acquire net

Clinic
stocked
out

0.025
[0.12]

-0.023
[0.16]

-0.033

-0.026

0.008

0.03

-0.0087

-0.046**

-0.026

0.026

[0.039]
0.019
[0.079]
0.0048
[0.0052]
-0.46***
[0.16]
-0.19**
[0.079]

[0.035]
0.012
[0.078]
0.0071
[0.0043]
-0.51***
[0.16]
-0.17**
[0.076]

[0.008]
0.0008
[0.006]
0.0002
[0.0006]
0.004
[0.008]
0.07**
[0.03]

[0.02]
0.01
[0.03]
-0.002
[0.003]
0.04
[0.05]
0.06*
[0.03]

[0.014]
0.015
[0.024]
-0.0052**
[0.0024]
-0.04
[0.037]
-0.018
[0.021]

[0.018]
0.0064
[0.021]
-0.002
[0.0019]
-0.054***
[0.019]
-0.036
[0.042]

[0.028]
0.054*
[0.028]
-0.0066
[0.0042]
-0.066
[0.042]
-0.014
[0.079]

[0.032]
-0.02
[0.045]
-0.0053
[0.0046]
0.11***
[0.036]
0.12
[0.11]

2028
2028
1549
2559
765
766
762
766
Observations
0.078
0.082
0.034
0.01
0.016
0.035
0.086
0.124
R-squared
0.76
0.8
0.01
0.1
0.041
0.043
0.14
0.13
Dep. Var. Mean
Each column is a separate regression, with controls for country fixed effects, the experimental treatments, and whether the healthworkers had the "honesty test" as a part of their dictator
game. Columns (1) and (2) also control for whether there were any stockouts in those clinics, as measured by the attendance checking team in Uganda and Kenya (there is no control in
Ghana where stockouts were determined by healthworker effort). Standard errors clustered at the level of the health facility in brackets. ***,**,* indicates significance at 1, 5 and 10
percent. Ghana sample includes only facilities sampled for direct distribution.
a

Indexes are averages across standardized variables as grouped in Tables 8 and 9, which are then re-standardized to have a mean of 0 and std dev of 1. The other-regarding preferences
index also contains the share left in the dictator game (shown in Fig 3).

47

Table A3. Ghana: experimental results for total local leakage
(1)
Dependent Variable:
Total local leakage rate
(administrative data estimate)
Effect of:
Voucher

-0.074*
[0.041]

Audit

-0.027
[0.028]

Small delivery

0.013
[0.035]

Health worker payment

-0.007
[0.036]

Observations
R-Squared

71
0.288

Dep. Var. Mean in direct distribution facilities

0.147

Notes: The table presents the results of an OLS regression with randomization
strata fixed effects and three health-center level controls: timing of program
introduction, baseline ANC attendance and ANC staff size. The local leakage
rate is the percent of bed nets unaccounted for, computed as described in main
text Section 5.2). There are only 71 observations (instead of 72) because one
facility refused to participte in the bed net distribution program. Instead of
imputing a zero leakage rate to that facility we exclude it from the analysis.
Standard errors clustered at the health facility level. ***,**,* indicates
significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent. "Effect of Audit" is the main effect, not the
diff-in-diff coefficient, since there is only one measurement of this variable per
health center (no pre- and post- measurements).

48

Figure 1. Clinic-level Estimate of the Number of Program Bed Nets Unaccounated for (Ghana only)
Figure 1A. Number of nets unaccounted for

Figure 1B. Percent of nets unaccounted for

Note: Based on 47 health facilities with direct distribution (all in Ghana). For each facility, the estimated
number of program nets unaccounted for is the difference between the total number of nets delivered to the
facility and the estimated number of "valid" (eligible) beneficiaries listed in the program ledgers. The
prevalance of invalid ledger entries was established through audits of randomly selected listed beneficiaries.
These audit surveys were misplaced by the survey team for one facility that is why we have only 47 and not
48 observations.

49

Figure 2. Health worker attendance data

Notes: Individual-level data from one unnannounced spot check. Kenya: 188 health workers from 48
facilities. Uganda: 214 health workers from 48 facilities. No unannounced spot check were
performed in Ghana.

50

Figure 3. Other-regarding preferences of health workers compared to others

0

2

Density

4

6

Dictator Game Outcome: Kenya

0

.2

.4
.6
Share left in envelope

.8

1

ANC clients (N=306, mean=.107)
Teachers (n=284, mean=.162)
Health workers (n=137, mean=.262)

0

.5

Density
1 1.5

2

2.5

Dictator Game Outcome: Ghana

0

.2

.4
.6
Share left in envelope

1

.8

ANC clients (n=286, mean=.191)
Teachers (n=99, mean=.441)
Shop keepers (n=98, mean=.48)
Bank/MFI employees (n=100, mean=.495)
Health workers (n=208, mean=.26)

0

1

Density

2

3

Dictator Game Outcome: Uganda

0

.2

.4
.6
Share left in envelope

.8

1

ANC clients (n=87, mean=.177)
Teachers (n=71, mean=.206)
Shop keepers (n=37, mean=.223)
Bank/MFI employees (n=29, mean=.252)
Health workers (n=149, mean=.27)

Notes: The dictator game allowed the participant to leave as much money as they
wanted, anonymously, for a community member, out of an envelope with 10 bills.

51

