NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE MEASUREMENT OF WEALTH:
RECESSIONS, SUSTAINABILITY AND INEQUALITY
Joseph E. Stiglitz
Working Paper 21327
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21327

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2015

Paper presented at a special session of the International Economic Association World Congress, Dead
Sea, Jordan, June, 2014 sponsored by the OECD. I am deeply indebted to the other members of the
panel—Gonzalo Hernandez Licona, Francois Bourguignon, and Martine Durand—and to Martin Guzman
for their insightful comments, and also to Ruoke Yang and Feiran Zhang for research assistance. Financial
assistance from INET and the Roosevelt Institute Inequality Project, and support by the Ford, McArthur,
and Bernard and Irene Schwartz foundations are gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Joseph E. Stiglitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Measurement of Wealth: Recessions, Sustainability and Inequality
Joseph E. Stiglitz
NBER Working Paper No. 21327
July 2015
JEL No. D31,E21,E22
ABSTRACT
This paper considers two central problems in our statistical frameworks which impair the ability to
use wealth to assess economic sustainability or the impacts of economic downturns. Some increases
in wealth may reflect increased economic rents—in particular, land and exploitation rents—and their
capitalized value, unrelated to an increase in the productive capacity of the economy. Another major
problem in our wealth accounts is the “missing capital” required to explain the marked decrease in
economic output, at the time of the recession and in the years following, that cannot be fully accounted
for by a decrease in measured inputs. When account is taken of this missing capital, the adverse effects
of austerity appear much greater than suggested by the standard national income accounts.

Joseph E. Stiglitz
Uris Hall, Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Room 212
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
jes322@columbia.edu

Introduction
This paper considers two central problems in the measurement of wealth within the existing
statistical frameworks, which impair both the ability to assess economic sustainability and the
impacts of an economic downturn. These measurement problems have, in turn, led to
confusion concerning the interpretation to be given to the dramatic increase in the wealth‐
output ratio in recent decades.
The Commission on the Measurement of Economic Performance and Social Progress
emphasized the central role of wealth in the assessment of sustainability. The proposition was
simple: if wealth (with a growing population, wealth per capita), appropriately measured, was
non‐decreasing, then the given path of consumption could be sustained in the future.1 The
Commission noted, however, that there might be significant problems in the valuation of
assets—exemplified by real estate bubbles (which might give the impression that wealth was
larger than it was and that, therefore, the economy was on a sustainable path when in fact it
was not, as occurred in the 2008 financial crisis). It also noted the difficulties of assessing
natural/environmental assets, particularly because there were no markets for such assets.
But standard measures of “wealth” may not adequately reflect sustainability for other reasons,
or more broadly an increase in measured wealth may not reflect the ability of the economy to
sustain higher rates of consumption. Here, we focus on three key instances, in two of which an
increase in wealth does not measure an increase in future productive capacities and in one of
which our wealth metrics do not capture a diminution in the economy’s productive potential.
Two anomalies2
The possibility that there might not be a close correspondence between measured wealth and a
variable ("K" for capital) that assesses the future productive potential of the economy helps
explain a disquieting aspect of Piketty’s recent book3: He showed that the wealth output ratio
increased enormously in recent decades. In spite of this, average wages did not increase, and
interest rates did not fall. It is hard to obtain such results in any standard production function if
we interpret wealth as capital.

1

Arrow et al. (2012).
The ideas in this section are elaborated upon in Stiglitz (2015a,b).
3
Piketty (2014).
2

1

There is a second puzzle. It has been observed that the labor’s share of income is decreasing.
There is a wealth of evidence arguing that the elasticity of substitution is less than unity.4 If
wealth is increasing, relative to the labor supply, then the share of labor should be increasing.
But these puzzles are immediately resolved if the measured wealth is not what is meant by
productive capital. Wealth and capital are both aggregates, but they represent different
aggregates. It is possible that wealth has gone up, but productive capital has not gone up
commensurately, or may even have gone down. That appears to have been what has happened
in several countries.5
A quick look at some of the key sources of increases of wealth shows that some may not lead to
an increase in the economy's productive potential—and some may even lead to a decrease in
its potential.
I. Land
The most important source of the disparity between the growth of wealth and the growth of
productive capital is land: much of the increase in wealth is an increase in the value of land—
not associated with any increase in the amount of land (and, therefore, of the productivity of
the economy). An increase in the value of land in the Riviera or in Southampton does not
increase the productive capacities of the land. Even if measured wealth has increased, if the
value of “K” has decreased, the economy’s future productive potential has decreased: the
amount of land is no greater now than it was fifty years ago.
Why the value of land might increase (and in particular, why it might have increased so
dramatically in recent decades) is a question I discuss more extensively elsewhere. (See Stiglitz,
2015a,b,c.) Note, for instance, that if the rents associated with land are fixed and last in
perpetuity, then a slight decrease in the (long term real) interest rate can lead to a large
increase in the value of land.6 As we noted earlier, the Commission, deliberating as a housing
bubble was forming in the United States, Spain, and many other countries, could not help
observe that market prices of land and other assets may not represent “equilibrium prices,” i.e.
4

See: Arrow et al (1961), Young (2013). It should be noted that some authors have recently argued otherwise. See
Mallick (2007). But the assumption of an elasticity of substitution greater than unity has one very disturbing
consequence: in models where the factor bias (i.e. whether technological change is capital or labor augmenting) is
endogenous, the steady state equilibrium is a saddle point. The economy is unstable. Stiglitz (2014).
5
There is a third important puzzle: one can only explain a fraction of the increase in wealth (in the case of the US,
between one half and three quarters) on the basis of savings, from national income data. In some cases, they
suggest a decline in the wealth income ratio (assuming wealth were capital), when there appears to be an
increase. Stiglitz (2015a, 2015b) refers to this as the wealth residual—the unexplained increase in wealth. But this
is at least less of a puzzle once it is recognized that wealth and capital are different concepts. The discussion in
sections I and II below explain why wealth can go up even when capital is declining.
6
If R is the rent from the land, and r is the real interest rate, then the value of land VT = R/r, so that there is an
equiproportionate increase in the value of land from a permanent decrease in the real interest rate.

2

may not even provide an accurate assessment of the present discounted value of future rents
to be derived from the asset. (That is why the Commission took the eclectic approach of
suggesting a dashboard that would include along with value measures physical metrics, e.g. of
the atmospheric concentration of greenhouse gases and changes in those numbers.)
Bubbles are a pervasive and recurrent aspect of market economies. While recessions may
represent “corrections”, the economy may not fully correct the prices of real estate, so the
economy simply moves from one bubble path to another.7
The central point of this section is simple: an increase in wealth reflecting an increase in the
value of real estate does not, in any way, measure an increase in the productive capacity of the
economy.
II. Increased rents capitalized in financial assets8
Some increases in wealth (as conventionally measured) may reflect increased economic rents,
unrelated to an increase in the productive capacity of the economy. Rather, they reflect an
increase in the ability of those in the financial sector, or more broadly, “capitalists”, to exploit
others—workers, consumers, and ordinary citizens. The result is that overall, changes in
measured wealth in recent decades probably overstate true “capital” accumulation. (In the
third part of this paper, we will argue that, in the context of the Great Recession, our metrics
understated the adverse effects of the downturn, by understating the adverse impacts on
wealth and wealth accumulation.)
Such would be the case if the average degree of monopoly in the economy increases—if, for
instance, network economies became more important, so that the fraction of the economy in
which monopolies or oligopolies dominate is increased. While hard to quantify, and varying
from country to country, in almost all countries these exploitive rents are significant, and in
many countries they seem to have gone up significantly.
The effective degree of monopoly could increase as well if firms get better at exploiting
whatever market power they have—if, for instance, firms get better in discriminating among
different categories of customers.

7

The recurrence of bubbles has been noted by Kindleberger (1978) and may reflect the fundamental instability of
economies with heterogeneous capital goods in the absence of a full set of futures markets extending infinitely far
into the future (or without perfect foresight extending infinitely far into the future), analyzed by Hahn (1966) and
Shell and Stiglitz (1967). Stiglitz (2014) shows the same dynamic instability arises in models with productive capital
(K) and land: unless the price of land is set initially correctly, the dynamics do not lead the economy to the steady
state equilibrium.
8
Some of the ideas in this section are elaborated on in greater length in Stiglitz 2015a.

3

Typically, the value of these rents gets capitalized into the value of financial assets—in the
value of those who can lay claim to the monopoly rents. Such exploitation represents a
redistribution from workers to capitalists, not an increase in the productive capacity of the
economy. Indeed, because there are distortions associated with the exercise of monopoly
power, the true productive potential of the economy has, in this sense, been reduced. If we
included in our accounting framework the present discounted value of real wages (human
capital), we would note that the increase in financial capital as a result of an increase in
monopoly power is less than the diminution in human capital. But, of course, wealth, or
capital, as conventionally measured does not include human capital.
But there are more subtle forms of "exploitation." Government allows too‐big‐to‐fail banks.
The value of those banks is higher than they otherwise would be, because of government risk‐
absorption. But the contingent‐liability of the government is not capitalized; it doesn’t show up
in the national balance sheet, and so it appears as if the wealth of the economy has increased.
But with appropriate metrics (where the decreased after tax wealth of wage‐earning citizens, as
a result of the increase in the expected present discounted value of the higher taxes that they
will have to pay to bail out the banks), just the opposite would have happened: we would have
recognized that because of the distortions associated with too‐big‐to‐fail banks, the productive
capacity of the economy has been diminished, with the decreased “wealth” of taxpayers being
larger than the increased value of banks; these metrics would have told us that the bail‐outs are
Pareto‐inefficient, and that the wealth of the economy has been diminished.9
Although the capitalization of exploitive rents may perhaps represent the largest part of the
increase in financial wealth associated with an increase in rents, changes in taxes and
regulatory regimes can have similar effects.
What’s missing?
In each of these situations, a change in the flow of resources that accrues to “capital” gets
capitalized in wealth, and the present discounted value of the decreased flow to the rest of the
economy is not reflected in our wealth metrics. We don’t, for instance, value the stream of tax
revenues to the government or the reduced wages accruing to workers as a result of increased
market exploitation.
There is a further potential problem, which we can only hint at here: Market intertemporal
pricing is in general not correct. Wealth (in the conventional accounts) uses the private sectors’
after tax returns. Whether a shift in taxation from capital to labor increases or decreases
societal welfare depends on labor and savings elasticities, and societal evaluations of the
9

This discussion raises similar issues as those that the Commission discussed in moving economic activities from
the public to the private sector.

4

resulting redistribution; changes in wealth may not only inadequately reflect these changes in
societal welfare—the two may move in different directions. For instance, measured wealth
won’t reflect the diminution of the present discounted value of what workers receive, while the
effects on capital are ambiguous—the measured wealth of the economy will increase as a result
of the increased flow of profits; but will decrease as a result of the higher after tax return. Tax
changes which lower the average tax on capital but increase the marginal tax can, on this
account, have a far greater impact on wealth—even if because of the increase in the marginal
tax rate, the tax structure is more distortionary.
Consider, for instance, a neoclassical production function where output is a function of capital,
K, labor, L, and land, T. Assume L and T are fixed. In the absence of taxation, wealth, W, is just
the sum of the value of K and land:
W = K + pT,
where p is the price of land, which in steady state is just equal to the return on land divided by
the return on capital: p = FT/FK.
It is easy to see that dW/dK = 1 + pT (FTK /FT ‐ FKK/FK) > 1 provided only that capital and land are
complements, i.e. wealth goes up more than the increase in capital stock.
But now assume that the government imposes a tax on the return to land at the rate t, but that
the return to capital—and therefore the level of K—remains unchanged. Then p = FT(1‐ t)/FK.
Wealth decreases, but the productive capacity of the economy is unaffected. In life cycle
models, the lower value of land typically leads to a higher value of K. If so, W and K can actually
move in opposite directions; the lower value of wealth is associated with an increase in
aggregate output.10
There are many similar examples. Many of the changes in wealth, associated with human,
social, and natural capital, may not be captured in our wealth metrics. The next section looks at
one particularly important example.

10

For instance, in the standard overlapping generations model, where individuals live for two periods, working
only in the first, the steady state value of K is given by s(K)w(K) – (1 –t) TFT/FK = K, where s is the savings rate of
workers and w is their wage. If d sw/dK < 0, then an increase in the tax rate t leads to an increase in K and a
lowering of wealth.

5

III. Missing real capital: The destruction of human and other forms of capital in recessions
Recessions destroy capital and impede its accumulation. We can trace out the consequences
for plant and equipment, as revealed by investment data.11 (Even then, we may not do so fully:
we don’t adequately monitor maintenance expenditures.12)
But we don’t adequately trace out the other forms of capital, and in particular, human capital.
There are several important effects.
The first has to do with education, and the effects would appear to be ambiguous: Some stay in
school longer when no jobs are available. It should be clear that a priori, the effects on student
enrollment are ambiguous: Does increased competition for jobs lead to greater incentives for
formal education? Or do reduced employment opportunities reduce incentives? Does the
effect of a lower opportunity cost outweigh these incentive effects?
On the other hand, with a prolonged downturn, many can’t afford to stay in school. Many
worry that if they have to borrow to go to school, if they can’t get a job, the debt burden will be
enormous. (These effects are obviously stronger in countries like the US where children and
their parents have to pay the bulk of costs, where tuition is high and there is greater reliance on
loan programs where repayments are not contingent on the borrower’s income. In the case of
the US, further discouragement results from a bankruptcy law that says that student debt
cannot be discharged even in bankruptcy.13 Still a further adverse effect arises from the
particular way that government support is provided: by states, who have balanced budget
frameworks, and who, accordingly, typically cut back support for higher education in a
recession, forcing much higher tuitions.14
In practice, it appears that in normal downturns, the first effect (increased demand for
education as a result of a lowered opportunity cost) dominates, but there is increasing evidence
11

We could also measure the increased market value of capital (including the increased value of equities) but for
reasons that should be clear from the discussion of Part II of this paper, that would not be a good measure of the
change in wealth. The economic downturn worsens the bargaining position of workers, lowering their real wage
(increasing the ability of firms to “exploit” workers). The resulting increase in the value of measured capital is
offset by a corresponding decrease in the present discounted value of wages (human capital), but the latter is
typically not recorded. (Shapiro‐Stiglitz (1984) provides a formal model showing how higher unemployment
lowers the real wage.)
12
Thus, traditional analyses describing the decline in productivity in recessions as a result of labor hoarding may
not be quite correct: some of the labor was spent in maintaining plant and equipment—doing maintenance that
had been deferred during the preceding boom. By the same token, the markedly different patterns of productivity
in recent downturns—reflecting ruthless management that quickly trims any unneeded labor—may not be as
positive as the numbers on their face suggest: they do not capture the impacts on the maintenance of either
human or physical capital stocks.
13
See the discussion in Stiglitz (2012).
14
This has been especially true in the 2008 recession, because of its severity and duration. For a discussion of the
impacts on tuition and student indebtedness, see Stiglitz (2013).

6

that in the current more extended downturn, at least in the US, over time the second effect has
become more important, especially for advanced (graduate) education.15
Other Hidden Losses
In addition to the unmeasured change in societal wealth from these changes in investments in
formal education, there are several other effects.
First, there is a reduction in the quality of education as government cuts back on funding, not
only for tertiary education, but also for primary and secondary.
Secondly, other government cutbacks affect both learning and future productivity: Reduced
access to health care and nutrition on the part of the poor can have life‐long effects, including
in the ability of children to learn; and these effects become especially important as the number
of children living in poverty increase with an economic downturn.
Perhaps the most adverse effects are related to a decrease in job experience (learning on the
job)—long recognized as a major part of human capital. There are especially adverse effects on
young people who can’t get jobs: in a period in which they should be accumulating skills and
work experience, their skills atrophy. Several studies16 have documented that those entering
the labor market at a time when unemployment is high experience significantly diminished life
time incomes. Such adverse effects are particularly significant, of course, among those who do
not get jobs. And when these adverse effects are aggregated over the large fractions of young
people who face extended unemployment (youth unemployment in Europe as a whole has
been persistently almost 25%, and in the most countries most afflicted by the euro crisis, over
50%) one obtains significant losses in human capital.
But this is not the only loss: Those in their 50’s and early 60’s are forced to retire early. They
had productive skills (human capital) which, in more normal times, would have yielded returns
for years to come. As a result of the crisis, all of this human capital is written down to zero—or
would be if we had a good set of accounts.
There is another effect in those countries where there has been a cutback in pensions and/or
where individuals rely on their own savings: many who would have retired are forced to keep
working (often at low skilled jobs), as their retirement income becomes greatly diminished
(especially with QE, quantitative easing, those who had put their money into “safe” assets—
government bonds—saw their incomes eviscerated).
15

Note that in any case, the market for education is distorted: there may either be too much or too little
investment in education. Because of signaling/screening effects as well as societal benefits arising from a more
education populace, social returns to education may be greater or less than the private returns.
16
Khan (2010), Brunner and Kuhn (2010), Taylor (2013).

7

While as a result, labor force participation of the elderly might not have declined as much as it
would otherwise, it is worth noting that there are adverse welfare effects both from the
destruction of human capital from the premature retirement and from the “forced” labor force
participation. Our standard metrics capture neither of these effects.17
When there is a deep and prolonged downturn, these effects on human capital can be very
significant; and it would seem that the adverse effects far outweigh the positive effects that
might arise from more extended enrollment in school. This is certainly consistent with
hysteresis effects associated with extended periods of unemployment, and with econometric
studies suggesting that prolonged downturns lead to a decrease in potential growth.18 These
unobserved wealth effects help explain why effects of downturns persist.19
Estimating the size of the missing capital—the magnitude of capital destruction in a recession
We can get a rough order‐of‐magnitude estimate of the magnitude of the capital destruction in
a recession by estimating the difference between where the economy would have been, in the
absence of the recession, and where it is today and is likely to be in the future. See Figures 1
and 2, which show that today GDP in the US is some 15% below what it would have been in the
absence of crisis—in Europe some 17% lower—and that these differences, even if they don’t
become bigger, are likely to extend into the foreseeable future. The total cost of the crisis in
terms of lost output is truly enormous—depending on the discount rate, possibly well in excess
of $100 trillion. (A 15% loss in a $15 trillion economy amounts to a loss of $2.25 trillion. Even if
the economy were immediately to return to a growth path of 2% growth, with a 3% real
interest rate, the present discounted value—PDV—of the loss is over $200 trillion.)20
We can in principle measure the delta in “normal” capital K (the difference between what K, as
conventionally measured, would have been but for the recession and actual K), that is, we can
estimate, the consequences of reduced investment to the capital stock. Similarly, we can
estimate the delta in normal human capital (“education”) as conventionally measured, that is
again, the difference between what the level of human capital, as conventionally measured,
17

There are a further set of complex adverse welfare effects, with potentially important implications for the stock
of human capital. As the elderly, who otherwise would have retired, seek jobs, there are search externalities on
other job‐seekers. (See Greenwald and Stiglitz 1988.) If the economy is in a demand constrained equilibrium,
firms that are capital constrained may decide to hire these older workers, rather than younger workers, adversely
affecting the accumulation of human capital by the former.
18
Reifschneider, Wascher, and Wilcox (2013).
19
Indeed, there is a literature suggesting that the economy’s dynamics exhibit near unit roots. See Campbell and
Mankiw (1987).
20
As Stiglitz, Sen and Fitoussi (2010) point out, GDP does not provide a good measure of the loss of well‐being: it
does not, for instance, include any valuation of the increased insecurity that the downturn has brought. Cutbacks
in public programs are valued at the reduction in the value of the inputs, not the value to citizens of the services
provided.

8

would have been, in the absence of the recession, and its actual level.21 We can then estimate
the predicted effect of these changes on output. (For instance, if lower investment has
decreased the capital stock from what would normally have been the case, in the absence of
the recession, by some 5%, then if the share of capital is .25, standard analyses would suggest
that output would be some 1.25% lower than it would have been on the normal path.)
The difference between the decline in GDP (relative to the normal path) that can thus be
accounted for and the actual decline in output (relative to the normal path) is the result of
missing “dark matter”—analogous to Solow’s residual. The present discounted value of the
difference is the value of the missing capital.
Back of the envelope calculations suggest that the magnitude of this missing capital is
enormous. True GDP is the sum of consumption plus true investment. True investment is the
difference in true wealth. We have been ignoring the effect of the downturn on hidden wealth,
and thus on true investment. The decline in GDP in the recession was, accordingly, much
greater than the standard numbers suggest.
There is an important agenda going forward of trying to parse out this missing capital. The
problem is analogous to that posed by Solow in his classic 1957 paper.22 He showed that one
could explain only about 12.5 percentage of the growth of output per capita by an increase in
the capital‐labor ratio. The rest was called “the residual,” and considerable efforts were made
in subsequent years to explain the residual, e.g. the movement of labor from less productive
sectors (agriculture) to more productive sectors, the shortening of hours of work, and, most
importantly, technological change.
Our earlier discussion helps identify some of this missing capital. We know that those who
enter the labor force in a bad (recession) year have a significantly lower lifetime PDV income.
And this is especially true of those who remain unemployed for extended periods—the
decreased experience shows up in lower incomes throughout their lifetimes. We also know
that those who get displaced from a job face a significant loss in PDV of income. We can use
these numbers to provide an estimate of the value of the loss in human capital on this account.
There are other capital losses that are harder to measure. Bankruptcy results in a loss of
organizational capital, including the tacit knowledge that resides within the bounds of a firm.
In recent years, there has been increasing recognition of the role of social capital for the well‐
functioning of the economy, and there some direct evidence of the erosion of social capital as a
result of long‐lasting deep downturns. Trust is too important, and the behavior of the banks in
21

As we have noted above, there may be significant measurement errors in both variables, e.g. because of hard‐
to‐observe changes in maintenance.
22
Solow (1957).

9

the years before the crisis undoubtedly led to an erosion of trust. Quantifying these effects is
an ambitious task for the future.
Even if we can’t precisely parse out the components of this dark matter, this missing capital—
partly due to the destruction of organizational and social capital, and partly due to the
destruction of key components of human capital (experience)—is real and needs to be taken
into account.
V. Concluding comments
The idea that there can be an increase in the value of wealth, without any change in the
amount of productive capital is, of course, an old one: in developing countries, there has long
been a concern that savings get transmitted only into an increase in the value of land or
holdings of gold. Indeed, a key issue in the theoretical literature of the 1960s and 1970s was
whether there was any meaningful measure of aggregate “capital.” The reswitching literature
(focusing on models in which there was production of commodities by means of commodities
(Sraffa 1963), so that “capital” represented working capital) noted that an economy at a low
interest rate and a high interest rate could look identical, though the value of capital might be
markedly different. 23
Another example of why metrics matter
One of the key messages of the International Commission on the Measurement of Economic
Performance and Social Progress (Stiglitz, Sen, and Fitoussi 2010) was that What you measure
affects what you do. This paper has argued that our standard metrics have not captured
adequately the adverse effects of recessions.
If we don’t measure the adverse effects on human capital, we won’t do anything to ameliorate
these effects, and we may even undertake policies which look good in the absence of these
effects, but which would look disastrous in their presence.
This analysis emphasizes that there are long‐term consequences of not taking strong counter‐
cyclical policies; and because of deficiencies in our wealth measures, we don’t correctly assess
these long term effect. If you focus on the liability side of the government—as those who have
urged austerity in Europe and elsewhere have done—one may take actions that result in the
net asset side of the entire economy decreasing, undermining sustainability. Austerity and the
single minded focus on government debt has been short‐sighted, besides being
counterproductive. Better metrics might have noted that austerity reduces correctly calculated

23

For a brief review, see Stiglitz 1974.

10

GDP by far more than is widely recognized, and worsens national balance sheets, because of
the resulting large amounts of missing capital, including hidden decrease in human capital.24
To put this another way: GDP is supposed to be measured as consumption plus the change in
wealth. But if we don’t measure the decrease in human capital and the other forms of capital
(which together constitute the missing capital), we are underestimating the decline in the
recession in GDP, and we are underestimating the adverse effects of the austerity measures
that have been adopted in Europe, especially for Europe’s future growth potential.
On the other side of the ledger, this short paper also provides an important cautionary note in
the interpretation of wealth‐income ratios, and the implication of these increases: they do not
necessarily mean that the economy has become more productive, and that current levels of
consumption are sustainable. A natural resource economy which uses the revenues gleaned
from the extraction of its resources to fuel a real estate bubble might even show an increase in
“wealth”—but its future productive capacities may well be significantly diminished. The
increase in financial wealth that has marked many advanced countries in recent decades may
similarly be a chimera, with the increase in real estate prices masking the far more important
reduction in real productive capital.

24

These are effects that go beyond the often made observation that the improvement in the liability side of the
balance sheet is often disappointing: because market GDP decreases (more than expected), tax returns are lower
(than expected) and social expenditures higher.

11

Figure 1: USA growth below trend

12

Figure 2: Europe growth below trend

13

References
Arrow, Kenneth J., Partha Dasgupta, Lawrence H. Goulder, Kevin J. Mumford, and Kirsten
Oleson, 2012, “Sustainability and the Measurement of Wealth,” Environment and
Development Economics, 17:317‐353.
——, Hollis B. Chenery, Bagicha S. Minhas, and Robert M. Solow, 1961, “Capital‐Labor
Substitution and Economic Efficiency,” The Review of Economics and Statistics,
43(3):225‐250.
Brunner, Beatrice and Andreas Kuhn, 2010, “The Impact of Labor Market Entry Conditions on
Initial Job Assignment, Human Capital Accumulation and Wages, IZA Discussion Paper
5360.
Campbell, John Y. and N. Gregory Mankiw, 1987, “Are Output Fluctuations Transitory?”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 102(4):857‐880.
Greenwald, B., and J. E. Stiglitz, 1988, “Pareto Inefficiency of Market Economies: Search and
Efficiency Wage Models,” American Economic Review, 78(2):351‐355.
Hahn, F.H., 1966, “Equilibrium Dynamics with Heterogeneous Capital Goods,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, pp. 633‐46.
Khan, Lisa B., 2010, “The Long‐Term Labor Market Consequences of Graduating from College in
a Bad Economy,” Labour Economics, 17(2):303‐316.
Kindleberger, Charles P., 1978, Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises, New
York: Basic Books.
Mallick, Debdulal, 2007, “The Role of the Elasticity of Substitution in Economic Growth: A Cross‐
Country Test of the de La Grandville Hypothesis,” Economic Series, Deakin University,
Faculty of Business and Law, School of Accounting, Economics and Finance.
Piketty, Thomas, 2014, Capital in the Twenty‐First Century, Cambridge, Massachusetts; London:
Harvard University Press.
Reifschneider, Dave, William L. Wascher, and David Wilcox, 2013, “Aggregate Supply in the
United States: Recent Developments and Implications for the Conduct of Monetary
Policy,” 14th Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference, November. Available at
<http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2013/201377/201377abs.html>.
Shapiro, Carl, and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1984, “Equilibrium Unemployment as a Worker Discipline
Device,” The American Economic Review, 74(3):433‐444.
Shell, Karl, and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1967, “Allocation of Investment in a Dynamic Economy,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 81:592‐609.

14

Solow, Robert, 1956, “A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 70 (1):65‐94.
——, 1957, “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function,” Review of Economics
and Statistics, 39 (3): 312–320.
Sraffa, Piero, 1963, Production of Commodities by Means of Commodities, Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., 1974, “The Cambridge‐Cambridge Controversy in the Theory of Capital; A
View From New Haven: A Review Article,” Journal of Political Economy, 82(4):893‐904.
——, 2012, The Price of Inequality: How Today’s Divided Society Endangers Our Future, New
York: W.W. Norton.
——, 2013, “Preface to the Paperback Edition,” The Price of Inequality: How Today’s Divided
Society Endangers Our Future, New York: W.W. Norton, pp. ix‐xxxv.
——, 2014, “Unemployment and Innovation,” NBER Working Paper, November, w20670.
——, 2015a, New Theoretical Perspectives on the Distribution of Income and Wealth among
Individuals: Part I. The Wealth Residual, NBER Working Paper, May, w21189.
——, 2015b, “New Theoretical Perspectives on the Distribution of Income and Wealth among
Individuals,” in Contemporary Issues in Macroeconomics: Lessons from The Crisis and
Beyond, to be published by Palgrave MacMillan, paper originally presented at an
IEA/World Bank Roundtable on Shared Prosperity, Jordan, June 10‐11, 2014 and at an
INET seminar at Columbia University, December 3, 2014.
——, 2015c, “Towards a General Theory of Deep Downturns,” in Contemporary Issues in
Macroeconomics: Lessons from The Crisis and Beyond, to be published by Palgrave
MacMillan, originally Presidential Address to the 17th World Congress of the
International Economic Congress, Dead Sea, Jordan, June, 2014.
——, Amartya Sen, and Jean‐Paul Fitoussi, 2010, Mismeasuring Our Lives: Why GDP Doesn’t
Add Up, New York: The New Press.
—— and K. Shell, 1967, “Allocation of Investment in a Dynamic Economy,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 81:592‐609.
Taylor, Mark, 2013, “The Labour Market Impacts of Leaving Education when Unemployment Is
High: Evidence from Britain,” ISER Working Paper Series, 2013‐12.
Young, Andrew T., 2013, “US Elasticity of Substitution and Factor‐Augmentation at the Industry
Level,” Macroeconomic Dynamics, 17(4):861‐897.

15

