NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SHOULD TAX REFORM
LEVEL THE PLAYING FIELD?

Lawrence K. Summers

Working Paper No. 2132

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 1987

This paper will appear in the 1987 Proceedings of the National Tax
Association.
I am grateful to Jim Poterba for helpful comments on
an earlier draft. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of
the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER Working Paper #2132
January 1981

Should Tax Reform Level the Playing Field?

ABSTRACT

While frequently invoked, the level playing field ideal
and its practical embodiment in tax legislation has received
relatively little analysis. This paper examines the
economic arguaents surroundjn the level playing field
dootrine. I conclude that levelling the playing field is an
issue of little econouic importance and that efforts to
level the playing field like those reoently enacted are
likely to create more important nonneutralities than those
they eliminate. They may however contribute to the
perceived fairness of the tax system.

Lawrence H. Summers
Department of Economics
Harvard University

Cambridge, MA 02138

-1-

The 1986 Tax Act represents the most significant reform of the Federal

Income Tax since the second World War. Reforms affecting the taxation of
business income are a major feature of the Act. Perhaps no phrase better
epitomizes the animating philosophy behind these reforms than "level playing

field'. The initial Treasury Department Tax Reform proposal In November of 1984
put the level playing field argument clearly and highlighted its importance:1

The taxation of capital and business income in the United States is deeply
flawed. It lacks internal consistency and is ill-suited to periods when
inflation rates have varied and been unpredictable. It contains subsidies
to particular forms of investment that distort choices in the use of the
nation's scarce capital resources.. .me Treasury Departments tax reforms
would rationalize the taxation of income from business and capital. An
overriding objective is to subject real economic income from all sources to
the same tax.
It is noteworthy that in putting forth its proposal the Treasury
concentrates only on the relative taxation of different types of capital assets
and not at all on the overall level of the tax burden placed on investment.

This logic carried over into the legislation that was actually enacted. The
desire to level the playing field and achieve neutrality was the principle

justification offered by proponents of the decision to abolish the investment
tax credit (ITC), scale back ACRS depreciation benefits and reduce corporate tax
rates.

While frequently invoked, the level playing field ideal and its
practical embodiment in tax legislation has received relatively little analysis.

This paper examines the economic arguments surrounding the level playing field
doctrine. I conclude that levelling the playing field is an issue of little

economic importance and that efforts to level the playing field like those
recently enacted are likely to create more nonneutralities than they eliminate.
In the process they will impair both economic efficiency and equity, though they

-2-

may make a contribution to the perceived fairness of the tax system.
The first section of the paper reviews the available studies and concludes
that the economic gains from levelling the playing field are, even on the most
favorable assumptions, very small--about equal to the statistical discrepancy in
the GNP accounts. It also argues that the effective tax rate calculations which
guide efforts to implement the level playing field doctrine have no demonstrable
relationship to actual investment decisions.

The second section describes recent research suggesting a number of reasons
why effective tax rate calculations like those commonly used in tax policy

debates prove to be very poor indicators of investment incentives. These
include problems in measuring depreciation, leverage effects, and differences in
hurdle rates across firms.

The third section notes that the level playing field doctrine as it is
usually discussed omits consideration of a very large fraction of total

investment. It also considers a dimension of neutrality not usually recognized
in tax policy discussions--neutrality between new and old capital. I conclude
that the nonneutralities between housing and non-housing capital, tangible and
intangible investments, and the present and the future created by recent tax

policies, dwarf in importance the interasset neutrality issue focused on by
proponents of the level playing field doctrine.

The fourth and concluding section of the paper suggests alternative
principles to the level playing field that could serve as touchstones in future
tax policy debates.

I. Does Levelling The Playing Field Matter?

-3-

The argument for levelling the playing field by having a neutral tax system

has been stated many times. Profit maximizing investors will carry on different
types of investment to the point where they receive the same after tax rate of

return. If the tax system taxes different investments differently, this will

mean that pre-tax returns will not be equalized. Since the social return to an
investment is measured by its pre-tax return, an inefficiency will be created.
Increasing investment in heavily taxed activities at the expense of investment

in lightly taxed activities would raise the level of output that the economy
could produce.

As a matter of theory, the argument is completely correct. But its
importance depends on the magnitude of the deadweight losses generated by non-

neutral taxes and on the ability of economists to measure the burden the tax
system places on different types of investment.

I take up these two questions

in turn.

The Costs of Nonneutrality

Nonneutralities in the taxation of capital income cause distortions of two
types. Firms may produce inefficiently, using less rather than more productive

types of capital. There may also be distortions in the mix of products which
the economy produces if inputs into some products are taxed more heavily than

inputs into others. Evaluating these distortions requires a model embodying
assumptions about the extent of substitutability between different types of
capital and different products and about the effective tax rates on different
types

of

investment.

In perhaps the most elaborate studies yet carried out, Don Fullerton and

-4-

Yolanda Henderson (1986> utilize a model that allows for 38 different capital

asset types to be used in 18 different industries. Fullerton and Henderson
allow for differences in financing policy across industries, the effects of
personal taxation and a variety of other institutional complexities. They
perform fairly elaborate sensitivity analysis regarding their assumptions about

asset and product substitutability. Their conclusion is that "these multiple
distortions impose a welfare loss that is still below one percent of national

output." In fact, most of their calculations suggest that the welfare loss from
tax nonneutralities is on the order of .3% of GNP. To put this figure In some
perspective, it is helpful to note that it is comparable to the typical
statistical discrepancy in the GNP accounts.

Results similar to those of Fullerton and Henderson have been obtained by a

number of other investigators. Gravelle (1981) and Auerbach (1983) estimated
the magnitude of the nonneutralities arising from distortions in the composition
of investment caused by corporate taxes at between .1 and .15 percent of CN?, or

about $5 billion. Hendershott (1986) puts the deadweight loss arising from
deviations from the level playing field ideal at .11 percent of the capital
stock which is eqivalent to about .25 percent of CNP.

Even these rather small figures substantially overstate the potential gains

in efficiency achievable by levelling the playing field. They refer to the
gains that would be achieved if a perfectly neutral tax bill were enacted and
capital were reallocated instantly between asset types and sectors of

production. Neither of these premises is tenable. As I discuss in more detail
below, tax reforms are unlikely to achieve full neutrality even using the

measuring rods of their proponents. Estimates of the welfare gains from actual
reforms are often only a small fraction of the preexisting inefficiency. And

-5-

the process of reAllocating capital between asset types can in reality only take

place through a redirection of new investments. This takes a long time. The
conclusion is that even on optimistic assumptions, the welfare gains from
levelling the playing field are very small.

What Do Effective Tax Rates Measure?

The premise of the neutrality calculations described above is that

effective tax rate calculations are indicative of the impact of the tax system

on investment. Otherwise, there would be little basis for concluding that
nonneutralities exist when there are interasset differences in effective tax
rates. Surprisingly little empirical research has examined the validity of this
premise and the work that has been done does not support it.
Bosworth (1985) subjects effective tax rate and cost of capital measures of

the types employed in the Fullerton-Henderson and other similar studies to a

simple test. He tries to correlate the change in the volume of cyclically
adjusted investment in different types of capital assets between 1980 and 1984

with changes in their effective tax rates. He finds that, 'There is no
significant correlation between those assets that have a higher than expected

capital stock and the relative magnitudes of tax reduction."2 He does find some
indication that there is an association between overall changes in costs of

capital and investment. The implication of Bosworth's finding is that there is
no demonstrable link between the calculated effective tax rates and the
composition of investment.

The point can be seen without elaborate calculations. Effective tax rate
measures such as those presented by the Treasury invariably suggest that

-6-

structures are taxed more heavily than investment. Indeed this was a major
rationale offered for the repeal of the investment tax credit. Yet, it is clear
that most tax shelters are based on structures rather than equipment investment.

It is in structures, not equipment where the problem of oversupply seems to
have been most serious in recent years.

The weak relationship between effective tax rates and the composition of

investment can be interpreted in two ways. One possibility is that taxes do
not exert an important influence on overall investment. An alternative
interpretation is that effective tax rate measures of the type that figure

prominently in neutrality debates do not adequately measure investment
incentives. There are strong reasons to prefer the latter interpretation.
First, there is a strong and demonstrable relationship between the total

volume of investment and tax policies. Calculations of cyclically adjusted
investment such as those presented in Blanchard and Summers (1984) indicate that
up until uncertainties about retroactive repeal of the ITC started to discourage
investment in early 1986, investment was abnormally strong during the current

recovery despite unprecedented high real interest rates and strong foreign

competition for US producers. Almost any theory of investment whether based on
cash flow, the cost of capital, or Tobin's q predicts that such effects should

be present. Second, there are a number of reasons to doubt that calculated
effective tax rates give very satisfactory indications of the impact of taxation

on the allocation of investment. I take up these issues in the next section.

II

Effective Tax Rates and Investment Incentives

As an empirical proposition, effective tax rate measures do not seem to be

-7-

strongly associated with the composition of investment. This is probably
because of problems in their construction. In this section I highlight three
difficulties with the standard measures of effective tax rates. While they all
could be addressed in future research and policy evaluation, it is not clear
that this is worthwhile, given the rather small stakes involved in neutrality
debates.

Measuring Depreciation

The central factor driving neutrality calculations is a comparison of the
generosity of the depreciation allowances offered by the tax system on different

types of assets with true economic depreciation. Unfortunately, neither tax nor
true depreciation is easily measured in practice. The standard approach to
measuring tax depreciation is to assume that assets are put in place and
depreciated once without ever being resold. While this assumption is probably
appropriate for equipment it is surely inappropriate for the structures
investment which were allegedly penalized under

pre-1986

law.

Gordon, Hines and Summers (1987) document that churning plays an important
part in tax planning regarding investments in structures, by showing that many
of these investments are initially depreciated using straight line rather than

accelerated schedules. This is only optimal for firms if they plan to resell
the assets. Gordon, Hines and Summers also document that taking account of the
possibility of churning can have dramatic effects on effective tax rate

calculations. At low inflation rates, taking account of churning can reduce
effective tax rates by more than 20 percentage points.

More difficult than the measurement of tax depreciation is the measurement

-8-

of economic depreciation. The standard approach is to define the rate of
economic depreciation as the expected rate of decline in an asset's price. The
data used in almost all evaluations of tax neutrality come from the pioneering
work of Hulten and Wycoff (1981) who utilized used asset prices to estimate

rates of economic depreciation. The difficulty is that data on used asset
prices are available only for a small subset of assets. As a consequence most
of the depreciation estimates provided by Hulten and Wycoff are extrapolations

not based on any data on the asset in question. Of the 38 asset categories used
in most studies, Hulten and Wycoff had direct information available on less than

10. Hulten and Wycoff did as much as probably can be done with the data they
had at their disposal. But it is appropriate to attach a great deal of
uncertainty to their calculations.

There is also a point of principle regarding the measurement of economic

depreciation. Jeremy Bulow and I (1984) argue that in defining economic
depreciation it is important to take account of the reality that used capital

prices decline at an uncertain rate. While the tax system shares in the return
to capital, it does not share in the risk associated with variations in the rate

of asset price decline. This is because depreciation allowances are permitted
according to an ex-ante schedule, not according to what actually happens to an

asset's price. As a consequence, allowing ex-ante depreciation at a rate equal
to an asset's expected rate of price decline is not equivalent to ex-post
depreciation. True economic depreciation in a risky environment requires the

addition of a risk premium to physical depreciation rates. On average, our
calculations suggest that this adjustment roughly halves appropriate
depreciation lifetimes.

-9-

Leverste Effects

Standard affective tax rate calculations presume that all assets are
financed in the same way, or that there are no tax favored means of financing.
In fact, as Bosworth (1985) and Gordon, Hines and Summers (1987) stress, there
are strong reasons to believe that debt is tax favored over equity, and that
some assets are able to carry much more debt than others.
Debt is tax-favored over other forms of finance because interest payments

are tax deductible whereas payments to other claimants are not. The
deductibility of interest would have no effect if the tax advantage to borrowing

were fully offset by a tax disadvantage to lending. This appears not to be the
case. A large fraction of corporate bonds are held by pension funds, non-profit
institutions and other tax-exempt entities. Market evidence comes from the fact
that long term municipal bonds which are tax free carry yields that are quite
close to those of taxable securities.

This means that any transaction that

uses debt finance is subsidized by the tax system, since the government loses
much more from the deductibility of interest than it collects from the taxation
of interest income.

Can different assets carry different amounts of debt? As a matter of
logic, the extent to which an asset is financed with debt depends on a tradeoff
of the tax advantage to debt, and the financing costs associated with its use.

These costs primarily involve the risk of bankruptcy. It seems likely that
liquid assets like real estate, automobiles or airplanes, where there are dense

secondary markets, will be much easier to borrow against than dedicated

equipment, where resale is likely to be difficult. To the extent that liquid
assets are easier to borrow against, they receive a tax advantage. The

-10-

magtütude of this tax advantage will rise with the level of nominal interest
rates.

These leverage effects are potentially quite important. Fullerton and
Cordon (1983) report that the debt to capital ratio of different industries

varied between .08 and .79 in 1973 with industries like real estate, which rely

on liquid types of capital assets, having the highest ratios. Gordon,Hines and
Summers (1987) report calculations indicating that even a relatively modest
difference in the ease with which structures and equipment can be borrowed
against, is sufficient to offset equipment's lower effective tax rate.

It is

almost certainly leverage effects that explain why commercial real estate is so
frequently useã as a tax shelter vehicle.

Defenders of standard effective tax rates point to Auerbach's (1984)
conclusion that corporations with higher ratios of structures to equipment do
not have higher debt to equity ratios as evidence that leverage effects may be

unimportant. This finding is not conclusive. It probably results from
overaggregation of capital assets.

Transportation equipment, which accounts

for a substantial fraction of equipment investment, is probably easy to borrow

against, where as public utility, mining and industrial structures, which
account for more than half of all structures investments, are probably hard to

borrow against. A finding that debt to equity ratios do not depend on the
overall volume of structures investments is not sufficient to rule out the

possibility that the detailed composition of investment greatly affects a firm's
ability to borrow. There is also the additional difficulty with Auerbach's
empirical work that he is unable to treat leases as a form of debt

obligation.

On balance, it appears likely that differences in the ease of borrowing,
although difficult to measure, exert an important influence on the cost of

-11-

capital

for diffecent assets. If this is the case, equalizing effective tax

rates that do not take account of leverage effects is not likely to increase

economic efficiency. This is almost certainly the case with respect to
proposals to raipe the taxation of equipment relative to commercial structures.

The Djscountin of Tax Benefits

Standard effective tax rate calculations presume that firms depreciate

prospective depreciation tax shields at a real rate of 4 percent. The logic
behind this assumption, •to which the calculations are quite sensitive is rarely

spelled out. Summers (1987) provides empirical evidence that the assumption is
inappropriate. A survey of firms' capital budgetting practices reveals that
most use real returns of above 10 percent to discount prospective tax benefits.
Furthermore

the rates used by different firms vary widely.

There are two implications of this finding. First, the wide variation in
the

hurdle rates of different firms suggests that even if effective tax rates

are

equated across firms, the pre-tax return to investment may not be. Second,

the generalized use of high discount rates suggests that the benefit of front
loaded investment incentives like the ITC may well be understated in

conventional calculations. Conversely, the attractiveness to investors of
schemes like indexing depreciation allowances which backload tax benefits may be

overstated. More generally, a further source of error in effective tax rate
calculations is introduced.

The analysis in this section Indicates that effective tax rate measures of
the types used in most neutrality calculations are likely to be badly flawed as

indicators of investment incentives. This makes it relatively unsurprising that

-12-

they do not seem to be associated with actual investment patterns. In
particular, flaws in effective tax rate measures can easily explain why
commercial structures investments have surged in recent years to become a major

tax shelter vehicle despite their relatively high effective tax rate. If
effective tax rate measures are badly flawed as indicators of investment
incentives, equalizing the effective tax rate on different categories of
investment is likely to create as many nonneutralities as it eliminates.

III. Other Nonneutralities

The analysis in the preceding sections suggests that the efficiency gains
from levelling the playing field in the manner suggested during the tax reform

debate are highly speculative and almost certainly very small. This section
suggests several other dimensions of neutrality not usually considered in
discussions of levelling the playing field that dwarf in importance the question
of interasset neutrality upon which so much attention has been lavished.

Intanaible vs Tan2ible Invesents

In striving to level the playing field by raising effective tax rates on
equipment in order to bring them into equality with estimated effective tax
rates on structures, land and inventories, reformers neglected an entire
category of investment outlays--investments in intangibles. Intangible
investments such as marketing, advertising and R&D outlays totalled more than

$200 billion in 1985. These expenditures exceeded investments in structures,
and dwarfed outlays on inventories and land. Although they provide benefits over

-13-

a number of years Just like physical investments, firms are not required to

amortize outlays for intangibles. Rather, intangible investments receive the
ultimate in accelerated depreciation, expensing. Unlike other investments, firms
can fully deduct the cost of intangible investments in the year in which they
are made.

This means that intangible investments have a zero effective tax rate.

Measures which raise the tax burden on other outlays exacerbate the
nonneutral.ity between tangible assets which are taxed and intangible assets

which are not. Failure to recognize that outlays on intangibles are expensed
accounts for the widespread misconception that the tax law somehow favors

capital intensive industries. This misconception is perpetuated by accounting
conventions. Since firms do not amortize their intangible outlays, their
profits are artificially understated, making relative tax burdens appear larger.
In fact, because intangibles can be expensed, the tax law actually penalizes
capital intensive industries.

Owner Occupied Housinz vs. Business Investment

The services of owner occupied housing are not taxed under the Federal
income tax. This creates a major tax bias towards investment in housing rather

than plant and equipment. This bias is exacerbated by the ease with which it is

possible to borrow to purchase housing. Achieving interasset neutrality by
raising the effective tax rate on equipment outlays as was done in the most
recent tax act, increases the tax distortion in favor of housing over plant and

equipment. This effect is likely to be quite large. Owner occupied housing
accounts for about one-third of the capital stock, more than twice as much as

-14-

non-residential structures or equipment. Its relative taxation is thus much more
important for economic efficiency than the relative taxation of different
classes of business investments.

New vs. Old Cpnital

Proponents of the level playing field doctrine typically neglect the

distinction between new and old capital. The 1986 Tax Act provides an excellent
example of the consequences of this neglect. By reducing the corporate income
tax rate that applies to the profits earned on past investments while at the

same time burdening new investment by eliminating the ITC and scaling back

depreciation benefits, the Act favors old capital at the expense of new. This
is ironic. Even the most ardent supply sider must acknowledge that tax
incentives cannot spur the creation of old capital. However, they can and do
have an important impact on new capital investment.

As Table 1 illustrates, this point is very important. While the 1986 Act
raises corporate tax revenues by a total of $120 billion over five years, it

also

confers substantial windfalls on capital that is already in place. Despite

the overall increase in corporate tax burdens, old capital actually receives tax

benefits totalling $68 billion. The tax burden on new corporate capital is then
increased by $188 billion.

Biasing the tax system towards old investment is neither equitable nor
efficient. It is inequitable because it confers windfalls on those who invested

in the past and wrote off their investments at a 46 percent rate but will be
taxed on their profits at a 33 percent rate. The inequity is compounded by the
fact that new investment by firms trying to compete with entrenched incumbents

TABLE 1

Cor,orate Tax Reform. New and Old Capital

19°1 gs-gg

1987

1988

1989

1g90

.8

-8.6

-17.1

-20.1.

-23.3

-68.3

Taxes on New
Investment -

24.3

32.5

39.6

43.5

48.3

188,4

Total

25.1

23.9

22.5

23.4

25.2

120.2

Taxes on Old
Cap ital

Source: Author's Calculation. Taxes on new capital include Capital Cost,
Minimun Tax, and some Accounting provisions of the 1986 Act. The other
changes are treated as applying to old capital.

-15-

is penalized. The bias towards old capital is inefficient, because it requires
major increases in the tax rate applicable to new investment.

The old capital-new capital argument can be taken too far. Blind pursuit
of its logic would suggest that the corporate tax rate should be raised to near
100 percent, and that more generous investment allowances should be granted so

as to preserve investment incentives. This would seem to burden old capital
without discouraging new investment. However, there is a clear problem with this

strategy. Like repudiation of the national debt, it has extremely adverse
expectational effects. The introduction of such a policy would cause potential
investors to fear that at some point in the future their investment would be
labelled as old capital and the tax rate on it would be jacked up.

Expectational considerations thus suggest that it would not be desirable to
raise taxes on old capital too sharply.

However, it is hard to see why conferring a windfall on old capital has

particularly desirable effects. In the present context, it is hard to believe
that investors expect the corporate rate to fall further, or depreciation

benefits to be scaled back again. Probably the expectational effects of the
1986 Act are perverse.

The Present vs. the Future

The level playing field principle focuses attention on the question of the

differential taxation of different types of capital income. It diverts
attention from the issue of the overall level of the taxation of capital income.
Since capital investments have as their ultimate objective future consumption,
taxes on capital may be thought of as taxes on future consumption. By reducing

-16-

the return available to savers and investors, they distort the choice between
present and future consumption.
The available evidence suggests that these intertemporal distortions whose
magnitude depends primarily on the overall level of the taxation of capital
income are far more important than any intersectoral distortions that taxes may

cause. In Summers (1981) I suggested that eliminating capital taxes might
produce steady state welfare gains on the order of 5 percent or more of GNP.
More recent work with more precisely calibrated models by Auerbach and Kotlikoff

(1987) and Jorgenson and Yun (1986) suggests similar figures. These
calculations neglect any beneficial externality effects which capital investment
may have on economic growth.
Each of the four nonneutralities discussed in this section is probably more
important than the static efficiency considerations stressed by tax reformers

seeking to level the playing field. They point in opposite policy directions
than the level playing field doctrine at least as it is usually discussed. This
suggests the importance for economic efficiency of reducing the tax rate on
equipment investment, even though this would raise the wedge between its tax
rate and the tax rate on certain other classes of business investment.

IV. Conclusions

The analysis in this paper suggests that efforts to level the playing field
(at least as the term is commonly understood) are not likely to contribute much

to economic efficiency. The stakes are small to start out with, and the many
measurement problems involved in the construction of effective tax rates make it

unlikely that any large fraction of the potential gains from levelling the

-17-

playing

field can be realized. It follows that in evaluating the efficiency of

tax reforms, attention should be focused on the overall tax burden placed on new

plant and equipment investments rather than the relative burden placed on
different types of investments.

Footnotes

1. U.S. Treasury Department (1984), p. xii.

2. Bosworth (1985) p.19.

References

Auerbach, A. (1983), "The Dynamic
No. 1152, Cambridge, MA:

Effects

of Tax Law Asymmetries,' Working Paper

National Bureau of Economic Research.

Blanchard, 0. and L. Summers. (1984) "Perspectives on High World Real Interest

Brookinas Paners on Economic

Rates" •

Activity

Vol.2 pp. 273-324.

Bosworth, B. (1985) "Taxes and the Investment Recovery", BroolcinEs Paoers on

Economic Activity 1985:1 pp.'-38.

Bulow, 3. and L. Summers. (1984) "The Taxation of Risky Assest", Journal of
Political Economy 92:1 pp. 20-39.

Fullerton, D. and R. Cordon. (1983) "A Reexamination of Tax Distortions in
General Equilibrium Models", in N. Feldstein (ed.) Sehavioral

in

tax

Policy

Six.ulation Methods

Analysis Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 369-462.

Fullerton, D. and Y. Henderson. (1986) "A Disaggregate Equilibrium Model of the
Tax Distortions Miong Assets Sectors, and Industries",

National

Bureau of

Economic Research Working Paper No. 1905.

Fullerton, D. and Y. Henderson. (1986) "The Impact of Fundamental Tax Reform on
the Allocation of Resources", National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
No.

1904.

Cordon, K., 3. Hines, and L. Summers. (1986) "Notes on the Tax Treatment of
Structures", National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 1896.

Cravelle, J. (1982) "Effects of the 1981 Depreciation Revisions on the Taxation
of Income from Business Capital," National Tax Journal 35, March, pp. 1-20.

Hendershott, P. (1986) "Tax Changes and Capital Allocation in the 1980's",
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 1911.

Hulten, C. and F. Wykoff. (1981) "The Measurement of Economic Depreciation," in

CR. Hulten, ed., Deyreciation. Inflation, and the Taxation of 1nco.e from
Capital, Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute Press.

Jorgenson, D. and K. Yun. (1986) "Tax Policy and Capital Allocation," Harvard
Institute of Economic Research Discussion Paper No. 1107.
Suuimers, L.

(1987) "Reforming Tax Reform for Growth and Competitiveness",

forthcoming.

Summers,

L.

(1987)

"Investment Incentives and the Discounting of Depreciation

Allowances", University of Chicago Press, forthcoming.

Summers, L.

(1981) "Capital Taxation and Accumulation in a Life Cycle Growth

Model", Anerican Econoaic Review September, 1981.

U.S. Treasury Department. (1984) Tax Reform for Fairness. Simplicity, and
Economic Growth, Office of the Secretary, Washington, D.C.

