                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE EFFECT OF SAVINGS ACCOUNTS ON INTERPERSONAL FINANCIAL RELATIONSHIPS:
            EVIDENCE FROM A FIELD EXPERIMENT IN RURAL KENYA

                                              Pascaline Dupas
                                               Anthony Keats
                                             Jonathan Robinson

                                           Working Paper 21339
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w21339


                         NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                                         July 2015




  We thank Sarah Green for outstanding research management, Helen Czapary, Sefira Fialkoff, Kathy
  Nolan, and Kim Siegal for their dedicated field research assistance, and Sindy Li and Odyssia Ng for
  their research assistance. We are very grateful to Simone Schaner for detailed comments. We thank
  seminar participants at the ASSAs, UCSC, and IPA for helpful comments. This study was implemented
  through IPA Kenya and funded through grants from the International Growth Center, the NBER Africa
  project, and the International Initiative for Impact Evaluations (3ie). The protocol for this study was
  approved by the IRBs of UC Santa Cruz, UCLA, Stanford and IPA Kenya. We have no financial interest
  in the issues studied in this paper. This RCT was registered in the American Economic Association
  Registry for randomized control trials under Trial number AEARCTR-0000740. The views expressed
  herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

  NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
  reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
  NBER publications.

  © 2015 by Pascaline Dupas, Anthony Keats, and Jonathan Robinson. All rights reserved. Short sections
  of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
  credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of Savings Accounts on Interpersonal Financial Relationships: Evidence from a
Field Experiment in Rural Kenya
Pascaline Dupas, Anthony Keats, and Jonathan Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 21339
July 2015
JEL No. C93,D14,G21,O16

                                           ABSTRACT

The welfare impact of expanding access to bank accounts depends on whether accounts crowd out
pre-existing financial relationships, or whether private gains from accounts are shared within social
networks. To study the effect of accounts on financial linkages, we provided free bank accounts to
a random subset of 885 households. Within households, we randomized which spouse was offered
an account and find no evidence of negative spillovers to spouses. Across households, we document
positive spillovers: treatment households become less reliant on grown children and siblings living
outside their village, and become more supportive of neighbors and friends within their village.


Pascaline Dupas                                   Jonathan Robinson
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
Stanford University                               University of California, Santa Cruz
579 Serra Mall                                    457 Engineering 2
Stanford, CA 94305-6072                           Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER                                          and NBER
pdupas@stanford.edu                               jmrtwo@ucsc.edu

Anthony Keats
Department of Economics
Wesleyan University
Middletown, CT 06459
akeats@wesleyan.edu




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at:
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/740/history/4598
1       Introduction
Financial markets in developing countries are quite limited, especially in rural and rela-
tively sparsely populated areas. Consequently, many financial transactions occur between
individuals, without the formal intermediation of banks or insurance companies. Perhaps
unsurprisingly given that people lack liquidity and effective punishment strategies, these
inter-personal relationships leave gaps – numerous studies over the past several decades doc-
ument that such methods do not fully overcome credit, savings or insurance market failures
(see Karlan and Morduch 2010 for a review). The inadequacy of such informal methods is the
fundamental motivation for the microcredit movement as well as the more recent explosion
of microsavings and microinsurance.
    This paper is about the effects of expanding access to formal savings accounts among the
unbanked population in rural Kenya.1 A number of recent papers have shown that providing
such accounts can be privately beneficial to the person receiving the account.2 However, there
is much less evidence on the indirect effects of such programs on other individuals within
account holders’ networks. Quantifying these spillover effects is important in determining
the ultimate welfare effects of expanding financial access, but it is unclear whether spillovers
will be positive or negative. On the one hand, expanding access to accounts may crowd
out interpersonal networks since savings accounts will make autarky more attractive (Ligon,
Thomas, and Worrall 2000). On the other hand, the gains from the account may be shared
within social networks.3 In this paper, we shed light on this question using a randomized
field experiment involving 885 households in rural Kenya.
    We first document that usage of the savings accounts was modest on average, but was
substantial among a subset of active users: while 69% of households who were offered an
account opened one, only 15% made at least 5 transactions in the account over the 28-
month period following account opening. This 15% used the account quite a bit – among
active users, the mean amount deposited in that 28 months was $223 (a sum about 5 times
monthly expenditures of roughly $43 in the control group). We examine effects on a number
of downstream outcomes, and find no negative effects on any outcomes, and some evidence
of a positive effect on food security.
    The main focus of this paper is to document the effect of the accounts on intra- and inter-

    1
      Bank account ownership is still quite low in the developing world (Chaia et al. 2009; Kendall, Mylenko,
and Ponce 2010), and is only about 15% across Sub-Saharan Africa (Aggarwal, Klapper, and Singer 2013).
    2
      Among others, see Dupas and Robinson (2013a), Prina (2014), Brune et al. (2015), Kast et al. (2014),
Callen et al. (2014) and Bruhn and Love (2014).
    3
      See Kinnan and Townsend (2012) for evidence that households indirectly linked to banks through kinship
networks are better able to access finance than other households. In a different context, see Angelucci and de
Giorgi (2009) for evidence on how conditional cash transfers are shared within social networks in Mexico.



                                                      2
household financial linkages. To examine intra-household issues, in dual-headed households,
the experiment randomized which spouse received the account. Thus, there are households
in which only the husband received an account, households in which only the wife did, and
husbands in which neither or both spouses did. We examine inter-household outcomes in
two ways. Directly, we examine whether treatment affects transfers given and received. In
addition, during the baseline we collected information on transfers that households gave
and received. By matching these partners to the treatment list, we can construct a simple
measure of how saturated the baseline network was with accounts.4
    On the intra-household side, we find that respondents preferred to open individual ac-
counts – although all respondents were given the option of opening the account jointly in the
spouse’s name, only 5% of household did this. We find that individual ownership strongly
predicts usage – both men and women significantly increase bank savings if they are given
an account in their own name, but do not increase savings if only their spouse is given an
account. In our setting, men saved more than women on average – consequently, usage was
significantly higher in households where the husband was offered the account, relative to
households where only the wife was, suggesting a rejection of the unitary household model.
However, we find no evidence that this differential usage affected any downstream outcomes.
In particular, male and female private expenditures were both unaffected by treatment, as
were intra-household transfers from husband to wife (and vice-versa).
    In contrast, we find evidence that inter-household linkages were affected. The house-
holds in our study send and receive transfers quite regularly, though the pattern of giving
and receiving varies substantially across types of partners. Our survey asked about the rela-
tionships to partners, separately within and outside the village. Households tend to receive
much more than they give from grown children, adult siblings, and other relatives, who
primarily reside outside the village. We call these “remittance-type” of relationships, and
as in earlier studies we find that those are, in terms of magnitudes, the primary component
of financial networks (e.g. Rosenzweig and Stark 1989, Jack and Suri 2014). On the other
hand, the pattern of sending and receiving transfers among friends and neighbors within the
village is more give-and-take: households give out just as much as they receive from friends,
neighbors and parents, who primarily live nearby. The size of these transfers are modest
relative to the remittance-type transfers. We call these “give-and-take” relationships.
    We find differential effects of our account offer across the two types of transfers. Regarding
the first type, treated households are less likely to receive (but no less likely to give) money

   4
     The network data we collected did not represent a full mapping of the village, however. We are therefore
unable to conduct a more formal network analysis, for example by examining how effects vary with the
centrality of a household.



                                                     3
from remittance-type partners. This result suggests that gaining access to an account makes
households less dependent on others. Since there is no evidence of negative effects on other
outcomes, the reduction in support from others is not harmful to households but instead
indicates that households impose less upon these individuals. The type of dependence we
document at baseline is not unique to our context. For example, Platteau (2000) shows that
there is also a strong social norm in West Africa to support friends and relatives if asked for
money. This can act as a tax on relatively wealthy households, which in turn may lessen the
private return to economic activities and possibly discourage investment. In the extreme,
such pressure could create a poverty trap (Hoff and Sen 2006). There is some evidence
in support of such sharing taxes limiting productive investment. Baland, Guirkinger, and
Mali (2011) present evidence that middle-class Cameroonian households take on costly loans
that they do not need to signal poverty in order to avoid requests from others. Jakiela
and Ozier (2015) show that women in rural Kenya are willing to pay a substantial cost
in order to hide income from their relatives. In South Africa, di Falco and Bulte (2011)
show a positive correlation between the size of the potential kinship network and durable
good investment, which is less liquid and therefore potentially harder to share. In Kenya,
Dupas and Robinson (2013b) find that individuals who appear to be net “givers” in their
financial relationships network are more likely to demand and benefit from commitment
savings products. Ligon (1998) and Kinnan (2014) show that hiding income limits the
effectiveness of informal insurance in India and Thailand, respectively.
    Our paper shows that an intervention aimed at the dependent household can lessen this
tax. Specifically, our results suggests that improving financial access among poor rural
households may have positive spillover effects on relatively richer households often located
outside the intervention area. This implies that hidden income is a limited concern within
family networks. This is consistent with Chandrasekhar, Kinnan and Larreguy (2015), who
show through a lab in the field experiment that the effect of hidden income on transfers is
mitigated among pairs who are socially closer.
    In regards to risk-sharing types of transfers within the village, we find evidence of positive
effects. Treatment households are more likely to send transfers to such partners (and no less
likely to receive transfers). Households with baseline networks more saturated with partners
who were offered accounts are not differentially affected, however, possibly suggesting that
treated households expanded the set of partners in their give-and-take network. It is also
possible that measurement error explains the small results from the spillover analysis. In
any case, we do not find a breakdown of social insurance as modeled in Ligon, Thomas and
Worrall (2000). An important reason for this is that the savings products modeled in Ligon,
Thomas and Worrall are purely for consumption smoothing, whereas the accounts provided



                                                4
in this experiment potentially also benefited households in other ways (as was captured
by the positive effects on food security and other outcomes).5 To the extent that such an
increase might be shared within networks (e.g. Angelucci and de Giorgi 2009 in the context
of the Progresa program in Mexico), this would mitigate any possible negative effect on risk
sharing.
    This paper is one of a recent handful of studies to examine the spillover effects of savings
accounts. Each of these studies find evidence that spillover effects are present, though the
findings appear to vary with the context and the sample studied. Comola and Prina (2014)
find that the introduction of savings accounts to women in Nepal caused them to increase
the number of financial partners they transacted with, within the village. Dizon, Gong, and
Jones (2015) examine the effect of savings accounts on a sample of vulnerable women (sex
workers, widows, separated women, and single mothers) in Kenya. They find that savings
accounts had no effect on transfers with “core connections” (give-and-take connections, in
our terminology) but crowded out transfers (given and received) to extended connections
(remittance givers, in our terminology). The reduction in transfers received is similar to our
own finding, though the reduction in transfers given is different. This is likely attributable
to differences in sample composition: in particular, the sample of vulnerable female-headed
households in Dizon et al. receive about 3 times more from core connections as from extended
connections, whereas in our sample of all unbanked households respondents receive about 5
times more from remittance-type partners than from give-and-take partners. Several other
studies look at the conceptually separate but related issue of how savings accounts affect
pre-existing group-based savings clubs such as ROSCAs. Dupas and Robinson (2013b) find
that gaining access to a private savings box decreased participation in ROSCAs, while Callen
et al. (2014) find that access to formal savings increased ROSCA participation in Sri Lanka,
possibly owing to the positive labor supply effect they document.
    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the experimental
design and Section 3 presents the data and some summary statistics on interpersonal financial
relationships in our sample. Section 4 presents the effects of the savings account offer on
households, followed by a description of the effect on intra- and inter-household transfers in

   5
     While we are unable to document specific pathways through which savings accounts may have benefited
program hosueholds, there are several likely candidates. Accounts may allow people to diversify their portfolio
of productive assets, particularly in cases where investment is lumpy (see Dupas and Robinson 2013a for
evidence that female market vendors increased investment in response to obtaining savings accounts). Access
to savings could also help households mitigate costly ex post responses to shocks, or increase labor supply
(see Callen et al., 2014 for evidence of such effects in Sri Lanka). Moreover, the mere fact of being offered
a private savings account could lead individuals to revise upwards their business investment goals and to
activate new mental accounts for these goals (see Schaner 2014 for evidence that short-term incentives to
save had large impacts on business investment through these mechanisms in the same area of Kenya as ours).



                                                      5
Section 5. We then discuss and conclude.


2       Experimental Design
2.1     Study Context
The study took place in a rural area of Kenya’s Busia District in Western province. Banking
options in the study area are relatively limited, as large bank branches are located only in
major towns, and the villages in our study are far enough from a town that the cost of
traveling there for banking is prohibitive. Locally, there are only two options: a “village
bank,” owned by share-holding villagers and affiliated with a microfinance organization,
and a partial-service branch (essentially a sales and information office with an ATM) for
a major commercial bank. Both banks have substantial account opening and maintenance
fees: at the onset of the study, the Village Bank had a $3.75 account opening fee and a
$1.25 minimum balance requirement, though no account maintenance fees; the commercial
bank had no account opening fee but a $2.50 minimum balance requirement, as well as a
$0.60 monthly account maintenance fee. Both also featured sizeable withdrawal fees, ranging
from $0.10 to $1.25 depending on the size of withdrawals.6 The Village Bank did not pay
interest on deposits; effectively, neither did the commercial bank (interest was only earned
if the account balance exceeded a very large amount). Deposits at the village bank are not
insured. Both institutions offer credit, though with somewhat stringent criteria.7
    Besides banks, there are several other ways to save. A majority of people keep at least
some money in cash at home. Many people (34% of men and 54% of women in our sample)
participate in Rotating Savings and Credit Associations (ROSCAs). A third possibility is
to save in “mobile money,” a service offered by cell phone companies in which people who
own a cell phone number can deposit, withdraw and transfer money by visiting a local
“cash point” (see Jack and Suri 2014 and Mbiti and Weil 2011). Take-up of mobile money
accounts grew rapidly over our study period, from 31% of households reporting having an
    6
      For the commercial bank, the withdrawal fee was $0.37 for ATM withdrawals and $2.5 for over-the-
counter withdrawals. For the village banks, the withdrawal fee was $0.125 for withdrawals below $12.5, $0.25
for withdrawals between $12.5 and $62.5, and $1.25 for withdrawals above $62.5. The median withdrawal
size we observe in our data was $9.16.
    7
      The Village Bank requires the formation of a group of at least 5 people who approve the purpose and
amount of each other’s loans, and who serve as mutual guarantors. To take out a loan, borrowers must
purchase a share in the bank, and are then eligible to borrow up to four times the value of shares owned
at interest rates between 1.25 and 1.5 percent per month (16-19% APR). The commercial bank grants
microloans to existing businesses for individuals who have had an account with any commercial bank for at
least 3 months. Two guarantors and full collateral are required for each loan, which must be repaid within
6 months, at an interest a rate of 1.5 percent per month (19% APR). See Dupas et al. (2012) for evidence
that demand for credit was limited.



                                                     6
account in 2009 to 58% in 2012, but the primary use of mobile money is to make transfers.
At the end of our study, only 15% of households reported saving on their mobile account,
about the same proportion as those using a bank account in our treatment group. We can
think of a number of reasons why mobile money had not become a major savings tool in
our study area by 2012. First, not everyone has a cell phone (only 52% of households in
our sample owned a cell phone at endline). Second, saving through mobile money is not
cheaper than regular banks, as mobile providers charge relatively large withdrawal fees.
Third, mobile money agents, especially rural ones, sometimes lack the liquidity they need to
honor all withdrawal requests as they come, so that there is no guarantee that money can
be withdrawn immediately.
   In addition to high fees, the service provided by the banks was on the whole very poor.
As shown in Dupas et al. (2012), many people reported that the banks were unreliable (with
limited opening hours and frequent unannounced closings). Many also reported that they
did not trust the banks, especially the Village Bank which had a recent banking scandal
at one of its branches.8 Overall, the accounts offered many disadvantages relative to other
options, including even keeping cash at home. This begs the question of why anybody would
use the accounts at all; if anybody does use them, this suggests that the problems of keeping
money elsewhere (such as the risk of overspending or giving it away) are quite large. In any
case, these disadvantages will depress usage and attenuate the potential for spillover effects.


2.2     Sampling Frame
This study took place in the catchment area of banks in three market centers in Western
Kenya. A census of all households in these catchment areas was carried out between August
and September 2009. The census survey collected information on demographic characteristics
of the household, sources of income, as well as access to financial services, knowledge and
perceptions of available financial services, and saving practices. A total of 1,898 households
were surveyed during the census exercise. Only 20% of these households had a member
with a bank account, despite the fact that the average distance to the closest deposit-taking
financial institution was (by design) only 1.6 kilometers, suggesting that physical access was
unlikely to be a limiting factor. Account ownership was predominantly male: 21% of men
had a bank account, against only 10% of women.
    Of the 1,898 households in the census, about half (989) were selected to participate in
the study. Those households excluded from the study were those with at least one bank
account holder (20%), and relatively atypical households, i.e. polygamous households (8%)
   8
    Trust in banks within Kenya may also be lower because of its history of banking scandals and various
pyramid schemes (see Dupas et al. 2012 for more detail).



                                                   7
and households with no female head (11%). Of the 989 sampled households, we could survey
both (when applicable) households heads in survey round 1 in 931 cases, and again in at
least one of the following rounds in 885 of the cases. Our analysis sample thus consists of
885 households for whom we have at least one follow-up survey round.9


2.3     Randomization
Out of the household sample, we created a sample of household heads. This individual-level
sample included either one or two individuals per household: the female head for single
female-headed households, and both the female and male head for dual-headed households.
We then randomized these individuals into treatment and control groups. The randomiza-
tion was done in May 2010, after stratifying the sample by household composition (single
female-headed or dual-headed), primary occupation, and market center. Note that the ran-
domization was conducted at the individual, not the household level. Thus, among dual-
headed households, while there are households in which either, both, or neither spouse got
the account, the size of each group was determined by chance – and consequently, the four
groups are not equal sized. Table A1 shows the final breakdown of households in our anal-
ysis sample. Among dual-headed households, 17% had no one assigned to the treatment,
33% had both heads assigned to the treatment group, 26% had only the female head as-
signed to treatment and 24% had only the male head assigned to treatment. Among single
female-headed households, 49.6% were assigned to the treatment group.


2.4     Treatment: Savings Accounts
Individuals selected for the treatment received a nominal, non-transferable voucher for a free
savings account. As mentioned above, the study took place around three market centers. In
one of these market centers, both the Village Bank and the Commercial Bank have a branch,
and the voucher was redeemable at either bank. In the other two market centers, only the
Village Bank had a branch, so respondents in those markets were given a voucher redeemable
only at the Village Bank. The experiment waived all account opening and maintenance fees,
but did not cover any withdrawal fees. In total, the subsidy amounted to $5 for accounts
at the village bank and $2.50 plus $0.60 a month for maintenance at the commercial bank.
The commercial bank account came with a free ATM card.


   9
      Since all households in the study did not have bank accounts at baseline and since richer households
are more likely to have accounts, households in the final study sample are poorer, less educated, and more
likely to be farmers than the average household in area. A comparison between our study sample and the
census of households we started with is provided in Dupas et al. (2012), Table 1.



                                                    8
    The vouchers were delivered to people in their homes between late May and early July
2010. During that visit, individuals received information on how the banks and accounts
worked, and when and how to redeem the voucher. Upon opening the account, individuals
could choose to open the account jointly with their spouse or alone. Sixty-nine percent of
vouchers that were distributed were redeemed. Only 5.7% of accounts that were opened were
joint accounts.10


3        Data and Background Facts on Interpersonal Finan-
         cial Relationships
3.1      Data and Timeline
We use three sources of data. First, the census survey, carried out in late summer 2009,
collected information on demographic characteristics, sources of income, access to financial
services, and saving practices more generally.
    Second, we have administrative data on deposits, withdrawals and loan applications from
the two banks in our study area, up until September 2012 (about 28 months after the initial
account opening in May 2010). All study participants that opened an account agreed to sign
a waiver allowing their bank to release their bank statements to the research team. We use
these bank statements to monitor the saving activity as well as the credit history of those
sampled for the account offer.
    Third, we administered six rounds of a comprehensive survey, including modules on sav-
ings, farming and non-farming activities, consumption, expenditures, and transfers between
spouses and between households.11 The surveys took place over approximately 2 years, and
were administered roughly every 4-5 months (the specific timeline is presented as Appendix
Figure A1).12 Because we sampled both female and male heads in dual-headed households,
we have surveys for both. By summing up answers across these surveys (making sure to avoid
double-counting for joint expenditures or income sources), we can compute household-level
    10
       The vouchers expired after 2 weeks. In practice, most of those who redeemed did so immediately.
Commercial Bank customers had to visit the branch twice, once to redeem the voucher and again two weeks
later in order to pick up their ATM cards and receive training in their use.
    11
       The look-back period for these measures varied. For transfers, respondents were asked about the last 3
months; for shocks, income, and expenditures, respondents were asked over the past 30 days. Since farming
is seasonal (there are 2 growing seasons per year in this part of Kenya), respondents were asked in a certain
round for the most current season (each relevant season was asked about in at most one monitoring survey).
    12
       The first survey round took place between February and May 2010, before the account treatment was
rolled out. Round 2 took place between July and September 2010, round 3 between October and December
2010, round 4 between February and May 2011, round 5 between July and September 2011 and round 6
took place between March and July 2012, slightly more than two years after the first round.



                                                     9
outcomes.


3.2    Attrition
In any given round, we consider a household as surveyed (and include that household in the
analysis) if all household heads were surveyed. In other words, for dual-headed households,
we ignore from the analysis a household-round observation with only one head surveyed
(since for those we do not have the household-level outcome). Appendix Table A2 presents
regressions of attrition. We have fairly low attrition overall: we surveyed 94% in round
3, 94% in round 4, 91% in round 5, and 89% in round 6. The most common reasons for
attrition was that the respondent was temporarily away at the time of the survey round.
We also had some permanent relocation of the respondent outside our study sample, and
a few deaths. From Panel A, differences in attrition rates are statistically indistinguishable
from zero with the exception of round 6, where dual headed treatment households were 9
percentage points more likely to be interviewed than dual headed control households. From
Panel B, we observe no evidence of differential attrition From Panel B, we observe little
difference in attrition rates between subgroups among dual-headed households. Overall,
differential attrition appears to be somewhat of a concern. To gauge the extent to which it
affects our ability to draw causal inference, in what follows, we show that the experimental
arms are balanced in terms of observable characteristics post-attrition. For all analyses in the
remainder of the paper, we also perform “placebo tests” testing whether the treatment effects
estimated are already there when estimated on the first survey round, before the treatment
was actually implemented. Reassuringly, the effects we observe in follow-up rounds are
not there pre-treatment, suggesting that the differential attrition is unlikely to explain our
results of interest. Finally, we use ANCOVA regressions as the specification for all our results
(controlling for baseline values of the dependent variable) which reduces the likelihood that
baseline imbalance will bias results.


3.3    Characteristics of Study Sample and Balance check
Table 1 presents some summary statistics on the households in the final analysis sample
of 885 households, and checks for balance in those characteristics by household type (dual-
headed households and single-headed female households). Columns 1 and 3 present sample
averages, while Columns 2 and 4 present p-values for tests of equality between the control and
treatment groups. Nearly all of the treatment-control differences are small and statistically
insignificant.
    Average education is around 6 years for female heads and 7 years for male heads. The



                                              10
average household has around 5 members. Average land size is 1.82 acres and total assets
(besides land) are worth about $237 on average (the exchange rate at the time of the baseline
survey was around 80 Ksh to US$1). Cell phone ownership is 40%. While every household
is involved in subsistence farming, many have other jobs as well: 43% engage in casual work,
34% sell farm produce, and 28% have a market business.
    By construction none of individuals in the sample had a bank account at baseline. In
contrast, as mentioned earlier, they have a relatively high rate of participation in ROSCAs.
When encountering shocks, people report relying primarily on support from others rather
than on self-insurance: when asked how they would deal with an emergency that required
1,000 Ksh (about 20% of monthly household expenditures) urgently, only 3% of the respon-
dents responded that they “would use savings” only. The most common coping strategy
reported was, instead, borrowing from relatives or friends.
    Finally, since Round 1 of the survey was conducted before the accounts were opened, we
can perform a placebo test to check that pre-treatment levels of the savings and downstream
outcomes of interest were similar across treatment and control. These tests are performed in
Web Appendix Tables WA1-WA6 (corresponding to main Tables 4-9). On the whole, these
placebo tests show minimal differences across groups.


3.4     Background facts on interpersonal financial relationships
3.4.1   Inter-household transfers

Table 2, Panel A documents the patterns of transfers that households give to and receive
from other households. The bottom line is that households in our sample are much more
likely to receive transfers than to send them, and on the whole are financially dependent on
other households. All the households in our sample are rural, and are quite poor on average.
They do, however, have relatives (adult children and siblings) who have moved out of the
area and are better off (pointing to the role of intranational migration from rural to urban
areas in increasing incomes), and who provide some support.
    The panel tabulates transfers in two ways: by relationship and by inside or outside the
village. In total, households had received an average of $112 over the 3 months prior to
the survey, and gave only $31. Most of what they receive comes from outside the village,
whereas only half of what they gives leaves the village. Tabulating transfers by relationship
type reveals that the two most important relationship types are adult children and siblings
(who tend to live outside the village). Households receive significant sums from these sources,
but send back very little: the average household received $45 from adult children and sent
out only $3; the average household received $29 from siblings and sent out only $6. The



                                              11
pattern of giving and receiving is more equal for other relationships: households give about
as much as they receive from neighbors and support parents, but the amounts involved here
are dwarfed by the other transfers.
    In the analysis, we separately analyze these two types of financial relationships. We
classify those relationships with an inflow/outflow ratio above the mean (which is 3.66) as
“remittances” – these include children, siblings, other relatives, and the “other” relationship
category. We classify those below the mean as “give and take” relationships – which include
friends, neighbors, and parents.

3.4.2     Intra-household allocation

Table 2, Panel B presents summary statistics on several intra-household outcomes, including
transfers, income, and expenditures.13 The overall picture is one in which women earn and
spend significantly less than men, and are financially dependent on men. As can be seen
from the top of the panel, men commonly transfer to women (82% of men did this in the
30 days preceding the survey, and the average amount transferred was $10.67), whereas
transfers from women to men are much less common (occurring just 28% of the time, and
amounting to only $1.13 on average). The table also shows cash income over the past 30
days (a measure which does not include prorated value of harvest income). On this measure,
men make about 70% more than women ($22 vs. $13). These differences translate into
expenditures: men spend about $37 per month, compared to $21 for women. Men are bigger
contributors to household public goods such as food, household items, and children, but also
have about 3 times higher personal expenditures ($6 vs. $2).


4        Direct Effects of Account Offer
4.1      Take-up of accounts
Table 3 presents summary statistics on take-up of the savings account. Sixty-nine percent
of treatment households opened an account. Among households in which both spouses were
offered an account, 81% of households opened at least one account, and 50% opened two.
Very few households (only 5%) opened joint accounts.
    While the majority opened accounts, average usage was fairly modest. Only 44% of those
sampled for an account (64% of those who opened one) ever used their account, that is, made
at least one transaction on the account. This pattern is shown in a histogram of the total

    13
     In the survey, transfers included cash transfers as well as an estimate of the cash value of any in-kind
transfers.



                                                     12
number of deposits in Figure 1, Panel A. Over half of the sample never used the accounts
and many of those who did use the accounts used them only infrequently. Over the 2.5
years we monitored account usage, 28% made two or more transactions in the account. Our
preferred measure of “active” use is making at least 5 transactions over this time period –
15% qualify as active users.14
    While most people did not use the accounts much, the sums transacted by the 15% of
active users was large. Since the banks were located in market centers which people may
not visit daily, people seemed to use the accounts for infrequent but large transactions: in
the overall sample, the average deposit was $9 and the average withdrawal $22 (these are
equivalent, respectively, to 14% and 36% of total monthly expenditures). Among active
users, the mean number of deposits and withdrawals was 9 and 5.5; since the transactions
were large, the mean (median) total value of deposits and withdrawals was $224 ($44) and
$175 ($32), respectively. These are large sums compared to $60 monthly expenditures. Note
also that the total withdrawn roughly matches the total deposited, consistent with people
saving up smaller sums for relatively short- or medium-term purposes (such as dealing with
emergencies), rather than longer-term goals which might have taken several years to reach
(such as buying land).
    Table 4 regresses four measures of take-up (ever used the account, active use of the
account (i.e. at least 5 transactions), and the total amount deposited and withdrawn over
the study period) on the treatment type. Specifically, we estimate

                                                                    0
                        Yhv = a ∗ Mh + b ∗ Bh + c ∗ SFh + Xh1 γ + θv + εhv                               (1)

where Xh1 is a vector of baseline characteristics including demographics, employment, asset
ownerships, baseline savings methods, and related variables. θv is a market center fixed
effect, which we include (and show in Table A3) because the quality of bank services differed
across branches. In particular, service was lower quality in market centers B and C (see
Dupas et al. 2012 for more details). Mh is a dummy equal to 1 if only the male head in
household h was sampled for a bank account, Bh is a dummy equal to 1 if both heads in
dual-headed household h were sampled for a bank account, and finally SFh is a dummy
equal to 1 if single-female household h was sampled for a bank account. The omitted group
is those households where only the female head was sampled for a bank account. In this
specification, a unitary household will save similarly in the three treatment configurations
(the male receiving the account only, the female only, or both spouses), so that a test of the

  14
     See Table 3 in Prina (2015) for a comparison of take-up and usage rates across a range of recent savings
studies.



                                                     13
unitary model is whether a = b = 0.15
    We find evidence that usage was higher in households where the husband got the account.
While account opening and an indicator for active usage did not differ, households in which
only the male got the account had 68% higher deposits and 100% higher withdrawals than
dual-headed households in which only the wife received the account (point estimates for both
spouses getting the account is also positive but statistically insignificant). This finding is
consistent with the fact that so few households chose to open joint accounts, as well as with
the results in Schaner (2015), who finds that incentives to save on individual accounts have
very different impacts than incentives to save on joint accounts. Like us, she also finds that
men use the accounts more and are more responsive to incentives.
    Turning to the covariates that appear to correlate with account usage, we find that
households with members self-employed outside of farming save more.16 In addition, take-
up is higher among those with higher baseline asset levels. In addition to these factors,
men who have more schooling and who were not members of a ROSCA at baseline are also
associated with higher usage in terms of the amounts deposited and withdrawn. Finally,
take-up and usage are considerably lower (in fact, usage is close to zero) in market centers
B and C.
    After observing usage for a period of about 9 months, it was apparent that usage was
fairly limited. To better understand reasons for low usage, we conducted a semi-structured
survey to half of the sample in January-February 2011.17 The results, which are reported in
Dupas et al. (2012), suggest that poor service and high fees were primary reasons for low
usage, in particular in market centers B and C.


4.2     Direct Impacts of Accounts on Treatment Households
For the remainder of this section, we turn to estimating the direct effects of the savings
accounts on savings behavior and other downstream outcomes, by comparing treatment
households to control households. For each outcome, we run two sets of regressions. In Panel
A of each table, we estimate the intention-to-treat (ITT) effects allowing for heterogeneity

  15
      This would not be true if the two spouses had different costs of banking (e.g. the male head travels
to the market center more often) and we had not given households the opportunity to open joint accounts
(since an account for the female would involve higher travel costs, at least for withdrawals which would have
to be made by the account holder). Since we allowed individuals to add their spouse as joint owner at no
cost, this is not an issue and the test is valid (as mentioned above, adding a joint owner was very uncommon,
occurring just 5% of the time).
   16
      This result helps to reconcile somewhat the findings with Dupas and Robinson (2013a), who find higher
take-up than we do here among a sample of self-employed market vendors.
   17
      In the impact analysis we control for whether the household was sampled for this survey, in case the
survey itself affected behavior.



                                                     14
by household type (dual or single-headed):

                                                                      0
         Yhvt = a ∗ Th ∗ Dh + b ∗ Th ∗ SFh + d ∗ SFh + µYhv1 + Xh1 γ + δt + θv + εhvt            (2)

    where Yhvt is the outcome of interest for household h in village v as observed in round
t, Xh1 is a vector of baseline characteristics (in particular, household type), δt is a round
fixed effect, θv is a market center fixed effect and εhvt is the error term. Th is a treatment
indicator, Dh is an indicator for a dual-headed household, and SFh is an indicator for being
a single female household. To further improve precision we include the pre-treatment mean
of the dependent variable Yhv1 (and therefore perform ANCOVA regressions).
    In Panel B, we exploit the full experimental design and allow for the treatment effect to
also vary among dual-headed households depending on who got treated:


                                                                           0
 Yhvt = a ∗ Fh + b ∗ Mh + c ∗ Bh + d ∗ Th ∗ SFh + e ∗ SFh + µYhv1 + Xh1 γ + δt + θv + εhvt (3)

    We present at the bottom of the tables p-values for joint significance, joint equality, and
for each pair-wise test of equality. Besides testing whether the treatments had an effect,
our main tests of interests here are whether a = b and whether a = c (in other words,
whether giving an account to the female or the male head or both matters, in dual-headed
households).
    In both Panels, we restrict regressions to t ≥ 3 (with round 1 included as control). We
do not include round 2 data because that round occurred too soon after the savings account
offer for impacts to yet be felt on most outcomes. Results for most outcomes look similar
with this round added, however.

4.2.1   Impact of savings accounts on bank usage

Table 5 examines the effect of the account on bank savings and other forms of savings, and
shows three main results. First, we find a significant effect of the account treatment on bank
usage. Dual-headed treatment households are 50 percentage points more likely to report
having a bank account, 7 percentage points more likely to report making a bank deposit
and 4 percentage points more likely to report making a bank withdrawal in the past 30
days.18 For single female-headed households, effects are similar though somewhat smaller
in magnitude. Second, we find no evidence that informal savings were crowded out. We
find small increases in ROSCA deposits and small decreases in home savings (of magnitudes
  18
     We consider indicators, rather than amounts deposited or withdrawn, because the vast majority of
observations are censored at zero.



                                                 15
roughly canceling each other out), but both are far from significant. This result is suggestive
that the bank savings were new savings and thus represented an increase in total financial
savings.19
    Turning to Panel B, we observe savings impacts for each of the sub-treatments. All
treatments are associated with statistically significant increases in bank account ownership,
deposits, and withdrawals. Consistent with the fact that few accounts were opened jointly,
we observe larger effects on reported account ownership when both spouses were offered
an account. There is no evidence of differential crowd-out behavior across treatment arms.
Finally, and reassuringly, we find no savings impacts in placebo tests run on round 1 data
only (Table WA1 in the Web Appendix). As discussed above, this suggests that differential
attrition is unlikely to be driving the results.

4.2.2    Impact of savings account on downstream outcomes

Table 6 turns to estimating the effects of the accounts on downstream outcomes. There
are two important difficulties to estimating effects here. First, as noted above, power is
limited by the fact that only about 15% of households used the accounts actively. Second,
the accounts were not geared for a particular purpose, and people had a number of different
savings goals. Appendix Table A3 tabulates savings goals (these were collected in early
2011 and so therefore are potentially endogenous to treatment and are therefore presented
only for descriptive purposes). These responses are at the individual respondent level. Of
those with goals (90% of the sample), 43% list school fees as one of their goals, 41% list
business investment, 36% agriculture/livestock, 27% home improvement, 12% buying land,
11% emergencies, 3% health care, and 7% other goals. This heterogeneity makes it hard to
find effects on any one outcome, as compared to previous papers such as Dupas and Robinson
(2013a) which included only self-employed people primarily saving for business expenses, or
Dupas and Robinson (2013b) which was focused exclusively on items for health.
    As might be expected given this, the overall pattern of results is fairly modest. For both
dual- and single-headed households, most effects are positive but few are significant. The
one exception is food security: dual-headed treatment households are 13 percentage points
less likely to report not having enough food at some point in the previous 6 months (on a
control base of 76%). While the decline for single-headed treatment households is smaller

  19
     Note, however, that our power to pick up this sort of crowding out is limited, since treatment effects
are driven by a small number of active users so that mean treatment effects are small. To see this, note
that the mean amount saved at home in the control group is $14 over 30 days while the average amount
contributed to a ROSCA is $7.16 per month, for a total of about $21 per month. The total amount saved
in the accounts was $34 over 28 months, or about $1.20 per month. Thus, at the mean, bank savings was
just over 5% of total savings.



                                                    16
(5 percentage points) and not significant, these households do report skipping meals on 2.4
fewer days in the past month (on a base of 8.6 days). As with the savings results, Panel B
shows no obvious differential patterns by subtreatments.20


5        Effects on inter-personal financial linkages
The main focus of this paper is on resource allocation across and within households when
access to formal savings devices increases. To the extent that there is limited commitment
or hidden information across households, increased access to formal savings may undermine
informal insurance arrangements. Similarly, if household behavior can be described by a uni-
tary model then we should find no differences in outcomes such as intra-household transfers
and private expenditures across treatment arms. However, if the unitary model is not the
appropriate benchmark, for example because spouses have different discount factors (Schaner
2015), gaining access to a savings account may enable household members to shield resources
from other family members. We take up these issues in turn below.


5.1      Inter-household Transfers
How do own-treatment effects spill over?

Table 7 uses the same econometric specifications as in Tables 4 and 5 to estimate the intent-
to-treat effects on inter-household transfers. Recall from Section 3.4.1 that transfers from
different partners serve different purposes – transfers from grown children and siblings are
essentially one-sided support payments, while transfers from neighbors and friends appear
to serve more of a give-and-take role. We present results on these two types of transfers
separately, and find differing impacts. We present results on both the prevalence of transfers
of each type, and their size, noting that our transfer amounts data is fairly noisy, and still
exhibits very large standard deviations despite winsorizing at the 99th percentile.
    We find a 9 percentage point drop in the incidence of remittance-type transfers among
dual-headed households offered an account (Table 6, Panel A, column 2; p-value: 0.051).
This represents a 13% reduction in this type of transfer, off of a base of 71 percent. We
also see a decrease in the amount received of around the same magnitude (-$2, on a base
of about $20) but it is very imprecisely estimated. In contrast, transfers to these far away,
better off relatives are unaffected. Thus, in net, transfers received from remittance-type of
partners fell. The specification in Panel B shows that this effect is strongest when the male

    20
     Unfortunately, we did not ask questions about food security in round 1 of the survey so we cannot run
a placebo test for this outcome.



                                                   17
head was offered an account. In fact, we cannot reject the null of no effect when only the
wife was offered an account (Panel B). We also find no effect for single female households.
    The results for the second type of transfers, those to friends and neighbors within the
village, are different. We observe that these types of transfers, which we characterized above
as more of the give-and-take type, actually go up in response to the treatment. The incidence
of transfers sent to others in the village increases by a statistically significant 12 percentage
points off of a base of 38%, thus a fairly large increase in percentage terms (Table 6 column
7). Here again, the increase in amount sent is of similar magnitude (around 21%) but
imprecisely estimated (column 8). Transfers received do not go up (columns 5 and 6), and
so overall treated households increased their net contribution to this type of financial partner.
To the extent that the treatment increased households income, this result is consistent with
some level of income pooling at the risk-sharing network level. Here again, the effects are
found only for dual-headed households, consistent with the fact that the direct effects of the
account offer were much more pronounced for them.

Peer effects

The analysis in Table 7 tells us whether getting an account affects how much the recipient
household transfers out or receive. In this subsection we instead look at whether having
more financial partners who received an account affected own outcomes, controlling for own
treatment status. To do this, we use the information we have on financial relationships from
the first survey wave. We asked respondents to list all the gifts and loans they either received
from or made to friends or relatives in the 90 days preceding the survey, and asked them
for the names of the sender/receiver and whether that financial partner was from within or
outside the village. Using a fuzzy name matching algorithm, we were able to match 47%
of named contacts from within the village with our sample list, meaning that we know the
treatment status of the partner for 47% of reported transactions with local partners. There
is almost certainly measurement error in this matching, which will attenuate effects towards
zero.21
    With this data, we estimate the following equation for several outcomes Y hvt :

                                                                      0
             Yhvt = a ∗ Ch + b ∗ CMh + c ∗ M Th ∗ +µYhv1 + Xh1 γ + δt + θv + εhvt                     (4)

  21
     There are several reasons why this percentage would not be 100% even with no measurement error.
First, people may have had contacts who had accounts at baseline and who were excluded from the sample.
As mentioned previously, even though this is a small proportion of the sample, better-off individuals may
disproportionately be supporting others. Second, the borders of our censusing activity were essentially
arbitrary – people may have thought that a person living close to them but just outside our catchment area
would qualify as “in the village” even though we wouldn’t have data on them.



                                                   18
    where Ch is the total number of transfers (whether in or out) reported by household h,
CMh is the total number of transfers with a partner that can be matched, and M Th is the
total number of matched transfers with a partner in the treatment group. The randomization
should ensure that, conditional on CMh , M Th is random. We also control for the total
number of transfers Ch because households with more unmatched contacts may differ from
other households. We include respondent treatment status in the vector of controls Xh1 .
    We show the results on transfers in Table 8. The estimates of the peer effects are show in
row 3. We find no evidence of negative spillovers in terms of transfers. Interestingly, we find
no positive spillover either – having more transactions with baseline partners sampled for an
account does not increase transfers in, even though in Table 7 (and again in Table 8, row 4,
Column 7) we saw that households in the treatment group report sending more to others.
There are two possible explanations for this apparently inconsistent result. One is that
treated households expanded the set of households in their financial network. This would be
consistent with the findings of Comola and Prina (2014), who exploit a randomized savings
account intervention that mimicked ours but in a different context (Nepal). An alternative
explanation is that measurement error (due to our imperfect matching) downwardly biases
the spillover analysis.
    To complement the transfer results, columns 9-11 of Table 8 look at other outcomes,
namely food security and reported reliance on contacts for emergencies. Again, we find no
evidence of negative spillovers of having baseline partners sampled for an account.22

Benchmarking effect sizes

We find statistically significant results for some inter-household transfers even though active
usage was limited to 15% of households. Results therefore must be driven by the small
number of people who used the accounts actively. What does this imply about the im-
plied treatment effects for them? The key outcomes we find are both among dual-headed
households: a 9 percentage point reduction in receiving a remittance-type transfer and a 12
percentage point increase in give-and-take transfers. Given a take-up rate of around 15%,
these effects imply that for active users, the incidence of transfers from children and sib-
ling dropped by 60% and transfers to friends and neighbors increased by 80%. The results
therefore suggest quite large effects for a small subset of individuals.



   22
     We note that the estimate of own treatment effects are unaffected when controlling for spillover effects
(that is, the coefficient estimates shown in rows 4-5 of Table 8 are similar to those shown in Table 7). The
results are also unlikely to be driven by differential attrition as we see no effect in the placebo tests on round
1 data for the post-attrition sample (see Web Appendix Table A4).



                                                       19
5.2    Intra-household outcomes
As described in Section 4.1, we find that bank usage is higher among married households in
which the male head received an account than among those in which only the female head
got an account. This suggests a rejection of the unitary household model. While account
usage differs, what effect does this have on other outcomes? Did the treatments, by changing
the autarkic outcome for the spouse(s) who received an account, affect how resources are
allocated within the household?
    To answer these questions, we restrict the sample to dual-headed households, and esti-
mate a version of equation 3 (without the single female head treatment) for savings outcomes
(Table 9) and other outcomes including between-spouse transfers, expenditures, and income
(Table 10). Consistent with results discussed previously, Table 8 shows that usage is much
higher in accounts in a respondent’s own name. For example, women are 43-47 percentage
points more likely to report having an account when offered one in their own name, but no
more likely when their husband is offered an account. Point estimates for deposits and with-
drawals are only positive for women when they are offered an account directly. The picture
is similar for men, though here we observe some spillover effects from wives’ accounts. Men
are 43-51 percentage points more likely to report having an account when it is in their name,
but 11 percentage points when it was offered to their wife (significant at 10%). Similarly,
dummies for making withdrawals and deposits are only statistically significant for treatments
in which the husband got the account directly. We do, however, observe a statistically signif-
icant increase in reported withdrawals for all three treatment arms, including the one where
the wife alone got the account. The pattern for men is one in which usage is much higher
in his own account, but in which there may be some usage of the spouse’s account. This is
also consistent that the few accounts that were opened jointly were predominantly in cases
in which the wife was offered an account and added the husband to the account (households
opened joint accounts 7% of the time when only the wife was offered the account, compared
to 2% of the time when only the husband was).
    Results for other outcomes are presented in Table 10. Interestingly, we find no effect
of the treatments on these outcomes. Transfers between spouses appear to be unrelated to
access to the free accounts, and not affected by whether the male head received the account
or not. Similarly, neither private nor public expenditures appear to be affected differentially
by treatment status. From these, we conclude that despite the differences in take-up and
usage in dual-headed households where men were offered accounts compared to those in
which only women received the accounts, there was no negative spillover onto spouses, and
more generally it seems that none of the treatments affected intra-household dynamics, at
least in what we measured.


                                              20
6    Discussion
In many developing countries, access to banks is expanding rapidly (see Allen et al. 2013
on the recent massive expansion of private banks like Equity Bank in Kenya). What effect
does this expansion have on the financial interrelationships that predated the entry of these
institutions? Do these new opportunities crowd out insurance by allowing people to opt out
of risk-sharing networks? Or are the gains from access shared through social networks?
    We investigate this question in the context of a field experiment that provided bank
accounts to a random subset of households in rural Kenya. The households in our study
tend to be dependent on relatives who live far away, but are linked in more of a give-and-take
relationship with friends and neighbors in the village. We find that the accounts allowed
households to rely upon far-away relatives less regularly, but to send more within the village.
Both results constitute positive spillovers, suggesting that the benefits of financial inclusion
can accrue beyond previously unbanked households alone. In particular, expanding access in
rural areas can have positive spillover effects even in urban areas for households that already
had ready access to banking options.
    On the other hand, the results we document are generated from a small fraction of the
target population (specifically the 15% of people who actively used the accounts). While
15% active usage is not out of line with take-up observed in other contexts (see Table 3
in Prina 2014), it is significantly smaller than what was observed in a previous study with
a similar village bank, also in Kenya (Dupas and Robinson 2013a). Mean deposits were
$4.66 per month in that earlier study, compared to $1.10 per month in the present one.
What accounts for much lower usage this time around? The two key differences are that the
banks and the study populations differ. First, the bank branches in this study suffered from
trust and service problems. Second, the sample in this paper is representative of unbanked
households without a female head, whereas the sample in the previous paper was composed
primarily of market vendors and bike taxis, and the effects were concentrated among market
vendors. Part of the explanation therefore could simply be that market vendors are better
able to save than people in other occupations such as farmers. Indeed, in the present study
we observe that market vendors are somewhat better off and, as shown in Table 4, are
somewhat more likely to use the accounts. What’s more, in a companion study conducted a
few years later in Uganda and Malawi with a broad swath of unbanked households, we again
find modest usage rates (Dupas et al., 2015). Does this mean that the majority of poor rural
households do not need saving products because they are too poor to save? The present
study allows us to explore this. After observing low take-up during the sample period, we
randomly introduced another savings product: savings boxes similar to those in Dupas and




                                              21
Robinson (2013b) and based on the lockboxes designed by Ashraf, Karlan and Yin (2006)
but without the embedded commitment mechanism. The boxes were simple metal boxes
with a deposit slit at the top. Respondents were also provided with a lock and key. Boxes
were given out in October-November 2011, between our fifth and sixth (and last) round of
surveying. Table A4 reports take-up statistics for this product. When we surveyed people
for round 6, we asked to see their box and checked how much money was in it. We consider
a household as having used the box if money was found in the box at that time: depending
on whether we count people who did not have their box on them as missing observations or
non-users, we find that 34-46% of people used the box. To compare with usage of the bank
accounts, we asked people how much they had deposited since receiving the box (which was
given out 8 months earlier). Since these are not transactions records but only self-reports,
responses should be taken with a measure of caution. That said, self-reported usage was
much higher than for the accounts: people reported depositing about $23 on average, or
about $2.50 per month. This is 2.5 times as large as the average for the accounts, which was
about $1 per month. While these savings could have simply been shifting money kept at
home in other sources into the box, we view this result as suggestive that households have
some savings at home, but preferred not to put it into the account. 23
    Thus while we find statistically significant and economically meaningful effects on inter-
personal linkages, effects are greatly attenuated by the simple fact that the relatively poor
quality of the savings product being offered resulted in low take-up. What effect would there
be of a better tailored product? Network effects we observe may well scale-up – or not.
Indeed, it could be that network effects are non-linear in the share of the network that has
access to formal accounts. This is an important question left for future work.




  23
     A natural question is whether the boxes affected transfers or other outcomes. Unfortunately, with only
1 round of post-lockbox data, we lack the power to explore this.



                                                    22
References
 [1] Aggarwal, Shilpa, Leora Klapper and Dorothe Singer (2013). “Financing Businesses
       in Africa: The Role of Microfinance.” (with Leora Klapper and Dorothe Singer),
       Chapter 9 in Microfinance in Developing and Developed Countries: Issues, Policies
       and Performance Evaluation, Jean-Pierre Gueyie, Ronny Manos and Jacob Yaron,
       eds. Palgrave Macmillan.
 [2] Allen, Franklin, Elena Carletti, Robert Schuman, Robert Cull, Jun Qian, Lemma W.
        Senbet, Patricio Valenzuela (2013), “Improving Access to Banking: Evidence from
        Kenya”. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 6593
 [3] Angelucci, Manuela, and Giacomo De Giorgi (2009). “Indirect effects of an aid program:
       How do cash transfers affect ineligibles’ consumption?” The American Economic
       Review 99 (1): 486-508.
 [4] Ashraf, Nava, Dean Karlan, and Wesley Yin. (2006). “Tying Odysseus to the Mast: Ev-
        idence from a Commitment Savings Product in the Philippines.” Quarterly Journal
        of Economics 121 (2): 635-672.
 [5] Baland, Jean-Marie, Catherine Guirkinger, and Charlotte Mali (2011) “Pretending to be
        Poor: Borrowing to Escape Forced Solidarity in Cameroon.” Economic Development
        and Cultural Change 60 (1): 1–16.
 [6] Bruhn, Miriam, and Inessa Love (2014). “The Real Impact of Improved Access to Fi-
        nance: Evidence from Mexico.” Journal of Finance, 69 (3): 1347-1376.
 [7] Brune, Lasse, Xavier Giné, Jessica Goldberg, and Dean Yang (2015). “Facilitating Sav-
        ings for Agriculture: Field Experimental Evidence from Malawi.” Forthcoming, Eco-
        nomic Development and Cultural Change.
 [8] Burgess, Robin and Rohini Pande (2005). “Do Rural Banks Matter? Evidence from the
        Indian Social Banking Experiment.” American Economic Review 95 (3): 780-795.
 [9] Callen, Michael, Suresh de Mel, Craig McIntosh, and Christopher Woodruff (2014).
        “What are the Headwaters of Formal Savings? Experimental Evidence from Sri
        Lanka”, BREAD Working Paper No. 431.
[10] Chaia, Alberto, Aparna Dalal, Tony Goland, Maria Jose Gonzalez, Jonathan Morduch,
       and Robert Schiff (2009). “Half the World is Unbanked.” Financial Access Initiative
       Framing Note.
[11] Chandrasekhar, Arun, Cynthia Kinnan and Horacio Larreguy (2015). “Social Networks
       as Contract Enforcement: Evidence from a Lab Experiment in the Field”. Mimeo,


                                            23
        Stanford University.
[12] Comola, Margherita and Silvia Prina (2014). “Do Interventions Change the Network?
       A Dynamic Peer Effect Model Accounting for Network Changes.” Working paper.
[13] Di Falco, Salvatore, and Erwin Bulte (2011). “A dark side of social capital? Kinship,
        consumption, and savings.” Journal of Development Studies 47 (8): 1128-1151.
[14] Dupas, Pascaline and Jonathan Robinson (2013a). “Savings Constraints and Microen-
       terprise Development: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Kenya.”American Eco-
       nomic Journal: Applied Economics 5 (1): 163-192.
[15] Dupas, Pascaline, and Jonathan Robinson (2013b). “Why Don’t the Poor Save More?
       Evidence from Health Savings Experiments.” American Economic Review 103 (4):
       1138-1171.
[16] Dupas, Pascaline, Sarah Green, Anthony Keats, and Jonathan Robinson (2012). “Chal-
       lenges in Banking the Rural Poor: Evidence from Kenya’s Western Province.” Forth-
       coming, NBER Africa Volume.
[17] Dupas, Pascaline, Dean Karlan, Jonathan Robinson and Diego Ubfal (2015). “Expand-
       ing Access to Formal Basic Savings Accounts: Experimental Evidence from Uganda,
       Malawi and Chile.” Unpublished.
[18] Foster, Andrew, and Mark Rosenzweig (2001). “Imperfect Commitment, Altruism and
        the Family: Evidence from Transfer Behavior in Low-Income Rural Areas”. Review
        of Economics and Statistics 83 (3), 389-407.
[19] Hoff, Karla, and Arijit Sen (2006). “The kin system as a poverty trap.” in Poverty Traps,
        edited by Samuel Bowles, Steven N. Durlauf, Karla Hoff. Princeton University Press.
        pp. 95-115.
[20] Jack, William and Tavneet Suri (2014). “Risk Sharing and Transaction Costs: Evidence
        from Kenya’s Mobile Money Revolution.” American Economic Review 104 (1): 183-
        223.
[21] Jakiela, Pamela and Owen Ozier (2015). “Does Africa Need a Rotten Kin Theorem?
        Experimental Evidence from Village Economies.” Forthcoming, Review of Economic
        Studies.
[22] Karlan, Dean and Jonathan Morduch (2010). “Access to Finance.” In: Dani Rodrik
        and Mark Rosenzweig, Editor(s), Handbook of Development Economics Volume 5:
        4703-4784. Elsevier.




                                             24
[23] Kast, Felipe, Stephan Meier, and Dina Pomeranz (2014). “Under-savers anonymous:
        Evidence on self-help groups and peer pressure as a savings commitment device.”
        Working paper.
[24] Kendall, Jake, Nataliya Mylenko and Alejandro Ponce (2010).“Measuring Financial
       Access around the World”. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 5253.
[25] Kinnan, Cynthia (2014). “Distinguishing barriers to insurance in Thai villages.” Working
        paper.
[26] Kinnan, Cynthia and Robert Townsend (2012). “Kinship and Financial Networks, For-
        mal Financial Access and Risk Reduction.” American Economic Review (Papers and
        Proceedings Issue) 102 (2): 289-293.
[27] Ligon (1998). “Risk Sharing and Information in Village Economies.” Review of Economic
        Studies 65 (4): 847-864
[28] Ligon, Ethan, Jonathan P. Thomas, and Tim Worrall (2000). “Mutual insurance, in-
        dividual savings, and limited commitment.” Review of Economic Dynamics 3 (2):
        216-246.
[29] Mbiti, Isaac and David Weil (2011). “Mobile Banking: The Impact of M-Pesa in Kenya.
       Forthcoming, NBER Africa Program.
[30] Prina, Silvia (2014). “Banking the Poor via Savings Accounts: Evidence from a Field
        Experiment”. Mimeo, Case Western Reserve University.
[31] Rosenzweig, Mark, and O. Stark (1989), “Consumption Smoothing, Migration, and
        Marriage: Evidence from Rural India”, Journal of Political Economy, 97, 905-926.
[32] Schaner, Simone (2014). “The Persistent Power of Behavioral Change: Long-Run Im-
        pacts of Temporary Savings Subsidies for the Poor”. Working paper, Dartmouth
        College.
[33] Schaner, Simone (2015). “Do Opposites Detract? Intrahousehold Preference Hetero-
        geneity and Inefficient Strategic Savings.” AEJ: Applied Economics 7 (2): 135-174.




                                             25
Figure 1. Sponsored Account usage

                                      Panel A. Distribution of Total Number of Deposits, by Household Type
                                            .59
                           .6


                                     .54
     Share of Households
                           .4




                                                    .19
                           .2




                                                                            .16
                                                                    .15
                                                           .14


                                                                                      .08
                                                                                              .06
                                                                                                                 .04
                                                                                                          .03
                                                                                                                                   .02
                                                                                                                            0
                           0




                                     No deposit   1 deposit only   2 to 4 deposits   5 to 9 deposits   10 to 19 deposits   20+ deposits


                                                          Single females                     Dual-headed households




                                Panel B. Quarterly transactions among "active users" (at least 5 transactions), by year




Notes: Data source: Administrative data obtained from banks


                                                                                       26
Table 1. Sample Characteristics and Balance Check
                                                                    (1)            (2)                  (3)             (4)
                                                                  Dual-headed households             Single Female Households
                                                                               Joint Test:                          Joint Test:
                                                                  Mean                                Mean
                                                                              All Account                            Account
                                                               [Std. Dev.]                         (Std. Dev.)
                                                                            Treatments = 0                        Treatment = 0
Age of female head                                                34.82           1.15                49.50            0.17
                                                                 [13.91]         {0.33}              [16.93]          {0.68}
Years of education of female head                                  5.89           0.21                 4.03            0.01
                                                                  [3.14]         {0.89}               [3.43]          {0.91}
Female head is literate (can write in Swahili)                     0.69           0.06                 0.43            0.00
                                                                  [0.46]         {0.98}                [0.5]          {0.98}
Age of male head                                                  41.18           0.96
                                                                 [15.44]         {0.41}
Years of education of male head                                    7.11           0.32
                                                                  [3.02]         {0.81}
Male head is literate (can write in Swahili)                       0.90           0.58
                                                                  [0.31]         {0.63}
Household size                                                     5.62           0.37                 4.51             2.85
                                                                  [2.21]         {0.77}               [2.39]           {0.09*}
Home has iron roof                                                 0.37           0.65                 0.56             0.02
                                                                  [0.48]         {0.59}                [0.5]            {0.9}
Home has cement floor                                              0.09           0.43                 0.16             0.03
                                                                  [0.29]         {0.73}               [0.37]           {0.87}
Value of durable goods and animals owned (USD)                      275           0.91                 191              0.01
                                                                  [296]          {0.43}               [259]            {0.93}
Acres of land owned                                                1.90           0.65                 1.73             2.74
                                                                  [1.99]         {0.58}               [1.78]           {0.1*}
Earn income from casual work                                       0.57           0.46                 0.27             0.35
                                                                   [0.5]         {0.71}               [0.44]           {0.56}
Earn income from sale of farm production                           0.41           0.41                 0.26             0.10
                                                                  [0.49]         {0.75}               [0.44]           {0.75}
Earn income from business (e.g. market vending)                    0.36           0.70                 0.19             0.10
                                                                  [0.48]         {0.56}               [0.39]           {0.76}
Total income earned in last 30 days (USD)1                          27            0.87                 7.32             1.76
                                                                   [47]          {0.45}                [27]            {0.19}
Owns mobile phone                                                  0.50           1.92                 0.27             0.12
                                                                   [0.5]         {0.13}               [0.44]           {0.73}
Has a mobile money account                                         0.30           0.87                 0.08             0.72
                                                                  [0.46]         {0.45}               [0.28]            {0.4}
Female head participates in a ROSCA                                0.54           0.61                 0.42             0.28
                                                                   [0.5]         {0.61}               [0.49]           {0.59}
Male head participates in a ROSCA                                  0.34           0.38                 0.00             0.00
                                                                  [0.48]         {0.77}
Where would you find money if you needed 1,000Ksh urgently?
Female head: would borrow from friend or relative                  0.51             1.15               0.39              0.15
                                                                   [0.5]           {0.33}             [0.49]             {0.7}
Female head: would sell agricultural production                    0.17             0.58               0.20              0.04
                                                                  [0.37]           {0.63}              [0.4]            {0.84}
Female head: would be able to rely on savings only                 0.03             1.18               0.01              0.00
                                                                  [0.18]           {0.32}             [0.07]            {0.99}
Male head: would borrow from friend or relative                    0.46             2.74
                                                                   [0.5]          {0.04**}
Male head: would sell agricultural production                      0.18             0.15
                                                                  [0.39]           {0.93}
Male head: would be able to rely on savings only                   0.03             1.13
                                                                  [0.17]           {0.34}
Number of Observations                                             485                                 397
Notes: Unit of observation is the household. Data from baseline (census) survey. Columns 2 and 4 shows F-statistics and {p-
values} from a test of whether the treatment account coefficients are jointly equal to zero. ***, **, and * indicate significance at
the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels respectively. Standard deviations are in brackets. Exchancge rate at time of baseline survey (early
2010) was around 80 Ksh to US$1.
1
 Income includes cash income from work only and does not include farm income, transfers, or other flows.
                                                                 27
Table 2. Summary statistics on transfers (averages totals, over 6 rounds)
                                                (1)                   (2)                      (3)
Panel A. Inter-Household Transfers
                                            Total received           Total sent              Ratio
Total (USD)                                     112.07                 31.41                  3.57
                                               (144.15)               (51.60)
By partner type
  Child                                          44.86                  3.38                 13.26
                                               (115.63)               (15.64)
  Sibling                                        29.32                  6.38                  4.60
                                                (56.76)               (14.43)
  Other relative                                 14.33                  3.55                  4.04
                                                (35.12)               (11.30)
  Friend                                         11.93                  5.66                  2.11
                                                (27.12)               (15.36)
  Parent                                          4.85                  8.29                  0.58
                                                (17.19)               (19.32)
  Neighbor                                        2.92                  2.75                  1.06
                                                 (7.31)                (6.76)
  Other                                           2.31                  0.15                 15.79
                                                (12.51)                (1.45)

By location of partner
  Outside village                                89.59                 15.80                  5.67
                                               (134.84)               (28.65)
  Within village                                 20.40                 14.37                  1.42
                                                (25.88)               (24.40)

Number of households                                         885


Panel B. Intra-Household Transfers and Allocations (dual-headed households only)

Transfers (past 30 days)                      Male Head            Female Head
Gave transfer to spouse                          0.82                  0.28
                                                (0.39)                (0.45)
Amount of transfers                             10.67                  1.13
                                               (14.29)                (4.41)
Income (past 30 days)
Total income                                     22.28                 13.20
                                                (38.37)               (26.35)
Expenditures (past 30 days)
Total                                            37.09                 20.70
                                                (30.76)               (19.79)
Personal                                          5.81                  2.39
                                                 (6.48)                (3.94)
Food                                             18.00                 11.74
                                                (14.85)               (12.13)
Household expenses                                4.09                  3.05
                                                 (5.93)                (4.25)
Items for children                               12.69                  6.27
                                                (34.03)               (16.69)

Number of households                                          485
Notes: Std. Deviations in parentheses. All monetary values in US Dollars. Exchange rate averaged
approximately 75 Ksh to $1 USD during the sample period.


                                                   28
Table 3. Take-up and usage of savings account
                                                                 (1)                      (2)
                                                                                    "Active" users
                                                             Full sample
                                                                               (at least 5 transactions)
Took up an account                                               0.69
If dual-headed household: took up joint account                  0.05
 If both heads sampled
     Took up at least one account                                0.81
     Only female took up account                                 0.14
     Only male took up account                                   0.17
     Both took up account                                        0.50

Ever used at least one account                                   0.44
 If both heads sampled
     Ever used at least one account                              0.50
     Only female used account                                    0.17
     Only male used account                                      0.16
     Both spouses used account                                   0.16

Made at least 2 transactions                                     0.28                    1.00

Made at least 5 transactions (="active")                         0.15                    1.00
 If both heads sampled
     Only female made at least 5 transactions                    0.06                    0.38
     Only male made at least 5 transactions                      0.07                    0.46
     Both spouses made at least 5 transactions                   0.01                    0.08

Deposits
Total value of deposits (USD)                                    34.16                  223.85
                                                               (205.24)                (496.88)
Total number of deposits                                          1.81                    9.02
                                                                 (4.15)                  (7.19)
If ever deposited, average deposit size                           9.06                   21.73
                                                                (26.80)                 (42.13)
Withdrawals
Total value of withdrawals (USD)                                 26.36                  175.44
                                                               (159.02)                (383.83)
Total number of withdrawals                                       0.86                    5.50
                                                                 (3.62)                  (8.01)
If ever withdrew, average withdrawal size                        21.98                   25.71
                                                                (31.93)                 (34.42)
Balance
Balance after 9 months (USD)                                   4.15                    23.65
                                                              (31.94)
Balance after 28 months (USD)                                  7.80                    48.42
                                                              (81.29)
Number of households                                            600                      88
Notes: Means presented, with standard deviations in parentheses. Sample restricted to households
sampled for at least one sponsored account. Data is over the entire sample period (2.5 years). All data
on account information come from administrative bank records. For households sampled for two
sponsored accounts, the transactions are summed across the two accounts when two were opened
and used. All monetary values in US Dollars. Exchange rate averaged approximately 75 Ksh to $1
USD during the sample period. There is a Ksh100 (USD $1.33) minimum balance requirement on
the accounts.




                                                  29
Table 4. Determinants of savings account usage
                                                     (1)                  (2)                    (3)                    (4)
                                                                     Had at least 5
                                           Ever used at least one
                                                                    transactions in         Total deposits      Total withdrawals
                                            sponsored account
                                                                  sponsored account
Treatment indicators
Single-headed household                             0.05                  -0.13                 -24.75                -14.32
                                                   (0.17)                 (0.13)                (62.48)              (53.41)
Male only sampled for account (a)                  -0.10                  -0.06                  38.61                 44.66
                                                   (0.06)                 (0.05)               (22.57)*             (19.30)**
Both heads sampled for account (b)                  0.07                  -0.01                  29.04                 17.07
                                                   (0.06)                 (0.04)                (20.94)              (17.91)
Other covariates
Someone in household earns income                   -0.03                  0.06                   31.63                 33.90
 from business (e.g. market vending)                (0.04)               (0.03)*                (16.35)*             (13.98)**
Log value of animals + durables owned                0.05                  0.04                    7.47                  6.31
                                                  (0.02)***             (0.02)***                 (7.61)                (6.50)
Years of education of female head                    0.01                  0.00                    2.10                  2.78
                                                    (0.01)                (0.01)                  (2.81)                (2.41)
Years of education of male head                      0.00                  0.00                    5.24                  5.76
                                                    (0.01)                (0.01)                  (3.35)              (2.87)**
Household has mobile money account                   0.06                  0.05                   15.85                  7.60
                                                    (0.05)                (0.04)                 (18.70)               (15.99)
Female head participates in a ROSCA                  0.06                  0.02                   -4.04                -10.55
                                                    (0.04)                (0.03)                 (15.05)               (12.87)
Male head participates in a ROSCA                   -0.02                 -0.03                  -41.06                -28.15
                                                    (0.05)                (0.04)               (19.22)**              (16.43)*
Market B                                            -0.15                 -0.01                  -45.55                -39.51
                                                  (0.05)***               (0.04)               (18.21)**             (15.57)**
Market C                                            -0.39                 -0.16                  -51.01                -41.38
                                                  (0.05)***             (0.04)***             (17.71)***            (15.14)***

P-value a=b                                       0.003**                0.218                  0.649                 0.125
P-value a=b=0                                     0.013**                0.361                  0.199                 0.066*
Observations                                        600                    600                    600                 600
Dep. Var. Mean for omitted category
  (dual headed, only female sampled)               0.59                   0.20                   58.16               47.76
Std. dev. for omitted category                     0.49                   0.40                  250.35               215.12
Notes: Unit of observation is the household. Sample restricted to households sampled for at least one sponsored account. All data on
account information come from administrative bank records. For households sampled for two sponsored accounts, the transactions are
summed across the two accounts when two were opened and used. Monetary values are in USD.




                                                                30
Table 5. Impact of Savings Treatment on Saving Behavior
                                               (1)                    (2)              (3)               (4)             (5)              (6)              (7)              (8)             (9)
                                                                                                                         In the past 30 days:
                                                 At least one
                                                spouse has a     Made a bank                       Made a bank         Bank         Member of a      Contributions Saves money at       Deposits to
                                                bank account                     Bank deposits
                                                                   deposit                         withdrawal       withdrawals      ROSCA            to ROSCA         home            home savings

Panel A. Pooled
Dual headed household * Sampled                      0.51             0.10             3.92              0.03           1.81              0.03             0.63            0.00             0.67
 for account                                      (0.04)***        (0.02)***        (1.46)***         (0.01)***        (1.14)            (0.04)           (0.81)          (0.03)           (2.03)
Single headed * sampled for account                  0.43             0.06            -0.12              0.02          -0.28             -0.01             0.22            0.00             0.34
                                                  (0.03)***        (0.01)***          (0.38)          (0.01)***        (0.80)            (0.03)           (0.45)          (0.03)           (0.84)
Single headed                                       -0.07            -0.03            -0.87             -0.01          -0.83             -0.15            -2.65           -0.25            -7.81
                                                   (0.04)*           (0.02)           (0.87)            (0.01)         (1.19)          (0.05)***        (0.78)***       (0.04)***        (1.91)***
Dep. Var. Mean (control, dual-headed hhs)            0.16             0.06             1.85              0.02           1.59              0.71             7.16            0.77            14.22
Dep. Var. SD (control, dual-headed hhs)              0.37             0.24            11.96              0.15          13.21              0.45             9.93            0.42            26.02
Observations                                        3208              3200             3200              3208           3208              3208             3202            3196             3196
# of IDs                                             885               885              885               885            885               885              885             885              885

Panel B. By treatment
Dual headed household * male only                    0.42             0.08             4.93               0.04          1.91              0.03             0.86           -0.03             1.18
 sampled for account (a)                          (0.05)***        (0.03)***         (2.71)*           (0.02)**        (1.51)            (0.05)           (0.96)          (0.04)           (2.62)
Dual headed household * female only                  0.48             0.07             1.54               0.02          1.90              0.03             1.40           -0.01             2.94
 sampled for account (b)                          (0.05)***        (0.02)***          (1.44)            (0.01)*        (1.60)            (0.05)           (1.08)          (0.04)           (2.65)
Dual headed household * both spouses                 0.59             0.12             5.07               0.04          1.68              0.02            -0.15            0.02            -1.47
 sampled for account (c)                          (0.04)***        (0.02)***        (2.24)**           (0.02)**        (1.56)            (0.04)           (0.89)          (0.03)           (2.15)
Single headed * sampled for account (d)              0.43             0.06            -0.12               0.02          -0.28             -0.01            0.22            0.00             0.34
                                                  (0.03)***        (0.01)***          (0.38)          (0.01)***        (0.80)            (0.03)           (0.45)          (0.03)           (0.85)
Single headed                                       -0.07            -0.03            -0.88              -0.01          -0.83             -0.15            -2.65           -0.25            -7.81
                                                   (0.04)*           (0.02)           (0.87)             (0.01)        (1.19)          (0.05)***        (0.78)***       (0.04)***        (1.90)***
p-values:
 Joint significance a, b, and c = 0                 <.001***           <.001***            0.06*          0.03*            0.46           0.91            0.34              0.37            0.24
 a=b=c                                              <.001***             0.16               0.21          0.59             0.99           0.96            0.23              0.21            0.12
 a=b                                                  0.25               0.75               0.22          0.32             0.99           0.88            0.61              0.57            0.52
 a=c                                                <.001***             0.18               0.97          0.74            0.90            0.78            0.23             0.09*            0.24
 b=c                                                  0.03*              0.07*             0.14           0.49             0.91           0.89            0.12              0.25            0.05*
 d=0                                                <.001***           <.001***            0.75           0.01*            0.73           0.74            0.63              1.00            0.69
Observations                                          3208               3200               3200          3208             3208           3208            3202              3196            3196
# of IDs                                               885                885                885           885              885            885             885               885             885
Notes: All monetary amounts are winsorized at the 99th percentile. All values in US Dollars. All regressions control for pre-treatment mean of dependent variable. Data from rounds 3-6 only. Standard
errors clustered at household level in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%.




                                                                                                 31
Table 6. Impact of Savings Treatment on Downstream outcomes
                                            (1)         (2)                   (3)           (4)              (5)            (6)            (7)         (8)          (9)          (10)        (11)
                                          Farming                         Non-farming                          Food security                                    Expenditures
                                                                                                       Did not have
                                                                                                                       Number of
                                              Total spent       Has a        Total                     enough food
                                                                                           Total                      days reduced                                           Household
                                              on farming        market      business                   at least once                      Total       Food        Personal             Children
                                                                                          income                          meals                                               goods
                                                inputs         business   investment                       (last 6
                                                                                                                      (last 30 days)
                                                                                                         months)
Panel A. Pooled
Dual headed household * Sampled                   1.54          -0.01         0.13          3.60           -0.08           -1.05           3.59        1.31          1.48         0.51        0.07
 for account                                    (0.79)*         (0.04)       (6.16)        (3.77)          (0.05)         (1.15)          (3.12)      (1.67)      (0.74)**       (0.71)      (0.23)
Single headed * sampled for account               -0.57          0.03         1.54          1.91           -0.01           -1.57           1.66        1.57          0.20        -0.45        0.05
                                                 (0.48)         (0.03)       (2.94)        (2.11)          (0.04)         (0.97)          (1.98)     (0.93)*       (0.40)        (0.46)      (0.12)
Single headed                                    -1.39          -0.16        -12.00        -16.71          -0.02           0.12           -21.68      -11.17        -3.36        -3.09       -0.77
                                                (0.77)*       (0.04)***     (5.76)**     (3.62)***         (0.06)         (1.27)        (2.69)***   (1.45)***    (0.58)***     (0.54)***   (0.21)***

Dep. Var. Mean (control, dual-headed hhs)        4.92            0.43        23.12         34.70            0.76           8.61           56.64       29.05        8.00          7.06        1.17
Dep. Var. SD (control, dual-headed hhs)          7.46            0.50        69.00         45.67            0.43           9.45           36.72       19.55        8.13          7.61        3.97
Observations                                     1616            3208        3194          3208             778            777            3207        3206         3207          3206        3198
# of IDs                                         867             885          885           885             778            777             885         885         885           885         885

Panel B. By treatment
Dual headed household * male only                  1.21          0.04         0.77          8.24           -0.10           -1.87           1.45         1.06         1.77        -0.06        0.12
 sampled for account (a)                          (0.99)        (0.05)       (7.18)       (4.91)*          (0.06)         (1.40)          (3.55)      (1.90)      (0.86)**       (0.77)      (0.27)
Dual headed household * female only                0.81         -0.02         2.85          4.37           -0.05           -0.59           7.71         3.00         1.96         1.40        0.13
 sampled for account (b)                          (0.92)        (0.05)       (8.62)        (4.82)          (0.06)         (1.37)         (3.66)**     (1.88)      (0.88)**       (0.88)      (0.27)
Dual headed household * both spouses               2.37         -0.03         -2.43         -0.31          -0.09           -0.83           1.45        -0.02         0.84         0.13       -0.02
 sampled for account (c)                        (1.02)**        (0.05)       (6.39)        (4.34)          (0.06)         (1.29)          (3.54)      (1.75)       (0.82)        (0.80)      (0.25)
Single headed * sampled for account (d)            -0.58         0.03         1.54          1.90           -0.01           -1.57           1.54         1.52         0.19        -0.48        0.05
                                                  (0.48)        (0.03)       (2.94)        (2.11)          (0.04)         (0.97)          (1.98)      (0.93)       (0.40)        (0.46)      (0.12)
Single headed                                     -1.41         -0.16        -11.99        -16.74          -0.02           0.13           -21.69      -11.17        -3.36        -3.09       -0.77
                                                 (0.77)*      (0.04)***     (5.76)**     (3.62)***         (0.06)         (1.27)        (2.70)***   (1.45)***    (0.58)***     (0.54)***   (0.21)***
p-values:
 Joint significance a, b, and c = 0                0.14            0.41          0.88          0.24             0.36          0.58          0.11       0.11         0.07*       0.24        0.82
 a=b=c                                             0.29            0.24          0.72          0.18             0.66          0.57          0.09*      0.06*        0.23        0.14        0.65
 a=b                                               0.67            0.17          0.79          0.45             0.39          0.32          0.06*      0.19         0.82        0.06*       0.99
 a=c                                               0.28            0.12          0.58          0.07*            0.82          0.39          1.00       0.42         0.19        0.77        0.46
 b=c                                               0.12            0.98          0.48          0.31             0.47          0.83          0.04*      0.02*        0.13        0.09*       0.45
 d=0                                               0.23            0.34          0.60          0.37             0.84          0.1*          0.44        0.1*        0.63        0.30        0.69
Observations                                       1616            3208          3194           3208             778           777          3207       3206         3207        3206        3198
# of IDs                                            867             885           885           885              778           777           885        885          885         885         885
Notes: All monetary amounts are winsorized at the 99th percentile. All values in US Dollars. All regressions control for pre-treatment mean of dependent variable. Data from rounds 3-6 only.
Standard errors clustered at household level in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%.



                                                                                                  32
Table 7. Impact of savings account on inter-household transfers
                                              (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)                (5)       (6)        (7)        (8)
                                                  Remittance type of partnership                     Give-and-Take type of partnership

                                                Received    Amount        Gave     Amount        Received    Amount        Gave     Amount
                                                transfer    received    transfer    given        transfer    received    transfer    given

Panel A. Pooled
Dual headed household * Sampled                    -0.09      -2.16       0.02      0.26            0.02      0.55       0.08          0.90
 for account                                     (0.04)**     (3.04)     (0.03)    (0.59)          (0.04)    (0.89)   (0.04)**       (0.81)
Single headed * sampled for account                 0.03      -0.47       0.00     -0.09           -0.02      0.03      -0.02          0.03
                                                  (0.03)      (2.01)     (0.02)    (0.32)          (0.02)    (0.29)    (0.03)        (0.32)
Single headed                                      -0.15      -6.15      -0.15     -1.58           -0.13     -3.00      -0.16         -1.71
                                                (0.04)***    (3.20)*   (0.03)*** (0.57)***       (0.04)*** (0.79)*** (0.04)***      (0.76)**

Dep. Var. Mean (control, dual-headed hhs)         0.71       20.35       0.31        2.80          0.38        4.45       0.38        3.84
Dep. Var. SD (control, dual-headed hhs)           0.45       35.99       0.46        8.55          0.49       12.00       0.49        9.90
Observations                                      3216       3216        3216        3216          3216       3216        3216        3216
# of IDs                                           887        887         887         887           887        887         887         887

Panel B. By treatment
Dual headed household * male only                  -0.12       -6.39      0.01      0.28            0.03      -0.36      0.09          1.27
 sampled for account (a)                        (0.04)***    (3.35)*     (0.04)    (0.77)          (0.05)    (0.97)   (0.05)**       (1.02)
Dual headed household * female only                -0.06       0.14       0.02     -0.11           -0.01      1.13       0.07          0.10
 sampled for account (b)                          (0.04)      (3.93)     (0.04)    (0.66)          (0.05)    (1.26)    (0.04)*       (0.92)
Dual headed household * both spouses               -0.09      -0.94       0.03      0.55            0.03      0.76       0.09          1.24
 sampled for account (c)                         (0.04)**     (3.40)     (0.03)    (0.70)          (0.04)    (1.01)   (0.04)**       (0.91)
Single headed * sampled for account (d)             0.03      -0.46       0.00     -0.09           -0.02      0.03      -0.02          0.03
                                                  (0.03)      (2.01)     (0.02)    (0.32)          (0.02)    (0.29)     (0.03)       (0.32)
Single headed                                      -0.15      -6.15      -0.15     -1.59           -0.13     -3.00      -0.16         -1.71
                                                (0.04)***    (3.20)*   (0.03)*** (0.57)***       (0.04)*** (0.80)*** (0.04)***      (0.76)**
p-values:
  Joint significance a, b, and c = 0            0.04*       0.1*        0.87         0.72          0.63         0.46       0.16        0.30
 a=b=c                                          0.39       0.07*        0.85         0.54          0.46         0.30       0.91        0.26
 a=b                                            0.17       0.06*        0.74         0.57          0.29         0.20       0.69        0.20
 a=c                                            0.55       0.05*        0.57         0.71          0.96         0.20       0.95        0.97
 b=c                                            0.37       0.76         0.83        0.28           0.27         0.76       0.72        0.14
  d=0                                           0.29       0.82         0.99         0.78          0.43         0.93       0.44        0.93
Observations                                    3216       3216         3216         3216          3216         3216       3216        3216
# of IDs                                         887        887          887          887           887          887        887         887
Notes: All monetary amounts are winsorized at the 99th percentile. All values in US Dollars. All regressions control for pre-treatment
mean of dependent variable. Data from rounds 3-6 only. Standard errors clustered at household level in parentheses. ***, **, and *
indicate significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%.
Rremittance-type partnerships are those with grown children, siblings, other relatives and others (all relationships with a in/out ratio above
the mean, see Table 2). Give-and-Take partnerships are with friends,33
                                                                     neighbors and parents.
Table 8. Spillover effects
                                                 (1)      (2)       (3)        (4)           (5)       (6)        (7)        (8)            (9)             (10)            (11)
                                                  One-sided (remittance) type of
                                                           partnership                       Give-and-Take type of partnership                      Round 6 Outcomes
                                                                                                                                                        Did not have
                                                                                                                                        Would rely on                  Number of
                                                                                                                                                        enough food
                                              Received Amount Gave Amount                Received Amount          Gave     Amount     friend/neighbor                 days reduced
                                                                                                                                                        at least once
                                              transfer received transfer given           transfer received      transfer    given     if needed money                      meals
                                                                                                                                                            (last 6
                                                                                                                                           urgently                   (last 30 days)
                                                                                                                                                          months)
Num. of transfers listed in round 1              -0.01    -0.40       0.00     -0.01         0.01       0.22       0.01      -0.13            0.00            0.00          0.33
                                              (0.00)***   (0.31)      0.00    (0.07)      (0.00)**    (0.16)      0.00       (0.10)          (0.01)         (0.01)       (0.16)**
Num. of round 1 transfers with partner           0.02      0.46       0.01     0.16          0.01      0.07       0.01        0.42            0.01           0.00          -0.02
   matched to sample list                      (0.01)**   (0.85)     (0.01)   (0.14)       (0.01)     (0.35)     (0.01)     (0.22)*          (0.02)         (0.02)         (0.38)
Num. of round 1 transfers with partner           -0.01    -0.06       0.00     0.07         -0.01      0.07       0.00        0.23           -0.02           -0.01         -0.85
   matched and sampled for account              (0.01)    (1.17)     (0.01)   (0.28)       (0.02)     (0.43)     (0.02)      (0.37)          (0.03)         (0.03)         (0.56)
Dual headed household * Sampled                  -0.09    -1.16       0.01      0.30         0.02       0.44       0.08       0.99           -0.11           -0.12         -1.58
 for account                                   (0.04)**   (2.61)     (0.03)   (0.60)       (0.04)     (0.84)    (0.04)**     (0.78)         (0.06)*        (0.06)**        (1.17)
Single headed * sampled for account               0.03    -0.52       0.00     -0.09        -0.02      -0.01      -0.02       0.02           -0.03           -0.02         -1.80
                                                (0.03)    (1.97)     (0.02)   (0.32)       (0.02)     (0.29)     (0.02)      (0.32)          (0.05)         (0.05)        (1.02)*
Single headed                                    -0.17    -4.59      -0.12     -1.38        -0.10      -1.91      -0.08      -1.54           -0.05           -0.05          0.29
                                              (0.04)***   (3.01)   (0.03)*** (0.60)**     (0.04)**   (0.80)**   (0.04)**   (0.74)**          (0.07)         (0.06)         (1.38)
Dep. Var. Mean (control, dual-headed hhs)       0.64      18.54     0.32      3.07         0.40       4.89      0.45       4.51           0.50               0.66           7.47
Dep. Var. SD (control, dual-headed hhs)         0.48      37.42     0.47      8.91         0.49      14.66      0.50      10.80           0.50               0.47           9.71
Observations                                    3216      3216      3216      3216         3216       3216      3216       3216            782               778            777
# of IDs                                        887        887       887      887          887        887       887        887             782               778            777
Notes: All monetary amounts are winsorized at the 99th percentile. All monetary values in US Dollars. Regressions control for own treatment status, household type, and
interactions between treatment status and household type. Data from rounds 3-6 only. Standard errors clustered at household level in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate
significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%.




                                                                                        34
Table 9. Intra-household impacts on savings
                                          (1)                (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)              (6)           (7)           (8)           (9)          (10)
                                                                         Female                                                                    Male
                                            Reports                                                                  Reports
                                                            Made                       Made                                         Made                        Made
                                          having bank                   Amount                      Amount         having bank                   Amount                      Amount
                                                           deposit                   withdrawal                                    deposit                    withdrawal
                                            account                                                                  account


Male only sampled for account (a)              0.01          0.00         -0.10          0.00          0.07             0.43          0.09         5.27           0.04         1.95
                                              (0.03)        (0.02)        (0.25)        0.00          (0.07)         (0.05)***     (0.03)***     (2.65)**      (0.02)***      (1.47)
Female only sampled for account (b)            0.49          0.06          0.26          0.03          0.47             0.11          0.02         1.35           0.00         1.73
                                            (0.05)***     (0.02)***       (0.30)      (0.01)***      (0.21)**        (0.04)***       (0.02)       (1.66)         (0.01)       (1.66)
Both sampled for account (c)                   0.45          0.05          0.67          0.02          0.99             0.51          0.09         4.64           0.01         0.98
                                            (0.04)***     (0.02)***       (0.54)      (0.01)***       (0.64)         (0.04)***     (0.02)***     (2.27)**        (0.01)       (1.51)
p-values:
 Joint significance a, b, and c = 0          <.001***       <.001***          0.23        <.001***           0.1*        <.001***    <.001***       0.07*          0.03*        0.53
 a=b=c                                       <.001***         0.01*           0.12        <.001***          0.08*        <.001***      0.01*        0.17           0.02*        0.85
 a=b                                         <.001***         0.01*           0.14        <.001***          0.07*        <.001***      0.02*        0.15           0.01*        0.91
 a=c                                         <.001***       <.001***          0.11           0.01*          0.14           0.13        0.81         0.84           0.12         0.58
 b=c                                           0.41           0.89            0.42           0.46           0.41         <.001***    <.001***       0.15           0.18         0.70
Dep. Var. Mean (control, dual-headed hhs        0.06          0.03            0.38           0.00           0.00           0.13        0.04          1.58          0.02         1.66
Dep. Var. SD (control, dual-headed hhs)         0.24          0.16            3.78           0.00           0.00           0.33        0.20         11.78          0.15        13.48
Observations                                   1723           1710            1710           1723           1723           1679        1656         1656           1679         1679
# of IDs                                        486            486             486            486            486            474         474          474            474          474
Notes: All monetary amounts are winsorized at the 99th percentile. All values in US Dollars. All regressions control for pre-treatment mean of dependent variable. Data from rounds 3-6
only. Standard errors clustered at household level in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%.




                                                                                          35
Table 10. Intra-household impacts on downstream outcomes
                                        (1)       (2)        (3)              (4)          (5)        (6)       (7)       (8)          (9)       (10)       (11)      (12)      (13)        (14)        (15)      (16)
                                                    Transfers                                           Expenditures (male)                                   Expenditures (female)                     Total income
                                            From                   From
                                                                                                                             HH                                                  HH
                                            wife to   Amount     husband Amount           Total    Personal       Food              Children     Total   Personal     Food              Children        Male     Female
                                                                                                                           expenses                                            expenses
                                           husband                to wife

Male only sampled for account (a)            -0.01      -0.17      -0.01      0.79         1.10      1.05          -0.36     0.39      -2.02     -2.03      0.13       -0.76     -0.28      -1.04       9.05      -1.15
                                            (0.04)     (0.31)     (0.04)     (1.26)       (2.78)    (0.67)        (1.36)    (0.58)    (2.70)    (1.56)     (0.34)     (1.05)    (0.32)     (1.40)     (4.29)**   (2.66)
Female only sampled for account (b)          -0.02      -0.20      -0.01      1.82         4.96      1.00          1.27      1.55      2.39      0.24       0.34       -0.70     0.22       0.85        4.32      -0.13
                                            (0.04)     (0.30)     (0.04)     (1.36)      (2.87)*    (0.64)        (1.40)   (0.70)**   (3.12)    (1.61)     (0.35)     (0.95)    (0.33)     (1.57)      (4.17)    (2.56)
Both sampled for account (c)                 0.00       -0.33      0.01       0.67         0.54      -0.11         -0.69     0.56      1.38      -1.49      0.31       -1.48     -0.26      1.70        -1.27     0.42
                                            (0.04)     (0.31)     (0.04)     (1.19)       (2.52)    (0.55)        (1.26)    (0.58)    (2.84)    (1.46)     (0.30)     (0.92)    (0.28)     (1.48)      (3.61)    (2.45)
p-values:
 Joint significance a, b, and c = 0           0.98        0.71        0.86      0.59        0.32      0.11       0.34       0.17      0.33        0.32      0.71       0.41     0.31       0.22         0.04*     0.94
 a=b=c                                        0.95        0.71        0.69      0.58        0.25      0.08*      0.19       0.23      0.18        0.26      0.78       0.52     0.20       0.11         0.02*     0.83
 a=b                                          0.89        0.88        0.88      0.40        0.20      0.95       0.18        0.1*      0.1*       0.12      0.54       0.95     0.13       0.17         0.28      0.70
 a=c                                          0.86        0.46        0.51      0.90        0.83      0.07*      0.76       0.76      0.15        0.68      0.53       0.40     0.93      0.04*         0.01*     0.55
 b=c                                          0.75        0.50        0.44      0.32        0.11      0.06*      0.07*      0.15      0.72        0.20      0.94       0.29      0.1*      0.54         0.13      0.83
Dep. Var. Mean (control, dual-headed hhs 0.28              1.13        0.82     10.67       37.09      5.81     18.00        4.09     12.69       20.70     2.39      11.74      3.05      6.27         22.28     13.20
Dep. Var. SD (control, dual-headed hhs)        0.45        4.41        0.39     14.29       30.76      6.48     14.85        5.93     34.03       19.79     3.94      12.13      4.25     16.69         38.37     26.35
Observations                                   1723        1723       1679       1679       1674      1674       1672       1672      1662        1720      1718       1719     1719       1710         1679      1723
# of IDs                                       486         486         474       474         474       474        474        474       474         486       486        486      486        485          474       486
Notes: All monetary amounts are winsorized at the 99th percentile. All values in US Dollars. All regressions control for pre-treatment mean of dependent variable. Data from rounds 3-6 only. Standard errors clustered
at household level in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%.




                                                                                                             36
Figure A1. Project and Data Timeline
                                       Survey Data                                    Administrative
                    Sampling                                    Intervention
                                        Collection                                     Bank Data
2009     Jun
         Jul
         Aug       Census w/
         Sep      Mini-Baseline
         Oct
         Nov
         Dec
2010     Feb
         Mar                             Survey
         Apr                            round 1
         May
                                                            Savings Account offer
         Jun
                                                                  (N=629)
         Jul
                                         Survey
         Aug
                                        round 2
         Sep
         Oct
                                         Survey
         Nov
                                        round 3
         Dec
2011     Jan
         Feb
         Mar                             Survey
         Apr                            round 4
         May
         Jun
         Jul
         Aug                             Survey
         Sep                            round 5           Savings Box Offer (N=593)
         Oct
         Nov
         Dec
2012     Jan
         Feb
         Mar                             Survey
         Apr                            round 6
         May
         Jun
         Jul
         Aug
         Sep
         Oct
         Nov
         Dec




                                                     37
Table A1. Experimental Design
                                               Only Female       Only Male
                                                                                 Both sampled    No one sampled
                                                 sampled          sampled
                                                                                  for savings      for savings     N
                                                for savings      for savings
                                                                                    account          account
                                                  account          account
Single-Headed households                            198                                                201         399
                                                 (49.6% )                                            (50.4% )

Dual-Headed households                              127              116              161               82         486
                                                 (26.1% )          (23.9% )        (33.1% )          (16.9% )
Notes: Table shows count of number of households in each category, with percentage of the sample in parentheses.




                                                                38
Table A2. Attrition
                                                      (1)            (2)            (3)          (4)        (5)
                                                  Surveyed in Surveyed in Surveyed in Surveyed in Surveyed in
                                                   Round 2     Round 3     Round 4     Round 5     Round 6

Panel A. Any Account (all households)
Dual headed household * Sampled                      -0.05         -0.01           -0.03        -0.07      -0.07
 for account                                         (0.03)        (0.03)          (0.03)     (0.037)*   (0.038)*
Single headed * sampled for account                   0.00          0.00            0.00         0.02       0.05
                                                     (0.02)        (0.02)          (0.03)      (0.03)    (0.032)*
Single headed                                         0.00          0.03            0.05        -0.01      -0.05
                                                     (0.03)        (0.03)          (0.04)      (0.04)     (0.04)
Observations                                          885           885             885          885        885
Mean                                                  1.00          0.94            0.94         0.91       0.89

Panel B. By account type (dual households only)
Dual headed household * male only               -0.07              -0.03            0.04        -0.08       -0.10
 sampled for account (a)                      (0.038)*             (0.04)          (0.05)       (0.05)   (0.048)**
Dual headed household * female only             -0.04               0.01           -0.04        -0.05       -0.09
 sampled for account (b)                        (0.04)             (0.04)          (0.05)       (0.05)    (0.048)*
Dual headed household * both spouses            -0.03               0.01           -0.06        -0.07       -0.03
 sampled for account (c)                        (0.04)             (0.04)          (0.04)       (0.05)     (0.05)
p-values
p-value for joint significance                       0.23          0.73            0.09*        0.38      0.07*
p-value for joint equality                           0.30          0.53            0.05**       0.82      0.12

Observations                                            486            486          486          486       486
Mean                                                    1.00           0.93         0.92         0.88      0.87
Notes: Unit of observation: household. All regressions control for market center.
Standard errors in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.




                                                                              39
Table A3. Self-reported savings goals
                                                     Mean
Has savings goal(s)                                  0.90

If yes, goal(s):
  School fee                                          0.43
  Business investment                                 0.41
  Agriculture/Livestock investment                    0.36
  Home improvement                                    0.27
  Buy land                                            0.12
  Emergency                                           0.11
  Health care                                         0.03
  Other                                               0.07

Number of individuals                                  703
Notes: Goals were collected in early 2011. Table is at the
individual respondent level.




                               40
Table A4. Take-up and usage of savings box
                                                                         (1)         (3)         (4)        (5)
                                                                                               75th       90th
                                                                       Mean       Median
                                                                                             percentile percentile
Box not available for spot check                                        0.40
Found money in box at unannounced spot checka                           0.34
 If both heads sampled
     Found money in box at unannounced spot check                       0.46
     Only female had money in box                                       0.26
     Only male had money in box                                         0.07
     Both spouses had money in box                                      0.13

Balance
Balance after 9 months (self-reported)                                   5.16       0.00        2.67       10.67
                                                                       (17.62)
Balance after 9 months (if box available for spot check)                 3.08       0.00        0.93        6.27
                                                                       (13.78)
Deposits
Total value of deposits (self-reported)                                 23.21       6.67       26.67       57.33
                                                                       (46.18)

Number of households                                                     482
Notes: Sample restricted to households sampled for at least one savings box. Data is over the 9 months after boxes
were distributed. For households sampled for two boxes, the amounts are summed across the two boxes. All
monetary values in US Dollars. Exchange rate averaged approximately 75 Ksh to $1 USD during the sample period.
a
  This is not conditional on the box being available.




                                                           41
                           Web Appendix

  The Effect of Savings Accounts on Interpersonal Financial
Relationships: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Rural Kenya

          Pascaline Dupas, Anthony Keats and Jonathan Robinson




                                      42
Table WA1. Placebo test for Table 4: savings behavior
                                                 (1)                  (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)             (7)              (8)              (9)
                                                                                                                         In the past 30 days:
                                                 At least one
                                                spouse has a     Made a bank                       Made a bank         Bank         Member of a      Contributions Saves money at       Deposits to
                                                bank account                     Bank deposits
                                                                   deposit                         withdrawal       withdrawals      ROSCA            to ROSCA         home            home savings

Panel A. Pooled
Dual headed household * Sampled                     0.03             0.03              2.08            0.00             2.19              0.02           -0.12            -0.07             0.84
 for account                                       (0.02)           (0.02)           (1.11)*          (0.01)           (2.40)            (0.06)          (0.95)           (0.06)           (1.97)
Single headed * sampled for account                 0.00             0.01              0.15            0.00            -0.23              0.04            0.31             0.05             0.63
                                                   (0.01)           (0.01)            (0.39)          (0.01)           (0.79)            (0.05)          (0.46)           (0.05)           (0.86)
Single headed                                      -0.02            -0.02             -0.29           -0.01            -0.10             -0.24           -3.60            -0.37            -7.22
                                                   (0.02)           (0.02)            (0.63)          (0.01)           (1.06)          (0.06)***       (0.96)***        (0.06)***        (1.98)***
Dep. Var. Mean (control, dual-headed hhs)           0.04             0.01              0.19            0.01             0.61              0.62            4.81             0.61             7.87
Dep. Var. SD (control, dual-headed hhs)             0.19             0.11              1.68            0.11             5.52              0.49            7.78             0.49            15.80
Observations                                        873              841               841             873              873               873             840              840              840
# of IDs                                            873              841               841             873              873               873             840              840              840

Panel B. By treatment
Dual headed household * male only                   0.01              0.04            4.05             0.00              0.42             0.00           -0.37            -0.05             1.10
 sampled for account (a)                           (0.03)           (0.02)*         (1.77)**          (0.01)            (3.54)           (0.07)          (0.94)           (0.07)           (2.07)
Dual headed household * female only                 0.04              0.02            0.44             0.02              6.69             0.03           -0.35            -0.04             0.21
 sampled for account (b)                           (0.03)            (0.02)          (1.73)           (0.01)           (3.49)*           (0.07)          (0.92)           (0.07)           (2.03)
Dual headed household * both spouses                0.03              0.03            2.00            -0.01              0.03             0.04            0.20            -0.11             1.14
 sampled for account (c)                           (0.03)            (0.02)          (1.64)           (0.01)            (3.31)           (0.07)          (0.87)          (0.06)*           (1.93)
Single headed * sampled for account (d)             0.00              0.01            0.12             0.00              -0.22            0.04            0.31             0.05             0.63
                                                   (0.02)            (0.02)          (1.26)           (0.01)            (2.47)           (0.05)          (0.67)           (0.05)           (1.49)
Single headed                                       -0.02             -0.02           -0.26            -0.01             -0.08            -0.24           -3.61            -0.37            -7.22
                                                   (0.02)            (0.02)          (1.64)           (0.01)            (3.26)         (0.06)***       (0.87)***        (0.06)***        (1.92)***
p-values:
 Joint significance a, b, and c = 0                  0.35               0.32              0.06*             0.1*           0.09*           0.87            0.86             0.28            0.90
 a=b=c                                               0.41               0.52              0.07*            0.05*           0.05*           0.76            0.69             0.34            0.84
 a=b                                                 0.18               0.26              0.02*            0.05*           0.05*           0.64            0.98             0.81            0.63
 a=c                                                 0.43               0.67              0.17             0.88            0.89           0.46             0.47             0.28            0.98
 b=c                                                 0.52               0.44              0.28             0.02*          0.02*           0.81             0.47             0.17            0.59
 d=0                                                 0.94               0.54              0.92             0.87            0.93           0.39             0.64             0.30            0.67
Observations                                          873                841               841              873             873            873              840              840             840
# of IDs                                              873                841               841              873             873             873             840              840             840
Notes: All monetary amounts are winsorized at the 99th percentile. All values in US Dollarss. All regressions control for pre-treatment mean of dependent variable. Data from rounds 3-6 only.
Standard errors clustered at household level in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%.




                                                                                                 43
Table WA2. Placebo test for table 5: downstream outcomes
                                              (1)                 (2)         (3)           (4)               (5)            (6)            (7)         (8)          (9)          (10)       (11)
                                            Farming                       Non-farming                           Food security1                                   Expenditures
                                                                                                        Did not have
                                                                                                                        Number of
                                              Total spent       Has a         Total                     enough food
                                                                                           Total                       days reduced                                           Household
                                              on farming        market       business                   at least once                     Total       Food         Personal             Children
                                                                                          income                           meals                                               goods
                                                inputs         business    investment                       (last 6
                                                                                                                       (last 30 days)
                                                                                                          months)
Panel A. Pooled
Dual headed household * Sampled                   1.84            0.06        3.02          5.48              -              -              4.06        -1.34        1.63          2.01      -0.30
 for account                                    (1.01)*         (0.06)       (3.94)       (2.91)*             -              -             (6.93)      (2.74)       (1.39)       (1.19)*     (0.59)
Single headed * sampled for account               0.28            0.03        -0.23         -0.76             -              -              0.34        -0.32        0.50         -0.03       0.34
                                                 (0.52)         (0.04)       (1.97)        (1.40)             -              -             (3.87)      (1.71)       (0.69)        (0.88)     (0.29)
Single headed                                    -3.15           -0.15        -3.91        -12.46             -              -             -35.61      -14.17       -5.89         -2.25      -1.45
                                               (0.96)***       (0.06)**      (3.97)      (2.75)***            -              -           (5.49)***   (2.55)***    (1.06)***     (0.96)**   (0.55)***

Dep. Var. Mean (control, dual-headed hhs)         6.03           0.30          9.00        19.33              -              -            62.25        28.16         8.12        6.80        1.67
Dep. Var. SD (control, dual-headed hhs)           8.15           0.46         33.19        22.78              -              -            43.84        21.92         8.49        6.60        4.89
Observations                                      855            873           830          873               -              -             843          842          843         843         837
# of IDs                                          855            873           830          873               -              -             843          842          843         843         837

Panel B. By treatment
Dual headed household * male only                  2.28           0.07         4.33         6.94              -              -              4.82        -1.81        1.65         2.67       -0.30
 sampled for account (a)                        (1.16)**        (0.06)       (3.99)       (3.67)*             -              -             (7.34)      (2.92)       (1.47)       (1.71)      (0.50)
Dual headed household * female only               0.96            0.06        5.23          3.29              -              -              3.99        -1.28        1.92         2.17       -0.28
 sampled for account (b)                         (1.13)         (0.06)       (3.91)        (3.61)             -              -             (7.21)      (2.87)       (1.45)       (1.68)      (0.49)
Dual headed household * both spouses              2.21            0.04        0.51          6.11              -              -              3.61        -1.09        1.39         1.45       -0.31
 sampled for account (c)                        (1.08)**        (0.06)       (3.71)       (3.42)*             -              -             (7.02)      (2.79)       (1.41)       (1.63)      (0.48)
Single headed * sampled for account (d)           0.28            0.03        -0.26         -0.78             -              -              0.33        -0.32        0.50        -0.04        0.34
                                                 (0.81)         (0.04)       (2.88)        (2.56)             -              -             (5.17)      (2.06)       (1.04)       (1.20)      (0.35)
Single headed                                     -3.15          -0.15        -3.84        -12.45             -              -             -35.59      -14.18       -5.88        -2.24       -1.45
                                               (1.06)***       (0.06)**      (3.70)      (3.37)***            -              -           (5.48)***   (2.18)***    (1.10)***     (1.28)*    (0.37)***
p-values:
  Joint significance a, b, and c = 0               0.12            0.70          0.35          0.20               -             -           0.93       0.94         0.61        0.40        0.93
  a=b=c                                            0.34            0.86          0.29          0.50               -             -           0.97       0.93         0.86        0.55        1.00
  a=b                                              0.20            0.94          0.80          0.27               -             -           0.87       0.79         0.79        0.68        0.96
  a=c                                              0.95            0.61          0.25          0.79               -             -           0.80       0.71         0.79        0.28        0.96
  b=c                                              0.19            0.67          0.15          0.35               -             -           0.94       0.92         0.58        0.51        0.92
  d=0                                              0.73            0.47          0.93          0.76               -             -           0.95       0.88         0.63        0.97        0.34
Observations                                        855             873           830           873               -             -            843        842          843         843         837
# of IDs                                            855             873           830           873               -             -            843        842          843         843         837
Notes: All monetary amounts are winsorized at the 99th percentile. All values in US Dollars. All regressions control for pre-treatment mean of dependent variable. Data from rounds 3-6 only.
Standard errors clustered at household level in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%.
1
 Food security questions were not asked in round 1.


                                                                                                  44
Table WA3. Placebo Test for Table 6: Impact of savings account on inter-household transfers
                                            (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)       (6)        (7)        (8)
                                         One-sided (remittance) type of partnership     Give-and-Take type of partnership

                                               Received   Amount        Gave      Amount      Received    Amount        Gave     Amount
                                               transfer   received    transfer     given      transfer    received    transfer    given

Panel A. Pooled
Dual headed household * Sampled                   0.02       -2.30       0.05        1.57         0.04       1.54     -0.01     -0.29
 for account                                     (0.06)     (4.74)      (0.06)     (0.96)       (0.06)      (1.69)    (0.06)    (1.33)
Single headed * sampled for account              -0.03      -0.79        0.03        0.44        -0.03       0.49      0.02      0.25
                                                 (0.05)     (2.10)      (0.04)     (0.27)       (0.04)      (0.39)    (0.04)    (0.23)
Single headed                                    -0.09      -6.62       -0.17       -1.68        -0.15      -3.96     -0.26     -3.60
                                                 (0.07)     (4.75)    (0.06)***   (0.79)**     (0.06)**   (1.46)*** (0.06)*** (1.27)***

Dep. Var. Mean (control, dual-headed hhs)        0.56       16.12         0.35     2.40          0.37        4.58       0.45       4.12
Dep. Var. SD (control, dual-headed hhs)          0.50       41.39         0.48     7.18          0.48       13.14       0.50      11.30
Observations                                     884         884          884      884           884         884        884        884
# of IDs                                         884         884          884      884           884         884        884        884

Panel B. By treatment
Dual headed household * male only                 -0.01      -5.06       0.03       1.25          0.02      -0.11        0.01     0.48
 sampled for account (a)                         (0.07)     (3.94)      (0.06)     (1.17)       (0.07)     (1.85)      (0.07)    (1.07)
Dual headed household * female only               0.03       -0.67       0.05       1.78          0.06       2.02       -0.02     0.14
 sampled for account (b)                         (0.07)     (3.87)      (0.06)     (1.15)       (0.06)     (1.82)      (0.07)    (1.05)
Dual headed household * both spouses              0.04      -1.59        0.07       1.63          0.03       2.34       0.00     -1.16
 sampled for account (c)                         (0.07)     (3.70)      (0.06)     (1.10)       (0.06)     (1.74)      (0.06)    (1.00)
Single headed * sampled for account (d)          -0.03      -0.79        0.03       0.44         -0.03       0.49       0.02      0.25
                                                 (0.05)     (2.74)      (0.04)     (0.81)       (0.05)     (1.29)      (0.05)    (0.74)
Single headed                                    -0.09      -6.62       -0.17      -1.68         -0.15      -3.96      -0.26     -3.59
                                                 (0.07)    (3.61)*    (0.06)***    (1.07)      (0.06)**   (1.70)**   (0.06)*** (0.98)***
p-values:
  Joint significance a, b, and c = 0            0.86       0.53         0.67       0.42           0.82       0.30        0.98       0.26
 a=b=c                                          0.73       0.42         0.74       0.87           0.81       0.26        0.92      0.14
 a=b                                            0.57       0.21         0.69       0.61           0.54       0.20        0.69      0.72
 a=c                                            0.44       0.30         0.43       0.70           0.86       0.12        0.88      0.07*
 b=c                                            0.86       0.78         0.72       0.87           0.62       0.83        0.77      0.14
  d=0                                           0.54       0.77         0.53       0.59           0.57       0.70        0.59       0.74
Observations                                     884        884          884        884            884        884         884        884
# of IDs                                         884        884          884        884            884        884         884        884
Notes: All monetary amounts are winsorized at the 99th percentile. All values in US Dollars. All regressions control for pre-treatment
mean of dependent variable. Data from rounds 3-6 only. Standard errors clustered at household level in parentheses. ***, **, and *
indicate significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%.

                                                                     45
Table WA4. Placebo test for Table 7: Spillover effects
                                              (1)      (2)       (3)        (4)            (5)       (6)        (7)       (8)
                                               One-sided (remittance) type of
                                                        partnership                        Give-and-Take type of partnership


                                             Received Amount Gave Amount                Received Amount        Gave     Amount
                                             transfer received transfer given           transfer received    transfer    given


Num. of transfers listed in round 1                0.04      1.26       0.04       0.58         0.07       1.36     0.07    0.99
                                                (0.01)*** (0.38)*** (0.01)*** (0.11)*** (0.01)*** (0.17)*** (0.01)*** (0.10)***
Num. of round 1 transfers with partner             0.00      0.88       0.02       0.09        -0.02      -0.17     0.00   -0.41
   matched to sample list                         (0.02)    (0.87)     (0.01)     (0.26)       (0.01)     (0.39)   (0.01) (0.22)*
Num. of round 1 transfers with partner            -0.02     -3.36       0.01      -0.70         0.01       0.13    -0.02   -0.17
   matched and sampled for account                (0.02) (1.38)** (0.02)         (0.40)*       (0.02)     (0.61)   (0.02)  (0.35)
Dual headed household * Sampled                    0.01     -2.02       0.05       1.53         0.04       1.53    -0.01   -0.24
  for account                                     (0.06)    (3.16)     (0.05)    (0.92)*       (0.05)     (1.40)   (0.05)  (0.80)
Single headed * sampled for account               -0.03     -0.80       0.03       0.44        -0.03       0.49     0.02    0.26
                                                  (0.05)    (2.70)     (0.04)     (0.79)       (0.04)     (1.20)   (0.04)  (0.69)
Single headed                                      0.04     -2.45      -0.02       0.07         0.07       0.61    -0.05   -0.63
                                                  (0.06)    (3.55)     (0.05)     (1.04)       (0.05)     (1.58)   (0.05)  (0.90)
Dep. Var. Mean (control, dual-headed hhs)          0.58     14.25       0.40       3.70         0.40       5.88     0.45    3.89
Dep. Var. SD (control, dual-headed hhs)            0.49     31.63       0.49      10.67         0.49      16.93     0.50    9.75
Observations                                       884       884        884        884          884        884      884     884
# of IDs                                           884       884        884        884          884        884      884     884
Notes: All monetary amounts are winsorized at the 99th percentile. All monetary values in US Dollars. Regressions control for own
treatment status, household type, and interactions between treatment status and household type. Data from rounds 3-6 only.
Standard errors clustered at household level in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%.




                                                               46
Table WA5. Placebo test for Table 8: intra-household savings behavior
                                            (1)         (2)         (3)                  (4)           (5)              (6)           (7)           (8)           (9)          (10)
                                                                  Female                                                                           Male
                                            Reports                                                                  Reports
                                                            Made                       Made                                         Made                        Made
                                          having bank                   Amount                      Amount         having bank                   Amount                      Amount
                                                           deposit                   withdrawal                                    deposit                    withdrawal
                                            account                                                                  account


Male only sampled for account (a)             -0.01          0.01          0.30        -16.08         20.89             0.02         0.02           4.34        -0.01          1.05
                                              (0.01)        (0.02)        (0.87)       (37.77)       (39.15)           (0.03)       (0.02)        (2.31)*       (0.02)        (4.92)
Female only sampled for account (b)           -0.01          0.00          0.12        -34.82          7.99             0.07         0.02           0.84         0.02          7.58
                                              (0.01)        (0.02)        (0.85)       (37.16)       (38.52)          (0.03)*       (0.02)         (2.30)       (0.02)        (4.93)
Both sampled for account (c)                  -0.01          0.03          1.00        -31.69         23.33             0.05         0.00           1.30        -0.01          0.51
                                              (0.01)       (0.02)*        (0.80)       (35.11)       (36.39)           (0.03)       (0.02)         (2.15)       (0.02)        (4.58)
p-values:
 Joint significance a, b, and c = 0            0.46           0.20            0.51           0.76           0.91          0.25         0.47         0.20          0.19          0.28
 a=b=c                                         0.58           0.18            0.41           0.84           0.88          0.42         0.34         0.17           0.1*         0.18
 a=b                                           0.82           0.59            0.82           0.58           0.71          0.19         0.82         0.09*         0.07*         0.14
 a=c                                           0.33           0.24            0.33           0.62           0.94          0.47         0.18         0.11          1.00          0.90
 b=c                                           0.45           0.07*           0.22           0.92           0.63          0.47         0.27         0.80          0.05*         0.08*
Dep. Var. Mean (control, dual-headed hhs        0.01          0.00            0.00          493.46         395.42          0.03         0.01        0.21           0.01         0.64
Dep. Var. SD (control, dual-headed hhs)         0.11          0.00            0.00          271.59         271.02          0.16         0.12        1.77           0.11         5.66
Observations                                    480            474             474            480            480            468         450          450           468           468
# of IDs                                        480            474             474            480            480            468         450          450           468           468
Notes: All monetary amounts are winsorized at the 99th percentile. All values in US Dollarss. All regressions control for pre-treatment mean of dependent variable. Data from rounds 3-6
only. Standard errors clustered at household level in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%.




                                                                                          47
Table WA6. Placebo test for Table 9: intra-household transfers, expenditures, and income
                                           (1)      (2)        (3)      (4)          (5)              (6)       (7)       (8)          (9)       (10)       (11)      (12)      (13)        (14)        (15)     (16)
                                                      Transfers                                         Expenditures (male)                                   Expenditures (female)                     Total income
                                           From                    From
                                                                                                                             HH                                                  HH
                                           wife to    Amount     husband Amount           Total    Personal       Food              Children     Total    Personal    Food              Children        Male    Female
                                                                                                                           expenses                                            expenses
                                          husband                 to wife

Male only sampled for account (a)           -0.09       0.05       0.04       0.61         1.77      1.20         -1.43      2.12    -0.50       -2.38      0.09      -1.45     -0.33       -4.03       5.41      0.47
                                            (0.07)     (0.51)     (0.05)     (1.44)       (5.84)    (1.33)        (2.15)    (1.36)   (4.19)      (3.14)    (0.56)     (1.55)    (0.69)     (2.19)*     (3.98)    (2.13)
Female only sampled for account (b)         -0.09      -0.40       0.04      -1.72         3.76      2.13         -0.22      1.44     3.90       -0.19      0.19      -0.38      0.48       -4.07       2.66      1.04
                                            (0.07)     (0.50)     (0.05)     (1.44)       (5.83)    (1.33)        (2.15)    (1.35)   (4.19)      (3.08)    (0.55)     (1.52)    (0.68)     (2.16)*     (3.98)    (2.09)
Both sampled for account (c)                -0.09       0.00       0.03      -0.67        -1.81      0.85         -2.25      0.47     5.78        0.37      0.16       0.25      0.01       -4.97       5.62      0.11
                                            (0.06)     (0.47)     (0.05)     (1.34)       (5.42)    (1.23)        (1.99)    (1.26)   (3.89)      (2.91)    (0.52)     (1.43)    (0.64)    (2.03)**     (3.70)    (1.98)
p-values:
 Joint significance a, b, and c = 0           0.46        0.73        0.86      0.32        0.69      0.43       0.58       0.33      0.23        0.75      0.99       0.61      0.63      0.1*        0.41       0.95
 a=b=c                                        1.00        0.54        0.97      0.20        0.49      0.49       0.52       0.32      0.19        0.56      0.98       0.42      0.42      0.83        0.63       0.87
 a=b                                          0.95        0.32        0.95      0.07*       0.70      0.44       0.53       0.58      0.24        0.43      0.85       0.44      0.19      0.99        0.44       0.76
 a=c                                          0.98        0.92        0.82      0.28        0.46      0.74       0.64       0.14      0.07*       0.29      0.88       0.19      0.56      0.61        0.95       0.84
 b=c                                          0.96        0.34        0.88      0.38        0.25      0.24       0.25       0.38      0.59        0.83      0.96       0.62      0.41      0.62        0.37       0.59
Dep. Var. Mean (control, dual-headed hhs 0.37              0.88       0.82       8.55       45.84      6.34     19.42       4.39      10.69       19.84     2.26      10.20      2.74      8.38        13.06      6.90
Dep. Var. SD (control, dual-headed hhs)        0.48        1.91       0.39      10.37       38.63      7.62     16.07       6.21      27.63       18.00     3.30      11.33      2.48     28.46        21.74      10.66
Observations                                   480         480         468       468         453       453        452        453       451         477       477        477       477       472         468        480
# of IDs                                       480         480         468       468         453       453        452        453       451         477       477        477       477       472         468        480
Notes: All monetary amounts are winsorized at the 99th percentile. All values in US Dollarss. All regressions control for pre-treatment mean of dependent variable. Data from rounds 3-6 only. Standard errors clustered
at household level in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%.




                                                                                                             48
