                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             HEALTHY(?), WEALTHY AND WISE:
                             BIRTH ORDER AND ADULT HEALTH

                                          Sandra E. Black
                                          Paul J. Devereux
                                          Kjell G. Salvanes

                                        Working Paper 21337
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21337


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2015




We are grateful to the Medical Birth Registry for Norway for providing the birth registry data. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Sandra E. Black, Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Healthy(?), Wealthy and Wise: Birth Order and Adult Health
Sandra E. Black, Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes
NBER Working Paper No. 21337
July 2015
JEL No. I1,J1

                                              ABSTRACT

While recent research finds strong evidence that birth order affects children’s outcomes such as education,
IQ scores, and earnings, the evidence for effects on health is more limited. This paper uses a large
dataset on the population of Norway and focuses on the effect of birth order on a range of health and
health-related behaviors, outcomes not previously available in datasets of this magnitude. Interestingly,
we find complicated effects of birth order. First-borns are more likely to be overweight, to be obese,
and to have high blood pressure and high triglycerides. So, unlike education or earnings, there is no
clear first-born advantage in health. However, later-borns are more likely to smoke and have poorer
self-reported physical and mental health. They are also less likely to report that they are happy. We
find that these effects are largely unaffected by conditioning on education and earnings, suggesting
that these are not the only important pathways to health differentials by birth order. When we explore
possible mechanisms, we find that smoking early in pregnancy is more prevalent for first pregnancies
than for later ones. However, women are more likely to quit smoking during their first pregnancy than
during later ones, and first-borns are more likely to be breast-fed. These findings suggest a role for
early maternal investment in determining birth order effects on health.


Sandra E. Black                                      Kjell G. Salvanes
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
University of Texas                                  Norwegian School of Economics
Austin, TX 78712                                     Hellev. 30, N-5035 Bergen
and IZA and NBER                                     Norway
sblack@austin.utexas.edu                             and IZA and CEPR
                                                     kjell.salvanes@nhh.no
Paul J. Devereux
School of Economics
and Geary Institute
University College Dublin
Belfield, Dublin 4
Ireland
and IZA and CEPR
devereux@ucd.ie
        Newspapers and magazines are replete with articles describing how you can predict your

future based on your birth order - what job you are likely to do, what personality characteristics

you exhibit, even so far as to predict how you will raise your children.1 Though these articles

often seem more circus show than academic, there is substantial research across a variety of

fields examining the relationship between birth order and individual outcomes. Although early

work was limited in its ability to distinguish birth order from other confounding characteristics

such as family size (for example, third born children on average come from larger families than

first born children), recent work has taken advantage of large survey and administrative datasets

to consistently find that, in developed countries, first-borns have higher IQ scores, educational

attainment, and earnings than later-borns.2

        There is a sizeable literature about the relationship between birth order and adult health.

However, individual studies have typically examined only one or a small number of health

outcomes and, in many cases, have used relatively small samples. In this paper, we use large

nationally representative data from Norway to identify the relationship between birth order and

health, where health is measured along a number of dimensions, including medical indicators,

health behaviors, and overall life satisfaction. In light of existing work documenting that

firstborns have greater education and earnings, studying a range of health outcomes provides a

more complete picture of the role of birth order on child success.

        Until recently, the identification of birth order effects has been limited due to the rigorous

data demands required for credible estimation. Later-born children are only observed in larger

families (by definition), and the characteristics of individuals who choose to have larger families

are observably quite different from those of individuals who choose to have smaller families. To


1
  http://www.huffingtonpost.com/dr-gail-gross/how-birth-order-affects-personality_b_4494385.html
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/04/29/firstborns-educational-success_n_5228493.html
http://www.nytimes.com/2009/09/08/health/08klas.html
2
  See, for example, Black et al., 2005, 2011; Bjerkedal et al., 2007; Kantarevic and Mechoulan, 2006; Booth and
Kee, 2008; Bu, 2014)
                                                                                                                  2
circumvent these issues, we use a large dataset from Norway and estimate the effects of birth

order on health using a family fixed effects specification. In this case, we are identifying the

effects of birth order by comparing siblings within the same family, thereby eliminating concerns

that birth order is picking up omitted family characteristics such as family size. We are also able

to control for mother’s and children’s birth cohorts—in this case, birth order effects are identified

off the differential timing of births within the same family. We find effects of health on birth

order that are complicated. First-borns are more likely to be overweight and have high blood

pressure and high triglycerides. However, later-borns are more likely to smoke and have poorer

self-reported physical and mental health. These results are found in both between-family (cross-

sectional) and within-family analysis. So, unlike education or earnings, there is no clear first-

born advantage in health. Also, we find that these effects are largely unaffected by conditioning

on education and earnings, suggesting that these are not the only important pathways to health

differentials by birth order.

        There are many mechanisms that could generate a relationship between birth order and

health, including differences in biological endowments, early parental investment, and later

parental or environmental factors. While we cannot examine all possible mechanisms, we focus

on the role of early parental investment behavior, as much recent research has highlighted the

importance of early investments (both in utero and in the first years of life) for the long-run

outcomes of children (see Aizer and Currie 2014 for a summary). In particular, using a variety of

data sources, we examine the effects of a child's birth order on maternal smoking during

pregnancy and the probability that he/she is breastfed as both these parental behaviors are likely

to have long-term implications for the health of the child.

        We find that smoking early in pregnancy is more prevalent for first pregnancies than for

later ones. However, women are more likely to quit smoking during their first pregnancy than



                                                                                                     3
during later ones, and first borns are more likely to be breast-fed. These findings suggest a role

for early maternal investment in determining birth order effects on health.

         The paper unfolds as follows. Section 2 discusses the related literature. Section 3

discusses the data we use and Section 4 presents the results. Section 5 discusses possible

mechanisms, and Section 6 concludes.



2. Related Literature

         A number of literatures have examined the relationship between birth order and health or

health behaviors, ranging from the medical literature to sociology to psychology to economics

(for instance Richiardi et al., 2004, Sulloway, 1996, and Argys et al., 2006).                  While much of the

research has used relatively small samples, there are several papers that have utilized population

registers like the Norwegian data we use.

         Recent work by Lundborg, Ralsmark, and Olof-Rooth (2014) examines the relationship

between family size, birth order, and height, where height is used as a proxy for health. Using

military enlistment data from Sweden covering the population of males at approximately 18 years

of age, the authors show that there are large and statistically significant negative effects of birth

order on height. However, while height is often used as a proxy for health in developing

countries, it is a more limited measure in a developed country such as Sweden.3

         Barclay and Kolk (2013) and Modin (2002) also use register data from Sweden but focus

on the relationship between birth order and mortality. They find that mortality risk increases with

birth order, and this pattern is stronger for women than for men. Additionally, a few papers have

examined the relationship between birth order and suicide and found a positive relationship (see




3
 Hatton and Martin (2010) also find negative effects of higher birth order on height of children in Britain in the
1930s.
                                                                                                                     4
Rostila et al, 2014 and references therein).4 While these studies represent an important

contribution to our understanding, mortality is clearly an extreme measure of health. In addition,

the authors lack more nuanced information on health behaviors and on mental health. Our

findings of birth order differences in smoking behavior suggest a plausible contributor to

mortality differences and our mental health findings provide context to the findings about suicide

in the literature.

         Using register data on Swedish conscripts aged about 19, Jelenkovic et al. (2013) find no

evidence that birth order affects blood pressure but find that it negatively affects BMI. We build

on this research by examining blood pressure, BMI, and obesity in addition to health behavior

and mental health indicators, in a sample of prime age adults.

         Moving beyond register data, researchers have used smaller cross-sectional and cohort

datasets to study various health outcomes. For example, Howe et al. (2014) use cohort data from

Brazil and the UK and find no consistent evidence for any relationship between birth order and

blood pressure or obesity. However, a key limitation of much of this research is the absence of

large-scale data sources required to sufficiently control for across-family differences (in

particular, family size and its correlates) and the failure of many studies to control for

confounders such as cohort effects and mothers age at the birth of the child. Our main

contribution is to examine a wide range of health outcomes on a large common sample and using

appropriate sets of control variables.

         We also study an area about which little is known -- the relationship between birth order

and adult health behavior. Much more is known about the relationship between birth order and

health-related behaviors of children and teenagers. Argys et al. (2006) use the NLSY to show

that, among adolescents, later-borns are more likely than first-borns to use alcohol and drugs and


4
 Swedish register data have also been used to study the relationship between birth order and cancer (Bevier et al.
2011; Hemminki and Mutanen 2001) with findings of positive birth order effects on some cancers (such as lung
cancer) and negative birth order effects for others (such as endometrial cancer).
                                                                                                                     5
engage in risky sexual behaviour. In related work, Rees et al. (2008) showed that later-born boys

were more likely to participate in sports in 10th grade but the opposite was true for later-born

girls.5 Our analysis shows that some of these behavioral differences persist well into adulthood

and so are likely to have important consequences for health.

         In terms of mechanisms underlying observed differences in outcomes by birth order, there

are a number of papers examining variation in parental investment behavior. Work by Price

(2008) and Monfardini and See (2012) examine parental time spent with children and find

differences by birth order. Lehmann et al. (2014), among others, show that birth order differences

in cognitive achievement appear early in life (as early as age 2), suggesting the importance of

early parental investments. Using the Children of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth

dataset (CNLSY), they show that later-borns experience a lower reduction in cigarette usage

during pregnancy, are breastfed less often, and experience less cognitive stimulation and

emotional support at ages 0 to 1. Buckles and Kolka (2014) show similar patterns in

breastfeeding by birth order using the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY). We show

similar results for Norway using larger sample sizes. An advantage of the Norwegian Birth

Registers is that they have information on smoking in both early and late pregnancy and so

enable us to study changes in smoking behavior over the course of pregnancy. Also, the smoking

data are probably more reliable than the retrospective self-reports in the CNLSY.



3. Data

         Data are compiled from a number of different sources. Our primary data source is the

Norwegian Registry Data, a linked administrative dataset that covers the population of

Norwegians from 1986 to 2010. These data are maintained by Statistics Norway and provide



5
  In addition, two interesting papers provide evidence that parents may strategically be stricter to first-borns than
later-borns (Hao et al., 2008; Hotz and Pantano, 2013).
                                                                                                                        6
information about labor market status, earnings, and a set of demographic variables (age, gender)

as well as information on families.

        We measure family size in the register by using personal identifiers matched between

parents and children to count the children of each mother, and we use information on year and

month of birth to assign birth order. We drop twins from our estimating samples because of the

ambiguities involved in calculating birth order for twins. We also drop only children and families

with 6 or more children from the sample so family sizes range from 2 to 5.6 Appendix Table 1

presents summary statistics for our sample. Most families in our sample (75%) have two or three

children. In our sample, 44% of children are first-borns, 38% are second-borns, 14% are third-

borns and 5% are fourth- or fifth-borns.

        These data are merged to health survey data using personal identification numbers. The

health data come from two population-based surveys carried out between 1988 and 2003 and

covering all counties in Norway: the Cohort of Norway (CONOR) and the National Health

Screening Service’s Age 40 Program. Both surveys were conducted by the National Institute of

Public Health, and for the most part, the same information was collected in both surveys. Both

consist of two components: the survey and the health examination. The survey includes

questions about specific diseases, general questions about health, medicine use, family disease

history, physical activity, and smoking and drinking habits. The health examination includes

blood pressure measurement and blood tests for cholesterol and blood sugar.

        Most of the health data come from the Age 40 Program, which covers all counties in

Norway except Oslo and includes men and women aged 40-42 who were surveyed sometime

between 1988-1999.7 The survey was conducted county by county and all of the inhabitants in

each county aged 40-42 were surveyed. Because of the scope of the project, it took a number of

6
  Fewer than 4% of families have 6 or more children. We also drop women whose age at first birth is less than 16 or
greater than 45 (only 9 observations are dropped as a result). The results are robust to these choices.
7
  The Age 40 Program dataset is described at http://www.fhi.no and in studies such as Jacobsen, Stensvold,
Fylkesnes, Kristiansen and Thelle (1992) and Nystad, Meyer, Nafstad, Tverdal and Engeland (2004).
                                                                                                                      7
years to cover all counties; as a result, different counties were surveyed in different years. Each

county was surveyed only once. All 40-42 year olds were asked to participate, and the response

rate is about 70 percent, yielding 374,090 observations.

        To this, we add the smaller CONOR dataset.8 The main advantage of the CONOR dataset

is that it includes Oslo, which was omitted from the Age 40 data. The CONOR dataset has

56,863 respondents from a wider set of age groups and collected between 1994 and 2003. It

consists of 10 different surveys across different age groups and counties. The response rate is

similar but a little lower (60 percent) compared to that of the Age 40 Program. The Oslo survey

was conducted in 2000 and 2001, where they sampled all 40, 45 and 46 year olds, in addition to

30/31 and 59/60 year olds. Because the surveys were mostly conducted in the 1990s and early

2000s and were focused on persons in their early 40s, we restrict the sample to cohorts born

between 1940 and 1960 who are aged between 35 and 60 at the time of the survey.9

        Because of non-response and the fact that different cohorts were sampled in different

municipalities, we observe only 41% of the complete 1940-1960 cohorts in the health surveys. A

concern is that selection into our sample may be related to individual health, and to the extent that

it is also correlated with birth order, this may introduce bias into our analysis. While we think

this is unlikely to be a problem, we use the population of these cohorts and regress an indicator of

whether one has health information on birth order and on the other control variables described in

the next section along with mother fixed effects. Although we find statistically significant

effects-- first-borns are 0.6% less likely to participate than second-borns and 1% less likely to




8
  The CONOR data set is described on the web page www.fhi.no/conor/index.html or in Søgaard (2006), and several
studies have used parts or the total sample including Søgaard, Bjelland, Telle and Røysamb (2003).

9
 86% of survey respondents were born between 1940 and 1960 so this cohort restriction allows us to keep most
people while still having a relatively homogenous sample. We lose an additional 660 observations by restricting to
persons aged between 35 and 60. Our results are similar when these sample restrictions are not imposed.
                                                                                                                     8
participate than third borns--these differences are sufficiently small that they are unlikely to lead

to large biases in estimation.10



4. Birth Order Analysis

         Credible identification of birth order effects has stringent data requirements; the fact that

later born children are more likely to come from larger families, be born to older parents, and be

born later chronologically highlights the importance of controlling for family size, parental age,

and child cohort effects when using cross-family variation. With sufficient sample sizes and

appropriate controls, however, the cross-sectional evidence can be quite compelling.

         To estimate the relationship between birth order and health, we regress health on birth

order indicators along with a variety of other controls. To avoid any confounding family size

effects, we include indicator variables for each possible family size. In addition to family size, the

control variables include gender, indicator variables for cohort (year of birth), indicator variables

for year of health exam, and indicator variables for age of mother at birth, and for age of mother

at first birth. We also include survey dummies in case measurement differed in any way across

surveys.

         An additional advantage of our dataset is that we can test the sensitivity of our results to

within-family comparisons. We do the within-family comparison by estimating specifications

using mother fixed effects. We include the same control variables as in OLS, except that now

family size and mother’s age at first birth drop out as they are the same for all children in the

same family.11 In this case, we are estimating the relative performance of different children (with

different birth orders) within the same family.



10
   Previous studies have found little indication of self-selection on observable family background variables in
CONOR when compared to the whole population (Søgaard, Selmer, Bjertnes, Thelle, 2003).
11
   Even when looking within family, we still face the issue that parents of later-born children are older, and later born
children belong to different cohorts, suggesting the need to also include indicators for mother’s age at birth and
                                                                                                                       9
         The mother fixed effects specifications are our preferred estimates as they are robust to

any family-specific unobservable characteristics. However, because this strategy is identified

from families with at least 2 children, the OLS estimates (without mother fixed effects) are for a

less-selected sample. Therefore, for completeness, we report both sets of results and, importantly,

they provide similar estimates.12

         We split our health outcomes into three groups—health measures, health behaviors, and

overall life satisfaction.



Health Measures

         We first examine the effect of birth order on a variety of health variables. From blood

samples, we have indicators for high blood pressure, high cholesterol, and high triglycerides.

Following the National Institute of Health (NIH - http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/health-

topics/topics/hbp/), we define a person as having high blood pressure if the systolic number is

greater than or equal to 140mmHg or the diastolic number is greater than or equal to 90mmHg.13

         For cholesterol, we once again follow the NIH in defining high cholesterol as total serum

cholesterol greater than or equal to 240 mg/dL (6.2mmol/l). Finally, triglycerides are a type of

fat found in blood. Following the classification by the American Heart Association, we define

high triglycerides as having a level higher than 2.25mmol/l. High blood pressure, high

cholesterol, and high triglycerides are all considered by the American Heart Association to be

major risk factors for heart disease.




child’s cohort of birth. In practice, only cohort controls are required as, conditional on the mother fixed effects,
mother’s age at birth is perfectly correlated with child’s birth cohort.
12
   We have also verified that OLS estimates on a sample of families with at least 2 participating children are quite
similar to the OLS estimates reported.
13
   "Blood pressure" is the force of blood pushing against the walls of the arteries as the heart pumps
blood. "Systolic" refers to blood pressure when the heart beats while pumping blood. "Diastolic" refers to blood
pressure when the heart is at rest between beats.
                                                                                                                       10
        We also have data on physical measurements taken during the examination -- height,

weight, and indicators for whether an individual is overweight or obese. Height is measured in

centimeters and weight is reported in kilograms; from these we construct Body Mass Index

(BMI) as weight divided by height (in meters) squared. As is standard, we define a person as

being overweight if their BMI is greater than or equal to 25 and as being obese if their BMI is

greater than or equal to 30.14

        The results for these outcomes are presented in Table 1.15 Because we have many

outcome variables, we report our main estimates pooling both across family sizes and by gender.

However, these estimates are quite representative, as we find that birth order effects generally do

not differ significantly by gender or across family size.16 The omitted birth order category is first-

born so all birth order coefficients are the effects relative to first-borns. Importantly, the results

show that the estimates are not very sensitive to specification choice; the within-family estimates

are generally similar to those using cross-sectional variation, suggesting that the estimated birth

order effects do not reflect omitted family characteristics. However, given our greater faith in the

fixed effects estimates, we focus on these when reporting coefficient values.

        We find that the probability of having high blood pressure declines with birth order, and

the largest gap is between first- and second-borns. Second-borns are about 3% less likely to have

high blood pressure than first-borns; fifth-borns are about 7% less likely to have high blood

pressure than first-borns. Given the proportion with high blood pressure is 24%, this is quite a

large difference. In contrast, there is little evidence of birth order effects on cholesterol in either

specification. However, there is strong evidence that the probability of having high triglycerides



14
   These are the definitions of overweight and obesity used by the World Health Organization (WHO):
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs311/en/.
15
   When we study binary dependent variables, such as whether the person has high blood pressure, we estimate linear
probability models. We estimate the standard errors using the Huber/White heteroskedasticity-robust estimator
clustered at the level of the person’s mother. This allows for arbitrary correlation of errors within sibling groups.
16
   Results available upon request.
                                                                                                                  11
is greater for first-borns than for second- or third-borns with the difference between first- and

second-borns being about 2%. This compares to a baseline of 22% with high triglycerides.

         The estimates for height show that height is decreasing with birth order. First-borns are,

on average, about 0.2 of a centimeter taller than second-borns. The effect seems monotonic, with

fifth-borns being--depending on specification--between .4 and .8 of a centimeter shorter than

first-borns on average.17 While first-borns are taller, they are also more likely to be overweight

and obese. Compared to second-borns, first-borns are 4% more likely to be overweight, and 2%

more likely to be obese. The equivalent differences between fifth-borns and first-borns are 10%

and 5%. For context, the proportions in the population that are overweight and obese are 47%

and 10% respectively. So, once again, these magnitudes are quite large. Overall, we find that

first-borns are less healthy in terms of physical markers such as blood pressure, triglycerides, and

indicators of overweight and obesity.18



Health-Related Behaviors

         We also study several health-related behaviors. The first set is whether the individual is a

daily smoker and the number of cigarettes smoked daily. Smoking is an important risk factor for

heart disease, lung cancer, and many other ailments. Another variable is the number of alcoholic

drinks consumed in the two weeks prior to the survey. This is the sum of beer, wine, and hard

liquor consumption. While moderate drinking may not have adverse health effects, heavy

drinking is known to have negative consequences for health (see for example Corder et al.,

2006). For men, heavy drinking is typically defined as consuming 15 drinks or more per week,




17
  These findings for height are similar to those reported for Sweden by Lundborg et al. (2014).
18
  Another health-related outcome is receiving disability benefit. Given that only 4% of our sample are in receipt of
this benefit and it is contingent on labor-market factors (and so affected by factors other than health), we do not
report estimates for it. However, analogous estimation shows that first-borns are less likely to receive disability
benefits.
                                                                                                                   12
and for women, heavy drinking is typically defined as consuming 8 drinks or more per week.19

Therefore, we also create a binary indicator for whether the man (woman) was a heavy drinker

based on these definitions. Questions about drinking were not asked in all of the health surveys

so our sample sizes for these variables are much lower than for smoking.20 The survey also

contains a question about frequency of exercise. We create a binary variable that is one if the

person exercises at least one hour per week and zero otherwise.21

         Table 2 presents the estimated effects of birth order on these health-related behaviors. We

can see that the number of cigarettes smoked daily increases monotonically with birth order –

first-borns smoke about 0.5 fewer cigarettes per day than second-borns and about 1 to 1.5 fewer

cigarettes than fifth-borns. The mean number of cigarettes smoked per day is only 5 so again

these birth order effects are quite large. The findings for whether the person smokes daily are

qualitatively similar, with first-borns 5% less likely to smoke than second-borns and about 13%

less likely to smoke than 5th-borns (38% of our sample smoke daily). Our smoking findings

suggest that the higher prevalence of smoking by later-borns found among adolescents in the U.S.

by Argys et al. (2006) may persist throughout adulthood and, hence, have important effects on

health outcomes.22

         In contrast, there is no evidence to suggest that later-borns drink more alcohol than first-

borns or that birth order is related to exercise. As mentioned earlier, our sample sizes are lower

for these variables but the standard errors are still low enough to rule out large effects.23



19
   http://www.cdc.gov/alcohol/faqs.htm#excessivealcohol
20
   We face the same issue with several other variables including exercise, self-reported health, reported happiness,
and questions about mental health.
21
   The question for weekly exercise is coded as "nothing", "<1 hour", "1-2 hours", and "3+ hours". We create a
binary variable that is one for either of the latter two categories and zero for the first two. Our results are not
sensitive to how we code the exercise variable.
22
   Since smoking tends to reduce BMI, we have examined whether controlling for cigarettes smoked affects the birth
order effects for obesity. We found that it made very little difference to the coefficients.
23
   One concern might be that there are very few families who have multiple children in these smaller samples,
leading to the fixed effects specifications being identified from very few children. For the drinking variables, there
are 18805 mothers who have multiple children with non-missing data in the sample (they have 39252 children in the
                                                                                                                   13
Self-Reported Physical and Mental Health

        Finally, we also study a set of self-reported health measures. The first is an indicator

variable for whether the person considered himself to be in good or very good health, while the

other three variables proxy for mental health. The first two mental health variables are created

from answers to a series of questions about whether the person was irritable, lonely, nervous,

anxious, calm, or depressed during the last two weeks. We have used these answers to create an

index for mental ill-health.24 This variable takes values between 1 and 4 (with higher numbers

indicating worse mental health) and has a standard deviation of .42. We have also taken a simpler

approach of creating a binary variable that is 1 if a person felt more than a little nervous, anxious,

irritated or depressed or if they didn’t feel calm or felt only a little calm. Only 21% of people are

allocated a one for this variable.25 Our final measure is not really a health measure at all--it is a

measure of whether the individual is happy—but may serve as a proxy for good physical and

mental health.

        Table 3 shows estimates for these health measures. The first one is an indicator variable

for whether the person considered himself to be in good or very good health. Later-borns are less

likely to consider themselves to be in good health. The difference between a first- and second-

born is about 1.5% from a base of 85%.

        When we turn to mental health, we see that mental health generally declines with birth

order. When we examine the mental health index, where higher values suggest worse mental


sample). While this is substantially fewer than for the smoking variables (69480 mothers), it is still a large sample
size.
24
   Respondents are asked separate questions about how irritable, lonely, nervous, anxious, calm, or depressed they
were during the last two weeks. They were asked “Did you feel #### during the last two weeks?” and the possible
answers were {no, a little, a lot, very much}. For irritable, lonely, nervous, anxious, and depressed, we code the
answers as {1, 2, 3, 4} respectively. For calm, we code the answers as {4, 3, 2, 1}. Then we construct the index by
taking the average of the six numbers for each person. Therefore, the index has a minimum of 1 and a maximum of 4
and higher values of the index imply poorer mental health.
25
   We have tried other ways of aggregating the answers from these questions to create an index of mental wellbeing
and found similar birth order patterns.
                                                                                                                  14
health, we see that, although not all estimates are statistically significant, the coefficients

generally suggest that mental health declines with birth order. We get qualitatively similar

estimates when we use the binary measure of mental illness. Finally, we find that later-borns are

less happy, with second-borns being about 2% and fifth-borns being about 8% less likely to say

that they are happy than first-borns. These are relative to a mean of 77% for our sample.26



Possible Mechanisms

         What can explain the birth order effects we find? One possibility is that health is affected

by education and earnings and these are a pathway through which birth order influences health. It

is well established that health tends to improve with education and earnings (See, for example,

Cutler and Lleras-Muney, 2010). We have verified that the effects of birth order on education and

earnings in our sample are consistent with what prior research has found – first-borns have higher

average education and earnings than later-borns – so this is a plausible explanation for poorer

health outcomes of later-borns. However, it cannot explain the fact that later-borns have better

health along some dimensions such as having lower risk of high blood pressure and obesity. We

have re-estimated the birth order regressions adding controls for education and earnings in order

to get a sense of how important they might be in determining the birth order effects.27 As

expected, we find that including these controls has the effect of improving the relative health of


26
   All family size estimates in the tables are the effects relative to 2-child families. Although we would not want to
push for a causal interpretation of the family size coefficients (due to likely omitted variable bias), it is interesting to
note the patterns we observe. Because poorer people tend to have larger families, we expect that true causal effects
of family size to be no more negative than OLS estimates. This is consistent with most family size findings from the
developed world including our own findings on the effects of family size on education using twin births and sex
composition as instruments (Black, Devereux and Salvanes, 2005). Therefore, it is interesting that the estimated
family size effects in Tables 1-3 do not consistently demonstrate that bigger families have worse health – in fact,
people from larger families are less likely to have high blood pressure, less likely to have high triglycerides, and less
likely to be overweight or obese. They also smoke fewer cigarettes and drink less alcohol. The only variable that
points to positive health benefits of coming from a smaller family is height – persons from four and five child
families are shorter than those from 2-child families.
27
  We include dummy variables for each education level (completed years of schooling), plus a dummy for having
positive earnings in 1995 (when sample members are aged between 35 and 55) and a control for earnings in 1995.
We have tried alternative specifications for these variables and found similar results.
                                                                                                                         15
later-borns relative to first-borns. However, the changes are not very large. For example, the

blood pressure advantage of 5th borns over 1st borns increases from 0.07 to 0.08, the analogous

obesity advantage increases from 0.05 to 0.054, the smoking difference falls from 1.58 to 1.24,

and the difference in value of the mental illness index falls from 0.074 to 0.067. So, while

education and earnings appear to be part of the story here, the birth order patterns are largely

unchanged when they are added as control variables.

        Birth order effects could also have biological origins. For example, the in-utero

programming hypothesis suggests that the maternal immune system changes with the number of

births and that this affects the child in utero and subsequently (Ohfuji et al., 2009). Also, it is well

established that birth weight tends to increase with parity so first-borns are, on average, lighter at

birth than their siblings. (See, for example, Juntunen, Läärä & Kauppila, 1997 and Wilcox,

Chang & Johnson, 1996.) While the long-term consequences of this are unclear, it may be part of

the explanation of the greater propensity of first-borns to be obese (Wells et al. 2011).

Additionally, the higher-blood pressure of first-borns may be related to their greater BMI.

        Another potential mechanism is personality. While the empirical evidence is not

particularly strong, there is an established set of theories about birth order and personality. First-

borns are often perceived to be intense and career-orientated while later-borns are considered to

be more laid back and creative (Sulloway, 1996, Zweigenhaf and von Ammen, 2000).28 This

provides a possible set of explanations for these findings. High blood pressure and triglycerides

may be caused by the stress that results from this driven, competitive personality type. However,

we do not have any data that allow us to examine this possibility further.

        Given the recent attention to the role of early parental investments on long-run children’s

outcomes, we will focus our attention here on two health-related decisions made by the mother

while pregnant or soon after the birth of her child. To do so, we introduce a variety of new
28
  Recent work using administrative data from Sweden suggests that first-borns are more likely to be managers. See
Black, Gronqvist and Ockert (2015).
                                                                                                               16
datasets. Note, however, that this new information is unavailable for the cohorts for whom we

have health information, so we cannot evaluate the role of these factors in determining the health

effects we have found thus far.



Parental Investments in Utero

        One potential explanation for health differences by birth order is that parents invest

differentially during pregnancy. For example, smoking during pregnancy has been shown to be

extremely harmful to the fetus (Rubin et al., 1986, Bernstein et al., 2005). Although we have no

information on maternal behavior during pregnancy for the individuals sampled in the health

survey, there is information in the Birth Register on smoking behavior of mothers who give birth

between 1999 and 2009. Women are asked whether and how much they smoked both at the

beginning and at the end of pregnancy. Women report smoking status at the start of the

pregnancy to doctors at a free, recommended consultation around gestational week 8-12 (some

women report it slightly later because their first consultation is after week 12). They are asked not

only about smoking status (yes/no) but also how many cigarettes per day they smoke. The birth

register also contains information on smoking behavior at the end of pregnancy collected during a

pre-birth hospital visit around gestational week 36. The response rate in our data for this smoking

question is 83% at the beginning of pregnancy and 79% at the end.29

        Table 4 presents the estimates when we examine whether smoking behavior depends on

the birth order of the in-utero child. We use the same control variables as in the previous

estimation of health effects.30 The OLS and FE estimates are similar and, as before, we will focus

on the FE ones. These estimates imply that mothers are about 4% more likely to smoke at the

beginning of their first pregnancy than for their second or third birth. Given the mean value of the

29
   We have created a variable for whether smoking information is missing and used it as a dependent variable to see
whether reporting is related to birth order. We found no evidence for any relationship.
30
   Note that our family size measure here is family size in 2009 and, unlike in the previous regressions, may not
represent completed family size for these women.
                                                                                                                 17
dependent variable is 14%, this is a sizeable effect. However, the pattern is actually reversed by

the end of the pregnancy, with mothers now less likely to smoke on their first pregnancy. These

patterns for smoking incidence are also found when we study the number of cigarettes smoked in

columns 3 and 4.

         We next take the sample of mothers who smoked at the beginning of pregnancy and

examine whether their decision to quit during pregnancy is related to the birth order of the child

(37% of smokers at the beginning of pregnancy no longer smoke at the end). Column 5 shows

these results; we find that mothers are much less likely to quit smoking during later pregnancies

than during their first pregnancy. Finally, in column 6, we find the same pattern when we include

all women and study the change in the number of cigarettes smoked between the beginning and

end of pregnancy.

         Taken together, our smoking findings paint a complicated picture. First-borns are more

likely to be exposed to smoke during early pregnancy than later-borns but less likely to be

exposed later in pregnancy. Thus, the health effects are not clear-cut. However, what is clear is

that behavioral responses by mothers differ by birth order in a way that is favorable to first-borns

-- parents are more likely to quit smoking during pregnancy for first-born children than for

subsequent ones.31



Parental Investments in Childhood

         Birth order effects could also be the result of differential parental behaviors post-birth.

Again, although we do not have data on early parental investments for our health sample, we do

observe information on breast feeding behavior for later cohorts and can examine whether

mothers breastfeed first-borns for longer than later-borns. Although there are some recent papers


31
  This is consistent with the work by Lehmann et al. (2014). Using the CNLSY, they find no statistically significant
effects of the child’s birth order on number of cigarettes smoked but, like us, they find evidence that mothers of later-
borns are less likely to reduce their smoking during pregnancy.
                                                                                                                     18
examining the relationship between birth order and breastfeeding in the US and Ecuador

(Lehmann et al, 2014; Buckles and Kolka, 2014; De Haan et al.,2014), it is useful to examine in

the context of Norway, where rates of breastfeeding are very high.32

         In the CONOR dataset, we can observe the breastfeeding decisions, including incidence

and duration for each child of the surveyed women. We merge the information for each child

with birth registers that are available for children born from 1967 onwards. This gives us

information on 42425 children born to 17554 mothers. Descriptive statistics for this sample are in

Appendix Table 3.

         The estimates are presented in Table 5. The dependent variable in the first column is

duration of breastfeeding (in months); the second column adds a control for birth weight, as this

may have an independent effect on breastfeeding and also has been shown to affect later

outcomes (Black et al., 2007). Columns 3 and 4 have the equivalent estimates where the

dependent variable is whether breastfeeding lasts at least 6 months. Both OLS and mother fixed

effects estimates show that later-borns are breastfed for less time than first-borns.33 The effect

sizes get slightly bigger once birth weight is controlled for, as heavier babies are more likely to

be breastfed and first-borns are, on average, lighter than later-borns.34



5. Conclusions

          In this paper, we have used large health surveys linked to population registers to study

the relationship between birth order and health and health behaviors. Unlike findings in the

literature for education and cognitive skills in developed countries, we do not find a clear first-

32
   Breastfeeding is very common in Norway with the average duration of breastfeeding being 7 months and only
about 7% of mothers do not breastfeed at all.
33
   Lehmann et al. (2014) find a similar pattern using the CNLSY as do Buckles and Kolka (2014) using the NLSY
(they also find mothers are more likely to receive first trimester care and take pre-natal vitamins during their first
pregnancy). De Haan et al. (2014) find the opposite -- first borns are breastfed for less time -- in their study of
Ecuador.
34
   Table 5 also includes family size estimates. These show that children from larger families are more likely to be
breastfed, suggesting that coming from a larger family has no adverse effects on parental investments.
                                                                                                                         19
born advantage in health. On average, later-borns have lower blood pressure, triglycerides, and

BMI than first-borns.

        Despite these findings, first-borns appear to have better health in other dimensions. They

have better self-reported physical and mental health, and they are more likely to report being

happy. They are also much less likely to smoke. The smoking finding is consistent with a

continuation of a pattern of poorer health behaviors by later-borns identified by previous research

on adolescents. Given the negative long-term health effects of smoking, it is also consistent with

the higher mortality rates found for later-borns in the previous literature. Additionally, our

finding that first-borns have better mental health may provide a partial explanation for the lower

suicide rates found in the prior literature for this group.

        Because of the likely importance of early investments in determining adult health, we

have also examined how smoking during pregnancy and breastfeeding depend on the birth order

of the child. Our findings generally corroborate ongoing research in this area that suggests greater

parental investment in first-borns. While this analysis is suggestive, further research will be

required to further untangle the various mechanisms underlying the complicated relationship

between birth order and adult health.




                                                                                                  20
References

Aizer, A. and J. Currie (2014). “The intergenerational transmission of inequality: Maternal
disadvantage and health at birth”, Science Vol. 344(6186), 856-861.

Argys, L. M., D. I. Rees, S. L. Averett, and B. Witoonchart (2006).”Birth order and risky
adolescent behavior”. Economic Inquiry 44 (2) (APR): 215-33.

Barclay, K. J., Kolk, M. (2013). Birth Order and Mortality: A Population-based Cohort Study.
Stockholm Research Reports in Demography, 2013:14.

Bernstein I. M., J. A. Mongeon, G. J. Badger, L. Solomon, S. H. Heil, S. T. Higgins (2005)
“Maternal smoking and its association with birth weight”. Obstetrics and gynecology, Vol
106(5):986-91.

Bevier, M., Weires, M., Thomsen, H., Sundquist, J., & Hemminki, K. (2011). Influence of family
size and birth order on risk of cancer: A population-based study. BMC Cancer, 11.

Bjerkedal, T., P. Kristensen, G. A. Skjeret, and J. I. Brevik (2007). “Intelligence test scores and
birth order among young Norwegian men (conscripts) analyzed within and between families”,
Intelligence.

Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes (2005). “The More the Merrier? The
Effects of Family Size and Birth Order on Children’s Education,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, CXX (2005), 669-700.

Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes, (2007). “From the Cradle to the Labor
Market? The Effect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
122(1), 409-439.

Black S.E., Devereux P.J. and K.G. Salvanes (2011). “Older and Wiser? Birth Order and IQ of
Young Men”, CESifo Economic Studies, 1:103–120.

Black, Sandra E., Erik Gronqvist, and Bjorn Ockert (2015). “Born to Be A Leader? The Effect of
Birth Order on Non-Cognitive Skills,” unpublished working paper.

Booth, A. L. and Kee, H. J. (2008). “Birth order matters: the effect of family size and birth order
on educational attainment”, Journal of Population Economics, 22: 367-397.

Bu, Feifei (2014). “Sibling Configurations, educational aspiration and attainment.” ISER
Working Paper 2014-11.

Buckles K. and Shawna Kolka (2014). “Prenatal Investments, Breastfeeding, and Birth Order”.
Social Science & Medicine. 118: 66-70. October 2014.

Corder, R., W. Mullen, N. Q. Khan, S. C. Marks, E. G. Wood, M. J. Carrier and A. Crozier.
2006. “Oenology: Red wine procyanidins and vascular health” Nature 444, 566 (30).



                                                                                                      21
Cutler, David M., and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2010. “Understanding Differences in Health
Behaviors by Education.” Journal of Health Economics, 29:1–28.

De Haan, Monique, Erik Plug,and José Rosero. 2014. Birth Order and Human Capital
Development: Evidence from Ecuador. Journal of Human Resources, March, 49:359-392.

Hatton, T.J., and R.M. Martin. 2010. “The Effects on Stature of Poverty, Family Size, and Birth
Order: British Children in the 1930s.” Oxford Economic Papers-New Series 62 (1): 157–184.

Hao, L., V.J. Hotz & G.Z. Jin (2008) “Games that Parents and Adolescents Play: Risky
Behavior, Parental Reputation and Strategic Transfers,” Economic Journal, 118(528):
515-555.

Hemminki, K., & Mutanen, P. (2001). Birth order, family size, and the risk of cancer in young
and middle-aged adults. British Journal of Cancer, 84, 1466–1471.

Hotz V. J. and J. Pantano (2013), “Strategic Parenting, Birth Order and School Performance”,
NBER Working Paper No. 19542.

Howe, Laura D., Pedro C. Hallal, Alicia Matijasevich, Jonathan C. Wells, Iná S. Santos, Aluísio
JD Barros, Debbie A. Lawlor, Cesar G. Victora, and George Davey Smith. "The association of
birth order with later body mass index and blood pressure: a comparison between prospective
cohort studies from the United Kingdom and Brazil." International Journal of Obesity 38, no. 7
(2014): 973-979.

Jacobsen B.K., I. Stensvold, K. Fylkesnes, I. S. Kristiansen, G. S. Thelle. 1992. “The Nordland
health study”, Scandinavian Journal of Social Medicine, 20 (3): 184-7.

Jelenkovic A, Silventoinen K, Tynelius P, Myrskyla M, Rasmussen F. Association of birth
order with cardiovascular disease risk factors in young adulthood: a study of one million Swedish
men. PLoS One 2013; 8.

Juntunen, K.S.T., E.J.J. Laara, and A.J.I. Kauppila (1997). “Grand Grand Multiparity and Birth
Weight.” Obstet. Gynecol. 90, 495-499.

Kantarevic, J, S. Mechoulan (2006). “Birth order, educational attainment, and earnings: An
investigation using the PSID”. Journal of Human Resources, 41 (4) (2006), pp. 755–777.

Lehmann, J. K., A. Nuevo-Chiquero, M. Vidal-Fernández (2014). The Early Origins of Birth
Order Differences in Children’s Outcomes and Parental Behavior, mimeo.

Lundborg P., H. Ralsmark and D.-O. Rooth (2014). “The More the Sicker? Health, Family Size,
and Birth Order”. memo, Lund University.

Modin, B. (2002). “Birth order and mortality: a life-long follow-up of 14,200 boys and girls born
in early 20th century Sweden". Social Science & Medicine. 54(7): 1051-1064.

Monfardini, C. and See, Sarah G. (2012). "Birth Order and Child Outcomes: Does Maternal
Quality Time Matter?," IZA Discussion Papers 6825.
                                                                                                22
Nystad W., H. E. Meyer, P. Nafstad, A.Tverdal, A. Engeland. 2004. “Body mass index in relation
to adult asthma among 135,000 Norwegian men and women.”American Journal of Epidemiology,
160(10) :969-76.

Ohfuji, S., Miyake, Y. Arakawa, M., Tanaka, K. and Sasaki S. (2009) Sibship size and
prevalence of allergic disorders in Japan: The Ryukyus Child Health Study. Pediatric Allergy and
Immunolgy, 20, pp. 377-384.

Price, J. (2008): “Parent-Child Quality Time: Does Birth Order Matter?" Journal of Human
Resources, 43(1), 26.

Rees, D. I., E. Lopez, S. L. Averett, and L. M. Argys (2008). “Birth order and participation in
school sports and other extracurricular activities” Economics of Education Review 27(3) (JUN):
354-62.

Richiardi, L., O. Akre, M. Lambe, F. Granath, Scott M. Montgomery, and Anders Ekbom (2004).
“Birth Order, Sibship Size, and Risk for Germ-Cell Testicular Cancer”, Epidemiology, Vol.
15(3): 323-329

M. Rostila, J. Saarela, I. Kawachi (2014). Birth order and suicide in adulthood: evidence from
Swedish population data. Am. J. Epidemiol. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwu090

Rubin, David H., John M. Leventhal, Peter A. Kraisilnikov, Birgitte Weile and Arne Berget
(1986). “Effects of passive smoking on birth weight”, The Lancet, Vol 328: 415PERLI

Søgaard, A. J. 2006. “Cohort Norway (CONOR). Materials and methods.” memo, Norwegian
Institute of Public Health.

Søgaard, A. J., R. Selmer, E. Bjertnes, G. D. Thelle. (2003). “The Oslo Health Study. The impact
of Self-selection in a Large, Populations-based Survey.” 2003. International Journal of Equity in
Health, 3(3): 3-13.

Søgaard, A. J., I. Bjelland, G. S. Thelle, and E. Røysamb (2003). “A comparison of the CONOR
Mental Health Index to the HSCL-10 and HADS Measuring mental health status in The Oslo
Health Study and the Nord-Trøndelag Health Study.” Norsk Epidemiologi, 13(2): 279-284.

Sulloway, F. J. (1996). Born to rebel: Birth order, family dynamics, and creative lives. New
York: Pantheon.

Wells JC, Hallal PC, Reichert FF, Dumith SC, Menezes AM, Victora CG. (2011).
Associations of birth order with early growth and adolescent height, body composition, and blood
pressure: prospective birth cohort from Brazil. Am J Epidemiol; 174: 1028–1035.

Wilcox, M.A., A. M. Z. Chang, A.M.Z., and I. R. Johnson (1996). The Effects of Parity on Birth
Weight Using Successive Pregnancies. Acta Obstet. Gynecol. Scand. 75, 459-463.

Zweigenhaft, R. L. and Von Ammon, J. (2000). “Birth order and civil disobedience: A test of
Sulloway’s ‘born to rebel’ hypothesis". The Journal of social psychology, 140(5):624–627.
                                                                                                 23
                                   Table 1: Birth Order and Health Outcomes
    OLS
                        (1)                    (2)                  (3)                (4)             (5)              (6)
                    High Blood                High                 High               Height          High             Obese
                     Pressure              Cholesterol         Triglycerides                          BMI
2nd Child            -0.033***               -0.003              -0.017***           -0.118***      -0.044***        -0.022***
                      (0.002)               (0.002)               (0.002)             (0.033)        (0.003)          (0.002)

3rd Child             -0.048***               -0.005              -0.020***          -0.214***      -0.063***        -0.031***
                       (0.004)               (0.004)               (0.004)            (0.057)        (0.005)          (0.003)

4th Child             -0.055***              -0.015**             -0.024***          -0.263***      -0.064***        -0.034***
                       (0.006)                (0.006)              (0.006)            (0.088)        (0.007)          (0.004)

5th Child             -0.069***               -0.018              -0.040***          -0.366**       -0.091***        -0.040***
                       (0.010)               (0.011)               (0.010)            (0.154)        (0.012)          (0.008)

2 siblings            -0.010***               0.001                -0.004**            -0.053       -0.007***        -0.006***
                       (0.002)               (0.002)                (0.002)           (0.033)        (0.002)          (0.001)

3 siblings            -0.017***               0.002               -0.009***          -0.251***      -0.009***        -0.005***
                       (0.003)               (0.003)               (0.002)            (0.041)        (0.003)          (0.002)

4 siblings            -0.017***              0.007**              -0.010***          -0.524***        0.001          -0.007***
                       (0.003)               (0.004)               (0.003)            (0.056)        (0.004)          (0.002)
N                      279624                278918                278911             279840         279706           279706

    Mother Fixed Effects
                   (1)                        (2)                    (3)                 (4)             (5)                (6)
               High Blood                    High                   High                Height          High               Obese
                Pressure                  Cholesterol           Triglycerides                           BMI
2nd Child       -0.030***                   -0.002                -0.016***           -0.198***       -0.038***       -0.023***
                 (0.004)                   (0.004)                 (0.004)             (0.042)         (0.004)         (0.003)

3rd Child            -0.046***                -0.000               -0.018***          -0.385***       -0.061***       -0.034***
                      (0.007)                (0.007)                (0.006)            (0.075)         (0.008)         (0.005)

4th Child            -0.054***                -0.013                -0.018*           -0.535***       -0.064***       -0.041***
                      (0.010)                (0.010)                (0.010)            (0.114)         (0.012)         (0.007)

5th Child            -0.072***                -0.021                 -0.011           -0.769***       -0.100***       -0.050***
                      (0.016)                (0.017)                (0.016)            (0.183)         (0.019)         (0.011)
N                     279624                 278918                 278911             279840          279706          279706
    Standard errors in parentheses allow for correlation of errors within family. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
    Each column represents a separate regression. The OLS control variables include indicators for gender, year-of-
    birth, test year, survey, age of mother at birth, and age of mother at first birth. The FE control variables include
    indicators for gender, year-of-birth, test year, and survey. The omitted birth category is first child. In the OLS
    regressions, the omitted family size category is one sibling.



                                                                                                                            24
                                      Table 2: Birth Order and Health Behaviors
       OLS
                          (1)                        (2)                      (3)                    (4)               (5)
                    Number Cigarettes           Daily Smoker             Number of                Heavy           Weekly Exercise
                         Daily                                        drinks in 2 weeks           Drinker
2nd Child              0.516***                    0.038***                -0.084*                 -0.001                0.001
                        (0.042)                    (0.003)                 (0.050)                (0.001)               (0.004)

3rd Child                 0.711***                 0.053***                  -0.069                -0.000                -0.004
                          (0.070)                  (0.005)                  (0.077)               (0.002)               (0.006)

4th Child                 0.788***                 0.054***                  -0.116                0.000                 -0.008
                          (0.107)                  (0.007)                  (0.112)               (0.002)               (0.009)

5th Child                 0.910***                 0.071***                  0.077                0.009**                -0.002
                          (0.186)                  (0.012)                  (0.190)               (0.005)               (0.016)

2 siblings                -0.163***                -0.010***               -0.279***             -0.003***               0.005
                           (0.038)                  (0.002)                 (0.044)               (0.001)               (0.003)

3 siblings                -0.169***                -0.010***               -0.576***             -0.006***               -0.006

                           (0.047)                  (0.003)                 (0.052)               (0.001)               (0.004)

4 siblings                 -0.071                    -0.001                -0.940***             -0.010***               -0.002

                           (0.063)                  (0.004)                 (0.063)               (0.001)               (0.005)
N                          277706                   278764                  129353                129353                144444

       Mother Fixed Effects
                       (1)                         (2)                 (3)                        (4)               (5)
               Number Cigarettes                 Daily         Number of drinks in 2            Heavy             Weekly
                     Daily                      Smoker               weeks                      Drinker           Exercise
2nd Child           0.560***                    0.049***            -0.207*                     -0.002             0.012

                          (0.065)               (0.004)                 (0.113)                  (0.003)           (0.009)

3rd Child                0.976***               0.084***                 -0.224                   -0.005            0.026
                         (0.116)                (0.008)                 (0.208)                  (0.005)           (0.017)

4th Child                1.177***               0.100***                 -0.180                   -0.001            0.021
                         (0.177)                (0.012)                 (0.321)                  (0.007)           (0.025)

5th Child                1.585***               0.134***                 0.104                    0.001             0.043
                         (0.284)                (0.019)                 (0.505)                  (0.012)           (0.040)
N                        277706                 278764                  129353                   129353            144444
       Standard errors in parentheses allow for correlation of errors within family. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
       Each column represents a separate regression. The OLS control variables include indicators for gender, year-of-
       birth, test year, survey, age of mother at birth, and age of mother at first birth. The FE control variables include
       indicators for gender, year-of-birth, test year, and survey. The omitted birth category is first child. In the OLS
       regressions, the omitted family size category is one sibling.
                                                                                                                              25
               Table 3: Birth Order and Self-reported Physical and Mental Health
OLS
                       (1)                         (2)                              (3)                       (4)
                   Good Health             Mental Illness Index              Bad Mental Health              Happy
2nd Child           -0.013***                   0.012***                         0.010***                  -0.014***
                     (0.003)                    (0.003)                           (0.003)                   (0.003)

3rd Child             -0.021***                    0.019***                         0.017***               -0.017***
                       (0.004)                     (0.005)                          (0.005)                 (0.005)

4th Child             -0.025***                    0.025***                         0.021***               -0.036***
                       (0.007)                     (0.008)                          (0.008)                 (0.008)

5th Child             -0.033***                     0.020                            0.020                 -0.042***
                       (0.012)                     (0.014)                          (0.014)                 (0.014)

2 siblings            0.008***                      -0.005                           -0.005                  0.004
                      (0.002)                      (0.003)                          (0.003)                 (0.003)

3 siblings              0.003                       -0.002                           -0.003                  0.006
                       (0.003)                     (0.004)                          (0.003)                 (0.004)

4 siblings              0.001                       -0.006                           -0.002                  0.006
                       (0.004)                     (0.005)                          (0.005)                 (0.005)
N                      151247                      147296                           140957                  142160

Mother Fixed Effects
                   (1)                             (2)                               (3)                       (4)
             Good Health                   Mental Illness Index               Bad Mental Health              Happy
2nd Child       -0.014**                        0.019**                            0.013*                   -0.022***
                 (0.006)                        (0.007)                            (0.007)                   (0.008)

3rd Child              -0.018                      0.028**                           0.024*                 -0.028**
                      (0.011)                      (0.013)                           (0.014)                 (0.014)

4th Child              -0.010                      0.050**                            0.028                 -0.056***
                      (0.017)                      (0.020)                           (0.021)                 (0.021)

5th Child              -0.029                      0.074**                           0.076**                -0.076**
                      (0.026)                      (0.031)                           (0.032)                 (0.033)
N                     151247                       147296                            140957                 142160
Standard errors in parentheses allow for correlation of errors within family. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
Each column represents a separate regression. The OLS control variables include indicators for gender, year-of-
birth, test year, survey, age of mother at birth, and age of mother at first birth. The FE control variables include
indicators for gender, year-of-birth, test year, and survey. The omitted birth category is first child. In the OLS
regressions, the omitted family size category is one sibling.
Mental Health Index: Respondents are asked separate questions about how irritable, lonely, nervous, anxious, calm,
or depressed they were during the last two weeks. They were asked “Did you feel #### during the last two weeks?”
and the possible answers were {no, a little, a lot, very much}. For irritable, lonely, nervous, anxious, and depressed,
we code the answers as {1, 2, 3, 4} respectively. For calm, we code the answers as {4, 3, 2, 1}. Then we construct
the index by taking the average of the six numbers for each person.
                                                                                                                     26
                                Table 4: Birth Order of Child and Smoking during Pregnancy
            OLS
                      (1)                 (2)                (3)                  (4)                (5)                (6)
                  Smoke at start        Smoke at         Number of            Number of             Stop            Change in
                                          end           Cigarettes at        Cigarettes at         during           number of
                                                            start                 end            Pregnancy          cigarettes
2nd Child             -0.030***          0.006***         -0.373***            0.039***           -0.133***          0.389***
                       (0.001)           (0.001)           (0.015)              (0.010)            (0.006)            (0.013)

3rd Child             -0.029***          0.021***          -0.365***            0.143***           -0.222***          0.459***
                       (0.002)           (0.002)            (0.029)             (0.019)             (0.011)           (0.023)

4th Child             -0.029***          0.034***          -0.371***            0.230***           -0.289***          0.522***
                       (0.004)           (0.004)            (0.047)             (0.032)             (0.018)           (0.039)

5th Child             -0.018***          0.048***          -0.326***            0.283***           -0.332***          0.511***
                       (0.007)           (0.007)            (0.084)             (0.060)             (0.032)           (0.067)

2 siblings            -0.037***          -0.031***         -0.340***            -0.200***          0.028***           0.158***
                       (0.002)            (0.002)           (0.019)              (0.014)           (0.007)            (0.013)

3 siblings            -0.048***          -0.040***         -0.387***            -0.217***           0.028**           0.205***
                       (0.004)            (0.003)           (0.039)              (0.029)            (0.013)           (0.026)

4 siblings            -0.057***          -0.049***         -0.382***            -0.169**             0.037            0.298***
                       (0.007)            (0.006)           (0.075)              (0.064)            (0.024)           (0.040)
N                      328399             312332            326100              310431               42069            306871

            Mother Fixed Effects
                    (1)         (2)                      (3)                   (4)                 (5)                 (6)
                 Smoke at     Smoke                 Number of              Number of              Stop             Change in
                   start      at end                Cigarettes at          Cigarettes at         during            number of
                                                        start                  end             Pregnancy           cigarettes
2nd Child           -0.035***       0.004***         -0.448***               0.020*             -0.034***           0.453***
                     (0.002)        (0.001)           (0.019)                (0.011)             (0.010)            (0.019)

3rd Child           -0.041***       0.018***          -0.553***              0.090***           -0.075***            0.600***
                     (0.003)        (0.003)            (0.037)               (0.022)             (0.018)             (0.037)

4th Child           -0.048***       0.027***          -0.654***              0.138***           -0.111***            0.711***
                     (0.005)        (0.004)            (0.057)               (0.034)             (0.028)             (0.057)

5th Child           -0.046***       0.041***          -0.760***              0.159***           -0.162***            0.777***
                     (0.009)        (0.007)            (0.096)               (0.057)             (0.046)             (0.095)
N                    328399         312332             326100                310431               42069              306871
            Standard errors in parentheses allow for correlation of errors within family. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
            Each column represents a separate regression. The OLS control variables include indicators for gender, year-of-
            birth, age of mother at birth, and age of mother at first birth. The FE control variables include indicators for gender
            and year-of-birth. The omitted birth category is first child. In the OLS regressions, the omitted family size category is
            one sibling.


                                                                                                                                 27
                          Table 5: Birth Order and Breastfeeding
OLS
                     (1)                 (2)                  (3)                (4)
               Months Breastfed    Months Breastfed    Breastfed for 6+   Breastfed for 6+
                                                           months             months
2nd Child          -0.256***           -0.334***            -0.002            -0.010*
                    (0.058)             (0.058)            (0.006)            (0.006)

3rd Child          -0.241**            -0.344***            -0.013            -0.023**
                    (0.114)             (0.114)            (0.010)             (0.010)

4th Child          -0.538***           -0.660***          -0.048***          -0.060***
                    (0.192)             (0.191)            (0.016)            (0.016)

5th Child          -0.941**            -1.067***           -0.060**           -0.072**
                    (0.374)             (0.372)             (0.028)            (0.028)

2 siblings         0.596***             0.587***           0.054***           0.053***
                   (0.064)              (0.064)            (0.006)            (0.006)

3 siblings         1.147***             1.149***           0.090***           0.090***
                   (0.109)              (0.109)            (0.010)            (0.010)

4 siblings         1.088***             1.091***           0.058***           0.058***
                   (0.240)              (0.240)            (0.021)            (0.021)

Birth Weight                            0.597***                              0.060***
                                        (0.053)                               (0.005)
N                      42443             42443             42443               42443

Mother Fixed Effects
                     (1)                 (2)                 (3)                 (4)
               Months Breastfed    Months Breastfed    Breastfed for 6+   Breastfed for 6+
                                                           months             months
2nd Child          -0.255***           -0.335***            0.003              -0.005
                    (0.053)             (0.054)            (0.005)            (0.005)

3rd Child          -0.240**            -0.351***            -0.014           -0.026***
                    (0.098)             (0.098)            (0.010)            (0.010)

4th Child          -0.478***           -0.611***          -0.055***          -0.068***
                    (0.155)             (0.155)            (0.015)            (0.015)

5th Child          -1.068***           -1.217***          -0.100***          -0.115***
                    (0.270)             (0.270)            (0.027)            (0.027)

Birth Weight                            0.584***                              0.060***
                                        (0.052)                               (0.005)
N                      42443             42443             42443               42443
                                                                                         28
Standard errors in parentheses allow for correlation of errors within family. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
Each column represents a separate regression. The OLS control variables include indicators for gender, year-of-
birth, test year, survey, age of mother at birth, and age of mother at first birth. The FE control variables include
indicators for gender, year-of-birth, test year, and survey. The omitted birth category is first child. In the OLS
regressions, the omitted family size category is one sibling.




                                                                                                                       29
                                    Appendix Table 1
                            Summary Statistics for Health Sample

                                       No. of    Mean       Standard     Min       Max
                                 Observations              Deviation
High Blood Pressure                   279624      0.24          0.43     0.00      1.00
High Cholesterol                      278918      0.26          0.44     0.00      1.00
High Triglycerides                    278911      0.22          0.41     0.00      1.00
Height                                279840    172.75          8.96   115.00    212.00
High BMI                              279706      0.47          0.50     0.00      1.00
Obese                                 279706      0.10          0.30     0.00      1.00
Number of Cigarettes per              277706      5.05          7.55     0.00     80.00
day
Daily Smoker                          278764      0.38          0.49     0.00      1.00
Number of Alcoholic                   129353      4.73          6.12     0.00    206.00
Drinks in last two weeks
Heavy Drinker                         129353    0.02            0.13      0.00      1.00
Exercise each week                    144444    0.42            0.49      0.00      1.00
Good Health                           151247    0.85            0.36      0.00      1.00
Happy                                 142160    0.77            0.42      0.00      1.00
Mental Illness Index                  147296    1.41            0.42      1.00      4.00
Bad Mental Health                     140957    0.21            0.41      0.00      1.00
Female                                280245    0.50            0.50      0.00      1.00
Age                                   280245   41.72            2.43    35.00     60.00
Year of Birth                         280245 1952.80            3.71     1940      1960
Mother’s age at birth                 280245   28.94            5.93    16.00     49.00
Mother’s age at 1st birth             280245   25.98            4.75    16.00     45.00
Survey year                           280245 1994.60            3.39     1988      2003
CONOR Sample                          280245    0.17            0.38      0.00      1.00
1st child                             280245    0.44            0.50      0.00      1.00
2nd child                             280245    0.38            0.49      0.00      1.00
3rd child                             280245    0.14            0.34      0.00      1.00
4th child                             280245    0.04            0.19      0.00      1.00
5th child                             280245    0.01            0.09      0.00      1.00
1 sibling                             280245    0.37            0.48      0.00      1.00
2 siblings                            280245    0.33            0.47      0.00      1.00
3 siblings                            280245    0.20            0.40      0.00      1.00
4 siblings                            280245    0.10            0.30      0.00      1.00




                                                                                           30
                                        Appendix Table 2

                              Summary Statistics for Smoking Sample
                                        No. of        Mean     Standard     Min     Max
                                  Observations                Deviation
Smoke at start of                      328399          0.14        0.34    0.00     1.00
pregnancy
Smoke at end of                         312332         0.09        0.29    0.00     1.00
pregnancy
Cigarettes per day at start             326100         1.21        3.68    0.00    83.00
of pregnancy
Cigarettes per day at end               310431         0.62        2.40    0.00    75.00
of pregnancy
Stop smoking during                       42069        0.37        0.48    0.00     1.00
pregnancy
Change in number of                     306871        -0.59        2.61   -51.00   65.00
cigarettes per day during
pregnancy
Female                                  397295        0.49         0.50     0.00     1.00
Year of Birth                           397295     2004.13         2.98    1999     2009
Mother’s age at birth                   397295       29.17         4.78   16.00    49.00
Mother’s age at 1st birth               397295       26.60         4.60   16.00    45.00
1st child                               397295        0.35         0.48     0.00     1.00
2nd child                               397295        0.45         0.50     0.00     1.00
3rd child                               397295        0.15         0.36     0.00     1.00
4th child                               397295        0.04         0.19     0.00     1.00
5th child                               397295        0.01         0.10     0.00     1.00
1 sibling                               397295        0.62         0.49     0.00     1.00
2 siblings                              397295        0.29         0.45     0.00     1.00
3 siblings                              397295        0.07         0.26     0.00     1.00
4 siblings                              397295        0.02         0.14     0.00     1.00




                                                                                            31
                                  Appendix Table 3
                       Summary Statistics for Breastfeeding Sample

                                 No. of       Mean        Standard    Min     Max
                           Observations                  Deviation
Months Breastfed                 42425         7.27           5.10    0.00    30.00
Breastfed for 6                  42425         0.61           0.49    0.00     1.00
months or more
Female                           42425         0.49           0.50     0.00    1.00
Year of Birth                    42425      1981.94           6.59    1967     2002
Mother’s age at                  42425        27.24           5.39   16.00    46.00
birth
Mother’s age at 1st              42425        23.78           4.31   16.00    45.00
birth
Survey year                      42425      1997.99           2.21   1994     2002
1st child                        42425         0.39           0.49    0.00    1.00
2nd child                        42425         0.39           0.49    0.00    1.00
3rd child                        42425         0.17           0.38    0.00    1.00
4th child                        42425         0.04           0.20    0.00    1.00
5th child                        42425         0.01           0.08    0.00    1.00
1 sibling                        42425         0.44           0.50    0.00    1.00
2 siblings                       42425         0.40           0.49    0.00    1.00
3 siblings                       42425         0.13           0.34    0.00    1.00
4 siblings                       42425         0.03           0.18    0.00    1.00
Birth Weight (kilos)             42425         3.55           0.54    0.01    6.01




                                                                                      32
