NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE PRIVATE NET BENEFITS OF RESIDENTIAL SOLAR PV:
THE ROLE OF ELECTRICITY TARIFFS, TAX INCENTIVES AND REBATES
Severin Borenstein
Working Paper 21342
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21342

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2015

I am indebted to Karen Notsund for many conversations and valuable insights on this research. For
excellent research assistance, I am grateful to Patrick Baylis and Walter Graf. For helpful comments,
I also thank Joe Aldy, Susan Buller, Estelle Cantillon, Lucas Davis, Don Fullerton, Ken Gillingham,
Koichiro Ito, Shayle Kann, Billy Pizer, Glenn Sheriff, Bob Weisenmiller, participants in the 2014
Toulouse School of Economics TIGER conference and the 2015 POWER conference, and seminar
participants at Duke University and Resources for the Future. I thank Pacific Gas & Electric for access
to the data that made this project possible. PG&E contributed no financial support to this study and
had no editorial control over the result. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Severin Borenstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Private Net Benefits of Residential Solar PV: The Role of Electricity Tariffs, Tax Incentives
and Rebates
Severin Borenstein
NBER Working Paper No. 21342
July 2015
JEL No. L94,Q42,Q52,Q58
ABSTRACT
With dramatic declines in the cost of solar PV technology over the last 5 years, the electricity industry
is in the midst of discussions about whether to use this low-polluting renewable energy source in grid-scale
generation or in distributed generation (DG), mostly with rooftop solar PV. California has led the
growth in DG solar in the U.S. I use 2007 to early 2014 residential data from Pacific Gas & Electric
– the utility with largest number of residential solar customers in the U.S. – to examine the full range
of private incentives for installing residential solar, from the direct payments and tax credits to the
indirect incentives that result from the residential tariff design and the crediting of solar production
under “net energy metering.” I then study the income distribution of solar adopters and how that has
changed over time. I find the skew to wealthy households adopting solar is still significant, but has
lessened since 2011. Adoption continues to be dominated by the heaviest electricity-consuming households,
probably because the steeply-tiered tariff structure greatly increases the private value of solar to such
customers while reducing the incentive for consumers who are below median consumption. In fact,
the financial incentive for those who adopt solar over the sample period may have been due nearly
as much to California's tiered tariff structure as to the 30% federal tax credit. The California experience
suggests that rate design can greatly influence the economic incentives for residential solar adoption
and which customers receive those benefits.

Severin Borenstein
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
severinborenstein@berkeley.edu

I. Introduction
Solar PV is at the center of a policy and vision debate over the future of electricity
generation. As solar panel costs have declined precipitously over the last 5 years, a new
battle has begun over the most effective way to deploy the technology, in grid-scale solar
farms or in smaller scale on customer rooftops. On a direct cost basis, PV farms seem
to have a substantial cost advantage, but distributed generation (DG) advocates argue
that distributed capacity – whether solar, small wind, fuel cell, or electricity storage –
has special qualities that make it more valuable.2 New York state is in the midst of an
initiative entitled “Reforming the Energy Vision” (REV) with one goal of wider deployment
of distributed resources.3
About half of all U.S. residential solar PV systems are in California, which is often looked
to as the model state for solar PV policies and adoption. The California Solar Initiative
(CSI) – a state subsidy that ran from 2007 to 2013 – along with federal tax policies and
the state’s sunny climate often receive credit for the massive expansion of solar over the
last decade, but there has also been recognition that high electricity rates combined with
favorable net metering policies have played a significant role. Residential electricity rates in
California are relatively high on average, and are designed to charge heavy electricity users
much higher marginal rates than smaller consumers, using what is known as increasingblock pricing (IBP), inclining-block pricing or tiered pricing. Accordingly, for high-usage
households, the incentive to install residential solar is greatly increased.
In this paper, I examine the range of incentives that have helped to promote residential
solar in California. It is not difficult to account for the rebates available under the California Solar Initiative and fairly straightforward to calculate the size of the federal tax credit.
However, estimating how much additional incentive comes from the tax advantage of accelerated depreciation that third-party owners can claim requires more careful modeling
of the benefit. And it is more challenging to estimate the additional incentive resulting
from increasing-block pricing and the net metering policies that most states, including
California, have adopted. I attempt to value these incentives and examine how important
their role may have been in supporting California’s DG solar leadership.
I then use census data and a statistical matching procedure from Borenstein (2012a) to

2

I focus here on the private returns to installing residential solar PV. For discussion of the social value,
see Baker et al. (2013) and Borenstein (2012a).

3

See http://www3.dps.ny.gov/W/PSCWeb.nsf/All/26BE8A93967E604785257CC40066B91A?OpenDocument

1

estimate the income of residential customers installing PV and examine how the incentives
have varied across households of different income brackets. As expected, I find that customers installing PV are disproportionately wealthy. The analysis, however, suggests that
the concentration of PV adoption among the highest income brackets has been declining in
the last few years. I also find that lower-income customers, who consume less on average,
tend to install larger systems relative to their annual consumption. This causes the savings
per kilowatt-hour (kWh) produced to be smaller for low-income customers because their
systems are, on average, displacing electricity from a lower tier of the increasing-block
pricing. Surprisingly, I find no support for the assertion that third-party ownership (TPO)
– contracts under which a company owns the panels on a customer’s roof and either leases
them to the homeowner or sells the homeowner the electricity from them – has disproportionately been utilized by low-income customers who adopt solar. Customers from the
lower income brackets are estimated to be slightly less likely to make use of TPOs than
wealthier customers.
For the systems installed under the California Solar Initiative, there are also data on
the price paid for the system. I use these data to analyze how price varies with attributes
of the buyer. Controlling for system size and year of installation, I find that smaller users
and poorer households – customers who likely have a lower willingness to pay – pay lower
prices for solar systems.
The analysis suggests that the average solar adopter since 2010 was likely to save money
(in net present value) over the life of the system, provided electricity tariffs remain unchanged in real terms. In fact, even if the increasing-block pricing were replaced with
a flat-rate tariff, I estimate that by 2013 solar prices were low enough that the average
system installed produced net savings so long as net metering policies and the federal tax
credit were maintained. If, however, electricity prices reflected more closely the long-run
marginal cost of generating with efficient gas-fired generation – including a robust price on
greenhouse gas emissions – the analysis suggests that DG solar would have a private cost
disadvantage, even with continuation of the federal tax credit.
This experience of the utility with the largest number of solar PV installations in the
U.S. makes clear that rate design can play a central role in establishing economic incentives
for residential PV adoption. The level and structure of retail rates drive both the rate of
adoption and the distribution of adoption and benefits across households of different income
levels.
In section II, I introduce the public and confidential data sources used in the analysis.
Section III presents the major incentives available to solar PV adopters (and their third2

party providers) in California over the 2007 to early 2014 period I study. In section IV,
I implement the estimation of customer income bracket and explain why it is likely to be
an improvement over previous approaches to this question. Section V presents estimates
of the private net benefits that solar adopting households received and how they varied
across the income brackets. I conclude in section VI.
II. Data Sources
The primary data sources used in this analysis are a public dataset from the California
Solar Initiative4 and confidential billing data obtained from Pacific Gas & Electric under
a non-disclosure agreement. For those systems that received rebates under the CSI, I
match these data (based on the CSI application number), which then indicates a solar PV
customer’s consumption before and after PV installation along with detailed data on the
PV installation and the census block group (CBG) of the customer.5
Unfortunately, not all new solar PV installations in PG&E territory are in the CSI
database. In 2007, many of the solar systems that interconnected were covered under
earlier programs for which comparable data are not available. In 2012, the CSI rebate
dropped to very low levels and then, during 2013, disappeared entirely. As a result, most
recent solar adopters have not filed with the CSI and submitted the CSI data. Even in peak
years, only about 80% of new systems installed by PG&E residential customers appear in
the CSI as PG&E administered systems.6 The billing data I have indicate the date of the
customer’s PV system interconnection and size of their system, but no information on cost
or incentives received. So, some calculations have to be adjusted to make use of the most
informative data, as described below. I discuss the robustness of conclusions to alternative
data screening.
As of November 2014, there were about 70,112 systems in the CSI database under PG&E
administration, of which 58,460 were completed under the Expected Performance-Based
Buydown (EPBB) program that pays an upfront rebate and 1484 were under the PBI
program that pays a per-kWh rebate for production in the first 5 years. I do not analyze
4

Available at http://californiasolarstatistics.ca.gov/current data files/

5

A CBG includes an average of about 600 houses.

6

New homes were covered under a separate program, the New Solar Homes Partnership. A small number
(under 2000) of low-income households received rebates under a program administered by Grid Alternatives. As discussed later, homes that were not in the CSI during the years the CSI was available appear
to have installed much smaller systems. It is possible that the paperwork costs were greater than the
rebate value for some customers.

3

the incentives received under the Perfomance-Based Incentive (PBI). Of the systems under
EPBB, the CSI database lists about 41,000 as residential and most of the rest as commercial. However, the PG&E data of residential accounts includes many that are listed as
commercial in the CSI database and have them on residential tariffs. I include these in the
analysis. In total, about 48,000 premises appear in both the CSI database and the PG&E
residential solar PV data.
The PG&E data include about 55,000 premises that do not appear in the CSI database
as having CSI-program systems administered by PG&E. For those households, I have only
billing data plus the date of interconnection of the solar system and the size of the system.7
Having a measure of system size for the non-CSI systems allows some calculations of the
incentives the owner could receive, but does not provide sufficient information to know
all incentives or the cost of the system, so those systems are excluded from some of the
analysis.
To focus on households with residential-size systems for which sufficient billing data
exist I exclude any households with less than 0.5kW or more than 20kW solar capacity
and any households with less than 365 days of billing data. I also exclude a small number
of systems that were installed before 2007. This leaves 89,879 households with solar PV
systems, of which 47,164 appear in the CSI database.
Based on U.S. census data, I then construct demographic data on the CBG of the
household including the distribution of income in the CBG.8 As discussed below, I use a
statistical matching approach from Borenstein (2012a) to estimate the income of particular
households within a CBG.
I have 2006 to May 2014 billing data for nearly all new residential solar PV customers
in PG&E territory who had installed solar from 2007 to May 2014. Using these data and
system size, I am able to construct counterfactual consumption levels for each premise and
then estimate the customer’s expected bill change from the solar installation.

7

Size of the system in these cases is the CEC-AC rating that PG&E calculates based on the rated capacity
of the panels and the specifications of the inverter. This rating does not take into account shading,
direction, azimuth or panel efficiency. For about 5000 systems in the CSI, I also received the PG&E
value of CEC-AC rating. From those 5000 overlap systems, the CSI rating – which does account for
these panel productivity factors – averages 91.5% of the CEC-AC rating. So for the systems not in the
CSI, I use an estimated CSI rating equal to the CEC-AC rating multiplied by 0.915.

8

I use 2000 long-form census data, updated to 2007 by GeoLytics. The long-form census was completed
by 1 in 6 households in 2000. Unfortunately, due to budget cuts and political opposition to census data
collection, the long form was not used in 2010.

4

III. Incentives to Install Residential Solar PV
California began encouraging the installation of residential solar PV in the mid-1990s
with direct and indirect subsidies. Through the tax code, the federal government has also
created financial incentives for residential solar. Since 2007, the period I study, households
installing solar PV have been eligible for a wide range of incentives. The most well known
are the capacity-based rebates available under the California Solar Initiative and the federal
tax credit for solar and other renewable energy sources. Somewhat less straightforward is
the value of accelerated depreciation allowed under the federal tax code for solar systems
owned by companies. And most indirect, but potentially important in magnitude, are
incentives that result from the retail rate structure and the way that electricity from
residential PV is treated under that structure.9
Direct Rebates and Tax Credits
Under the California Solar Initiative, customers were eligible for direct cash rebates based
on the amount of PV capacity they installed.10 The CSI programs were administered at
the utility level for the 3 large California investor-owned utilities (IOUs). Within each
utility-territory program, the level of the rebate declined as the total capacity supported
in the territory hit certain capacity milestones. The program began in 2007 with rebates
of $2.50 per watt of capacity and dropped to under $0.50 in 2010 and eventually to zero in
2013.11 Figure 1 shows the rebates per watt of rated capacity received by PG&E customers
over time.
Households installing PV have also been eligible for a 30% federal tax credit on the cost
of the system since 2007. Prior to 2009, however, the credit was capped at $2000 when
taken by an individual. A parallel program for business-owned systems – including systems
placed on residential buildings and then leased to the homeowner or the power then sold
to the homeowner under a power purchase agreement (PPA) – also had a 30% tax credit,
9

It is worth noting that the federal tax credit and accelerated depreciation are also available to grid-scale
solar development projects. In addition, grid-scale projects receive some other financial incentives that
do not apply to residential solar.

10

Less than 1% of residential systems installed under the CSI chose instead to receive subsidies based on
the system’s actual electricity production in the first 5 years of operation (the PBI program).

11

In later years, there were a small number of systems covered under the low-income focused programs:
SASH for single-family structures and MASH for multi-family buildings. I have not yet been able to
reliably match these to the billing data, so these systems – about 1800 over the sample period – are not
included in the analysis that uses CSI data. The SASH dwellings are included in the analysis that uses
all residential installations in PG&E territory.

5

Figure 1: CSI rebates paid under PG&E program over time

but with no cap in any years. From 2009 on, the residential tax credit was changed to
have no cap, putting residential-owned and business-owned systems on an equal footing
for the tax credit. I cannot calculate the federal tax credit for those systems not in the
CSI database, because no data are available on the cost or the ownership of those systems.
Finally, there are three caveats on calculation of the federal tax credit. I am calculating
it based on the cost of the system reported to the CSI. It is possible that this isn’t the cost
reported on tax forms, though there have also been reports of inflated cost reports under
the CSI in order to justify higher tax credits. There are also two possible restrictions on
the federal tax credit for residential installations. First, the credit is non-refundable and,
as of now, cannot be carried forward beyond 2016. So the customer (or TPO) must have
enough tax liability to absorb the credit. Second, the tax credit is subject to the limits
of the Alternative Minimum Tax for individuals. I have no way of calculating the impact
of these restrictions. Overall, my calculation of the federal tax credit incentive probably
overstates its value somewhat, but it is not possible to estimate how much.12
Accelerated Depreciation
The tax treatment of business-owned systems continues to differ from household-owned
in another important way: the use of accelerated depreciation. When an individual homeowner buys a solar PV system she does not pay taxes on the output of the system and she
12

As of this writing, the federal tax credit is scheduled to drop to 10% for businesses and 0% for residential
customers on January 1, 2017.

6

is not allowed to take a tax deduction for depreciation of the system. When a company
owns the system, however, the income it earns leasing the system or selling energy under a
PPA is taxable and the company can claim a tax deduction for depreciation of the system.
In the simplest setting, if the overall operation of the firm generates zero economic profit
and the depreciation that could be claimed exactly matched the economic depreciation,
then these tax treatments would have no net effect on the economic cost to the customer.13
But if deductability is accelerated relative to the true economic depreciation, then this
accelerated depreciation generates a tax advantage relative to ownership by the homeowner. The size of the tax advantage can be modeled based on the allowed depreciation
relative to actual economic depreciation. However, other long-term capital investments are
subject to 20-year depreciation even when they last much longer. Thus, in modeling the
additional incentive effect of the allowed accelerated depreciation, I compare it to 20-year
depreciation.14
Over the entire sample period I study, residential solar PV was eligible for 5-year accelerated depreciation. From 2008 to 2013, however, solar PV was allowed even more
accelerated depreciation through a first-year “bonus” depreciation. In most of this period,
the bonus depreciation was 50%, meaning the firm takes 50% in the first year and depreciates the remaining 50% over years 1 through 5. For systems placed in service after
September 8, 2010 and before January 1, 2012, the bonus was 100%, meaning that the
firm could take the entire cost of a system as an expense in the first year. In the appendix,
I model these implementations of accelerated depreciation under reasonable assumptions
of the real interest rate, the inflation rate, and the form of depreciation. I find that accelerated depreciation is equivalent to a 12.6% to 15.2% reduction in the cost after state
incentives and the federal tax credit.15 The direct beneficiary of the savings is the company
that owns the PV system. The share of the value that flows to the homeowner, however,
depends on the details of the lease or power purchase contract the customer signs. I do
not have reliable information on these contracts.16 I calculate the accelerated depreciation

13

See Auerbach (1982) for an analysis of the economics of accelerated depreciation.

14

This seems appropriate if some investment will be made to produce this electricity and the alternative
technology receives 20-year depreciation.

15

This is broadly consistent with calculations in a leaked 2010 White House memo that estimated a $1.9
billion wind power project would generate $200 billion in tax savings from accelerated depreciation. See
page 8 of the memo, which is at http://abcnews.go.com/Blotter/page?id=12048229.

16

Another advantage of the leasing or power purchase arrangements is that the depreciation is based on
the expected revenues to the firm rather than costs. In itself, this is tax neutral if expected revenues

7

value for only the company-owned systems that are in the CSI database. For systems not
in the CSI, I don’t have the cost data or ownership information for this calculation.
Rate Structure and Net Energy Metering
The most indirect incentives for installing solar PV in California come from the residential rate structure and the way that residential PV is treated within that structure.
IOUs in California – including PG&E – collect virtually all residential customer revenue
through increasing-block pricing, a volumetric charge that increases the marginal price per
kilowatt-hour as the household’s total consumption increases within a billing period. These
residential rates have little or no fixed monthly charge or other non-volumetric charge. As
a result, high-usage electricity consumers face very high marginal prices, which increases
the return to installing PV. Throughout the period studied here, the rate structures had
4 or 5 tiers with lowest-tier prices in the range of $0.12-$0.15 and the highest-tier prices
in the range of $0.28-$0.48. Even the lowest tier price is likely above the average long-run
marginal cost of additional consumption of a residential customer.17 Figure 2 shows the
average rate structure over the sample period for PG&E.
Marginal retail rates well above marginal cost create a particularly potent incentive to
install PV due to another policy known as Net Energy Metering (NEM). NEM, which California adopted in the 1990s, is often described as running the electricity meter backwards
when the solar PV system is producing more electricity than the household is consuming.
In financial terms, it means that the household is selling excess generation at any point in
time back to the utility at the household’s marginal retail electricity rate for the billing
period.
In practice, if a household’s monthly net consumption is positive, then a bill is calculated
for that net consumption using the increasing-block rate schedule the household faces. If
the net consumption is negative, the reverse happens with the negative amount given
a dollar value using the normal rate schedule. Households on NEM are on a 12-month
billing cycle. During their annual billing cycle, the household will pay a small monthly
exactly cover the cost of installation and operation, but there are widespread reports of the revenue
estimates having been inflated in some cases. See Podolefsky (2013). I do not attempt to model the
subsidy impact of this feature of the tax code. I do account for the fact that, despite the 30% tax credit,
the basis for accelerated depreciation is 85% of the full cost, not 70%. This seems to be the result of a
fairly arbitrary decision to reduce the depreciation basis by half of the tax credit.
17

That is, if one evaluated the long-run marginal cost of an additional kilowatt-hour of consumption
allocated proportionally to a customer’s existing consumption in each hour of the year, the average
additional cost per kilowatt-hour would likely be no higher than the lowest tier retail prices. I discuss
this claim at greater length below.

8

Figure 2: Average PG&E increasing block pricing tariff during 2007-2013

bill that reflects only some of the non-usage based costs the utility incurs when serving
the household. At the end of the annual billing cycle, there is a true-up process where
the 12 months of credits and debits for the net electricity consumed are summed. If the
household is a net consumer, it owes the utility for its net consumption.18 If it is a net
exporter of electricity, prior to 2011 it earned zero compensation for the balance, but since
2011 the household is paid an amount based on the average day-ahead wholesale electricity
price between 9am and 5pm. Since 2011, this has been in the range of $0.035 to $0.05
per kilowatt-hour. About 5% of households with PV are net exporters over a 12 month
period. In fact, as discussed below, solar PV systems are often designed to just replace
consumption on the highest tiers of the increasing-block rate schedule.
Considering the impact of NEM is particularly important when one recognizes – as I
discuss in more detail below – that typically more than one-third of the electricity generated
by residential PV systems in California is not used on-site, but instead flows into the grid.19
If that electricity flowing to the grid were compensated at the day-ahead wholesale price,
as is the policy for annual net generation, it would noticeably reduce the benefits of solar
PV.

18

If the customer is on a time-of-use rate, the calculation is more complex. The net payment depends on
when consumption from the grid occurs. The vast majority of solar PV customers are not on time-of-use
rates. The calculations I show assume that all customers are on time-invariant rates.

19

See Darghouth et al (2011).

9

Incidence of Financial Incentives for Residential PV
Although I calculate or estimate the size of each of these incentives, I do not attempt
to evaluate how they are divided between buyers and sellers in the market. The great
dispersion in prices and customization of each solar installation suggests that the market
is unlikely to be well-characterized as perfectly competitive, so estimation of pass-through is
especially difficult. Attempts by Podolefsky (2013), Henwood (2014), and Dong, Wiser and
Rai (2014) come to widely varying conclusions of 17%, 45% and 99% of subsidies accruing
to the buyers, respectively. Due to the complexity of contracts for solar installations,
the incentive to mis-report transaction prices, and the opportunity to include ancillary
construction services for strategic tax reasons, it is hard to know how the benefits of these
financial incentives are actually apportioned. In addition, the residential solar industry is
known for having very high customer acquisition costs, which may dissipate a significant
share of the rents available from these incentives.
IV. The Income Distribution of Households Adopting PV
Direct data on income or wealth of households installing solar PV are not available, but
I do have information that locates each household in a census block group (CBG), an area
that contains about 600 households on average. These data are combined with information
from the 2000 census long form that estimates income distribution in categories that I have
aggregated up to five brackets that correspond roughly to quintiles.20 The annual household income brackets are $0-$20,000, $20,000-$40,000, $40,000-$60,000, $60,000-$100,000,
and above $100,000, in 2000 dollars. This gives the income distribution in the CBG in
which each solar PV system is located.
As Borenstein (2012a) discusses, in doing this sort of matching households to CBGs (or
census tracts), historically nearly all research has associated each household with the median household income in the CBG, but in fact there is substantial income heterogeneity
within CBGs. Borenstein (2012a) develops a method of bounding distributional effects
based on the full income distribution of households in each CBG and then develops a preferred estimate of each household’s income bracket based on the household’s electricity use
and the correlation of rank in electricity usage with rank in income within CBGs. I use
this method to derive a best estimate of each household’s income. To be precise, I derive
20

The 2000 long-form data have been updated to 2007 with additional sampling by GeoLytics. I use the
GeoLytics data for these calclations, but results are changed very little if the original 2000 census data
are used. Unfortunately, the census long form was not funded by Congress for the 2010 census, instead
replaced by the American Community Survey. The ACS has far less survey density, so cannot be used
for this analysis.

10

household income bracket estimates based on the preferred “weighted-rank method” presented in Borenstein (2012a). Within each CBG, this method associates larger electricity
consumers with higher income in expectation. Borenstein (2012a) shows that this is an
accurate assumption and that failure to make the adjustment would on average understate the income of larger consumers and, in this case, would understate the income of
households installing solar PV.21
As always in using household income estimates it is important to recognize that income
is not perfectly correlated with measures closer to public policy concerns, such as wealth
or permanent income. Unfortunately, it is difficult to improve on reported income using
census data.
These are not the first estimates of the distribution of income of households installing
solar PV. Reports produced by the state’s California Solar Initiative22 , by Energy & Environmental Economics (E3) consulting for the California Public Utilities Commission23,
and by PG&E24 have reported income estimates based on median household income at
various areas of aggregation. The CSI report uses 2000 census data at the zip-code level,
which are about 8 times larger than a census block group on average. The E3 study uses
median income at the census tract level, which are about 3-4 times larger than census block
groups. The E3 study uses 2010 census data, but estimates are based on the American
Community Survey, which captures about 3% of all households, as opposed to about 17%
captured by the long form 2000 census. The PG&E study uses 2010 data at the census
block group level. Most importantly, all three studies use median household income of
the area of observation. They do not incorporate information from the distribution of
income and the correlation between usage and income level within an area of observation.
The CSI report suggests a sharp increase from 2007 to 2011 in the share of households in
low-middle income zip codes that installed solar. Over the same period, the E3 study finds
at census tract level a slight decline in the average income of households installing solar.
The PG&E analysis also covers 2007-2011 and finds a slight decline in the share of new
solar installations installed in CBGs with high median household income within PG&E

21

I have also done the analysis, however, using the income bracket from the random-rank method which
makes no such association. The results are directionally the same, but attribute substantially less
capacity to the highest income brackets.

22

California Solar Initiative Annual Program Assessment, June 2012

23

California Net Energy Metering Ratepayer Impacts Evaluation, October 2013

24

Buller, 2013

11

Figure 3: Concentration Curves and Indexes of solar PV adopters by year
territory over that period.
The CSI-program results reported here are not directly comparable to the previous
studies because I do not include the small number of systems on the low-income MASH
and SASH programs. The broader results I present use the much-larger sample of all
homes that interconnected during the sample period whether or not they received rebates
under the CSI. As explained above, over the entire sample period, about half of all systems
I study are included in the CSI. And the results reported here include data through 2013
and for part of 2014. My sample is slightly limited by the need to have sufficient electricity
usage information to apply the within-CBG income matching method described above.
Figure 3 presents estimated concentration curves for the share of total systems installed
for each income category, weighted by system capacity, as well as the the overall distribution
of all households’ incomes in PG&E territory.25 The lefthand panel uses just CSI data
for which the CEC system capacity rating is known (a total of 47,164 observations) from
2007 to 2013, while the righthand panel adds all other systems for which system capacity
is inferred from the CEC-AC rating (89,879 observations) and includes data for the first
5 months of 2014. The concentration indexes for each year – measuring the share of area
below the overall distribution line that is above the solar PV distribution line – are shown on
the right. The concentration of PV in the highest income brackets has clearly declined over
the sample period, with most of the change coming in the last couple years. Calculating the
standard error of the estimated concentration index is complex, but it is straightforward
25

Concentration curves are closely related to Lorenz curves, but rank population on the horizontal axis
by income (or other socio-economic variable) rather than by exposure to the variable on the vertical
axis. For details see Maguire and Sheriff (2011).

12

to calculate the mean income category of households installing PV (weighted by capacity).
In both samples, a constant mean throughout the sample period is strongly rejected.
V. The Private Net Benefits of Installing Solar
I now turn to analyzing the benefits that households received from installing solar PV.
To do this, I estimate all of the subsidies that were available to the household that were
discussed in section III. This is not a complete list of possible subsidies, excluding, for
instance, subsidies to low-income households and subsidies for solar in new homes which
are not identified as PG&E-administered CSI participants. With the current data, I cannot
identify households in these other programs.
I also do not account for the value of renewable energy credits (RECs) that a solar
PV system creates when it is installed. RECs for residential solar PV in California are
of extremely low value, because the California Renewable Portfolio Standard effectively
excludes them from being counted towards meeting the state’s Renewables Portfolio Standard (RPS), and other states have thus far not accepted California residential solar RECs
for their own RPSs, even in cases where in-state residential solar is included in their programs. It appears that RECs from California residential solar are purchased by electricity
retailers as part of “greening up” their portfolios to well above the RPS requirement and by
some companies as part of a decision to consume more renewable energy.26 These RECs
are not traded in a public exchange, but industry media report trades at about $0.001
cents per kWh.27
The incentives that I do estimate are the largest available to the typical residential PV
adopter. For households not identified within the CSI, I also have no information of system
cost or whether the system is third-party owned. Thus, for net benefit measures, I focus on
households identified as having received CSI incentives through the PG&E-administered
branch of the CSI program.
CSI rebates are reported in the CSI data, as are the system prices that determine the
federal tax credit. In 2009 and later years the full 30% credit could be claimed on personal
as well as business tax returns. The CSI rebate is considered a price reduction for tax
credit purposes if the owner is an individual. Therefore, the 30% tax credit applies to the
after-rebate net price paid by the customer. For a company, however, the state rebate is
26

For instance, see Marin Clean Energy’s Integrated Resource Plan, page 4. http://www.mcecleanenergy.org/wp-content/uploads/2014 Integrated Resource Plan.pdf

27

See, for instance, http://www.solarreviews.com/news/common-points-of-confusion-on-california-renewableenergy-credits-(recs)/.

13

generally taxable income, in which case the basis for the 30% credit is then not reduced
by the state rebate. These are equivalent if the business faces a 30% marginal tax rate. I
don’t know the actual tax rate of third-party business owners of residential systems, but
the marginal corporate tax rate for firms above a fairly small size was 35% over this period,
so I ignore this distinction and implicitly assume the 30% marginal tax rate.
The value of accelerated depreciation to a business depends on its cost of capital, the
expected inflation rate, and the true economic depreciation of the solar panels, among
other factors. These are all beyond data availability, so I assume the reasonable parameters discussed in the accelerated depreciation analysis in Appendix A and assume that
accelerated depreciation reduces the effective system cost to businesses by 12.6%-15.2%
depending on the first-year bonus depreciation.
The final incentive I estimate is due to electricity bill savings. This can be characterized
as an incentive because the customer’s private savings is greater than the utility’s cost
reduction when the customer reduces consumption. If that is the case, then to the extent
that the customer’s marginal price exceeds the utility’s marginal cost, a share of the private
savings from installing solar is a rent transfer rather than societal surplus creation. The size
of that gap is, of course, quite controversial. If marginal price does exceed marginal cost,
then net energy metering expands the quantity of electricity on which the rent transfer
would occur.
I calculate the indirect incentive due to NEM and IBP based on the average price
schedule over the sample period.28 I compare the customer’s bill under the IBP schedule to
the amount the same customer would have paid if she had faced a constant flat electricity
tariff that raised the same revenue.29 That average cost pricing would yield a price of
about $0.1905 per kWh, a price that is very likely above long-run marginal cost. So, I also
calculate the economic incentive of the actual rate compared to a flat rate of $0.10 per
kWh, a figure that is a plausible representation of long-run marginal cost, but would need
to be augmented with a significant fixed or other charge in order to be revenue neutral.30
28

I have also done the calculations based on the tariff that was in place on the date the system was placed
in service, but it makes almost no difference in the findings. It does, however, make it more difficult
to examine the year-to-year variation in other aspects of the incentive. For that reason – and the fact
that customers probably did not assume a rate frozen at the exact rate at the time of installation – I
calculate incentives using the average retail rate over the sample period.

29

This assumes no net change in consumption among customers with solar.

30

The best estimates of long-run marginal cost from gas-fired generation is about $0.06/kWh, but DG
solar PV consumed onsite also avoids the 7%-9% of electricity that is dissipated through line losses
as the power flows from generation through transmission and distribution lines to the end user. See

14

Under NEM and IBP, the customer is compensated for PV generation, whether consumed on-site or injected into the grid, at the retail price of electricity. Under PG&E’s
retail rates, the lowest marginal rate is for kWhs up to the baseline quantity, a quantity of
electricity that differs across the 10 climate regions that span PG&E’s territory, but is the
same for all residential customers within each climate region.31 Then there is a somewhat
higher rate for an additional quantity equal to 30% of baseline. Beyond that the rate
jumps substantially for the third tier that covers a quantity equal to 70% of baseline, and
then it jumps again for all consumption beyond 200% of baseline. The exact rate changed
numerous times during the sample period as wholesale electricity prices move, but the basic structure looks like figure 2.32 About half of all customers consume beyond the second
tier.33 Because the marginal rate a customer faces is about 3 times higher on the highest
block than on the lowest block, it is clear that the incentive to install solar PV is much
greater for heavier-use households.
In order to calculate how much the retail rate structure enhances the incentive to install
solar PV, one must also know the customer’s consumption level. I use the confidential
billing data to construct quantity consumed by month of year. I use three different methods, each imperfect in a different way, to estimate the customer bill savings from solar
PV. The first approach uses pre-installation bill data to calculate average household usage
prior to adopting solar PV. The second uses post-installation data and adds back in the
expected production quantity from the solar PV system installed to get total household
electricity consumption (including energy provided by their own solar PV). The solar PV
production quantity comes from a simulation model that accounts for month-of-year and
latitude of the household, and I then adjust for the efficiency rating of the system that was
installed.
Borenstein (2008). Accounting for line losses, the electricity delivered for consumption from conventional
generation has a marginal cost closer to $0.065/kWh. The timing of power from solar PV also boosts
its value, or the cost of alternative sources. Solar PV generation produces more at peak times, so it is
replacing power at times when marginal electricity costs are higher. Borenstein (2008) estimates that in
real-world grid operation this increases the cost of the alternative power source by an average of 20%,
bringing marginal cost of alternative generation to around $0.078/kWh. Inclusion of the cost of GHG
emissions raises the cost of alternative generation by slightly less than $0.02 per kWh at a GHG price
of $50/ton, bringing the avoided marginal cost to about $0.10.
31

The baseline is higher for “all-electric” households. I adjust for this in the very small number of
households that are on “all-electric” rates.

32

Due to California legislation, the prices on the first two tiers were practically frozen during the sample
period and all revenue adjustments came from moving the rates on the third and fourth tiers (and a
fifth tier at some times) up or down.

33

See Borenstein (2012b).

15

The first approach assumes that installing PV is not systematically associated with
a change in consumption, which may not be the case.34 The second approach assumes
that the simulation model for solar production is error free. Solar PV generation, however,
varies due to shading and soiling of the panels, neither of which is captured very well in the
simulation or the CEC rating. Both approaches assume that demand is price inelastic. To
the extent that installing solar PV reduces quantity purchased from the utility and reduces
the marginal price due to the IBP tariff, the first method understates the consumer surplus
gains from installing PV and the second method overstates the gains. Based on Ito’s (2014)
finding that consumers facing IBP respond to average price more than marginal price and
his estimate of a medium/long-run elasticity of -0.088, the surplus measurement error due
to the quantity response to the change in price would be quite small compared to the
overall surplus change.
The third approach combines the first two methods, estimating usage using both preand post-installation data. Each method is used only if at least one year of the appropriate
data is available. I present results using the third method, but the three approaches yield
substantially similar results.35
All of these estimates implicitly assume that the real price level and price structure will
remain constant over time. That is unlikely to be the case, but there are many possible
permutations of rate changes that would change the savings from a solar PV system.
The real average price of residential electricity in California today is about the same as
it was 30 years ago (based on data from the U.S. Energy Information Administration),
but it has risen in PG&E territory. Retail rates may be driven significantly by adoption
of grid-scale renewable generation and the allocation of integration costs, but these costs
are very difficult to predict. The other great uncertainty is the extent to which the IBP
rate structure will be flattened over time. The ratio of higher to lower tier prices during
the sample period is an extreme outlier compared to the rest of the U.S. Recently-passed
34

Installing PV could be associated with increases in consumption because it is part of a larger remodel
of a house, because installing PV has a “moral licensing” effect that causes people to make less effort
to restrain their electricity consumption, or because the marginal price the customer faces is lower after
installing PV. It could be associated with lower consumption if PV is part of a broader adoption of
sustainable energy practices that includes greater energy efficiency and conservation.

35

The tedious details of the usage calculation: For pre-solar installation data, for each billing period, a
day’s usage is assigned to be the average daily usage for the billing period in which the day occurs. The
average usage on each day of the year (e.g., August 15) is taken to be the average of all the times that
day of the year appears in the dataset for the household. Monthly usage for each calendar month is
then calculated as the sum of the average usage on each day of the month. Bills are then calculated for
each calendar month. The procedure for post-solar installation are the same except that the simulated
average solar PV generation is added back to the billed quantity before these calculations are carried
out.

16

Table 2a: Average cost and direct financial incentives for systems in CSI

Table 2b: Average bill savings under alternative tariffs for all PG&E residential solar

legislation allows for a gradual flattening, and some has occurred since the end of the
sample, but the actual tariffs that will be adopted are hard to forecast. For these reasons,
I stick with a average price structure that was in existence over the 2007-2014 timeframe,
in real 2014 dollars.
Table 2 presents summary statistics broken out by year of system installation and pur17

chase versus lease/PPA.36 Throughout the sample period, lease/PPA arrangments have
significant tax advantages over outright purchase by the homeowner, particularly in 20072008 when the federal tax credit was capped for homeowners. Yet, the lease/PPA model
had a relatively small market share until the last few years of the sample. The incentives
in the top panel of table 2 can be calculated only for systems that were part of the CSI,
because data on cost are not available for other systems.
The bill savings shown in the bottom panel of table 2 are calculated for all systems in the
billing data that meet the criteria discussed in section II. The 4 right-hand columns are the
estimated net present value of bill savings based on each household’s estimated monthly
usage pattern and simulated generation from the installed solar PV system over the life of
the system. I assume constant real electricity rates and consumption patterns, and a 25
year life of the system with the PV output declining by 0.5% of the original output each
year, due to panel degradation. Throughout the calculations presented here, I assume
a 4% real discount rate for all consumers. To the extent that lower-income consumers
face higher interest rates than wealthier consumers, ignoring the difference will tend to
overstate the NPV for lower-income customers relative to others.
The difference between these savings in the lower panel suggests the size of the additional
incentive due to rate design. For systems installed in the first third (approximately) of 2014,
the increasing-block pricing system implies an additional incentive averaging slightly over
$7000 compared to a revenue-neutral flat rate of $0.1905/kWh. The additional incentive
due to such tiered pricing averages about $16,000 compared to charging a flat rate of
$0.10/kWh.
One might ask how much net metering increases the value of residential solar versus a
system that reduces retail bills just for energy used on-site, but pays a wholesale price for
energy injected into the grid. The answer would depend on how much of the electricity
generated is injected into the grid. Darghouth et al (2011) present calculations of the
share of electricity that would be considered injected into the grid under hourly, rather
than monthly, net metering. This still understates injections, but may capture most of
the effect. They show the share is an increasing function of the ratio of PV generation to
customer load. At a 60% ratio, the average for my sample, figure 6 in Darghouth et al
suggests about 30% of the PV generation would be injected into the grid. If that electricity
were compensated at a marginal avoided cost of $0.10, and the remainder reduced usage

36

For purchased systems, “price” is the purchase price. For leased systems, it is a constructed figure that
is reported to the IRS for tax credit purposes. It is supposed to represent the fair market value of goods
and services delivered under the lease contract.

18

Figure 4: Average value of incentives for installing residential PV

billed under the IBP tariff, this would significantly lower the gains from installing solar. I
carry out this calculation for every PG&E residential PV system in the dataset and report
the results for those in the CSI in the “IBP with hourly NEM” column of table 2b.37
Switching from annual netting to hourly netting has a smaller effect on bill saving than
one might expect, because under IBP the solar generation would still displace the most
expensive kWhs first, so the electricity now compensated at marginal avoided cost is the
least expensive electricity that the solar PV system would have displaced. For instance, if
the system is large enough to lower the customer’s net consumption into the first or second
tier, then switching to hourly net metering would change the customer’s compensation from
the $0.12-$0.15 avoided charge to the $0.10 wholesale payment.
Figure 4 summarizes the major incentives available to residential PV adopters per kilowatt of capacity installed. In 2007 and 2008 – a time in which most systems were purchased
by the homeowner so qualified for very limited federal tax credits – the CSI played a larger
financial role in promoting residential solar than the federal tax credit or the IBP rate
structure compared to a revenue-neutral flat rate. From 2009 on, however, the CSI role
rapidly diminished and the federal tax credit and tiered rate structure were far more powerful mechanisms. The federal tax credit, of course, was available throughout the U.S., but
the extremely high marginal rates faced by heavy consumers in California were unmatched
in the continental U.S.

37

The calculation for each household is based on that household’s ratio of PV generation to annual
consumption and matched to the “hourly netting” function displayed in figure 6 of Dargouth et al
(2011).

19

Differences in Private Benefits Across Income Brackets
Using the estimated income brackets discussed in section IV, I now examine how solar
systems differ across the households of different income levels that install them. Table 3
presents descriptive regressions of customer and system attributes on income brackets and
year-of-installation fixed effects. The omitted income category is the wealthiest bracket
and the omitted year is 2013.
Not surprisingly, column (1) shows lower-income customers install smaller systems on average and column (2) demonstrates they consume less on average.38 Column (3) considers
the ratio of PV generation to consumption and shows lower-income customers who adopt
PV produce more electricity onsite relative to their annual consumption. The wealthiest
income bracket installed systems that displaced about 57% of their consumption, while the
figure was higher for all other income brackets about 26 percentage points higher for the
poorest income bracket. Thus, lower-income PV adopters both start from a lower tier of
the increasing-block price schedule and displace a larger share of their consumption with
their PV systems than do richer customers.
Column (3) doesn’t control for month of usage, month of PV production, or climate zone
(and associated baseline quantity) of the household, but column (4) does. The dependent
variable in column (4) is the household’s average savings per kWh their system produces
or, put differently, the average price of the kWh purchase that is displaced by onsite PV
generation. The constant of 0.272 means that under PG&E’s average increasing-block
tariff over the sample period, the highest-income bracket PV adopters in 2013 would have
expected that their onsite PV production would reduce their bill by 27.2 cents per kWh on
average. This number is 5.9 cents lower for the lowest-income bracket, about 22% lower.
Compared to the highest-income households installing PV, the savings for next to lowest
bracket are 12% smaller per kWh produced, 8% smaller for the middle income bracket,
and 7% smaller for next-to-highest bracket.

Finally, column (5) of table 3 shows the same regression as a linear probability model
for the own versus lease/PPA decision, employing only data on customers in the CSI, for
whom the own/lease information is available. Leases and PPAs have been widely discussed
as a way for lower income households to get into solar without the upfront costs. Through
38

These results are, in part, mechanically a result of the weighted-rank within-CBG income bracket
matching technique described in the previous section, but they also hold even using the random-rank
approach. However, the random-rank approach fails to capture the fact that within census block groups
higher-use consumers are on average wealthier.

20

Table 3: Descriptive regressions of customer and system attributes

2013, however, in these data there was actually a statistically greater tendency for wealthier
households to make use of the lease/PPA option. Still, with an overall rate of about 70%
in 2013, the rate differed by only a few percentage points across income brackets, so it
appears that this has become the dominant financial arrangement in all income brackets.
Solar PV Pricing
The net benefits from installing solar will also depend on the price the customer pays.
To investigate this, I narrow the sample to just systems purchased by the homeowner,
excluding leases and PPAs. Though “Total Cost” is reported in the CSI database for TPO
systems, that entry is not a transaction price, as it is with systems that are sold. Rather,
it is the seller’s estimate of the “fair market value” of the contracted goods and services.
In the case of PPAs, the more common form of contract, it incorporates an estimate of
the value of the energy, as well as the value the consumer receives from the option to
purchase the system, generally after 15 or 20 years, and the value of ongoing maintenance
and repair. It’s hard to know how to interpret these figures – particularly when they also
21

affect the federal tax credit, creating incentives to distort the number.39 For these reasons,
I focus on 27,292 systems in the CSI database that are owned by the household. These
are not a random sample of systems, of course, but it is unclear how the selection into
household system ownership affects the pricing of those systems.40
I estimate a pricing equation that allows for a fixed component and a quadratic function
of system size. Two indicators of customer willingness-to-pay are also included: income
bracket and annual usage. These are positively correlated, both in reality and by construction of the income bracket variable. Yet, their effects are strongly and separately
significant. Income bracket is included as an integer from 1, the lowest bracket, to 5, the
highest.41 Table 4 also shows results with income bracket interacted with system size,
allowing for income to affect the marginal price of extra capacity rather than a constant
change for all systems. Finally, I include fixed year effects interacted with system size.42
Of course, estimating a pricing equation with a quantity measure on the right-hand side
raises issues of endogeneity and bias. While price increases with system size, higher price
for a marginal kilowatt of capacity would likely cause the buyer to constrain the size of the
system to some extent. I don’t have a great instrument at this point, so instead interpret
the results in light of this possible bias.
Perhaps surprisingly, the positive coefficient on P V capacity 2 suggests an increased system size has an increasing marginal price. Using the coefficients in column (4), average
price per kilowatt of capacity still falls with capacity out to about 11 kW capacity (varying
somewhat with the year, income and annual consumption) due to the fixed cost component
estimated in the constant term, but marginal cost increases by about $100/kW with every
1 kW increase in system size. This could be due roof capacity constraints. Note that
this effect is in the opposite direction than the bias one would expect to find from typical
endogeneity, where lower marginal price is associated with higher quantity.43
39

Podolefsky (2013) finds 8% higher reported price for comparable systems under third-party ownership.

40

Gillingham et al (2014) estimate a system pricing equation using data from many states and incorporating many more variables, including measures of supply side variables on installer competition and
experience. Each approach has its advantages. The analysis presented here includes detailed information on customer usage, but does not include multi-state observations and focuses only on residential
systems.

41

Results are similar with fixed effects for each income bracket.

42

Including fixed year effects without system size interaction yields similar results for the other variables.

43

Gillingham et al (2014) find that average price per kW of capacity falls with capacity out to about 8kW

22

Table 4: Regressions of Solar PV Price (for purchased systems)

The impact of annual electricity usage and household income bracket are both very
statistically and economically significant. A one standard deviation increase in annual
consumption raises the price of the system by about $1400, or about 4% at the mean.
High usage households are displacing more expensive electricity due to increasing-block
pricing, so receive more value from the system. It appears that sellers recognize this
impact and capture some of those rents.
Likewise, for a given system size and household usage, customers in a higher income
bracket pay more. Estimated as a simple price shift, it is estimated to add about $314
for each income bracket increase. Column (3) estimates this impact as a change in the
marginal price, suggesting each income bracket increase raises price by $89 per kW of
capacity. Estimating both a fixed and a per-kW effect together in Column (4) causes some
collinearity, but it appears that higher income increases cost for systems above about 2
kW capacity.
and then increases.

23

Together these results suggest that residential solar PV pricing exhibits at least some
imperfect competition, with sellers able to price discriminate and extract higher prices
from customers who receive greater savings from the system and may generally have higher
willingness to pay. This of course does not mean that PV sellers are making extranormal
profits. It is quite possible that any rents captured by sellers are dissipated in excess entry
or competition among sellers for customer acquisition.
The Private Net Present Value of Installing Solar
Finally, I turn to the private net present value of the solar PV investment for those who
have installed systems. As explained earlier, the potential savings to the consumer are
calculated under three different tariffs, an increasing-block pricing tariff that was typical
of the structure in place during the sample period, a flat rate-tariff that recovers the same
revenue (under a zero-elasticity assumption), and a much lower flat-rate tariff that more
closely reflects the marginal cost of supplying power from the grid. All of these rates
are assumed to remain constant in real terms. I align monthly estimated usage – which
I assume is unchanging over the assumed 25-year life of the system – with monthly PV
generation to accurately capture the kilowatt-hours displaced by the solar PV generation
under net energy metering. This does not affect the savings calculations under flat rates,
but has a significant effect under increasing-block pricing.
I assume that the customer pays the price shown in the CSI database – again confining
the analysis to systems owned by the household, not by third parties. The customers are
assumed to make full payment for the system and receive full rebate and tax credit in the
year of purchase. The calculation accounts for the actual CSI rebate the customer received
and for the changes in the federal tax credit available at the time the system goes into
operation. I assume that the system lasts 25 years (with production decreasing at 0.5%
of original output each year), and that the customer owns the residence for the life of the
system (or that the electricity savings value of the solar PV is exactly capitalized into any
sale of the residence). Finally, I assume that every customer has a 4% real cost of funds.
This assumption almost certainly biases the results towards more favorable outcomes for
low income households relative to wealthier ones, because in reality low-income customers
are likely to face a higher interest rate. Any assumption of an interest rate differential
would be fairly arbitrary, however, so I adopt the 4% rate for all.
The resulting average net present values per kilowatt of capacity installed are shown in
figure 5a for the average increasing-block pricing tariff and current net metering policy.
The high-income customers are also the highest consumers so they crowd out the highestprice energy with their solar PV installations. Figure 5a shows this outweighs the higher
24

prices that these customers pay. As suggested earlier, the lowest income bracket has few
customers, but their average NPV is consistently more negative. The NPV for all income
brackets turns positive by 2010, but the average benefits per unit of capacity installed
are consistently larger (more positive) for the higher-income households. This appears to
change in 2013, however, for all groups but the lowest-income bracket.
Figure 5b shows the impact of net metering. Using the estimates of share of PV power
used onsite from Darghouth et al (2011), figure 5b shows the estimated average NPV under
hourly net metering adjusting for the size of each system relative to that household’s consumption. The calculations assume that any excess generation within an hour is credited
to the household at the assumed marginal avoided cost of $0.10/kWh. This change lowers
the net present value.

Figure 5c shows the same calculations as in 5a except assuming a flat retail rate of
$0.1905/kWh, which would be revenue neutral under zero elasticity. Flattening the rate
lowers the value for households in all income brackets who have installed solar, but it has a
greater negative impact on the highest-income households, because they are disproportionately using solar to displace higher-tier consumption. For the same reason, the impact on
the average NPV of solar for lower-income households is much smaller. Of course, flattening the retail rate actually improves the average NPV of solar for customers who consume
only on the first and second tier, though they are a very small share of solar adopters.
Lastly, figure 5d shows the results for a marginal retail price of $0.10/kWh, an approximation of the long-run marginal cost, including the externalities, from a natural gas-fired
25

power plant. This is just a downward shift of the lines in figure 5c, but it highlights the
fact that a two-part tariff that set marginal price equal to social marginal cost would make
the economics of solar PV much less attractive, even with the federal tax credits.
VII. Conclusion
It is, of course, not a surprise that most households installing solar PV are relatively
affluent. Until the past few years, the cost of residential solar was so high that even with
aggressive rebates and tax incentives it was still not a choice that most customers could
justify on finances alone. In California, however, the retail rate structure has tilted the
buyer profile even more in the direction of large uses, who are disproportionately wealthy.
I estimate that in 2013, the average net present value of the lifetime savings from installing
residential solar was nearly $7000 greater under the increasing-block pricing structure than
it would have been under a flat rate structure. That additional incentive is more than the
CSI rebate at any time except the first two years of the program, and nearly as large as
the 30% federal tax credit.
I find that the income distribution of solar PV installations remains heavily skewed
towards the wealthy, but somewhat less so in the last few years with some evidence of the
gap narrowing further in 2014. While lease and PPA arrangement are argued to help lowerincome customers get into solar, I find evidence of slightly lower use of such arrangements
among lower-income households than among the highest income customers. Lower-income
and smaller users, however, do appear to pay less for their solar PV systems, suggesting
that sellers are able to capture some share of the rents that wealthier and high-consumption
households get from installing PV.
26

As a result of the retail rate structure and economies of scale in installing PV, and
despite the influence of income and usage on the purchase price, the net present value of
installing solar PV was higher for higher-income households for most of the sample period.
I show, however, that this differential would have been absent under a flat rate structure.
It is important to note the limits of the data used here. Much of the analysis focused
only on households that received subsidies under the CSI program. As a result, much
of the analysis is limited for 2013 and beyond. Since then, the cost of solar PV panels
has dropped significantly and prices for installed residential solar PV have also declined
substantially. The economics of PV are improving, both at residential and grid-scale. With
current incentives for residential PV, including the benefits of accelerated depreciation on
third-party systems – which are now over two-thirds of new residential installations – the
private net benefits appear to be positive for a far larger set of customers than even at the
end of the sample studied here.
Still, the net present value calculations also support the view that distributed solar PV
remains a fairly expensive source of electricity generation. With the end of the CSI, the
three major sources of financial incentives are the 30% federal tax credit, the increasingblock pricing tariff that increases incentives for the largest customers (while decreasing it
for small users), and, for third-party owned systems, the value of accelerated depreciation.
The tax credit is scheduled to decrease to 10% for businesses and to 0% for individuals
at the end of 2016. The steepness of increasing-block pricing in California has already
decreased with the highest tier now about double the lowest, rather than about triple as it
averaged from 2007 to early 2014. And proposed changes now under consideration by the
California Public Utilities Commission compress the tiers further. Accelerated depreciation
is also under political pressure. If these incentives were lost, even with the recent declines
in residential PV prices it seems unlikely that DG solar would remain privately economic.
Numerous countries and U.S. states are now promoting residential solar PV with direct subsidies, renewable energy credits, tax breaks and other incentives. This analysis
demonstrates that residential electricity rate design can also play a primary role in creating incentives for residential solar adoption and in how those incentives are distributed
across households of different incomes.

27

REFERENCES
Auerbach, Alan J. 1982. “The New Economics of Accelerated Depreciation.” Boston
College Law Review, September, 1327-55.
Baker, Erin, Meredith Fowlie, Derek Lemoine, and Stanley S. Reynolds. 2013. “The
Economics of Solar Electricity.” Annual Review of Resource Economics, 5: 387-426.
Barbose, Galen L., Samantha Weaver, and Naïm Darghouth. 2014. “Tracking the Sun VII:
An Historical Summary of the Installed Price of Photovoltaics in the United States
from 1998 to 2013.” Berkeley: Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. September.
Working Paper LBNL-6350E.
Borenstein, Severin. 2008a. “The market value and cost of solar photovoltaic electricity
production.” Center for the Study of Energy Markets Working Paper 176.
http://www.ucei.berkeley.edu/PDF/csemwp176.pdf.
Borenstein, Severin. 2008b. “Response to Critiques of ‘The market value and cost of solar
photovoltaic electricity production’.”
http://faculty.haas.berkeley.edu/borenste/PVwork.html
Borenstein, Severin. 2012a. “The Private and Public Economics of Renewable Electricity
Generation,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26(1), Winter 2012.
Borenstein, Severin. 2012b. “The Redistributional Impact of Non-Linear Electricity Pricing.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4(3): 56-90.
Buller, Susan M. 2013. “Comparison of CPUC Income Analysis and PG&E Income Analysis.” Pacific Gas & Electric, mimeo.
California Public Utilities Commission. 2012. “California Solar Initiative Annual Program
Assessment, June 2012.” Available at
http://www.cpuc.ca.gov/PUC/energy/Solar/2012CASolarLegReport.htm
California Public Utilities Commission. 2013. “California Net Energy Metering Ratepayer
Impacts Evaluation, October 2013.” Available at http://www.cpuc.ca.gov/NR/rdonlyres/D74C5457-B6D9-40F4-8584-60D4AB756211/0/NEMReportwithAppendices.pdf
Darghouth, Naïm, Galen L. Barbose, and Ryan H. Wiser. 2011. “The impact of rate design
and net metering on the bill savings from distributed PV for residential customers in
California.” Energy Policy. 39. 5243-5253.
Darghouth, Naïm, Galen L. Barbose, and Ryan H. Wiser. 2013. “Electricity Bill Savings
from Residential Photovoltaic Systems: Sensitivities to Changes in Future Electricity Market Conditions.” Berkeley: Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 2013.
Working Paper LBNL-6017E.
Dong, C.G., Ryan Wiser and Varun Rai. 2014. “Incentive Pass-through for Residential Solar Systems in California.” Berkeley: Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory,
October. Working Paper LBNL-6927E.

28

Energy & Environmental Economics. 2013. California Net Energy Metering Ratepayer
Impacts Evaluation, report prepared for the California Public Utilities Commission.
October.
Gillingham, Kenneth, Hao Deng, Ryan Wiser, Naïm Darghouth, Gregory Nemet, Galen
Barbose, Varun Rai, and C.G. Dong. 2014. “Deconstructing Solar Photovoltaic Pricing: The Role of Market Structure, Technology and Policy,” Lawrence Berkeley National Lab Working Paper. December.
Henwood, Keith. 2014. “Subsidy Pass-through is Residential Solar Markets,” University
of Chicago working paper, October.
Hughes, Jonathan E. and Molly Podolefsky. 2013. “Getting Green with Solar Subsidies:
Evidence from the California Solar Initiative,” University of Colorado Working Paper.
October.
Ito, Koichiro. 2014. “Do Consumers Respond to Marginal or Average Price? Evidence
from Nonlinear Electricity Pricing.” American Economic Review. 104(2): 537-563.
Maguire, Kelly and Glenn Sheriff. 2011. “Comparing Distributions of Environmental
Outcomes for Regulatory Environmental Justice Analysis.” International Journal of
Environmental Research and Public Health. 8:1707-1726.
Podolefsky, Molly. 2013. “Tax Evasion and Subsidy Pass-Through under the Solar Investment Tax Credit,” University of Colorado Working Paper 13-05. November.

29

Appendix A: Calculating the benefit of accelerated depreciation
Consider an individual homeowner who buys and owns a solar PV system. She does not
pay taxes on the output of the system and she is not allowed to take a tax deduction for
depreciation of the system. Now consider a company that owns the system. The income
it earns leasing out the system or selling energy under a PPA is taxable and the company
can claim a tax deduction for depreciation of the system. In the simplest setting, if the
operating profit (before capital depreciation) just matched true economic depreciation of
the system, and if the depreciation that could be claimed as a tax deduction also matched
the economic depreciation, then the firm would have no tax liability or benefit from the
taxation in any year. In fact, so long as the NPV of the tax deduction for depreciation
is equal to the NPV of the true economic depreciation, then the firm would face a only a
non-distorting tax on its true economic profit.44
If, however, the NPV of the tax deduction for depreciation that the firm is allowed to
take is greater than the NPV of the economic depreciation – which could occur if the tax
deduction is accelerated relative to economic depreciation or is just set higher than the
economic depreciation – then a business owner that faces such taxes and deductions gets a
net benefit compared to a homeowner that faces no taxation. In the very simplest case, if
the NPV of the true economic profit were zero,45 but the company could deduct the entire
cost of the system in the year it is purchased, yet only pay taxes on the operating profit
over the years as the net revenue rolls in, then the firm would be much better off than if
it paid no taxes at all, as the homeowner does.
In the empirical analysis, I do not compare the accelerated depreciation to deduction of
true economic depreciation, because that is not the treatment of other generation sources.
Standard accounting depreciates long-lived assets such as generation facilities over 20 years.
Thus, I compare the net present value of the tax deduction received under standard treatment to the net present value of the deduction under accelerated depreciation. I assume
that depreciation is calculated based on the double declining balance method with the firm
facing a nominal interest rate of 7% and an inflation rate of 3% annually. I assume that the
firm is in a 35% marginal tax rate, which is the corporate tax rate for firms of significant
size.
As a baseline, I compare to depreciation of the asset over 20 years with depreciation
44

This assumes that the marginal tax rate faced by the firm doesn’t change over time.

45

Meaning that, untaxed, the NPV of revenues the firm earns from the system exactly equals the NPV
of its costs.

30

permitted only for the owner’s net cost after receiving the CSI rebate and the 30% federal
tax credit.46 The actual depreciation allowed differs from this baseline for three reasons:
(1) Firms were allowed to depreciate 85% of the system cost (after state rebates), not the
70% they actually had to pay after they took the federal tax credit; (2) for the entire
sample period, firms were allowed to depreciate the system over 5 years rather than 20;
and, (3) from 2008 to 2013 firms were allowed to take a larger share of the depreciation in
the first year, known as a bonus depreciation, 50% for the entire period except September
8, 2010 to December 31, 2011 when the bonus was 100%, that is, the entire system was
expensed in the first year.
In a spreadsheet, I calculated the NPV of the tax savings from depreciation of the system
under standard 20-year depreciation of the system cost, which would be 70% of the cost
after state incentives. I then recalculate the NPV with the additional factors listed in the
previous paragraph. As a percentage of the full cost of the system, after state incentives,
I calculated that depreciation under normal 20-year treatment would results in a NPV
tax savings of $4,472 on a $30,000 system (after state rebate). With deductability of 85%
rather than 70%, the NPV of tax savings rises to $5,431, an addition savings of $959 or
3.8% of the net cost under normal depreciation (of $25,528). With accelerated depreciation
(to 5 years), this additional savings rises to 12.6%. Under accelerated depreciation with a
50% first-year bonus, it’s 13.9%. And with 100% depreciation in the first year, it is 15.2%.
In calculating the incentives, I use these percentages as a function of the net cost after
state incentives and the federal tax credit.

46

The CSI rebate actually received by the system is used in the calculation. All company-owned systems
were eligible for the 30% federal tax credit during the sample period.

31

