                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 TOP INCOMES IN CANADA:
                                EVIDENCE FROM THE CENSUS

                                          Thomas Lemieux
                                          W. Craig Riddell

                                        Working Paper 21347
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21347


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2015




This paper was prepared for the IRPP/CLSRN conference on “Inequality in Canada: Driving Forces,
Outcomes and Policy” on February 24-25 in Ottawa. We would like to thank the Social Sciences and
Humanities Research Council of Canada for financial support, Haimin Zhang and Oscar Becerra-
Camargofor expert research assistance, and David Card, David Green, France St.-Hilaire, Michael
Veall andArmine Yalnizyan for very helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Thomas Lemieux and W. Craig Riddell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Top Incomes in Canada: Evidence from the Census
Thomas Lemieux and W. Craig Riddell
NBER Working Paper No. 21347
July 2015
JEL No. J24,J31

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper looks at the evolution of incomes at the top of the distribution in Canada. Master files of
the Canadian Census are used to study the composition of top income earners between 1981 and 2011.
Our main finding is that, as in the United States, executives and individuals working in the financial
and business services sectors are the two most important groups driving the growth in top incomes
in Canada. A finding more specific to Canada is that the oil and gas sector has also played an important
role in income growth at the top, especially in more recent years. Another arguably Canadian-specific
finding is that holders of medical degrees have lost ground compared to other top income earners.
Finally, despite the IT revolution, scientists, engineers and even computer scientists do not account
for much of the growth in top incomes in Canada.


Thomas Lemieux
Vancouver School of Economics
University of British Columbia
#997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1
CANADA
and NBER
thomas.lemieux@ubc.ca

W. Craig Riddell
Vancouver School of Economics
University of British Columbia
#997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1
CANADA
craig.riddell@ubc.ca
I. INTRODUCTION


After a long period of relative stability in the postwar period, the Canadian earnings and
income distribution has changed substantially over the past several decades. One of the
most striking developments has been the dramatic rise in incomes at the very top of the
income distribution (Saez and Veall, 2005; Veall, 2012). At the same, real earnings have
fallen at the bottom of the distribution, and showed little growth in the middle of the
distribution, especially among men (Green and Sand, 2014). As a consequence, earnings
and income inequality have increased, a development that has received much public as
well as scholarly interest (Fortin, Green, Lemieux, Milligan and Riddell, 2012; Veall,
2012). Other noteworthy changes in the wage structure since the early 1980s include
some widening of earnings differences by educational attainment, substantial growth in
earnings gaps by age, and narrowing of gender earnings differentials (Boudarbat,
Lemieux and Riddell (2010), among others).
       The dramatic increase in top incomes has received substantial attention. However,
much remains to be learned about top earners and how the characteristics of this group
have evolved over time. Are they mainly employees or owners of businesses? How
important to their high incomes is labour earnings relative to income from other sources
such as investments? What industries and occupations do they work in, and how have
these changed over time? What about other personal and demographic characteristics
such as gender, educational attainment and province and city of residence?
       The purpose of this study is to use master files from the Canadian Census to better
understand the factors behind the dramatic increase in top earnings since the early 1980s.
There are a number of competing explanations for the increase in inequality in Canada
and other countries like the United States and United Kingdom.1 Studies that look at the
whole earnings distribution have generally focused on explanations linked to
technological change, globalization, and labour market institutions. Some of these
explanations have direct implications for top-end earnings. For instance, if technological

1
 Alvaredo and Piketty (2008) show a sharp divergence between “English-speaking” countries
where inequality and top income shares have increased rapidly since about 1980, and other
countries like France or Japan where the income distribution has remained much more stable.
This is a major puzzle that we don’t try to address in this paper.

                                              1
change affects the earnings distribution through a change in the skill premium, highly
educated workers at the upper end of the distribution should have experienced more
growth in earnings than less educated workers.2 Likewise, top-earners performing highly
skilled tasks that are hard to offshore should do better in terms of earnings than those
performing routine tasks that can easily be offshored, or replaced by computers.
        By contrast, explanations for inequality growth based on changes in labour market
institutions may not play an important role at the top end of the distribution. For instance,
changes in the minimum wage have been shown to be an important determinant of
inequality at the bottom end of the distribution (DiNardo, Fortin, and Lemieux, 1996;
Lee, 1999; Fortin and Lemieux, 2014), but they are unlikely to play much of a role at the
upper end of the distribution. De-unionization is also an important explanation for the
increase in earnings inequality among men (Card, Lemieux, and Riddell, 2004), but since
very few top earners are unionized it is not a very promising explanation for the changes
in inequality observed at the top end. Note however, that occupational licensing and
professional organizations of highly skilled workers can be viewed as a related form of
unionization that may be playing a more important role than traditional unions at the top
end.3 This could help account for changes in earnings of specific top-end occupations
such as medical doctors.
        In addition to these general explanations for changes in inequality over the whole
distribution, a number of factors more specific to the very top end have also been
discussed in the literature. For instance, a number of studies have looked at the role of
changes in “the way CEOs are paid” as a potential explanation for the phenomenal
growth in their earnings over the last few decades.
        In a standard competitive model, CEOs, like other workers, are simply paid their
marginal product, i.e. their addition to the firm’s value. Some authors like Gabaix and
Landier (2008) and Gabaix, Landier and Sauvagnat (2013) have argued that a
2
  See Acemoglu and Autor (2011) for a detailed discussion of the role of technological change in
wage inequality. Following Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003), Acemoglu and Autor discuss the
implications of “routine-biased” technological change relative to the more traditional skill-biased
technological change approach. In both cases, however, highly educated workers should
experience wage gains relative to less-educated workers.
3
  Kleiner and Krueger (2013) show that in the United States there are now over 30 percent of
workers in who work in occupations that require a professional license. This far exceeds the
fraction of the workforce covered by traditional collective bargaining agreements.

                                                 2
market/competitive model of CEO pay could explain the observed growth in
compensation. Other authors are more sceptical. For instance, both Bebchuk and Fried
(2004) and Bertrand and Mullainathan (2001) dispute the conventional view that
executives are “paid for performance”. They instead argue that CEOs are much more
likely to be directly or indirectly “setting their own pay” relative to other workers. In
other words, they are in a better position to extract economic rents than the rest of the
workforce.4
        In addition to CEOs, Kaplan and Rauh (2010) suggest that the finance sector has
also played an important role in the growth in earnings at the top end. But unlike CEOs of
large publicly-traded firms for whom detailed compensation data has to be disclosed, the
income of most top earners in investment banks, private-equity firms and hedge funds is
not publically available. Based on some limited data Kaplan and Rauh (2010) argue that
the finance sector played an important role in the growth of top income shares, but the
evidence on this is limited.5
        Dramatic growth in top incomes may also reflect the phenomenon of “superstars”
as formalized in a famous paper by Rosen (1981). Although we expect earnings of
“superstars” to exceed those of “stars,” the magnitude of the premium depends on the
size of the market. In some circumstances small differences in the skills of certain
individuals may get magnified incredibly if there is a large market for the products of
their services, i.e. when the service or product can be provided to a large audience (or
group of customers) that can share the cost. In these circumstances, the “best person”
may command a superstar salary that is astronomical relative to the “next-best” person,
even though the superstar’s ability or skill may be only marginally better than the next-
best person. The recent “decline of distance” and associated globalization of economic
activity may have dramatically increased the market size for some labour services,
resulting in the increased incidence of “superstar” salaries.


4
  Economic rents refer to payments to a factor of production in excess of opportunity cost or
“transfer earnings” – the amount a factor of production must earn to prevent its transfer to an
alternative use. In the case of labour, rents are earnings in excess of what the worker could earn in
her next best alternative employment opportunity.
5
  See also Bajika, Cole, and Heim (2010) who use data on occupations based on income tax
statements, and Statistics Canada (2013) for information on the occupational distribution of top
earners in the 2011 NHS data.

                                                 3
       More generally, the debate around the growth of top earnings has revolved around
two broad classes of explanations. These positions are nicely articulated in a recent
Journal of Economic Perspectives symposium on the “top one percent”. Proponents of
the market-based view such as Kaplan and Rauh (2013) argue that the growth in top
earnings is a broad-based phenomenon linked to the increasing demand for the unique
skills and abilities of top earners linked to technological change, globalization, scale
effects, etc. On the other side of the debate, Bivens and Mishel (2013) propose an
explanation linked to the increased ability of top earners to extract rents that are pervasive
in the labour market. Decreases in marginal tax rates on earned income may also have
raised the incentive to receive remuneration in the form of earnings rather than other
forms of compensation.
       These two classes of explanations are closely connected to the above-mentioned
debate about the source of growth in executive compensation. They also mirror the more
general and older debate about the sources of growth in overall inequality. Influential
early studies such as Katz and Murphy (1992) or Juhn, Murphy and Pierce (1993) use a
broad-based market view where the growth in inequality is mostly linked to an increase
in the return to skill. By contrast, Freeman (1993), Card (1992, 2001) and DiNardo,
Fortin and Lemieux (1996) look at the contribution of de-unionization where the main
mechanism for changing inequality is the increasing inability of workers in the middle of
the distribution to extract rents through collective bargaining agreements.
       The debate between these two classes of explanations is also highly policy
relevant. If a portion of earnings consists of rents, these can be “taxed away” without
affecting the allocation of labour to various uses. If on the other hand these high earnings
represent an increase in the return to skills or talent, taxing this income could result in a
loss of talent to other uses (and perhaps other countries).
       If one had good measures of skills, rents, and ability to appropriate these rents, it
would be straightforward to determine which of these explanations are behind the growth
in top earnings. Short of this, good proxies for skills (education, experience, field of
study) and job characteristics (industry, occupation, firm size) can be used to see how
well they do at explaining the growth in top earnings. Finding that earnings growth is
mostly concentrated among highly educated workers in science, technology, engineering,


                                               4
and mathematics (STEM) regardless of industry (i.e. either Google or hedge funds)
would be more supportive of the market/skills view. In contrast, finding that the growth
in top earnings was limited to few industries (say finance) and occupations (say CEOs),
could lead one to conclude that rent extraction is the key factor behind the growth in top
earnings, especially if (as is argued by Bivens and Mishel, 2013) evidence consistent with
rent extraction exists in these industries and occupations.
          Most of the research on the evolution of top incomes has used administrative data
on taxfilers (e.g. Saez and Veall, 2005; Finnie and Irvine, 2006; Murphy, Roberts and
Wolfson, 2007; Murphy, Michaud and Wolfson, 2008; Veall, 2012). Although taxfiler
data has important advantages, they also have disadvantages. In particular, these data
contain relatively few socio-demographic characteristics. Thus basic information such as
the role of educational attainment and occupation in the rise of top incomes remains to be
investigated. Unlike most other data sets available for studying top earners, the master
files of the Canadian Census contain detailed information on education, field of study
(since 1986), occupation, industry and a number of other important socio-economic
characteristics. This allows us to shed considerable light on the factors behind the growth
in top earnings in Canada since 1980.
          The paper proceeds as follows. After introducing the census master file data in
Section 2, we show in Section 3 that the main trends in top incomes in the census data are
generally consistent with what has been found using tax data. We then present a detailed
analysis of the role of education, occupation, industry, and other worker and job
characteristics in the growth in top incomes in Section 4, and conclude in Section 5.


II. CENSUS DATA


In this paper we use master file (MF) data from the Canadian Census over the period
1981 – 2006.6 These data have a number of important advantages. First, as noted
previously, the responses to the “long form” Census questionnaire provide detailed
information on a number of important socio-demographic characteristics, including
gender, industry of employment, occupation, education and immigrant status, as well as

6
    We also report some results from the 2011 National Household Survey, as discussed below.

                                                 5
annual earnings and work experience during the previous year. The information on
educational attainment is particularly detailed, and includes years of completed schooling
(except in 2006), all diplomas, certificates and degrees obtained, and field of study
(starting in 1986). Most of this information has been collected on a consistent basis over
the 1981 to 2006 period. A second important advantage is the large sample size – 20% of
the Canadian population. The large sample size is particularly important for studying a
small group like the top 1% of income earners. The combination of these two features
means that we are able to investigate the characteristics of narrowly defined sub-groups
within the top 1% such as medical doctors or those with degrees in finance and
accounting. A third important advantage of the MF data is the absence of top coding
(which occurs when observations above a certain level are censored for confidentiality
reasons).7
        Much previous research into aspects of Canada’s wage structure – such as returns
to education and experience, male-female earnings differences, and earnings differences
between immigrants and the native born – uses public use (PU) Census data. Indeed, in
some research areas such as that of immigrant earnings, the Census has been the “work
horse” source of micro-data. Similarly, Boudarbat, Lemieux and Riddell (2010) argue
that the Census is the best source of information for studying the evolution of returns to
education over time in Canada. However, although the PU data have the advantage of
being widely available to researchers, they are not suitable for investigating top income
earners because of their relatively limited sample sizes and because these data are top-
coded.8 During a period in which the overall earnings distribution is relatively stable, top-
coding may not affect conclusions about the evolution of the wage structure. However, in
a period in which there is a dramatic rise in incomes at the very top of the distribution –
as has been the case in Canada during the past three decades – there is considerable risk




7
  For example, if the data are top-coded at incomes in excess of $225,000 then all individuals
with income greater than $225,000 are simply reported as earning $225,000.
8
  The Census is also much less affected by non-reporting of earnings and other information at the
bottom of the income distribution, a problem that has been identified in the other surveys such as
the Survey of Consumer Finances (Frenette, Green and Picot, 2006).

                                                6
that the combination of top coding in the PU Census files and dramatic increases in top
incomes may result in incorrect conclusions about changes in the wage structure.9
        Unfortunately, two important changes introduced in the 2006 Census create some
comparability problems with the 1981-2001 data. First, respondents who are required to
complete the “long form” (Form 2b) of the Census are now given the opportunity of
allowing Statistics Canada access to their income tax records instead of self-reporting the
income items as was the case with earlier Censuses. Over 80 percent of respondents in
the 2006 Census did permit access to their tax records (Statistics Canada, 2008). As a
result, the information on income and earnings is not strictly comparable to previous
Census data.10
        Second, the information on educational attainment was simplified in 2006 relative
to the 1981-2001 Censuses. While it was possible to precisely identify the number of
years of schooling in the earlier Censuses, the only information available in the 2006
Census is the highest diploma or degree obtained. This limits the number of educational
categories that can be used in our empirical analysis.11 For example, starting in 2006 all
workers without any certificate or diploma are pooled in the same educational category,
regardless of whether they have one or eleven years of schooling. We are nonetheless
able to construct six education categories that are consistently defined over time. These
categories are: i) less than a high school diploma, ii) high school diploma, iii) post-
secondary degree or diploma below a university bachelor’s degree (including trade

9
  For example, a substantial majority of top earners are men (Fortin et. al. 2012). As top incomes
have grown over time, the fraction of male observations that are censored has increased relative
to the fraction of female observations that are censored. Use of PU data may thus yield incorrect
conclusions about the evolution of the male-female earnings differential.
10
   According to Statistics Canada (2008), comparability problems are significant for workers
more marginally attached to the labour market. Since we focus on workers with a strong
attachment to the labour market (full time workers and, in some cases, full-time/full-year
workers), the comparability problems should not have much impact on our results. Brochu,
Morin, and Billette (2013) also conclude that the change in income reporting introduced in 2006
most likely has an impact at the bottom of the distribution.
11
  Another consequence of the changes introduced in 2006 is that it is no longer possible to
directly compute years of potential experience which is defined as age minus years of schooling
minus six (the typical age when one starts school). As is well known, it is generally preferable to
use potential experience instead of age to control for life-cycle effects in a standard Mincer
earnings regression. Given these data limitations, we look at the role of age instead of experience
in our analysis of top incomes.

                                                 7
certificates), iv) university bachelor’s degree, v) professional degrees in medicine,
dentistry, and veterinary medicine, and vi) post-graduate degree (Masters and PhD).
       A new question about field of study (for post-secondary degrees only) was
introduced in the Census in 1986. From 1986 to 2001, field of study was coded using the
Major Field of Study (MFS) classification system. A new classification system (the
Classification of Instructional Programs, or CIP) was then introduced in the 2006 Census.
We explain in the data appendix how we have recoded the data to have a fairly consistent
set of fields of study over the 1986-2006 period. We use a set of 10 major fields of study
in our main analysis tables, and report supplemental evidence for 25 more detailed fields
that contain a particularly large fraction of top income earners.
       There have also been some changes over time in the classification system used for
industry and occupation. As in the case of field of study, in the main analysis tables we
present results for a limited set of industries and occupations that are consistently defined
over time. We also present more detailed results for industries and occupations in which
top earners tend to be concentrated. The data appendix provides detailed information on
how the industry and occupation classifications were harmonized over time.
       In 2011 the mandatory Census ‘long form’ was replaced by the voluntary
National Household Survey (NHS). In order to provide the most recent available
information, we report NHS results in our main tables. However, because of the
voluntary nature of the NHS, substantial caution needs to be exercised in comparing
Census and NHS data.


III.TRENDS IN INEQUALITY AND TOP INCOMES: CENSUS AND TAX DATA


In this section we first report basic trends in top incomes using the data compiled by
Veall (2012) using data from Statistics Canada’s Longitudinal Administrative Databank
(LAD), which is based on income tax data. We then show that these trends are quite
comparable to those obtained using Census data. This suggest that even though income
data are self reported in the Census (until 2006), there do not appear to be significant
reporting biases that would make the Census of questionable validity for studying the
evolution of top incomes in Canada.


                                              8
A. Trends based on tax data
As is well known, tax data show a large increase in top income shares in Canada since the
early 1980s (Saez and Veall, 2005; Veall, 2012). Figure 1 reproduces the trend in the top
1 percent and top 0.1 percent computed by Veall (2012) using data from the LAD.12 The
top 1 percent income share grew from less than 8 percent in the early 1980s to close to 14
percent in 2006-07, before declining slightly during the recession of 2008-09. Note that
while the LAD data only starts in 1982, data from tax reports used in Saez and Veall
(2005) indicate that top income shares were relatively stable in the 1970s and early
1980s. The sharp growth in these shares starting in the mid-1980s is, therefore, a major
departure relative to earlier trends.
        Figure 1 shows that the top 0.1 percent income share grew even more
dramatically since the early 1980s. It more than doubled from around 2 percent in the
early 1980s to around 5 percent in recent years. Put in other terms, this indicates that the
income of the top 0.1 percent (1 tax filer out of a 1000) went from 20 times average
income to 50 times average incomes over a period of about 20 years.
        These dramatic trends are illustrated in a different way in Figure 2a that shows
real growth in income at different points of the distribution. This is once again based on
Veall (2012) using data from the LAD. Figure 2a shows that average incomes in Canada
increased by 13.5 percent between 1982 and 2010. But the rest of the figure shows that
these gains are very unevenly spread across the distribution. In particular, average
incomes for individuals below the top 10 percent (i.e. the “bottom 90 percent”) were
essentially stagnant as they only grew by about 2 percentage points over the 28-year
period. This corresponds to less than 0.1 percent real income growth per year, which is
negligible.13



12
   This information about top incomes in Canada (and the United States in some later graphs) was
downloaded from the World Top Income Database (Alvaredo, Atkinson, Piketty, and Saez, 2014)
on January 28 2014. In the case of Canada the data were provided by Michael Veall using the
LAD (from 1982 to 2010) and tax data records dating back to early in the 20th century. The
income concept is ‘market income’ which includes all income except government transfers and
capital gains.
13
   Annualized growth rates are reported in Figure 2b, discussed below.

                                               9
        As we move up the distribution real income gains become larger and larger and
reach 160 percent for the top 0.01 percent of the distribution (Figure 2a), or close to 6
percent per year (Figure 2b). But although the growth at the top is very large, it is not
quite as large as in the United States. Figure 2b compares annualized growth rates in
Canada and the United States. In both countries, the incomes of the “bottom 90 percent”
show no growth whatsoever over time. Higher up in the distribution, income growth is
systematically larger in the United States than in Canada. It is more than twice as high by
the time we reach the very top of the distribution.
        Although the available data indicates significant Canada – US differences in the
growth of top incomes, these apparent differences may reflect differences and changes in
how income is reported in the two countries (Veall, 2012). In particular, in both Canada
and the US there have been changes in incorporation laws (and their administration) that
influence whether income earned by professionals (such as doctors, dentists and lawyers)
flows through to personal income reported for tax purposes. The extent to which these
changes in incorporation laws and practices can account for differential growth in
reported top incomes is an open question.14 In addition, in Canada the change introduced
in the 2006 Census that allowed individuals to choose to permit access to their tax returns
rather than self-report their income may have played a role. It is unclear what an
incorporated individual would answer on the Census income question prior to tax-based
reporting.
        Figure 2c suggests that differences in income growth at the very top may have to
do with the fact Canada does not quite have the upper tail of very top earners that is
observed in the United States. Instead of comparing U.S. and Canadian income growth by
fractiles (99 to 99.9 percent, 99.9 to 99.99 percent, etc.), Figure 2c plots income growth


14
   For example, the 1986 reform in the United States led to a substantial amount of income being
transferred from C corporations (income that does not flow through to the personal income tax
system) to S corporations whose income does flow through to personal income tax (Slemrod,
2000; Veall, 2012)). This change is the main cause of the 1986 spike in measured top incomes in
the US, and suggests that Canadian top income levels would be higher if incomes reported by
Canadian Controlled Private Corporations, or CCPCs (equivalent to C corporations in the US),
were reported as personal income for tax purposes. In addition, in Canada there has been an
increased propensity over this time period for doctors, lawyers and dentists to form companies, in
part because legal prohibitions that restricted at least some kinds of professional income from
being reported as corporate income for tax purposes were lifted during the 1990s and 2000s.

                                                10
as a fraction of average income in each fractile. Interestingly, the figure shows that points
for Canada and the United States line up well except at the very top of the distribution
(99.9 to 99.99 and especially the top 0.01 percent). In other words, individuals with
similar incomes in the two countries experienced fairly similar income growth between
1982 and 2010. But since there are not quite as many people (relative to population) with
extremely high incomes in Canada and the United States, fractile-based comparisons at
the top tends to contrast people with substantially different levels of incomes in the two
countries. For example, average income of the top 0.01 percent was over $10 million in
the US, more than double that of Canada’s counterpart, which makes the difference in
average annual growth rates (15 percent in the US versus less than 5 percent in Canada)
even more striking. This factor appears to account for most of the difference in the
growth in top incomes in the two countries.
        Another way of illustrating the consequences of the increasing concentration of
income in Canada is to look at the evolution of different measures of the labour share of
total income, in particular with and without including top earners in labour’s share.15
Figure 3 shows that after hovering around 65 percent until the mid-1990s, the labour
share has declined precipitously to reach only about 60 percent in recent years.16
Although the labour share has also declined in most other industrialized countries
(Karabarbounis and Neiman, 2013), this is a dramatic change since the labour share in
Canada had been stable at around two-thirds for decades.
        The decline in the labour share is even more dramatic when the top 1 percent of
earners is excluded from the share of income going to labour. The adjusted share now
goes from a peak of 62 percent in the early 1990s to only 54 percent in recent years.
Fitting a linear trend to the data indicates that the labour share declined by 0.17
percentage points a year between 1982 and 2008. The rate of decline almost doubles to
0.30 percent once we remove the top 1 percent from the labour share.
        While these yearly percentage changes look small, they correspond to large
numbers since the size of the total pie (Canada’s GDP) is now approaching 2 trillion
dollars. The 0.17 percent annual decline in the labour share means that, year after year,

15
   Labour share refers to the fraction of national income received by workers, the remainder going
to capital.
16
   The labour share was downloaded from the OECD website.

                                               11
3.2 billion dollars go from labour to capital. A further 2.5 billion a year moves from the
“bottom 99 percent” of workers to the top 1 percent. This adds up to 5.2 billion dollars
annually moving from the bottom 99 percent to the top one percent and capital,
equivalent to about $230 annually for each of 23 million Canadian workers as of 1995,
the middle of our sample period. This dramatically illustrates how large the distribution
effects linked to growing inequality in Canada have been over the last few decades.
B. Comparing census and tax data
As we noted in Section II, all the income data in the long-form Census were self-reported
until 2001. Starting in 2006 Statistics Canada gave respondents the option of instead
allowing access to their tax return, and over 80 percent of individuals agreed to share
their income tax information to reduce response burden. One concern with self-reported
income is that it may systematically understate incomes at the very top. For instance,
Bound and Krueger (1991) find evidence of mean reversion in self-reported income.
They compare administrative income data (from the U.S. Social Security administration)
to self-reported income (from the Current Population Survey) for the same individuals,
and find that high-income individuals tend to underreport their income, while low-income
do the opposite. However, Bound and Krueger (1991) did not look explicitly at the case
of top earners. Using the confidential (and non top coded) version of the March CPS,
Burkhauser et al (2012) conclude that trends in top income based on self-reported data
are quite similar to those obtained using administrative tax data.
       Frenette, Green, and Picot (2006) compare trends in inequality and average
income by vingtiles in Canada using a variety of data sets. Their findings suggest that
Census and tax data show similar income trends, except perhaps at the bottom of the
distribution. Milligan (2013) reaches a similar conclusion in the case of top income
shares. In Figures 4a and 4b, we explicitly compare the income cut-offs and income
shares computed from the master files for the Census (reported in Milligan 2013) to those
from the LAD (reported in Veall 2012).
       The income cut-offs for the 95th and 99th percentiles in the two data sources are
remarkably similar. The cut-offs from the LAD are slightly higher than those from the
Census, but in most cases the gap is less than 5 percent. In the case of the cut-off at the
99.9th percentile, there is a more substantial gap between the two data sources. The


                                              12
income cut-offs are systematically larger in the LAD, and the gap relative to the Census
grows until 2001 when it reaches close to 25 percent. The cut-offs get much closer in
2006, however, suggesting that the introduction of the option to allow use of income tax
information in the Census makes the two data sources more comparable.17
        The income shares reported in Figure 4b are also relatively similar in the two data
sources. As in the case of the income cut-offs, there is more of a gap at the very top end
though the difference between the two data sources declines substantially in 2006. We
conclude from the examination of these trends that the Census provides very accurate
information on top end incomes that is quite close to that obtained using tax data (LAD).
There is more of a difference between the two sources at the very top end (99th
percentile) but this gap has narrowed substantially with the recent introduction of tax-
based reporting.


IV. DETAILED EXAMINATION OF TOP INCOMES USING CENSUS AND NHS
DATA


We now take advantage of the rich features of the Census and NHS to look at detailed
characteristics of top earners. The main contribution of the paper is to show how the
composition of top earners has changed over time, and which groups have experienced
the most income growth.
        Existing Canadian studies have looked at the characteristics of top earners at a
given point in time. In contrast, our primary focus is on the evolution of the
characteristics of this group over time. Using Census data for 2006, Fortin et al. (2012)
show that there is a fair amount of diversity among top earners. The largest groups of top
earners are executives, doctors (including dentists and veterinarians) and individuals
working in the financial sector. Fortin et al. (2012) also show that top earners are much
more highly educated than average, and are overwhelmingly men. More recent data from
the 2011 NHS (Statistics Canada, 2013) confirms that top earners are more educated than

17
  Brochu, Morin, and Billette (2013) look at differences in the income distribution between
Census respondents who did and did not consent to share their income tax data with Statistics
Canada. They find that the bottom end of the distribution is more affected by response issues than
the top end.

                                                13
average. The NHS data also indicate that the majority of top earners come from only
three fields of study: business, health, and engineering.
       To the best of our knowledge, however, no existing studies have attempted to
document the evolution over time of the composition of top earners using the detailed
information on education, occupation, industry, etc. available in the Census. In the United
States, Bajika, Cole, and Heim (2010) use information about occupations available in
income tax statements to look at trends in the composition (and average income) of top
earners by occupation. While it is unclear to what extent the information on occupation
reported on income tax returns is accurate, Bajika, Cole, and Heim (2010) show a number
of interesting trends in the composition of US top earners. In particular, they find that
most individuals in the top 0.1 percent are executives, managers, supervisors, and
financial professionals. Individuals in these occupations also account for 70 percent of
the growth in the share of national income earned by the top 0.1 percent between 1979
and 2005. This group also accounts for close to 50 percent of the top 1 percent of earners.
The main reasons for the difference between the fraction of executives, managers,
supervisors, and financial professionals in the top 1 and 0.1 percent is that a large number
of medical doctors are in the top 1 percent (MDs account for 15 to 20 percent of the top 1
percent depending on the year), but few MDs make it into the top 0.1 percent.
       Our main results are reported in Tables 1 and 2. The analysis sample includes all
individuals age 15 and above with positive incomes. Table 1a provides a detailed
description of the characteristics of top earners (those with income in the top one percent
of the distribution) in each of the six censuses (1981 to 2006) and the 2011 NHS. As a
benchmark, we also report the distribution of characteristics for all individuals with
positive incomes in Table 1b. Table 2a then presents the average income of top earners as
a function of the different characteristics reported Table 1, while Table 2b does the same
for all income earners.
       Tables 1 and 2 provide two different, but related ways of looking at the sources of
growth in top earnings over time. Holding the fraction of all income earners in a given
group or sector (e.g. finance) constant over time, if that group experiences unusual
growth in income at the top, we should see an increase the fraction of all top income
earners (e.g. in the top one percent) who are in that sector. In other words, we will


                                             14
conclude that a given group contributes positively to the growth in incomes at the top if
the fraction of top earners in that group (Table 1a) increases faster than the fraction of all
income earners in that same group (Table 1b). Likewise, we would reach the same
conclusion if average incomes in the group, conditional on being in the top one percent,
were also shown to be increasing relative to other groups or sectors. As we will see in the
results presented below, both approaches for looking at sources of growth in incomes at
the top yield relatively similar answers.
        In our examination of the evolution of top incomes we focus on Census data as
these are collected on a consistent basis over time. NHS results are included in the tables,
and occasionally discussed in the text. However, because the two data sources cannot
reliably be compared, little attention is given to the NHS results.
        Since there is a lot of information reported in the tables, we have added a
summary table at the end of the paper that reports the most salient results from Table 1a
and 1b. Readers may want to consult this summary table instead of the detailed tables we
are about to discuss.
        In the summary table and the Appendix tables (discussed later) we also report the
ratio of top earners to all earners for each category at the beginning and end of the sample
period. These “relative proportions” enable the reader to easily see which groups are
under-represented or over-represented among top earners, and how the extent of under-
or over-representation changed over time.18
        The first row of Table 1a shows the income cut-off for the top one percent of the
income distribution. Consistent with the evidence reported in Figure 4a, the cut-off
increases steadily over time (in constant 2000 dollars) to reach about 154,000 in the 2006
census and 160,000 in 2011. Table 1a also shows that labour earnings are by far the
largest source of income of individuals in the top one percent.19 On average, labour
earnings represent over 80 percent of the income of individuals in the top one percent,


18
   For example, as shown in the summary table, the relative proportion of men among top earners
was 1.7 in 1981 and 1.6 in 2011, indicating that men are substantially over-represented among top
earners and the extent of over-representation declined modestly from about 70% in 1981 to about
60% in 2011.
19
   Labour earnings include both wage and salary earnings and self-employment income. Note that
studies based on tax data (e.g. Saez and Veall, 2005) also indicate that labour earnings account
for most of the income of top income earners.

                                               15
which is substantially higher than the corresponding figure for all individuals (Table 1b).
Furthermore, earnings as a fraction of income of people at the top have been relatively
constant over time. This clearly indicates that explanations for the growth in earnings at
the top have to focus on the role of labour earnings, as opposed to other income sources
like investment income.
        A related set of results on hours of work is reported in the following rows of
Table 1a. The results indicate that individuals in the top one percent tend to work
substantially longer hours than the rest of the workforce. For instance, conditional on
working, hours of work of top earners are stable around 48 to 49 hours compared to 38 to
39 hours for all workers. Furthermore, there is a much higher share of individuals at the
top who work more than 50 hours a week, and this fraction has increased from 46 percent
in 1981 to 54 percent in 2006.20 This is consistent with Kuhn and Lozano (2008) who
find that, in the United States, high wage workers have been increasingly likely to work
long hours (more than 48 hours a week in their case).
        The next set of results in Table 1a show the role of standard demographic
characteristics (gender, education, and age) in the probability of being in the top one
percent. The most dramatic finding is that an overwhelming fraction of top earners are
men. This fraction steadily declines over time, but remains extremely high (over 80
percent) in 2006 and 2011. The downward trend is not surprising since the gender wage
gap has also been declining over time (Baker and Drolet, 2010). The very small fraction
of women at the top is nonetheless consistent with the existence of a glass ceiling that
makes it hard for women to access high-paying jobs.21
        Education also plays a very important role in the probability of being a top
income earner. Even in 2006, only 19 percent of all income earners (see Table 1b) had a
bachelor’s degree or more (including professional and graduate degrees). This fraction
was even lower (less than 10 percent) in 1981. By contrast, in 2006 65 percent of top
income earners have at least a bachelor’s degree, rising to 68 percent in 2011. In other
words, individuals in the top 1 percent are more than three times as likely to hold at least

20
   The large decline in this fraction to 30% in 2011 is puzzling, and we can only speculate about
the reasons for the discrepancy with previous data.
21
   See Albrecht, Bjorklund and Vroman (2003) for evidence on the glass ceiling hypothesis, and
Bertrand, Goldin and Katz (2010) for recent evidence on the gender gap among MBA graduates.

                                                16
a bachelor’s degree than typical individuals. The importance of higher education has also
grown over time. Back in 1981, 44 percent of top earners had a least a bachelor’s degree,
which is about 20 percentage points less than in 2006. The growing role of higher
education in top earnings is consistent with Boudarbat, Lemieux, and Riddell (2010) who
show that returns to higher education have steadily increased in Canada since 1981.
        Among individuals with at least a bachelor’s degree, those with a medical degree
(including degrees in dentistry and veterinary medicine) are particularly likely to be part
of the top one percent. Table 1a indicates that around 12 percent of these individuals are
part of the top one percent in 2006, despite the fact they represent only about 0.5 percent
of the population (Table 1b). Note, however, that the share of top income earners who
have a medical degree has been declining steadily over time despite the fact they
represent a slightly growing share of all income earners (Table 1b). This suggests that
over time medical doctors have lost ground relative to other top earners, perhaps because
their earnings depend more on government policies than on market forces. The fact that
the downward trend stopped after 2001 is also consistent with the large federal re-
investments in health care that started around year 2000.22 The role of government
policies rather than market forces in influencing salaries of doctors and dentists is also
consistent with U.S. evidence. In the US, where governments play a smaller role in
determining these salaries there does not appear to indicate a similar decline in the
fraction of medical doctors at the top of the distribution (Bajika, Cole, and Heim, 2010).
        We next show that the probability of being in the top one percent depends on age.
Not surprisingly, very few individuals under the age of 35 (less than 5 percent in 2006)
are part of the top one percent. This is as expected since it is well known that earnings
grow rapidly as a function of age until about age 40. Furthermore, the fraction of top
earners under age 35 has declined steadily over time. Table 1b shows that this reflects in
part changing demographics as the fraction of young people in the population has also
declined over time (aging of the baby boom cohort). But the share of young top earners


22
  Federal health and social transfers to provinces decreased during most of the 1990s to reach
$12.5 billion in 1998-1999. Transfers increased steadily to $22.3 billion in 2003-04 and have
grown dramatically since then following the Health Accord of 2004. Health transfers are now part
of a separate program (the Canada Health Transfer, or CHT) that has grown from $15.3 billion in
2004-05 to $32.1 billion in 2014-15. See Department of Finance (2014) for more detail.

                                              17
declined to a greater extent than would be expected on the basis of demographic trends,
which is consistent with a well-documented decline in the relative earnings of young
workers starting in the early 1980s.23
        While the information about medical degrees is available in the main census
question about educational attainment (highest degree or diploma), detailed information
on other fields of study is only available starting in 1986. We look at ten broad fields of
study in Table 1 and present more detailed breakdowns in Appendix Table 1. The most
noticeable trend in Table 1a is the growing importance of commerce/business degrees
among top earners, which mainly reflects the general growth in this type of degree in the
whole population (Table 1b).24 Another noticeable trend is the declining importance of
health degrees among top earners, which is consistent with the evidence for medical
degrees discussed above.
        A comparison of Tables 1a and 1b also indicates that holders of degrees in pure
and applied science are more likely to be part of the top one percent than most other
degree holders. For instance, individuals with degrees in engineering and applied science
represent 9 (10) percent of top earners in 2006 (2011), but only 2.8 (3.0) percent of all
income earners. That said, the fraction of top earners with science degrees has only
increased slightly over time, suggesting this is not the main group behind the growth of
top incomes in Canada. However, the aggregate number reported in Table 1 hides some
interesting developments among more finely defined groups of degree holders. In
particular, Appendix Table 1 shows that the share of top earners with degrees in
computer science (and applied mathematics) has increased dramatically over time.
Computer scientists only accounted for about 0.2 percent of top earners in 1986,
compared to 1.6 percent in 2001. Appendix Table 1 also shows that the fraction of top
earners with computer science degrees has grown much faster than the fraction of these
individuals among all income earners that increased from 0.2 percent in 1986 to 0.5
percent in 2001. Nonetheless, despite this substantial growth in percentage terms, those
with degrees in computer science made up less than 2% of top earners in 2001.


23
  See Beaudry and Green (2000) and Boudarbat, Lemieux and Riddell (2010).
24
  The over-representation of this group declined by a modest amount from 4.2 to 4.0 over the
1981 to 2001 period.

                                               18
        It is difficult to compare fields of study in 2006 to those in earlier years because
of a major change in the classification system used (from the MFS to the CIP
classification) for coding of field of study. Appendix Table 1 nonetheless shows that the
fraction of computer scientists among all income earners kept growing after 2001 (from
0.5 percent in 2001 to 0.7 percent in 2006) while the fraction among top earners declined
precipitously (from 1.6 percent in 2001 to 0.9 percent in 2006). This suggests that the
1986 to 2001 growth in the fraction of top income earners with computer science degrees
was mostly a transitory phenomenon linked to IT boom (and bust) of the 1990s. When
taking the longer view (up to 2006 and 2011), the growth in the IT sector does not appear
to be a major factor in the growth of incomes at the top end.
        We next look at the industry composition of top earners.25 The main finding about
industry composition is the growth in the fraction of top earners working in business
services and the finance and insurance sector. The fraction of top income earners working
in business services (management consulting, law and accounting firms, etc.) increased
from 12 to 19 percent between 1981 and 2006. The increase in finance and insurance was
even more dramatic, as the fraction of top earners working in this sector doubled from 5.4
percent in 1981 to 10.8 percent in 2006. This dramatic change happened despite the fact
the fraction of all income earners in this sector remained constant at around 3 percent
(Table 1b) between 1981 and 2006. By contrast, the fraction of all income earners in
business services doubled from 3.4 to 6.7 percent between 1981 and 2006, indicating that
the growth in top earners in business services is a composition effect linked to the growth
of the sector. The NHS data indicate that this growth continued in the latter half of the
2000s. These results clearly indicate that the financial sector played an important role in
the growth of top earnings in Canada, just as it did in the United States (e.g. Bajika, Cole,
and Heim, 2010).

25
   For 1981 to 2001 we are able to construct a consistent classification of major industries from
the 1970 SIC (for 1981) and the 1980 SIC (for 1986-2001). We can also construct a consistent
classification for 2001 and 2006 using the 1997 NAICS (for 2001) and 2002 NAICS (for 2006).
These two sets of consistent classifications are reported in Appendix Table 2. In Table 1, the
figures reported for 2006 are obtained by computing the 2001 to 2006 change from the consistent
NAICS coding of industries, and adding it to the “closest” major industry aggregate for 2001
(based on the SIC classification). In most cases the industry aggregates based on SIC and NAICS
are very close to each other, but the 2006 figures reported in Table 1 are nonetheless based on an
approximation.

                                                19
       Another sector in which the fraction of top earners has increased rapidly in recent
years is the oil and gas extraction (and mining) sector. The fraction of top income earners
working in that sector almost doubled from 3 percent in 1981 to 5.7 percent in 2006 (and
rose substantially further to 7.1% in 2011 according to the NHS), with most of the change
happening in recent years. Not surprisingly, the fraction of top earners from Alberta
(lower down in Table 1a) has also increased rapidly in recent years. 17 percent of top
income earners lived in Alberta in 2006, which is much larger than the fraction of all
income earners living in this province (10.3 percent in Table 1b). These findings are also
consistent with Veall (2012) who shows that Alberta is the province that has experienced
the fastest growth in the top income share in Canada.
       The next set of results looks at the role of occupations. Because of major changes
in the coding of occupations introduced in 1991, we only report results for 1991 to 2011
that are based on the SOC 1991 classification of occupations. Not surprisingly,
executives (senior management) account for a disproportionate share of top income
earners. For example, in 2006 16.8 percent of top earners were senior managers, despite
the fact that this occupation only accounts for 0.9 percent of all income earners (Table
1b). More importantly, the fraction of top income earners in senior management
occupations has increased over time, going from 13.7 percent in 1991 to 16.8 percent in
2006. Interestingly, all of the increase in the fraction of managers (of all levels) in the
top one percent (from 35 to 38.5 percent) comes from senior management. Likewise,
essentially all the growth in the broad business, finance, and administrative occupations
(from 8.7 to 12.7 percent) comes from business and finance.
       The only other occupation that has grown in importance among top earners is
natural and applied science occupations (from 5 to 7.5 percent in 2006). Note, however,
that the relative importance of this occupation has also grown among all income earners
(from 3.6 to 4.8 percent in Table 1b). Furthermore, individuals in this occupation are
about 50 percent more likely than average to be in the top 1 percent (e.g. 7.5 percentage
points is about 50 percent higher than 4.8 percentage points). By contrast, individuals in
business and finance are more than 3 times more likely than average to be at the top (9.1
vs. 2.7 percent in 2006). This figure is even higher among senior managers who are
almost 20 times more likely than average to be at the top (16.8 vs. 0.9 percent in 2006).


                                              20
On balance, our findings are similar to the trends for the United States, where the
evidence indicates that top executives and finance specialists are the two most important
groups behind the growth in incomes at the top (e.g. Bajika, Cole, and Heim, 2010, and
Kaplan and Rauh, 2013).
        The last set of results in Table 1a indicates how top income earners are distributed
across provinces and cities. As we discussed above, a noticeable trend is the growth in
the fraction of top income earners who live in Alberta. The fraction of top income earners
living in Ontario also outpaced population growth in that province, going from 39 to 51
percent between 1981 and 2001, but declining somewhat during the next decade. This is
again consistent with Veall (2012) who shows that, after Alberta, Ontario is the province
that has experienced the fastest growth in its top income share. By contrast, the share of
top income earners living in Quebec has declined faster (from 21 to 17 percent) than its
population share. The share of top income earners also declined in British Columbia
despite the fact its population share increased. The decline in the forest industry, as well
as reductions in Canadian ownership (and thus loss of head offices) in this sector, may
have contributed to the BC experience.
        The results for major urban areas use the Census definition (Census Metropolitan
Areas). Overall, top incomes are to an important extent an urban phenomenon – over
60% of top earners live in the 5 major cities (Table 1a), whereas almost 60 percent of the
population live outside these large urban areas (Table 1b). The top 1 percent is over-
represented in 4 of the 5 largest cities – the exception being Montreal where the fraction
of top income earners is about the same as its share of the population. Looking at changes
over time, the results for cities parallel those for provinces. The most noteworthy changes
over time have been the increases in the fraction of top income earners in Toronto (from
20% to 28%) and (especially) Calgary, where the fraction of top earners almost doubled
from 5% to over 10%, much larger than its share of Canada’s population.26 More
generally, the growth of incomes at the very top of the distribution is essentially an urban
phenomenon – the fraction of the top 1% living outside the five major cities declined
from 49% in 1981 to 39% (38%) in 2006 (2011) (Table 1a).

26
  In their analysis using tax data, Murphy and Veall (2013) show that more than one-half of the
surge of the share of market income received by the top 1% in Canada is attributable to Calgary
and Toronto.

                                               21
       Given the growing importance of senior managers in the top 1%, we show in
Appendix Table 3 the industrial composition of senior managers among top earners and
all earners over the 1991-2011 period. Among top earners, senior managers in business
services grew substantially (from about 12% to 17%), but proportionately less than the
growth of senior managers in business services among all earners – thus their relative
proportion fell from 1.2 to 1.0. In contrast, in finance and insurance the 35 percent
increase in senior managers among the top 1% was greater than the growth in senior
managers in finance and insurance among all earners. This highlights the combined
importance of the finance and insurance sector and CEOs and other senior managers in
that sector in the growth of top incomes. The opposite trends hold for numerous other
sectors – such as educational services and accommodation, food and beverage – that
were characterized by decreases in the relative importance of senior managers but even
larger declines in the representation of senior managers in the top 1% of earners.
       Table 2a reports the average income of individuals in the top one percent.
Consistent with the evidence from tax data (e.g. Figure 2a), the first row of the table
indicates that average real income among all top income earners has increased
substantially over time to reach $342,000 in 2006 (in year 2000 dollars).27 Comparing
Tables 2a and 2b also indicates that the rate of income growth in average income for top
earners has substantially outpaced the rate of growth for all income earners. This is again
consistent with the evidence based on tax data reported in Figure 2a.
       The detailed breakdowns by groups and sectors show that trends in average
incomes at the top are closely connected to trends in the fraction of individuals at the top
(Table 1a). For example, the average income of individuals with medical degrees
declined relative to other top earners between 1981 and 2006. The average income of top
income in this group was similar to the average for all top earners in 1981, but was 23

27
  There is a surprising and sizable drop in the average income of top earners in the 2011 NHS,
despite the fact that the income cutoff grew between 2006 and 2011. This appears to be due to
under-reporting of income among the very highest earners. Statistics Canada (2011) compares the
number of individuals reporting income above certain levels (100,000, 200,000, 300,000,
500,000, 1,000,000) in the NHS and according to tax data (T1 file). The number of individuals
reporting income above 100,000 and 200,000 is very similar in these two data sources, but the
number of individuals reporting income above 1,000,000 is about 20% less in the NHS than in tax
data. There are also fewer individuals reporting income above 300,000 and above 500,000 in the
NHS.

                                              22
percent below average in 2006. So both the fraction of top income earners who have
medical degrees (Table 1a), and the evolution of their average incomes indicate that this
particular group lost ground relative to other top income earners over time. Note also
that, conditional on being in the top one percent, individuals with medical degrees are
now one of the groups with the lowest average incomes. This likely reflects the
compensation system for doctors, which is closely connected to government-set (or
negotiated) reimbursement rates for different medical procedures. For all practical
purposes, most medical doctors are paid something akin to piece rates, which essentially
makes it impossible to earn the extremely high incomes of some top executives,
investment bankers, etc.
        Table 2a indeed shows that executives/managers and individuals in the financial
sector earn substantially higher incomes than other top earners. Furthermore, the rate of
growth in average income for these two groups is above the average for all top income
earners. As a result, by 2006 top income earners in finance were earning 26 percent
above the average for all top income earners. In other words, the situation of individuals
working in the financial sector is exactly the opposite of those with medical degrees, as
both their share among top earners and their average incomes have grown over time.
       A similar picture emerges when we examine the growth of top earnings by major
field of study over the 1986 to 2006 period (Table 2a). The largest increases occurred for
Commerce, Management and Business administration (95%) and Mathematics, Computer
and Physical Sciences (104%), two major fields that also grew as a fraction of top
earners. In contrast, income among the top 1 percent whose field of study was in Health
Professions increased by 40%, less than one-half as much.


V. CONCLUDING REMARKS


In this paper, we use detailed information from the master files of the 1981 to 2006
census and 2011 NHS to look at the evolution of top incomes in Canada. Like studies
based on tax data, we find that incomes at the top have grown much faster than in the rest
of the Canadian population. Census data also allows us to look at detailed characteristics
of top income earners, and how these characteristics have changed over time.


                                            23
        A first important conclusion we reach is that, as in the United States, executives
and individuals working in the financial and business services sectors are the two most
important groups driving the growth in top incomes in Canada. A finding more specific
to Canada is that the oil and gas sector has also played an important part in income
growth at the top, especially in more recent years. A closely related finding is that
Alberta now accounts for a disproportionate share of top income earners in Canada.
        At the other end of the spectrum, individuals with medical degrees have generally
lost ground relative to other top income earners. Average incomes have increased for this
group, but not as fast as for other workers. Another important finding is that, given the
prominent role of technological change in many explanations for the growth in top
incomes, individuals with pure or applied science degrees, including computer scientists,
have made substantial gains relative to other top income earners. However, these gains
are smaller than those made by senior managers and those working in the financial and
business services sectors. There are many more computer scientists at the top than 30
years ago, but this group still constitutes only a small fraction of top earners. In addition,
the greater presence of computer scientists among top earners mostly reflects a general
increase in the fraction of all income earners who hold computer science degrees.
        What do these findings tell us about the role of market forces vs. rents that we
discussed in the introduction? When comparing top executives and doctors, it is clear that
“rents” or related institutional factors have to be at least part of the story for changes at
the top. In Canada, the ability of doctors (as individuals or as a group) to extract rents
chiefly depends on reimbursement rates that are negotiated with provincial health
authorities. While there is an ongoing debate on the ability of top executives to extract
rents (see the references in the introduction), it is difficult to believe that rents are not part
of the explanation for why executives did much better than doctors in terms of top
income growth in recent decades.
        While technological change can affect earnings of different groups of workers in
different ways, the results for scientists and computer scientists in particular suggest that
this is only a modest part of the story for what happened at the very top of the
distribution. If the IT revolution was the main driver of income growth at the very top, it



                                               24
would be hard to believe that the group of IT specialists at the very core of this revolution
would not represent a larger fraction of top income earners.
       In the case of the oil and gas sector, market forces are surely playing a role in the
growth in earnings in that sector, and in provinces (in particular Alberta) where this
sector is most developed. It is not clear, however, why people at the very top should
benefit more than the other income earners. Indeed, when looking below the top one
percent, Fortin and Lemieux (2014) find that less-skilled workers benefited more from
the extractive resources boom than more-skilled workers. Furthermore, Bertrand and
Mullainathan (2001) use changes in oil prices as a prime example of why many CEOs
appear to be paid for “luck” instead of performance. If CEOs were paid in a way that
serves the interests of shareholders, they should be rewarded based on their effort and
performance, as opposed to factors like world oil prices that are beyond their control. The
fact that top incomes went up substantially in the oil and gas sector is consistent with a
skimming model of pay setting (Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2001) where top executives
are able to capture some of the large rent created by higher oil prices.
       On balance, we think that our findings are more consistent with a rent-extraction
story than a pure market-based explanation. It is important to stress, however, that the
role of rents does not mean that top income earners are “rentiers” in the traditional sense
of the word. Like the rest of the Canadian population, people at the top earn most of their
income from work. If anything, work effort has increased over time, as evidenced by the
growing share of top earners working more than 50 hours a week. So while some of the
high incomes are surely a compensation for hard work, the growth in top incomes over
time is just too large to be accounted for this factor alone.




                                              25
REFERENCES

Albrecht, James, Anders Bjorklund and Susan Vroman (2003). “Is There a Glass Ceiling
in Sweden?” Journal of Labor Economics 21 (January) 145-177.

Alvaredo, Facundo, Tony Atkinson, Thomas Piketty, and Emmanuel Saez (2014). World
Top Income Database (http://topincomes.g-mond.parisschoolofeconomics.eu/)

Alvaredo, Facundo, and Thomas Piketty (2008), “The Dynamics of Income
Concentration over the Twentieth Century: The Case of Advanced Economies”, Paris
School of Economics mimeo, November.

Acemoglu, Daron and David H. Autor (2011) “Skills, Tasks, and Technologies:
Implications for Employment and Earnings,” in O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, eds.,
Handbook of Economics, vol. IV.B, 1043-1172.
Autor, David H., Frank Levy and Richard J. Murnane. 2003. “The Skill Content of
Recent Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 118 (November) 1279-1333.

Bajika, Jon, Adam Cole, and Bradley T. Heim (2010) Jobs and Income Growth of Top
Earners and the Causes of Changing Income Inequality: Evidence from U.S. Tax Return
Data, Williams College mimeo.

Baker, Michael, and Marie Drolet (2010). A New View of the Male/Female Pay Gap,”
Canadian Public Policy 36 (December) 429-464.

Beaudry, Paul, and David A. Green (2000) “Cohort patterns in Canadian earnings:
assessing the role of skill premia in inequality trends,” Canadian Journal of Economics
33 (November), 907-936.

Bebchuk, Lucian, and Jesse Fried (2004) Pay without Performance: The Unfulfilled
Promise of Executive Compensation, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Bertrand, Marianne, Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence F. Katz (2010) "Dynamics of the
Gender Gap for Young Professionals in the Financial and Corporate Sectors," American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(3): 228-55.

Bertrand, Marianne and Sendhil Mullainathan (2001) “Are CEOs Rewarded for Luck?
The Ones without Principals Are,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116 (3): 901–932.

Bivens, Josh and Lawrence Mishel (2013). “The Pay of Corporate Executives and
Financial Professionals as Evidence of Rents in Top 1 Percent Incomes” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 27 (Summer) 57-78.




                                           26
Boudarbat, Brahim, Thomas Lemieux and W. Craig Riddell (2010). “The Evolution of
the Returns to Human Capital in Canada, 1980-2005” Canadian Public Policy 36
(March) 63-89.

Bound, John, and Alan B. Krueger (1991) “The Extent of Measurement Error in
Longitudinal Earnings Data: Do Two Wrongs Make a Right?” Journal of Labor
Economics , Vol. 9, No. 1 (January) , pp. 1-24

Brochu, Pierre, Louis-Philippe Morin and Jean-Michel Billette (2013) “Opting or Not
Opting to Share Income Tax Information with the Census: Does it Affect Research
Findings?” forthcoming in Canadian Public Policy

Burkhauser, Richard V., Shuaizhang Feng, Stephen P. Jenkins, and Jeff Larrimore
(2012), “Recent trends in top income shares in the United States: Reconciling estimates
from March CPS and IRS tax return data,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 94,
No. 2, pp. 371-388.

Card, David (1992). “The Effects of Unions on the Distribution of Wages: Redistribution
or Relabelling?” NBER Working Paper 4195, Cambridge: Mass.: National Bureau of
Economic Research.

Card, David (2001) “The Effect of Unions on Wage Inequality in the U.S. Labor
Market.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 54 (January): 296-315.

Card, David, Thomas Lemieux, and W. Craig Riddell (2004) “Unionization and Wage
Inequality: A Comparative Study of the U.S., UK and Canada,” Journal of Labor
Research, Vol. 25: 519-59.

Department of Finance (2014) History of Health and Social Transfers
(http://www.fin.gc.ca/fedprov/his-eng.asp)

DiNardo, John, Nicole M. Fortin and Thomas Lemieux (1996) “Labor Market Institutions
and the Distribution of Wages, 1973–1992: a Semiparametric Approach”, Econometrica,
64: 1001-1046

Dustmann, Christian, Johannes Ludsteck and Uta Schönberg (2009). “Revisiting the
German Wage Structure” Quarterly Journal of Economics (May) 843-881.

Finnie, Ross, and Ian Irvine (2006) “Mobility and Gender at the Top Tail of the Earnings
Distribution” The Economic and Social Review, Economic and Social Studies, vol. 37(2),
pages 149-173.

Fortin, Nicole M., Sergio Firpo, and Thomas Lemieux (2009). “Unconditional Quantile
Regressions”, Econometrica 77(3), May, 953-973.



                                           27
Fortin, Nicole M., David A. Green, Thomas Lemieux, Kevin Milligan and W. Craig
Riddell (2012). “Canadian Inequality: Recent Developments and Policy Options”
Canadian Public Policy 38 (June) 121-145.

Fortin and Lemieux (2014). “Changes in Wage Inequality in Canada: An Interprovincial
Perspective” mimeo, University of British Columbia, January.

Freeman, Richard (1993). “How Much has Deunionization Contributed to the Rise of
Male Earnings Inequality?” In Sheldon Danziger and Peter Gottschalk, eds. Uneven
Tides: Rising Income Inequality in America. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, pp.
133-63.

Frenette, Marc, David A. Green, and Garnett Picot (2006) “Rising Income Inequality in
the 1990s: An Exploration of Three Data Sources,” in D. Green and J. Kesselman (eds.),
Dimensions of Inequality in Canada, UBC Press, pp. 269-306.

Gabaix, X. and A. Landier (2008), “Why Has CEO Pay Increased So Much?”, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 123, pp. 49-100.

Gabaix, X., A. Landier and G.L. Savagnat (2013). “CEO Pay and Firm Size: An Update
after the Crisis” NBER Working Paper 19078, May.

Green, David A. and Benjamin Sand (2014) “Has the Canadian Labour Market
Polarized?” CLSRN Working Paper #133, April.

Hubbard, William H.J. (2011). “The Phantom Gender Difference in the College Wage
Premium” Journal of Human Resources 46 (Summer) 568-86.

Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin M. Murphy and Brooks Pierce (1993), “Wage Inequality and the
Rise in Returns to Skill”, Journal of Political Economy 101, pp. 410-42.

Kaplan, Steven N., and Joshua Rauh (2010). “Wall Street and Main Street: What
Contributes to the Rise in the Highest Incomes?” Review of Financial Studies 23(3):
1004-1050.

Kaplan and Rauh (2013). “It’s the Market: The Broad-Based Rise in the Return to Top
Talent” Journal of Economic Perspectives 27 (Summer) 35-56.

Karabarbounis, Loukas, and Brent Neiman (2013) The Global Decline in the Labor
Share, NBER Working Paper 19136, June.

Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin M. Murphy (1992). “Changes in Relative Wages 1963-
1987: Supply and Demand Factors” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 35-78.




                                           28
Kleiner and Krueger (2013). “Analyzing the Extent and Influence of Occupational
Licensing on the Labor Market” Journal of Labor Economics 31 (April 2013) S173-
S202.

Kuhn, Peter J. and Lozano (2008) “The Expanding Workweek? Understanding Trends in
Long Work Hours among U.S. Men, 1979-2006,” Journal of Labor Economics 26 (April)
311-343.

Lee, David S. (1999) “Wage Inequality in the United States during the 1980s: Rising
Dispersion or Falling Minimum Wage?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114: 977-1023.

Lemieux, Thomas (2006). “Increasing Residual Wage Inequality: Composition Effects,
Noisy Data, or Rising Demand for Skill?” American Economic Review 96(3) June, 461-
98.

Milligan, Kevin (2013) Income inequality in Canada: Trends in the Census 1980-2005
UBC working paper.

Murphy, Brian, Paul Roberts and Michael Wolfson (2007). A Profile of High Income
Canadians. Statistics Canada, Income Statistics Division, Income Research Paper Series.

Murphy, Brian, Sylvie Michaud and Michael Wolfson (2008). “Income Trajectories of
High Income Canadians, 1982-2005” mimeo, Statistics Canada.

Murphy, Brian and Michael Veall (2013). “A Tale of Two Cities? The Surge in Top
Incomes at the City Level in Canada. Mimeo, Statistics Canada and McMaster
University.

Rosen, Sherwin (1981). “The Economics of Superstars” American Economic Review 71
(December) 845-58.

Saez, Emmanuel, and Michael Veall (2005), “The Evolution of High Incomes in
Northern America: Lessons from Canadian Evidence” American Economic Review 95(3):
831-849.

Slemrod, Joel, editor (2000). Does Atlas Shrug? The Economic Consequences of Taxing
the Rich. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Statistics Canada (2008) Income and Earnings Reference Guide, 2006 Census. Catalogue
no. 97-563-GWE2006003, Ottawa.

Statistics Canada (2011) Income Reference Guide, National Household Survey, 2011.
Catalogue no. 99-014-XWE2011006, Ottawa.

Statistics Canada (2013) Education and Occupation of High-Income Canadians, Ottawa,
Catalogue No. 99-014-X2011003


                                          29
Veall, Michael (2012). “Top Income Shares in Canada: Recent Trends and Policy
Implications” Presidential Address, Canadian Economics Association, Canadian Journal
of Economics 45 (November) 1247-1272.




                                         30
DATA APPENDIX
In this appendix we explain how we reconcile the codes for major field of study and
industry to obtain consistent classifications over time.
       The census master files report the major field of study variable based on the
Major Field of Study (MFS) classification from 1986 to 2001, and the Classification of
Instructional Programs (CIP) in 2006. To take into account this change, we use the
concordance between MFS and CIP downloaded from the Statistics Canada website,28
and report the results at the major levels of the MFS. However, because the CIP has a
more detailed classification than the MFS, there are 170 CIP categories with more than
one MFS major level. To deal with those cases, we add an “overlapped” category, which
includes individuals with a major field of study in one of these 170 categories.
       Regarding industry, four different classifications are used in the Census master
files over the years: the Standard Industry Classification 1970 (SIC-1970) for 1981, the
SIC-1980 for 1986 to 2001, the North American Industry Classification System 1997
(NAICS-1997) for 2001, and the NAICS 2002 for 2006. Because SIC and NAICS have a
similar structure at the major industry level, we group some NAICS categories to match
the SIC categories and report the industry composition at the SIC major industry level.29
Finally, to keep consistency over time in both the composition and averages of 2006, we
compute the value of these variables in 2006 based on their level in 2001 (using SIC) and
the changes from 2001 to 2006 computed using the grouped NAICS classification.




28
   http://www.statcan.gc.ca/subjects-sujets/standard-norme/mfs-pde/mfscip-pdecpe-concstat-
eng.htm
29
   In particular, we group NAICS categories 51 and 22 into SIC’s “Communication and other
utility” level; NAICS categories 54 to 56 into SIC’s “Business Services” level, and NAICS
categories 71 and 81 into SIC’s “Other services” level.

                                              31
                            Figure 1: Top income shares in Canada, 1982‐2010 LAD
                    16

                    14

                    12
Top income shares




                    10

                    8

                    6

                    4

                    2

                    0
                     1980     1985       1990        1995          2000   2005     2010
                                                Top 1%        Top 0.1%




                                                         32
                    Figure 2a: Total Income Growth by Fractiles, 1982‐2010
180

160

140

120

100

 80

 60

 40

 20

     0
          Average      0 to 90     90‐95       95‐99          99‐99.5     99.5‐99.9 99.9‐99.99 Top 0.01

               Figure 2b: Annualized income growth between 1982 and 2010, Canada
                                        and the United States
16



14



12



10



 8



 6



 4



 2



 0
         Average      0 to 90    90 to 95    95 to 99        99 to 99.5   99.5 to 99.9   99.9 to 99.99   Top 0.01


‐2

                                            Canada       United States




                                                        33
                                           Figure 2c: Annualized income growth in Canada and the United as a
                                                           function of average fractile income
                                  16

                                  14

                                  12
Annualized (real) income growth




                                  10

                                  8

                                  6

                                  4

                                  2

                                  0
                                  10,000              100,000               1,000,000                 10,000,000   100,000,000
                                  ‐2
                                                                Average fractile income (log scale)

                                                                     Canada      United States




                                                                              34
                 Figure 3: Labour share with and without the top 1%
0.70

0.68

0.66

0.64

0.62

0.60

0.58

0.56

0.54

0.52

0.50
    1980          1985          1990         1995          2000           2005           2010
           Total labour share     Labour share without top 1%     Trend          Trend




                                            35
                                            Figure 4a: Top income cutoffs: LAD vs. Census
                            700000


                            600000


                            500000
 Income cutoffs ( 2000 $)




                            400000


                            300000


                            200000


                            100000


                                0
                                     1980         1985          1990            1995        2000          2005       2010
                                 LAD 95      LAD 99          LAD 99.9          Census 95     Census 99       Census 99.9

                                            Figure 4b: Top income shares: LAD vs Census
16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0
                        1980              1985           1990              1995            2000           2005             2010
                                                 LAD 95‐99              LAD 99‐99.9        LAD 99.9+
                                                 Census 95‐99           Census 99‐99.9     Census 99.9+

                                                                          36
                    Table 1a: Characteristics of Top Income Earners (Top 1 Percent), 1981-2011

                                                   1981      1986      1991      1996      2001      2006      2011
Income cutoff (2000 Dollars)                    122,439   118,871   125,213   119,795   140,150   153,908   160,232

Work and earnings
  Positive hours of work                         86.9%     87.1%     85.5%     86.7%     88.5%     87.8%     87.1%
  Work 50+ hours a week (only workers)           46.5%     48.0%     46.9%     53.5%     52.7%     54.4%     39.6%
  Average hours of work (only workers)             48.6      48.6      47.5      48.7      48.4      48.8      45.8
  Fraction of income from earnings               80.1%     81.3%     81.2%     83.1%     85.5%     84.6%     82.0%

Men                                              91.5%     90.0%     86.5%     84.9%     83.1%     81.2%     79.7%

Education
   Less than a bachelor's degree                 53.9%     46.7%     46.7%     40.9%     37.5%     35.4%     32.5%
   Bachelor's degree                             17.6%     21.3%     21.2%     24.6%     28.1%     29.5%     32.0%
   Medicine, dentistry, veterinary               14.7%     15.8%     14.0%     14.2%     12.3%     12.1%     10.4%
   Other graduate degrees                        13.8%     16.2%     18.2%     20.4%     22.1%     22.9%     25.2%

Age groups
   Under 35                                      13.7%     10.9%      9.5%      7.8%      7.3%      4.8%      4.2%
   35-64                                         76.5%     78.4%     77.7%     80.3%     83.0%     84.3%     83.7%
   Over 64                                        9.8%     10.7%     12.8%     11.9%      9.7%     11.0%     12.1%

Major Field of Study
  Educational, Recreational and Counselling Services        1.5%      2.1%      2.3%      1.8%      1.7%      2.1%
  Fine and Applied Arts                                     1.0%      1.2%      1.0%      1.1%      0.8%      0.8%
  Humanities and Related Fields                             2.5%      2.6%      3.0%      3.1%      2.3%      2.3%
  Social Sciences and Related Fields                       10.0%     11.7%     12.5%     12.8%     11.8%     12.2%
  Commerce, Management and Business                        16.2%     16.8%     20.2%     22.9%     24.7%     25.3%
  Agricultural, Biological, Nutritional, and Food Sc.       1.6%      1.8%      1.8%      1.7%      1.3%      1.4%
  Engineering and Applied Sciences                          8.0%      7.5%      7.8%      8.9%      9.0%     10.3%
  Applied Science Technologies and Trades                   5.9%      7.0%      6.7%      7.5%      6.6%      7.6%
  Health Professions and Related Technologies              19.3%     17.6%     18.1%     16.1%     16.6%     15.2%
  Mathematics, Computer and Physical Sciences               3.2%      3.2%      4.1%      5.1%      3.0%      3.1%
  No Specialization/No postsecondary educ.                 30.7%     28.5%     22.4%     18.8%     16.7%     13.6%
  Overlapped                                                                                        5.4%      6.2%

Industry
   Agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting     7.5%      5.0%      4.5%      2.9%      2.0%      1.4%      1.1%
   Mining, quarry and oil & gas                   3.0%      3.7%      2.5%      2.7%      2.9%      5.7%      7.1%
   Manufacturing                                 11.9%     12.0%     10.7%     11.9%     11.5%      9.6%      7.7%
   Construction                                   5.7%      4.3%      5.4%      3.4%      3.6%      4.2%      5.3%
   Transportation and storage                     4.5%      4.3%      3.9%      3.7%      3.4%      2.6%      2.4%
   Communication and other utility                1.5%      1.9%      2.0%      2.2%      2.5%      2.1%      2.3%
   Wholesale trade                                7.0%      5.9%      5.4%      6.8%      7.3%      7.7%      7.0%
   Retail trade                                   5.5%      5.0%      5.2%      3.9%      4.1%      4.3%      3.8%
   Finance and insurance                          5.4%      6.5%      6.7%      8.3%     10.2%     10.8%     11.0%
   Real estate                                    4.8%      4.3%      4.2%      3.9%      3.9%      4.1%      3.9%
   Business service                              11.9%     13.6%     15.5%     16.7%     20.8%     19.0%     19.2%
   Government service                             3.4%      3.5%      3.7%      3.4%      2.2%      2.2%      3.5%
   Educational service                            3.2%      3.3%      3.2%      3.2%      1.9%      1.8%      3.1%
   Health and social service                     15.6%     17.3%     15.8%     16.4%     15.0%     15.2%     13.3%
   Accommodation, food and beverage               1.4%      1.4%      1.3%      1.1%      1.1%      0.8%      0.8%
   Other services                                 2.2%      2.8%      3.0%      3.1%      2.8%      2.6%      2.8%
   Not applicable                                 5.5%      5.3%      6.8%      6.4%      4.8%      5.8%      5.6%




                                                          37
                                                Table 1a (continuation)

                                                  1981      1986       1991      1996       2001       2006          2011

Occupation (Based on SOC 91)
  Management                                                         35.0%      34.8%      38.2%     38.5%      36.3%
      Senior management                                              13.7%      13.6%      16.0%     16.8%      16.0%
  Business, finance and administrative                                8.7%      11.2%      11.7%     12.7%      13.0%
      Business and finance                                            5.6%       7.7%       8.9%      9.1%       9.2%
  Natural and applied sciences and related                            5.0%       5.4%       7.8%      7.5%       9.2%
  Health                                                             15.8%      16.1%      14.6%     15.2%      13.8%
  Social science, education, government service and religion          9.7%       9.7%       8.7%      9.0%      10.1%
  Art, culture, recreation and sport                                  1.4%       1.5%       1.6%      1.0%       1.2%
  Sales and service                                                   7.6%       7.4%       6.2%      5.9%       4.9%
  Trades, transport and equipment operators and related               5.0%       3.5%       3.5%      2.4%       3.4%
  Occupations unique to primary industry                              4.0%       2.6%       1.9%      1.5%       1.7%
  Occupations unique to processing, manufacturing and utilities       0.9%       1.3%       1.0%      0.6%       0.7%
  Not Applicable                                                      6.8%       6.4%       4.8%      5.8%       5.6%

Industry - Senior Management only
   Agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting                         0.7%       1.0%       0.6%      0.7%       0.8%
   Mining, quarry and oil & gas                                       3.8%       4.4%       3.7%      4.3%       4.9%
   Manufacturing                                                     25.6%      24.5%      20.8%     19.7%      15.6%
   Construction                                                       7.2%       4.9%       3.7%      5.4%       7.2%
   Transportation and storage                                         3.4%       3.9%       3.4%      3.5%       3.4%
   Communication and other utility                                    3.4%       3.6%       4.9%      3.9%       2.9%
   Wholesale trade                                                   12.0%      13.6%      12.0%     12.5%      12.4%
   Retail trade                                                       6.7%       4.9%       4.5%      4.4%       4.4%
   Finance and insurance                                             10.2%      10.5%      13.2%     13.6%      14.0%
   Real estate                                                        3.2%       3.8%       3.9%      4.3%       4.6%
   Business service                                                  11.9%      12.9%      20.2%     17.1%      17.3%
   Government service                                                 4.5%       3.2%       1.9%      2.3%       3.2%
   Educational service                                                0.7%       0.9%       0.7%      0.8%       1.0%
   Health and social service                                          1.7%       2.5%       1.9%      1.7%       2.2%
   Accommodation, food and beverage                                   1.7%       1.1%       1.0%      1.2%       1.3%
   Other services                                                     3.5%       4.1%       3.6%      4.5%       4.9%

Largest Central Metropolitan Areas
   Montreal                                     12.7%     12.4%      11.5%      11.9%      11.4%     11.2%      11.0%
   Toronto                                      20.3%     25.6%      27.9%      27.4%      30.2%     28.6%      27.3%
   Calgary                                       5.4%      5.9%       4.8%       5.6%       7.1%      9.4%      10.5%
   Edmonton                                      4.0%      3.4%       2.7%       2.8%       3.2%      3.9%       5.1%
   Vancouver                                     9.1%      8.1%       8.7%       9.3%       8.5%      8.3%       8.4%
   Rest of Canada                               48.6%     44.6%      44.4%      42.9%      39.7%     38.6%      37.7%

Province of residence
   Newfoundland and Labrador                     0.8%      0.8%       0.8%       0.8%       0.7%      0.7%       0.9%
   Nova Scotia                                   1.8%      2.2%       1.9%       1.9%       1.7%      1.5%       1.3%
   New Brunswick                                 1.0%      1.3%       1.3%       1.3%       1.0%      0.9%       1.0%
   Quebec                                       20.8%     19.4%      18.2%      17.8%      16.7%     16.7%      16.3%
   Ontario                                      38.9%     45.2%      49.3%      48.1%      51.1%     47.1%      43.1%
   Manitoba                                      3.2%      3.2%       2.7%       2.7%       2.3%      2.1%       1.9%
   Saskatchewan                                  4.3%      3.4%       2.4%       2.3%       1.7%      1.7%       2.2%
   Alberta                                      14.5%     12.4%       9.9%      10.9%      12.9%     17.0%      20.8%
   British Columbia                             14.4%     11.7%      13.0%      13.8%      11.5%     12.0%      11.9%
   PEI/Yukon/NW Territories/Nunavut              0.4%      0.4%       0.5%       0.5%       0.3%      0.3%       0.4%

Population (000s)                                157.2     170.7      193.5      213.0     227.3      244.2      259.2

Note: The sample consists of the top one percent of all income earners (individiduals with non-zero income) age 15
and above.
Source: Authors' calculations based on data from the master files of the 1981 to 2006 census and the 2011 National
Household Survey.



                                                          38
                              Table 1b: Characteristics of all Income Earners, 1981-2011

                                                 1981      1986      1991      1996         2001     2006     2011
Work and earnings
  Positive hours of work                        64.6%     63.4%     62.6%     60.3%        61.6%    61.8%    60.3%
  Work 50+ hours a week (only workers)          14.3%     15.8%     15.0%     17.7%        17.9%    18.2%    12.5%
  Average hours of work (only workers)            39.1      39.1      38.3      38.1         38.8     39.0     37.6
  Fraction of income from earnings              76.7%     69.9%     77.9%     62.7%        61.8%    63.0%    59.5%

Men                                             53.8%     52.3%     50.8%     50.3%        49.2%    48.9%    49.1%

Education
   Less than a bachelor's degree                90.9%     89.4%     87.9%     86.0%        84.0%    81.2%    78.4%
   Bachelor's degree                             5.9%      7.1%      7.9%      9.2%        10.5%    12.0%    13.8%
   Medicine, dentistry, veterinary               0.4%      0.4%      0.5%      0.5%         0.5%     0.5%     0.6%
   Other graduate degrees                        2.8%      3.1%      3.7%      4.3%         5.0%     6.2%     7.2%

Age groups
   Under 35                                     44.9%     41.8%     38.8%     34.5%        31.4%    29.9%    29.4%
   35-64                                        41.5%     43.8%     46.3%     49.9%        52.7%    53.7%    53.1%
   Over 64                                      13.6%     14.4%     15.0%     15.6%        15.9%    16.5%    17.5%

Major Field of Study (Based on MFS classification, 1986 - 2006)
  Educational, Recreational and Counselling Services        3.5%     3.9%      4.5%         4.7%     4.4%     4.7%
  Fine and Applied Arts                                     1.9%     2.1%      2.3%         2.5%     2.7%     2.8%
  Humanities and Related Fields                             2.2%     2.3%      2.6%         2.9%     2.7%     2.8%
  Social Sciences and Related Fields                        2.8%     3.3%      4.1%         4.5%     4.4%     4.8%
  Commerce, Management and Business                         7.7%     8.5%      9.3%         9.9%    10.5%    11.3%
  Agricultural, Biological, Nutritional, and Food Sc.       1.7%     1.8%      2.0%         2.2%     1.9%     2.1%
  Engineering and Applied Sciences                          1.3%     1.5%      1.8%         2.1%     2.8%     3.0%
  Applied Science Technologies and Trades                   8.5%     9.1%      9.5%         9.8%    10.0%    10.3%
  Health Professions and Related Technologies               3.9%     4.4%      4.7%         5.0%     5.8%     6.6%
  Mathematics, Computer and Physical Sciences               1.1%     1.2%      1.4%         1.7%     0.8%     0.9%
  No Specialization/No postsecondary educ.                 65.4%    61.9%     57.9%        54.7%    48.0%    44.4%
  Overlapped                                                                                         6.0%     6.5%

Industry
   Agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting    4.2%      4.1%      3.7%      3.3%         2.9%     2.4%     2.0%
   Mining, quarry and oil & gas                  1.4%      1.2%      1.0%      0.8%         0.8%     1.0%     1.1%
   Manufacturing                                15.3%     13.5%     11.4%     10.4%        10.4%     8.9%     6.8%
   Construction                                  5.2%      4.7%      5.1%      4.2%         4.3%     4.9%     5.2%
   Transportation and storage                    3.8%      3.5%      3.2%      3.0%         3.1%     3.0%     2.9%
   Communication and other utility               2.6%      2.5%      2.6%      2.2%         2.1%     2.0%     2.0%
   Wholesale trade                               3.8%      3.6%      3.3%      3.6%         3.8%     3.8%     3.6%
   Retail trade                                  9.9%     10.0%     10.3%      9.2%         8.9%     9.0%     9.0%
   Finance and insurance                         2.9%      2.8%      3.1%      2.6%         2.7%     2.7%     2.8%
   Real estate                                   1.4%      1.4%      1.3%      1.4%         1.3%     1.4%     1.4%
   Business service                              3.4%      3.7%      4.4%      4.8%         6.1%     6.7%     6.8%
   Government service                            6.2%      6.1%      6.1%      4.6%         4.2%     4.2%     5.1%
   Educational service                           5.4%      5.2%      5.4%      5.2%         5.2%     5.4%     5.8%
   Health and social service                     6.0%      6.5%      7.0%      7.2%         7.5%     7.9%     8.3%
   Accommodation, food and beverage              4.9%      5.1%      5.3%      5.2%         5.2%     5.1%     4.9%
   Other services                                4.6%      5.2%      5.4%      5.8%         5.5%     5.6%     5.4%
   Not applicable                               19.0%     20.9%     21.5%     26.5%        26.1%    25.8%    27.2%




                                                         39
                                                 Table 1b (continuation)

                                                   1981      1986      1991      1996       2001       2006          2011

Occupation (Based on SOC 91)
  Management                                                          7.4%       6.4%       7.5%      7.0%       7.1%
      Senior management                                               0.7%       0.7%       0.9%      0.9%       0.8%
  Business, finance and administrative                               15.0%      13.9%      13.2%     13.4%      13.0%
      Business and finance                                            2.1%       2.2%       2.6%      2.7%       2.8%
  Natural and applied sciences and related                            3.6%       3.6%       4.7%      4.8%       5.0%
  Health                                                              3.8%       3.6%       3.8%      4.1%       4.5%
  Social science, education, government service and religion          5.0%       4.9%       5.1%      5.5%       6.8%
  Art, culture, recreation and sport                                  1.9%       2.1%       2.2%      2.3%       2.5%
  Sales and service                                                  19.8%      19.6%      18.5%     18.8%      17.6%
  Trades, transport and equipment operators and related              12.0%      10.3%      10.3%     10.7%      10.6%
  Occupations unique to primary industry                              4.1%       3.6%       3.2%      2.9%       2.4%
  Occupations unique to processing, manufacturing and utilities       5.9%       5.6%       5.6%      4.8%       3.2%
  Not Applicable                                                     21.5%      26.5%      26.1%     25.8%      27.2%

Industry - Senior Management only
   Agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting                         1.1%       1.0%       1.0%      1.5%       1.4%
   Mining, quarry and oil & gas                                       1.5%       1.9%       1.6%      1.8%       1.8%
   Manufacturing                                                     19.5%      18.2%      15.2%     14.1%      11.9%
   Construction                                                       8.1%       6.8%       5.4%      6.8%       7.7%
   Transportation and storage                                         3.3%       3.6%       3.2%      3.4%       2.9%
   Communication and other utility                                    2.4%       2.1%       2.8%      1.9%       1.3%
   Wholesale trade                                                   10.0%      11.6%      10.8%     10.5%      10.3%
   Retail trade                                                       9.0%       7.5%       5.7%      5.7%       5.6%
   Finance and insurance                                              5.5%       5.3%       6.9%      6.3%       7.2%
   Real estate                                                        2.3%       2.6%       3.1%      3.5%       3.3%
   Business service                                                  10.1%      12.7%      17.3%     17.6%      17.4%
   Government service                                                13.2%      11.9%      11.2%      9.1%       8.8%
   Educational service                                                1.5%       1.5%       1.8%      2.2%       2.4%
   Health and social service                                          4.1%       4.6%       5.3%      5.2%       6.2%
   Accommodation, food and beverage                                   2.4%       1.7%       1.5%      2.1%       2.4%
   Other services                                                     5.9%       7.0%       7.2%      8.4%       9.2%

Largest Central Metropolitan Areas
   Montreal                                      11.9%     11.8%     11.6%      11.6%      11.5%     11.5%      11.4%
   Toronto                                       13.2%     14.3%     14.6%      14.8%      15.5%     15.9%      16.5%
   Calgary                                        2.6%      2.7%      2.8%       2.9%       3.3%      3.4%       3.6%
   Edmonton                                       2.8%      3.1%      3.1%       3.0%       3.2%      3.3%       3.4%
   Vancouver                                      5.7%      5.7%      6.1%       6.5%       6.7%      6.8%       7.0%
   Rest of Canada                                63.8%     62.2%     61.8%      61.2%      59.9%     59.0%      58.1%

Province of residence
   Newfoundland and Labrador                      1.9%      1.9%      1.9%       1.9%       1.7%      1.6%       1.6%
   Nova Scotia                                    3.3%      3.4%      3.2%       3.2%       3.0%      2.9%       2.8%
   New Brunswick                                  2.7%      2.7%      2.6%       2.6%       2.5%      2.3%       2.3%
   Quebec                                        25.6%     25.3%     25.0%      24.7%      24.2%     24.1%      23.9%
   Ontario                                       36.5%     37.1%     37.6%      37.4%      37.8%     38.2%      38.3%
   Manitoba                                       4.3%      4.2%      4.0%       3.9%       3.7%      3.5%       3.5%
   Saskatchewan                                   3.9%      3.9%      3.5%       3.4%       3.2%      3.0%       3.0%
   Alberta                                        9.3%      9.2%      9.1%       9.2%      10.0%     10.3%      10.6%
   British Columbia                              11.8%     11.6%     12.2%      13.2%      13.2%     13.2%      13.4%
   PEI/Yukon/NW Territories/Nunavut               0.7%      0.8%      0.8%       0.8%       0.7%      0.7%       0.7%

Population (000s)                               15,722.6 17,061.9 19,345.6 20,916.8 22,723.1 24,423.2 25,918.5

Note: The sample consists of all income earners (individiduals with non-zero income) age 15 and above.
Source: Authors' calculations based on data from the master files of the 1981 to 2006 census and the 2011 National
Household Survey.




                                                           40
          Table 2a: Average Income by Sub-Groups of Top Income Earners, 1981 to 2011 (2000 Dollars)

                                                   1980      1985      1990      1995      2000      2005      2010
Income cutoff (2000 Dollars)                    122,439   118,871   125,213   119,795   140,150   153,908   160,232
Total Income (Millions)                          31,048    33,233    41,163    43,523    59,888    83,649    83,000

Work and earnings
  Mean total income                             197,476   194,733   212,754   204,364   263,433   342,487   320,235
  Mean employment income                        154,596   154,945   169,234   168,224   222,532   283,925   257,510
  Work 50 hours or more per week                202,404   201,109   221,366   213,126   270,227   351,551   338,824
  Only workers                                  196,968   195,765   213,683   206,172   264,366   341,078   317,956

Men                                             197,927   195,902   215,445   207,591   269,305   353,899   330,569
Women                                           192,610   184,237   195,546   186,258   234,520   293,277   279,690

Education
   Less than a bachelor's degree                199,026   192,360   212,036   202,334   252,479   332,147   310,945
   Bachelor's degree                            199,174   199,138   217,153   207,275   280,681   362,247   332,140
   Medicine, dentistry, veterinary              193,395   195,346   209,020   198,711   228,682   264,072   276,029
   Other graduate degrees                       193,614   195,187   212,340   208,867   279,417   374,532   335,313

Age groups
   Under 35                                     184,330   175,753   194,326   190,027   237,574   265,980   267,993
   35-64                                        198,259   195,169   212,291   203,744   263,734   339,881   314,670
   Over 64                                      209,804   210,998   229,180   217,966   280,223   395,761   377,184

Major Field of Study
  Educational, Recreational and Counselling Services      166,541   185,078   193,567   242,902   305,506   277,523
  Fine and Applied Arts                                   183,822   201,533   187,580   252,626   319,172   302,072
  Humanities and Related Fields                           182,058   211,401   204,854   268,565   333,744   301,970
  Social Sciences and Related Fields                      199,789   222,292   210,366   283,285   353,880   330,882
  Commerce, Management and Business                       197,619   213,723   213,166   290,116   387,484   351,715
  Agricultural, Biological, Nutritional, and Food Sc.     179,463   199,455   189,589   235,333   294,068   287,939
  Engineering and Applied Sciences                        197,808   212,678   198,421   267,591   345,467   335,847
  Applied Science Technologies and Trades                 178,062   202,611   191,909   241,776   311,860   280,756
  Health Professions and Related Technologies             194,524   208,495   198,239   231,352   273,891   278,402
  Mathematics, Computer and Physical Sciences             183,677   206,442   195,933   247,649   375,666   333,075
  No Specialization/No postsecondary educ.                198,856   217,589   208,378   260,149   357,498   330,015
  Overlapped                                                                                      321,675   298,417

Industry
   Agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting   197,024   184,941   195,098   186,982   223,138   298,872   349,005
   Mining, quarry and oil & gas                 191,041   189,723   212,942   202,876   262,076   368,425   325,085
   Manufacturing                                192,290   195,838   208,717   216,429   276,795   358,888   339,291
   Construction                                 202,966   202,125   265,346   210,151   278,968   412,812   353,933
   Transportation and storage                   186,373   173,678   190,267   184,994   228,670   312,807   268,646
   Communication and other utility              172,405   172,038   192,443   182,760   252,521   286,168   294,521
   Wholesale trade                              204,423   203,908   225,948   212,640   262,643   339,279   309,513
   Retail trade                                 201,587   206,712   220,390   206,246   270,912   355,267   337,182
   Finance and insurance                        232,659   229,941   233,053   247,249   347,607   449,075   393,278
   Real estate                                  206,261   202,139   220,071   209,897   266,416   387,307   349,802
   Business service                             197,907   198,432   216,638   206,211   264,166   337,294   316,488
   Government service                           157,928   154,112   166,808   159,680   191,907   225,459   228,836
   Educational service                          159,630   160,243   169,264   166,891   200,941   260,351   254,150
   Health and social service                    196,175   196,509   209,671   198,872   230,133   270,557   276,712
   Accommodation, food and beverage             212,749   212,422   205,750   193,637   245,854   381,346   335,958
   Other services                               208,189   181,251   219,319   210,336   269,699   300,353   330,258
   Not applicable                               209,271   189,551   209,522   188,098   239,726   352,244   333,820




                                                          41
                                                Table 2a (continuation)

                                                  1980      1985      1990      1995      2000      2005      2010

Occupation (Based on SOC 91)
  Management                                                        233,410   225,875   301,671   397,701   353,533
      Senior management                                             256,621   263,210   342,551   445,925   390,037
  Business, finance and administrative                              204,133   212,245   273,323   355,372   336,412
      Business and finance                                          210,283   220,435   281,659   353,330   343,050
  Natural and applied sciences and related                          184,521   174,519   219,891   290,086   282,178
  Health                                                            209,752   199,356   229,263   271,421   277,195
  Social science, education, government service and religion        204,166   195,482   252,477   314,536   309,064
  Art, culture, recreation and sport                                215,348   221,876   279,888   303,670   374,332
  Sales and service                                                 191,051   176,701   222,594   274,526   272,218
  Trades, transport and equipment operators and related             197,882   172,922   218,951   322,284   273,754
  Occupations unique to primary industry                            193,292   179,833   211,977   279,549   297,147
  Occupations unique to processing, manufacturing and utilities     171,831   165,297   214,086   273,332   228,985
  Not Applicable                                                    209,522   188,098   239,726   352,244   333,820

Industry - Senior Management only
   Agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting                       272,260   215,018   305,168   458,750   310,790
   Mining, quarry and oil & gas                                     334,310   299,272   397,253   681,684   639,084
   Manufacturing                                                    249,078   293,979   353,118   463,607   445,659
   Construction                                                     312,731   264,124   404,440   496,645   462,190
   Transportation and storage                                       268,117   228,839   293,758   423,008   318,682
   Communication and other utility                                  227,350   241,222   323,706   372,645   396,251
   Wholesale trade                                                  274,594   266,511   336,590   461,882   383,925
   Retail trade                                                     259,883   272,602   354,937   442,294   355,764
   Finance and insurance                                            263,570   273,484   427,296   487,603   411,622
   Real estate                                                      286,661   280,374   328,055   531,239   402,583
   Business service                                                 240,609   245,907   314,708   410,386   330,496
   Government service                                               160,911   151,849   196,108   260,101   229,527
   Educational service                                              170,478   165,186   209,828   265,655   241,631
   Health and social service                                        190,313   196,205   257,095   290,660   360,945
   Accommodation, food and beverage                                 222,514   213,016   330,137   445,109   378,791
   Other services                                                   251,944   256,687   258,298   271,616   271,460

Largest Central Metropolitan Areas
   Montreal                                     191,205   188,265   209,441   201,578   249,712   310,967   309,024
   Toronto                                      209,676   211,223   229,959   221,335   301,527   385,355   352,476
   Calgary                                      205,390   193,738   208,526   212,789   269,211   412,905   358,449
   Edmonton                                     193,350   201,612   212,676   206,276   245,142   348,040   314,705
   Vancouver                                    205,173   197,428   216,497   213,185   272,301   343,962   338,543
   Rest of Canada                               192,058   186,187   202,546   191,146   236,880   301,936   286,223

Province of residence
   Newfoundland and Labrador                   184,419 187,803 206,902 184,575 227,296 265,317 241,721
   Nova Scotia                                 180,915 183,004 190,830 184,965 240,071 274,421 279,402
   New Brunswick                               191,906 179,358 213,136 185,062 225,937 263,484 258,638
   Quebec                                      189,566 183,171 200,401 193,293 241,122 300,482 298,238
   Ontario                                     203,796 203,163 221,478 209,525 278,548 352,817 331,055
   Manitoba                                    186,891 187,540 201,743 197,599 235,650 304,016 298,565
   Saskatchewan                                188,779 180,712 191,733 188,495 227,656 328,678 302,810
   Alberta                                     197,450 193,180 205,166 210,247 254,731 381,821 326,647
   British Columbia                            200,227 194,212 213,600 206,797 260,012 334,455 324,817
   PEI/Yukon/NW Territories/Nunavut            186,672 172,333 183,156 170,088 208,480 269,473 249,566
Note: The sample consists of the top one percent of all income earners (individiduals with non-zero income) age 15
and above.
Source: Authors' calculations based on data from the master files of the 1981 to 2006 census and the 2011 National
Household Survey.




                                                          42
           Table 2b: Average Income by Sub-Groups of All Income Earners, 1981 to 2011 (2000 Dollars)

                                                   1980        1985      1990      1995      2000      2005      2010
Total Income (Millions)                         443,231     470,174   565,253   573,945   676,442   772,984   862,766

Work and earnings
  Mean total income                              28,191      27,557    29,219    27,439    29,769    31,650    33,288
  Mean employment income                         23,139      21,677    22,727    20,670    22,942    24,120    24,851
  Work 50 hours or more per week                 46,119      43,728    47,365    47,178    52,400    56,601    60,101
  Only workers                                   34,617      33,488    35,115    33,907    36,546    38,499    41,297

Men                                              36,731      35,263    36,787    33,888    36,865    38,948    39,793
Women                                            18,252      19,112    21,397    20,918    22,885    24,655    27,023

Education
   Less than a bachelor's degree                 25,827      24,880    26,205    24,266    25,747    26,851    27,986
   Bachelor's degree                             44,808      43,375    44,805    41,210    45,746    47,171    48,156
   Medicine, dentistry, veterinary              103,663     107,178   104,207    94,618    94,607   102,625    96,600
   Other graduate degrees                        58,743      57,382    58,123    53,631    57,106    58,093    57,332

Age groups
   Under 35                                      23,377      21,624    22,458    19,498    20,427    20,442    21,944
   35-64                                         36,261      35,369    36,763    34,368    36,932    39,412    41,246
   Over 64                                       19,488      20,973    23,406    22,840    24,437    26,668    28,160

Major Field of Study (Based on MFS classification, 1986 -   2006)
  Educational, Recreational and Counselling Services         34,253    37,075    34,897    35,203    38,001    40,518
  Fine and Applied Arts                                      23,331    25,547    22,471    24,404    23,340    24,763
  Humanities and Related Fields                              34,724    35,526    32,121    34,404    33,962    35,330
  Social Sciences and Related Fields                         42,585    44,237    39,436    43,365    46,210    46,789
  Commerce, Management and Business                          34,559    36,583    35,027    39,991    43,082    43,814
  Agricultural, Biological, Nutritional, and Food Sc.        30,334    32,245    29,535    31,011    31,943    33,180
  Engineering and Applied Sciences                           60,272    59,557    51,366    56,264    53,848    56,609
  Applied Science Technologies and Trades                    37,971    40,186    36,831    38,987    39,676    40,682
  Health Professions and Related Technologies                38,701    40,130    38,071    39,562    41,635    42,025
  Mathematics, Computer and Physical Sciences                45,600    47,195    44,252    48,655    55,875    55,197
  No Specialization/No postsecondary educ.                   22,552    23,249    21,171    22,124    22,599    23,222
  Overlapped                                                                                         34,564    37,014

Industry
   Agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting    26,384      23,431    25,080    24,266    25,622    25,045    27,475
   Mining, quarry and oil & gas                  46,735      50,280    51,946    53,053    57,949    72,235    79,406
   Manufacturing                                 33,882      34,788    36,409    36,719    38,899    41,260    42,701
   Construction                                  35,051      31,164    35,033    30,752    34,354    35,338    38,296
   Transportation and storage                    37,618      37,392    37,913    36,643    37,841    37,906    39,502
   Communication and other utility               41,098      42,833    42,274    42,502    44,541    46,754    50,538
   Wholesale trade                               35,625      34,326    36,751    36,128    39,328    42,794    45,355
   Retail trade                                  22,612      21,338    22,398    20,631    22,120    22,814    24,601
   Finance and insurance                         34,823      36,961    38,468    42,284    50,982    57,595    58,510
   Real estate                                   38,624      36,300    39,719    36,684    42,288    46,133    47,521
   Business service                              38,225      37,748    41,251    39,091    44,861    45,619    48,772
   Government service                            36,464      36,597    38,418    39,856    42,373    46,817    49,052
   Educational service                           37,757      37,513    38,371    37,830    36,882    37,649    40,983
   Health and social service                     30,853      31,677    33,207    32,950    34,467    37,165    39,099
   Accommodation, food and beverage              14,648      14,145    15,168    14,178    15,570    15,305    16,862
   Other services                                20,838      19,456    21,851    20,457    23,332    23,602    26,200
   Not applicable                                13,913      15,208    17,554    16,157    17,061    18,706    18,933




                                                            43
                                               Table 2b (continuation)

                                                 1980       1985       1990      1995       2000       2005          2010

Occupation (Based on SOC 91)
  Management                                                         54,783    53,924     60,112     68,569     68,055
      Senior management                                              96,386    95,677    109,304    131,894    126,672
  Business, finance and administrative                               29,222    30,022     32,659     35,057     37,806
      Business and finance                                           42,520    44,717     49,293     53,584     56,226
  Natural and applied sciences and related                           46,869    45,922     48,026     51,168     54,932
  Health                                                             40,902    42,187     43,901     47,816     49,223
  Social science, education, government service and religion         44,772    43,894     44,103     45,842     45,376
  Art, culture, recreation and sport                                 27,423    25,074     27,743     26,042     27,917
  Sales and service                                                  20,746    19,577     20,506     20,820     22,643
  Trades, transport and equipment operators and related              34,191    32,512     34,033     34,273     36,589
  Occupations unique to primary industry                             25,165    23,980     24,959     25,311     28,934
  Occupations unique to processing, manufacturing and utilities      29,887    29,493     30,405     31,559     32,122
  Not Applicable                                                     17,554    16,157     17,061     18,706     18,933

Largest Central Metropolitan Areas
   Montreal                                    28,882     27,836     29,136    26,818     29,199     30,489     31,348
   Toronto                                     31,489     32,182     35,070    31,560     35,618     36,291     36,409
   Calgary                                     34,279     33,030     32,953    31,542     35,693     43,579     46,349
   Edmonton                                    32,692     30,090     29,892    28,019     30,468     35,575     40,343
   Vancouver                                   32,397     29,795     31,908    29,894     31,421     32,207     33,600
   Rest of Canada                              26,556     25,866     27,385    26,078     27,823     29,648     31,524

Province of residence
   Newfoundland and Labrador                   22,712     21,450     22,866    21,465     22,620     24,640     28,734
   Nova Scotia                                 23,406     24,291     25,389    23,471     25,297     26,914     29,052
   New Brunswick                               22,610     22,530     24,115    22,603     24,091     25,366     27,932
   Quebec                                      27,022     25,840     27,257    25,264     27,125     28,597     29,768
   Ontario                                     28,891     29,488     31,916    29,741     32,865     33,969     34,609
   Manitoba                                    25,329     25,454     25,725    24,685     26,416     27,925     30,050
   Saskatchewan                                26,955     25,498     25,125    24,548     25,811     28,188     33,409
   Alberta                                     31,879     29,789     29,738    28,465     31,350     37,654     41,727
   British Columbia                            30,894     28,141     30,125    28,636     29,613     30,777     32,276
   PEI/Yukon/NW Territories/Nunavut            23,830     23,992     26,583    25,929     26,831     29,095     32,897

Note: The sample consists of all income earners (individiduals with non-zero income) age 15 and above.
Source: Authors' calculations based on data from the master files of the 1981 to 2006 census and the 2011 National
Household Survey.




                                                          44
                                      Summary Table: Selected Characteristics of Income Earners, 1981-2011
                                                         Top earners                       All earners                          Relative proportions
                                                     1981      2006      2011         1981       2006    2011                  1981       2006       2011
Income cutoff (2000 Dollars)                      122,439 153,908 160,232

Work and earnings
  Average hours of work (only workers)                   48.6       48.8       45.8         39.1       39.0       37.6
  Fraction of income from earnings                     80.1%      84.6%      82.0%        76.7%      63.0%      59.5%           1.0        1.3       1.4

Men                                                    91.5%      81.2%      79.7%        53.8%      48.9%      49.1%           1.7        1.7       1.6

Education
   Less than a bachelor's degree                       53.9%      35.4%      32.5%        90.9%      81.2%      78.4%           0.6        0.4       0.4
   Bachelor's degree                                   17.6%      29.5%      32.0%         5.9%      12.0%      13.8%           3.0        2.5       2.3
   Medicine, dentistry, veterinary                     14.7%      12.1%      10.4%         0.4%       0.5%       0.6%          34.2       22.1      17.7
   Other graduate degrees                              13.8%      22.9%      25.2%         2.8%       6.2%       7.2%           5.0        3.7       3.5

Major Field of Study (base year: 1986)
  Commerce, Management and Business                    16.2%      24.7%      25.3%         7.7%      10.5%      11.3%           2.1        2.3       2.2
  Engineering and Applied Sciences                      8.0%       9.0%      10.3%         1.3%       2.8%       3.0%           6.2        3.2       3.4
  Health Professions and Related Technologies          19.3%      16.6%      15.2%         3.9%       5.8%       6.6%           4.9        2.9       2.3

Industry
   Mining, quarry and oil & gas                         3.0%       5.7%       7.1%         1.4%       1.0%       1.1%           2.1        5.4       6.6
   Finance and insurance                                5.4%      10.8%      11.0%         2.9%       2.7%       2.8%           1.9        4.0       3.9
   Business service                                    11.9%      19.0%      19.2%         3.4%       6.7%       6.8%           3.6        2.8       2.8

Occupation (base year: 1991)
  Management                                           35.0%      38.5%      36.3%         7.4%       7.0%       7.1%           4.7        5.5       5.1
     Senior management                                 13.7%      16.8%      16.0%         0.7%       0.9%       0.8%          19.0       18.6      19.1
  Business, finance and administrative                  8.7%      12.7%      13.0%        15.0%      13.4%      13.0%           0.6        1.0       1.0
     Business and finance                               5.6%       9.1%       9.2%         2.1%       2.7%       2.8%           2.7        3.3       3.3
  Natural and applied sciences and related              5.0%       7.5%       9.2%         3.6%       4.8%       5.0%           1.4        1.6       1.8

Province of residence
   Quebec                                              20.8%      16.7%      16.3%        25.6%      24.1%      23.9%           0.8        0.7       0.7
   Ontario                                             38.9%      47.1%      43.1%        36.5%      38.2%      38.3%           1.1        1.2       1.1
   Alberta                                             14.5%      17.0%      20.8%         9.3%      10.3%      10.6%           1.6        1.7       2.0
   British Columbia                                    14.4%      12.0%      11.9%        11.8%      13.2%      13.4%           1.2        0.9       0.9

Note: The sample consists of all income earners (individiduals with non-zero income) age 15 and above.
Source: Authors' calculations based on data from the master files of the 1981 to 2006 census and the 2011 National Household Survey.
                                Appendix Table 1: Detailed Distribution for the Top 25 Fields of Study Among Top Income Earners
                                                           Top income earners                           All income earners                     Relative proportions
                                                     1986        1991       1996     2001          1986      1991     1996    2001                 1986          2001

Business and Commerce                                  5.9%       6.6%      8.5%        11.2%        1.4%       1.7%      2.1%          2.8%         4.2         4.0
Medicine — General                                    10.2%       9.8%      9.7%         8.8%        0.3%       0.3%      0.3%          0.3%        38.5        26.1
Financial Management                                   6.8%       6.6%      7.6%         8.2%        1.7%       2.0%      2.3%          2.5%         4.0         3.3
Law and Jurisprudence                                  6.2%       7.2%      7.2%         6.9%        0.4%       0.5%      0.5%          0.5%        15.1        12.6
Economics                                              1.7%       1.9%      2.2%         2.6%        0.3%       0.4%      0.4%          0.5%         5.2         5.2
Engineering, n.e.c.                                    0.7%       1.3%      1.7%         2.4%        0.1%       0.2%      0.3%          0.4%         6.7         6.6
Dentistry                                              2.6%       2.3%      2.6%         2.2%        0.1%       0.1%      0.1%          0.1%        31.0        20.3
Electrical/Electronic Engineering                      1.2%       1.2%      1.2%         1.9%        0.3%       0.3%      0.3%          0.4%         4.9         4.1
Marketing, Merchandising, Retailing and Sales          1.1%       1.3%      1.7%         1.7%        0.6%       0.7%      0.7%          0.8%         1.9         2.1
Computer Science and Other Applied Mathematics         0.2%       0.4%      0.7%         1.6%        0.2%       0.3%      0.4%          0.5%         1.0         2.9
Medical Specializations (Non-surgical)                 1.8%       1.5%      1.8%         1.6%        0.1%       0.1%      0.1%          0.1%        35.0        22.7
Electronic and Electrical Technologies                 1.0%       1.0%      1.1%         1.3%        1.3%       1.4%      1.4%          1.3%         0.7         1.0
Building Technologies                                  1.1%       1.5%      1.2%         1.2%        1.9%       2.2%      2.1%          2.1%         0.6         0.6
Mechanical Engineering Technologies                    1.3%       1.3%      1.3%         1.2%        2.0%       2.1%      2.2%          2.1%         0.6         0.6
Mechanical Engineering                                 1.5%       1.1%      1.3%         1.1%        0.2%       0.2%      0.3%          0.3%         6.4         3.5
Surgery and Surgical Specializations                   1.7%       1.2%      1.3%         1.1%        0.0%       0.0%      0.0%          0.0%        52.5        34.0
Civil Engineering                                      1.6%       1.5%      1.2%         1.0%        0.2%       0.2%      0.3%          0.3%         6.8         3.5
Education - General                                    1.0%       1.2%      1.3%         1.0%        2.0%       2.2%      2.4%          2.4%         0.5         0.4
Psychology                                             0.6%       0.7%      0.9%         1.0%        0.5%       0.5%      0.7%          0.7%         1.2         1.4
Data Processing and Computer Technologies              0.1%       0.2%      0.4%         0.9%        0.5%       0.7%      0.9%          1.3%         0.2         0.7
Industrial Management and Public Administration        1.3%       1.0%      1.4%         0.9%        0.6%       0.7%      0.8%          0.7%         2.0         1.3
Biological and Chemical Engineering                    1.1%       0.8%      0.8%         0.8%        0.1%       0.1%      0.1%          0.1%        11.0         6.3
Political Science                                      0.5%       0.6%      0.8%         0.7%        0.2%       0.2%      0.4%          0.3%         2.4         2.4
Mathematics                                            0.5%       0.5%      0.7%         0.7%        0.2%       0.2%      0.2%          0.2%         2.7         3.8
Geology and Related Fields                             0.8%       0.6%      0.6%         0.7%        0.1%       0.1%      0.1%          0.1%         6.9         5.6
Other Major Fields of Study                           17.1%      18.1%     18.6%        18.6%       19.3%      20.8%     22.7%         24.4%         0.9         0.8
No Specialization/No postsecondary education          30.7%      28.5%     22.4%        18.8%       65.4%      61.9%     57.9%         54.7%         0.5         0.3

Note: Major Field of Study classification used for 1986 to 2001
Source: Authors' calculations based on data from the master files of the 1981 to 2006 census and the 2011 National Household Survey.




                                                                                   46
                                                                  Appendix Table 1 (continuation)
                                                             Top income earners                             All income earners                 Relative proportions
                                                                           2006      2011                                 2006          2011       2006          2011

Medicine (MD)                                                               7.0%         6.5%                             0.3%          0.3%        25.8        20.3
Business Administration, Management and Operations                          6.9%         7.3%                             2.3%          2.5%         3.0         2.9
Business/Commerce, General                                                  6.5%         7.1%                             1.4%          1.8%         4.5         4.0
Law (LLB, JD, BCL)                                                          6.0%         5.8%                             0.5%          0.5%        12.9        11.9
Accounting and Related Services                                             5.6%         5.7%                             2.0%          2.2%         2.8         2.6
Medical Residency Programs                                                  3.0%         2.1%                             0.1%          0.1%        36.8        29.2
Economics                                                                   2.4%         2.3%                             0.5%          0.6%         4.3         3.9
Finance and Financial Management Services                                   2.4%         2.3%                             0.6%          0.6%         4.3         3.8
Medical Scientist (MSc, PhD)                                                2.0%         2.1%                             0.1%          0.1%        23.1        21.1
Mechanical Engineering                                                      1.6%         1.5%                             0.4%          0.4%         3.7         3.7
Electrical, Electronics and Communications Engineering                      1.5%         1.4%                             0.6%          0.6%         2.5         2.5
Civil Engineering                                                           1.4%         1.4%                             0.4%          0.4%         3.8         3.8
Engineering, General                                                        1.4%         3.0%                             0.3%          0.6%         5.1         5.1
Dentistry (DDS, DMD)                                                        1.4%         1.2%                             0.1%          0.1%        18.4        13.4
Legal Research and Advanced Professional Studies (Post-LLB/JD)              1.1%         1.3%                             0.1%          0.1%        13.7        13.2
Geological and Earth Sciences/Geosciences                                   1.1%         1.1%                             0.1%          0.1%         8.4         8.1
Education, General                                                          1.0%         1.3%                             2.5%          2.7%         0.4         0.5
Liberal Arts and Sciences, General Studies and Humanities                   1.0%         1.5%                             1.0%          1.3%         1.0         1.2
Computer Science                                                            0.9%         1.1%                             0.7%          0.8%         1.4         1.4
Marketing                                                                   0.9%         0.8%                             0.4%          0.4%         2.4         1.9
Chemical Engineering                                                        0.9%         0.9%                             0.1%          0.1%         6.1         6.0
Political Science and Government                                            0.8%         0.8%                             0.3%          0.4%         2.6         2.4
Pharmacy, Pharmaceutical Sciences and Administration                        0.8%         0.7%                             0.2%          0.2%         4.3         3.5
Precision Metal Working                                                     0.7%         0.7%                             1.3%          1.3%         0.6         0.5
Psychology, General                                                         0.7%         0.7%                             0.6%          0.7%         1.1         1.0
Other Major Fields of Study                                                24.4%        25.9%                            35.2%         36.9%         0.7         0.7
No Specialization/No postsecondary certificate or diploma                  16.7%        13.6%                            48.0%         44.4%         0.3         0.3

Note: Classification of Instructional Programs (2000) classification used for 2006 and 2011.
Source: Authors' calculations based on data from the master files of the 1981 to 2006 census and the 2011 National Household Survey.




                                                                                   47
                                                              Appendix Table 2: Detailed Distribution by Industry
                                                         Top income earners                                     All income earners                     Relative proportions
                                              1981       1986     1991      1996       2001          1981      1986      1991      1996         2001       1981         2001

Industry classification based on SIC 1970 (1981) and SIC 1980 (1986-2001)

   Agricultural and rel. service             6.6%       4.3%       3.7%       2.0%       1.5%         3.2%       3.0%       2.8%        2.5%    2.1%         2.1         0.7
   Fishing and trapping                      0.2%       0.2%       0.2%       0.3%       0.1%         0.3%       0.3%       0.3%        0.3%    0.3%         0.6         0.6
   Logging and forestry                      0.7%       0.5%       0.6%       0.6%       0.3%         0.7%       0.7%       0.6%        0.6%    0.5%         1.0         0.7
   Mining, quarry and oil wells              3.0%       3.7%       2.5%       2.7%       2.9%         1.4%       1.2%       1.0%        0.8%    0.8%         2.1         3.6
   Manufacturing                            11.9%      12.0%      10.7%      11.9%      11.5%        15.3%      13.5%      11.4%       10.4%   10.4%         0.8         1.1
   Construction                              5.7%       4.3%       5.4%       3.4%       3.6%         5.2%       4.7%       5.1%        4.2%    4.3%         1.1         0.8
   Transportation and storage                4.5%       4.3%       3.9%       3.7%       3.4%         3.8%       3.5%       3.2%        3.0%    3.1%         1.2         1.1
   Communication and other utility           1.5%       1.9%       2.0%       2.2%       2.5%         2.6%       2.5%       2.6%        2.2%    2.1%         0.6         1.2
   Wholesale trade                           7.0%       5.9%       5.4%       6.8%       7.3%         3.8%       3.6%       3.3%        3.6%    3.8%         1.8         1.9
   Retail trade                              5.5%       5.0%       5.2%       3.9%       4.1%         9.9%      10.0%      10.3%        9.2%    8.9%         0.6         0.5
   Finance and insurance                     5.4%       6.5%       6.7%       8.3%      10.2%         2.9%       2.8%       3.1%        2.6%    2.7%         1.9         3.8
   Real estate                               4.8%       4.3%       4.2%       3.9%       3.9%         1.4%       1.4%       1.3%        1.4%    1.3%         3.4         3.0
   Business services                        11.9%      13.6%      15.5%      16.7%      20.8%         3.4%       3.7%       4.4%        4.8%    6.1%         3.6         3.4
   Government services                       3.4%       3.5%       3.7%       3.4%       2.2%         6.2%       6.1%       6.1%        4.6%    4.2%         0.5         0.5
   Educational services                      3.2%       3.3%       3.2%       3.2%       1.9%         5.4%       5.2%       5.4%        5.2%    5.2%         0.6         0.4
   Health and social services               15.6%      17.3%      15.8%      16.4%      15.0%         6.0%       6.5%       7.0%        7.2%    7.5%         2.6         2.0
   Accommodation, food and beverage          1.4%       1.4%       1.3%       1.1%       1.1%         4.9%       5.1%       5.3%        5.2%    5.2%         0.3         0.2
   Other service industries                  2.2%       2.8%       3.0%       3.1%       2.8%         4.6%       5.2%       5.4%        5.8%    5.5%         0.5         0.5
   Not applicable                            5.5%       5.3%       6.8%       6.4%       4.8%        19.0%      20.9%      21.5%       26.5%   26.1%         0.3         0.2

Note: The sample consists of all income earners (individiduals with non-zero income) age 15 and above.
Source: Authors' calculations based on data from the master files of the 1981 to 2006 census and the 2011 National Household Survey.




                                                                                       48
                                                                      Appendix Table 2 (continuation)
                                                         Top income earners                                        All income earners                  Relative proportions
                                                                  2001      2006     2011                                   2001      2006      2011       2006         2011

Industry classification based on NAICS 1997 (2001), 2002 (2006), and 2007 (2011)

   Agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting                      1.8%       1.2%       0.9%                               2.7%        2.3%    1.8%         0.5         0.5
   Mining and oil and gas extraction                               2.8%       5.6%       7.0%                               0.8%        1.0%    1.1%         5.4         6.6
   Utilities                                                       0.7%       1.0%       1.5%                               0.6%        0.6%    0.6%         1.7         2.4
   Construction                                                    3.6%       4.1%       5.2%                               4.1%        4.7%    5.0%         0.9         1.0
   Manufacturing                                                  10.9%       9.0%       7.1%                              10.2%        8.7%    6.6%         1.0         1.1
   Wholesale trade                                                 6.9%       7.3%       6.6%                               3.2%        3.2%    3.0%         2.3         2.2
   Retail trade                                                    4.2%       4.4%       4.0%                               8.4%        8.5%    8.5%         0.5         0.5
   Transportation and warehousing                                  3.5%       2.7%       2.5%                               3.6%        3.6%    3.4%         0.8         0.7
   Information and cultural industries                             3.6%       3.0%       2.7%                               2.0%        1.8%    1.7%         1.6         1.6
   Finance and insurance                                          10.9%      11.5%      11.6%                               3.0%        3.0%    3.1%         3.9         3.7
   Real estate and rental and leasing                              3.1%       3.3%       3.1%                               1.2%        1.3%    1.3%         2.5         2.3
   Professional, scientific and technical                         18.5%      16.8%      17.0%                               4.6%        4.9%    5.1%         3.4         3.3
   Management of companies and enterprises                         0.6%       0.7%       0.5%                               0.1%        0.1%    0.1%         7.9         6.9
   Administrative and support, waste man                           1.6%       1.4%       1.6%                               2.9%        3.2%    3.1%         0.4         0.5
   Educational services                                            1.8%       1.7%       3.0%                               4.9%        5.1%    5.5%         0.3         0.5
   Health care and social assistance                              15.0%      15.3%      13.3%                               7.1%        7.5%    8.0%         2.0         1.7
   Arts, entertainment and recreation                              0.8%       0.7%       0.6%                               1.5%        1.6%    1.6%         0.4         0.4
   Accommodation and food services                                 1.1%       0.8%       0.8%                               5.1%        5.1%    4.8%         0.2         0.2
   Other services (except public administration)                   1.3%       1.2%       1.5%                               3.6%        3.6%    3.4%         0.3         0.5
   Public administration                                           2.3%       2.3%       3.6%                               4.3%        4.3%    5.2%         0.5         0.7
   Not applicable                                                  4.8%       5.8%       5.6%                              26.1%       25.8%   27.2%         0.2         0.2

Note: The sample consists of all income earners (individiduals with non-zero income) age 15 and above.
Source: Authors' calculations based on data from the master files of the 1981 to 2006 census and the 2011 National Household Survey.




                                                                                       49
                                Appendix Table 3: Industry Distribution for Senior Management, 1981-2011
                                                                                                                    Relative proportions
                                                           1991       1996       2001      2006       2011          1991      2006      2011
Top income earners (top 1 percent), senior management
  Agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting          0.7%            1.0%      0.6%       0.7%       0.8%            0.6       0.5      0.6
  Mining, quarry and oil & gas                        3.8%            4.4%      3.7%       4.3%       4.9%            2.5       2.4      2.7
  Manufacturing                                     25.6%            24.5%     20.8%      19.7%      15.6%            1.3       1.4      1.3
  Construction                                        7.2%            4.9%      3.7%       5.4%       7.2%            0.9       0.8      0.9
  Transportation and storage                          3.4%            3.9%      3.4%       3.5%       3.4%            1.0       1.0      1.2
  Communication and other utility                     3.4%            3.6%      4.9%       3.9%       2.9%            1.4       2.1      2.2
  Wholesale trade                                   12.0%            13.6%     12.0%      12.5%      12.4%            1.2       1.2      1.2
  Retail trade                                        6.7%            4.9%      4.5%       4.4%       4.4%            0.7       0.8      0.8
  Finance and insurance                             10.2%            10.5%     13.2%      13.6%      14.0%            1.9       2.2      2.0
  Real estate                                         3.2%            3.8%      3.9%       4.3%       4.6%            1.4       1.2      1.4
  Business service                                  11.9%            12.9%     20.2%      17.1%      17.3%            1.2       1.0      1.0
  Government service                                  4.5%            3.2%      1.9%       2.3%       3.2%            0.3       0.3      0.4
  Educational service                                 0.7%            0.9%      0.7%       0.8%       1.0%            0.5       0.4      0.4
  Health and social service                           1.7%            2.5%      1.9%       1.7%       2.2%            0.4       0.3      0.4
  Accommodation, food and beverage                    1.7%            1.1%      1.0%       1.2%       1.3%            0.7       0.6      0.5
  Other services                                      3.5%            4.1%      3.6%       4.5%       4.9%            0.6       0.5      0.5

All income earners (senior management only)
    Agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting             1.1%       1.0%      1.0%       1.5%       1.4%
    Mining, quarry and oil & gas                           1.5%       1.9%      1.6%       1.8%       1.8%
    Manufacturing                                         19.5%      18.2%     15.2%      14.1%      11.9%
    Construction                                           8.1%       6.8%      5.4%       6.8%       7.7%
    Transportation and storage                             3.3%       3.6%      3.2%       3.4%       2.9%
    Communication and other utility                        2.4%       2.1%      2.8%       1.9%       1.3%
    Wholesale trade                                       10.0%      11.6%     10.8%      10.5%      10.3%
    Retail trade                                           9.0%       7.5%      5.7%       5.7%       5.6%
    Finance and insurance                                  5.5%       5.3%      6.9%       6.3%       7.2%
    Real estate                                            2.3%       2.6%      3.1%       3.5%       3.3%
    Business service                                      10.1%      12.7%     17.3%      17.6%      17.4%
    Government service                                    13.2%      11.9%     11.2%       9.1%       8.8%
    Educational service                                    1.5%       1.5%      1.8%       2.2%       2.4%
    Health and social service                              4.1%       4.6%      5.3%       5.2%       6.2%
    Accommodation, food and beverage                       2.4%       1.7%      1.5%       2.1%       2.4%
    Other services                                         5.9%       7.0%      7.2%       8.4%       9.2%

Note: The sample consists of all income earners (individiduals with non-zero income) age 15 and above.
Source: Authors' calculations based on data from the master files of the 1981 to 2006 census and the 2011 National Household Survey.
