NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EVALUATING THE RISK OF CHINESE HOUSING MARKETS:
WHAT WE KNOW AND WHAT WE NEED TO KNOW
Jing Wu
Joseph Gyourko
Yongheng Deng
Working Paper 21346
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21346

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2015

We appreciate the comments of seminar participants at the Asian Bureau of Finance and Economic
Research 3rd Annual Conference 2015, the 17th NBER-CCER Conference on China and the World
Economy, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and New York University. Gyourko thanks the
Research Sponsor Program of the Zell/Lurie Real Estate Center at Wharton for financial support.
Wu thanks the National Natural Science Foundation of China for financial support (No. 71003060
& 71373006). We gratefully acknowledge Jingting Huang, Wei Guo, and Pu Wang for outstanding
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Jing Wu, Joseph Gyourko, and Yongheng Deng. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Evaluating the Risk of Chinese Housing Markets: What We Know and What We Need to
Know
Jing Wu, Joseph Gyourko, and Yongheng Deng
NBER Working Paper No. 21346
July 2015
JEL No. R11,R3,R31,R52
ABSTRACT
Real estate is an important driver of the Chinese economy, which itself is vital for global growth.
However, data limitations make it challenging to evaluate competing claims about the state of Chinese
housing markets. This paper brings new data and analysis to the study of supply and demand
conditions in nearly three dozen major cities. We first document the most accurate measures of land
values, construction costs, and overall house prices. We then create and investigate a number of
supply and demand metrics to see if price growth reasonably can be interpreted as reflecting local
market fundamentals. Key results include the following:
(1) Real house price growth has been high, averaging 10% per annum since 2004. However, there
is substantial heterogeneity across markets, ranging from 3% (Jinan) to 20% (Beijing). House price
growth is driven by rising land values, not by construction costs. Real land values have risen by
over15% per annum on average. In Beijing, the increase has been by a remarkable 27.5% per year
(or by 1,036%) since 2004.
(2) There is variation about the strong positive trend in house price and land value growth. Land
values fell by nearly one-third at the beginning of the global financial crisis, but more than fully
recovered amidst the 2009-2010 Chinese stimulus. More recent growth has been much more modest,
with some markets beginning to decline. Quantities of land sales by local governments to private
residential developers have dropped sharply over the past two years. The most recent data show
transactions volumes down by half or more. This should lead to a reduced supply of new housing
units in coming years.
(3) Market-level analysis of short- and longer-run changes in supply-demand balances finds important
variation across markets. In the major East region markets of Beijing, Hangzhou, Shanghai and
Shenzhen which have experienced very high rates of real price growth, we estimate that the growth
in households demanding housing units has outpaced new construction since the turn of the century.
However, there are a dozen large markets, primarily in the interior of the country, in which new
housing production has outpaced household growth by at least 30% and another eight in which it did
so by at least 10%. Regression results show that a one standard deviation increase in local market
housing inventory is associated with a 0.45 standard deviation lower rate of real house price growth
the following year.
(4) There are no official data on residential vacancy rates in China, but some researchers have
reported very high figures (17%+). We develop a new series at the provincial level which yields a
much lower vacancy rate on average, but it has been rising—from 5% in 2009 to 7% in 2013.
(5) The risk of housing even in markets such as Beijing which show no evidence of oversupply, is best
evidenced by price-to-rent ratios. They are well above 50 in the capital city. Poterba’s (1984)user
cost model suggests these levels can be justified only if owners have sufficiently high expectations of
future capital gains. Even a modest one percentage point drop in expected appreciation (or increase
in interest rates) would result in a drop in prices of about one-third, absent an offsetting increase in
rents.

Jing Wu
Tsinghua University
Heshanheng Building
Beijing 100084, China
ireswujing@tsinghua.edu.cn
Joseph Gyourko
University of Pennsylvania
The Wharton School of Business
3620 Locust Walk
1480 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
gyourko@wharton.upenn.edu
Yongheng Deng
Institute of Real Estate Studies
National University of Singapore
Singaporeydeng@nus.edu.sg

I.

Introduction
China’s large share in global growth makes our understanding of the risks and

opportunities in its housing markets of first order importance. Housing is not broken out
separately in the Chinese national income accounts, but the real estate sector is quite large: it
comprised 5.9% of Chinese output in 2013, while the construction sector contributed another
6.9%.1 Unfortunately, it is extremely challenging to evaluate competing claims about conditions
in Chinese housing markets, with data limitations being a key reason why. Private housing
markets did not exist before the reforms of the late 1990s, so there is only a short time series over
which variation in prices and quantities across markets can be examined (e.g., Wang (2011);
Chen and Han (2014)). That is compounded by worries about the quality of official data on
house prices. For example, there is no official constant quality price index reported based on
large, representative samples of micro-level housing transactions.
The best data on house and land value appreciation comes from constant quality price
series developed by academic researchers (Deng, Gyourko and Wu (2014); Wu, Deng and Liu
(2014); Guo et al (2014); Fang et al (2015)). These series show much higher appreciation rates
in aggregate, as well as greater short-term volatility, than official series reported by the
government. Real constant-quality growth in overall house prices has averaged about 10% per
annum on a compounded basis over the past decade. However, there is substantial heterogeneity
across markets, ranging from a low of less than 3% per annum (Jinan) to a high of nearly 20%
per annum (Beijing).
Overall house price growth has been driven by appreciation in local land markets, not by
construction costs. The latter are flat to very modestly increasing in most markets. Real land
1

Source: National Bureau of Statistics of China, “China Statistics Yearbook, 2014”. The construction sector
includes non-housing real estate and non-real estate activities such as infrastructure.

3

prices have been appreciating at an average annual compound rate of over 15% since 2004
across 35 large cities. Once again, there is substantial variation across cities, with real price
growth escalating at 27.5% per annum in Beijing since 2004. Compound annual land prices
growth has averaged just over 7% in Dalian and Wuhan, but even that rate implies a doubling of
real land prices since 2004.
We also track changes in quantities, not just prices. Series on the number of land parcels
sold by local governments to private residential developers and on the amount of newly-built
space sold each year show wide variation across years. The negative impact of the global
financial crisis on transactions volumes in housing markets is clearly visible in these data, as is
the positive impact of the Chinese financial stimulus in 2009-2010. More recent data from 2014
show a sharp decline in trading volumes. Land parcel sales at the end of the year were down 60%
from levels transacted two years ago. This takes transaction volumes back to levels not seen
since the global financial crisis. Whether changes in transactions volume lead changes in prices,
as happened in the United States, remains to be seen. In addition, the reduced volume is likely to
have a major impact on the health of local public finance in China, as many cities rely heavily on
land sales to fund their activities and to service debt (e.g., Ambrose, Deng and Wu (2015); Fan,
et. al. (2015); Tao (2015)).
Real house and land price appreciation have been quite high by U.S. standards, but it
bears emphasizing how different are Chinese economic and housing market conditions. The
high Chinese appreciation starts from a low price level in a country that still is urbanizing. Its
overall economic growth also has been high over the past decade: 7%-10% per annum, which is
about the level of real house price growth on average. Some markets such as Beijing have

4

appreciated at far higher rates, but that just highlights the need to look at underlying supply and
demand fundamentals to better gauge the sustainability of prices.
We look at a number of metrics in this regard in Section III. In aggregate, there have
been big increases in the quantity of floor space completed in major markets over time. Among
35 large cities we track in the analyis reported below, the amount jumped about 50% after the
2009-2010 stimulus period and stayed at an elevated level. Substantial demand is needed to
justify a supply increase that large. In fact, trend demand is strong in China, as its urban
population has also grown about 50% between its 2000 and 2010 censuses.
Other measures are examined at the local market level. The first is annual supply of new
space as a share of local market size. There is noteworthy heterogeneity across markets in this
metric. The quantity of new supply is not increasing relative to market size in the strongest
appreciating eastern markets such as Beijing and Shanghai. However, we do see rising supply in
a variety of other major cities including Chengdu, Chongqing, Guangzhou, Tianjin and Xian. In
2014, private developers in Tianjin delivered new supply equal to 9% of the 2010 stock.
Another measure examined is the amount of inventory held by private developers as a share of
yearly sales volume in the market. There is no upward trend in this series for Beijing either, but
that for Shanghai (and various other markets) is strongly positive.
Longer-run calculations of changes in the supply-demand balance also are reported. In
aggregate, we find no overbuilding for the nation in the following sense: our estimate of the net
increase in households living in urban areas exceeds net new housing units by about 10%
between 2001-2012. While there is no evidence of aggregate overbuilding, there is substantial
local heterogeneity, just as there was in price appreciation. Growth in the supply of dwelling
space has far outpaced household growth by at least 30% in twelve major markets and did so by

5

at least 10% in another eight. The dozen cities with the largest imbalances of new housing units
supplied relative to growth in the number of households needing living space since 2001 include
Chengdu, Guiyang, Harbin, Hohhot, Lanzhou, Nanchang, Qingdao, Shenyang, Wuhan,
Yinchuan and Zhengzhou. However, the major eastern markets including Beijing, Hangzhou,
Shanghai and Shenzhen have seen growth in households outpace net new construction since the
turn of the century.
There are no official data on vacancy rates among owner-occupied housing units in China.
Other researchers have reported very high rates in the high teens or above. We develope a new
series at the provincial level using what we believe to be the highest quality data currently
available. This series shows a much lower vacancy rate on average, but it has been rising in
recent years—from 5% in 2009 to 7% in 2013.
The final two metrics examined are price-to-rent and price-to-income ratios. Housing
units tend to trade at very large multiples of rent in China. Individual market ratios range from
the low 20’s to above 50 in Beijing. While high compared to U.S. data, there typically is no
upward trend in these series. Poterba’s (1984) user cost framework suggests these levels can
justified if owners have sufficiently high expectations of future capital gains. The price
appreciation needed to justify purchasing in Beijing is well within the range of recent experience
in that market, but the same cannot be said for a number of other cities. Even in Beijing, this
analysis should not be interpreted as indicating its housing market is not risky. In fact, these data
imply high risk in markets where the user costs of owning are in the 2%-3% range (so that priceto-rent ratios are well over 33). Small drops in expectations of future appreciation (or
commensurate rises in interest rates) imply a large negative adjustment in price levels, absent
offsetting increases in rents.

6

Price-to-income data highlight another risk for housing markets that look solid in terms
of supply-demand fundamentals. These ratios also are very high by U.S. standards (8 is typical
and Beijing’s ratio always is well over 10), but they are consistent with standard Chinese
underwriting, which presumes continued high income growth in urban areas. Of course, that is
the embedded risk. If for any reason that growth does not materialize, housing will be
unaffordable in most places, and in the most expensive east region markets in particular.
Section IV concludes our analysis by empirically investigating whether changes in some
of these market fundamentals can account for variation in house prices over time within a market.
They can, as we document that the magnitude of the inventory overhang in a market at the end of
this year is an economically and statistically significant predictor of price change the next year.
A one standard deviation higher normalized housing inventory in a market is associated with a
0.45 standard deviation lower rate of house price growth the following year (ceteris paribus).
Thus, oversupplied local markets are likely to suffer price declines (or lower growth) than
markets with better underlying fundamentals.
The plan of the paper is as follows. The next section discusses and analyzes the two
primary official series on house prices and contrasts them with a land price measure we have
introduced and an unofficial constant quality house price series in development. Section III then
investigates a number of other metrics that can be used to gauge housing market conditions.
Section IV examines whether these measures can explain the variation in price changes across
markets. There is a brief conclusion.

II.

Prices and Quantities in Chinese Housing Markets
Official House Price Series

7

The National Bureau of Statistics of China (NBSC) reports two series on house prices.
One called “Price Indices for Real Estate in 35/70 Large and Medium-sized Cities” tracks prices
measured at the housing complex level within city. An average transaction price is calculated for
each sampled housing complex at a monthly frequency, and then compared with that for the
same (or comparable) complex in the preceding month. The NBSC then calculates a monthly
house price growth rate at the city level as the weighted average of the growth rates of all
sampled complexes in the corresponding month.
This series originally covered 35 major markets and expanded to 70 in July of 2005.
Unfortunately, it is not reported consistently over time because the NBSC adjusted its data
and/or computational strategies at the beginning of 2011 in ways not fully detailed for the public.
While results are not strictly comparable before and after that time, splicing together the June
2005-December 2010 and January 2011-December 2014 periods finds real aggregate house price
growth is reported to be only 16.7% at the national level, for an implied compound annual
growth rate of 1.6%. Many observers do not find this pattern consistent with the reality of
Chinese housing markets on average, and we agree.2
A second government-provided series is the “Average Selling Price of Newly-Built
Residential Buildings” (“Average Price Indices”, hereafter). Since the mid-1990s, real estate
developers in China are required to report a variety of business indicators to the government
statistics agency, including the total volume (in floor area) of newly-built housing units sold
within each sampling period and the aggregate sales price of these units. Dividing the total price
paid by total floor area of the transacted units, weighted average house prices per square meter

2

For example, reports from the Financial Times (“Fears of China Property Bubble Grow”, Mar 10, 2010), China
Daily (“Doubts over Increase in Property Price”, Feb 27, 2010) and Wall Street Journal (“China Underestimated
House Price Growth in Beijing, Shanghai”, Jan 28, 2013) show their concerns on the low growth rates suggested by
this index.

8

are calculated and reported at the city, province, and national level, respectively. To be more
precise, if ten units with 100 square meters each were sold in a market for an aggregate amount
of one million yuan, the reported price would be 1,000 yuan per square meter.
Reported house price growth is much higher in this series and there is substantial
variation across markets. Table 1 lists aggregate and implied real compound appreciation rates
between 2004 and 2014 from this series for 35 major markets that will be the focus of much of
the analysis in this paper. The map in Figure 1 shows that this set includes many non-Tier 1
cities that are spread throughout China’s regions. The value of newly-built housing in these
markets equals nearly one-half of the value of all new homes in China. The interquartile range
of aggregate real price growth across these 35 cities runs from 95.8% to 162.2%. Thus, threequarters of these major markets are estimated to have experienced close to or substantially more
than a doubling of real prices since 2004. Implied per annum real appreciation rates over the
past decade range from a low of 3.9% (Yinchuan) to a high of 14.3% (Xiamen) in these data.

Construction Costs
The price of newly built housing reflects the sum of the price of land and improvements
(i.e., the physical housing units), in addition to the developer’s profit. To gauge whether
construction costs have been escalating sharply in China, we constructed a basket of
representative construction cost items including building materials prices, construction worker
wages, and expenses for construction machinery. Those costs are from the NBSC based on
surveys conducted by local statistical agents. The average increase in real construction costs
across our 35 markets from 2004-2013 is only 8.1% in aggregate, or 0.9% per annum on a
compounded basis. The largest increase is 17% in Xian and real costs actually fell by 1% over

9

the decade in Beijing. Thus, construction cost increases cannot account for the large increases in
real house prices depicted in the Average Price Indices series.

Land Price Data
Modest increases in real construction costs imply that house price growth must have been
driven primarily by land price growth in China. The only currently available official data on
land prices in China come from the “China Urban Land Price Dynamic Monitor” system
reported by the Ministry of Land and Resource of China. It tracks parcel values in over 100
major cities. Its land price indexes are appraisal-based, and are not derived from actual market
transactions. In each city, representative land parcels are selected as “monitoring points” by
technicians employed by local land authorities. For example, there are 257 such land parcels in
Beijing. Of that total, 98 are for residential usage. Local land appraisals are conducted each
quarter for every parcel. City, regional, and national-level average land prices and price indexes
are then computed. This land price series tends to be quite smooth over time, and does not show
markedly high appreciation in land values on average. For example, real growth of the aggregate
residential-usage land price index at the national level between 2004 and 2014 was 54.2%, for a
4.4% per annum implied compound growth rate.
This stands in sharp contrast to another land price index that we developed in previous
research (Deng, Gyourko and Wu, 2014). This “Chinese Residential Land Price Index” (CRLPI)
is a constant-quality, residential land price index based on sales of long-term leasehold estates to
private developers in the same set of 35 large cities listed in Table 1. China is one of the only
countries in the world for which it is possible to frequently observe transactions involving vacant
residential land. This is because the Chinese government retains ownership of all urban land.

10

Since 1988, private developers have been able to purchase use rights from the government for up
to 70 years on residential properties. Developers make a single, upfront payment to the relevant
local public entity. Our series treats that payment as the transactions price of the land parcel, but
it clearly is for a lengthy (but finite-lived) leasehold estate.
This series begins in the first quarter of 2004 and presently runs through the fourth
quarter of 2014. Table 2 reports the number of cities covered each year, along with the number
of land parcels sold. This land price index adjusts average transactions prices for various
differences in site quality via a hedonic model that is estimated at the city level for a dozen large
markets at an annual frequency, at the regional level on a semi-annual basis, and the 35 city
aggregate level on a quarterly basis. Each land parcel is equally weighted.3
Figure 2’s plot of this aggregate series depicts extremely high real land price growth
across these markets over the past 44 quarters. Real prices have appreciated by 357% since
2004(1), for an implied real average annual compounded appreciation rate of 15.2% (3.6% on a
quarterly basis; see Table 3). There is variation about this very strong decade-long trend, with
real land values dropping by about one-third between 2007(3)-2009(1) as the global financial
crisis occurred. That this was followed by a more than doubling of real prices during the
massive Chinese stimulus period in 2009 provides an indication of how important government
policy likely is for this sector. Real land price growth then was flat during most of 2011 and
2012 before escalating again in 2013. In 2014(3), there is a decline of 6.8%, which takes the
series back to its 2013(3) level, but the index rebounded by 10.7% in the last quarter of 2014.
This aggregate series masks sometimes substantial heterogeneity at more local levels.
This is not so evident in the regional data plotted in Figure 3. There is a strong common trend
across land markets in all three regions, although the most recent data show a downturn in the
3

Deng, Gyourko and Wu (2014) describe the underlying data sources and index construction in detail.

11

West and Middle regions, but not the East. Real, constant quality land price growth ranges from
231% in the West region to 326% in the Middle region (see Table 4).
More variation is visible across the 12 large cities for which annual indexes are reported
in Figure 4. The first two columns of Table 5 show that real land price growth has been strong in
each of these cities between 2004-2014, with only three being below 10% on an average annual
compound basis (7.2% in Dalian; 7.3% in Wuhan; 8.6% in Xian). Real price growth in Beijing
has averaged an astounding 27.5% per year since 2004, for an aggregate increase of over 1,000
percent. No other city approaches this magnitude, but four other markets have real average
annual compound appreciation rates over 15% (Shanghai, Chongqing, Tianjin, and Guangzhou).
The remaining four experienced still strong price growth of between 10%-15% per year
(Hangzhou, Changsha, Nanjing and Chengdu).4

Discussion
The middle set of columns in Table 5 incorporate the government’s Average Price
Indices data. Land price appreciation is greater than reported house price growth in most, but not
all, of these major markets. In Beijing, Changsha, Chongqing, Nanjing, Tianjin and Shanghai,
aggregate land price growth is more than 100 percentage points higher than the government’s
Average Price Indices.
Reconciling our high land price appreciation rates with the government’s house price
appreciation estimates requires that land constitute a relatively small share of overall house value.
We doubt that is reasonable, especially in markets such as Beijing. A simple comparison would
start with the following identity, which states that overall house price is the weighted sum of the
4

The CRLPI for Beijing reports real land price appreciation that is 900 percentage points higher than the
government’s appraisal-based series. No other gap is as wide, but the differences in aggregate appreciation typically
are wide—300+ percentage points in other cities such as Chengdu, Hangzhou and Shanghai.

12

value of the land and the building improvements, with developers earning a standard profit on
that sum. More specifically,
(Pl + Pb)*Devp = HP

(1)

where Pl and Pb are the prices of land and building improvements, respectively; Devp is the
developer’s profit margin, and HP is the overall house price. If we presume that only the price
of land and building improvements changes, the growth rate of house price (gHP) can be
calculated as equation (2):
(sl*gPl) + (sb*gPb) = gHP

(2)

where gPl and gPb are the price growth rates of land and building improvements, respective; sl
and sb are the share of land and building improvements in overall house value, respectively.
Equation (2) allows us to experiment with different land and building shares to see
whether our land price series is consistent with the government’s house price series. If land has a
50% share in overall house value in Beijing, equation (2) implies either that our land price
growth measure is biased upward or the government’s house price growth is biased downward.
Using the 1036% real land price growth from Table 5 and a 1% decrease in construction costs
yields the following:
(0.5*1036%) + (0.5*-1%) = 518% >> 226%

(2’)

The implied house price growth is 518%, which is far greater than the 226% reported by the
government’s Average Price of Newly-Built Housing series. In contrast, if one thought land
share in Beijing was only 20%, the equation becomes 207%, which would be close to the
government’s house price series.
One noteworthy effort to improve the quality of house price measurement is Wu, Deng
and Liu (2014). They estimate a hedonic model to create a constant-quality house price index

13

based directly on micro transactions data of all newly-built housing units in the 35 major city
sample we are using. While Wu, Deng and Liu’s (2014) data stopped in 2010, Table 6 lists the
aggregate and implied real compound annual appreciation rates based on constant-quality prices
between 2006 and 2014. In general, it suggests a higher appreciation rate than the Average Price
Index reports for most, but not all, 35 markets. For example, the series for Beijing finds total
real house price growth of about 385% between 2006(1)-2014(4), which implies a real average
compound appreciation rate of 19.8% (4.6% on a quarterly basis). This is about 8 percentage
points above the rate measured in the Average Price Indices. Using this higher figure for gHP, a
land share of about 72% results in overall annual house price growth of 19.8% based on equation
(2). While not available to the public, we work below with updated constant quality house price
data from Wu, Deng and Liu (2014). We view its index construction as superior because it is
directly based on micro-level transactions data, with an additional effort made to adjust for
changing trait quality over time. Those data show very high real house price appreciation rates,
with an average of about 10% per annum for 35 major markets over the past decade (Table 6).
There is wide variation in growth across markets, ranging from 2.8% (Jinan, column 2, Table 6)
to 19.8% (Beijing, column 2, Table 6).5

Quantities: Transactions Volumes
Short time series on land parcel sales and the square meters of newly-built housing sold
are available. The land parcel sales data are from the 35 markets tracked in the CRLPI and are
plotted in Figure 5. There is considerable volatility in these data. It shows a doubling in the
quantity of land parcel purchases from around 200 to 400 per quarter in the cities covered by the

5

Very recent work by Fang, et. al. (2015) based on mortgage data from a large lender uses a hybrid approach that
builds price indexes from 2003-2013 based on sequential sales of new homes within the same housing development.
They also find high average real price appreciation and substantial variation across markets.

14

CRLPI from the beginning of 2005 through the end of 2006. Transactions volume fluctuated
around that higher level until the global financial crisis hit China in 2008. By the beginning of
2009, the number of parcels sold had fallen back just below 200. The stimulus period in 20092010 then saw a dramatic rebound, with sales escalating well above 500 in the fourth quarter of
2009. There are strong seasonal effects in these sales data, and the series fluctuates fairly widely
between 350 and 550 per quarter until the third quarter of 2012, after which we see a sharp spike
to 700, before volumes fall back down to the 500 level. There have been fewer than 400
purchases in each quarter of 2014. In the last quarter of 2014, there were only 277 sales, 56% of
the sales volume from a year earlier in 2013(4) and only 40% of the number sold two years
earlier in 2012(4).
Figure 6 plots the year-over-year growth in total square meters of newly-built housing
units that are sold, as provided by National Bureau of Statistics of China. This series starts in
2007(1), with the latest data available from the last quarter of 2014. It also exhibits a sharp spike
in sales volume leading up to the financial crisis, followed by a dramatic decline. The impact of
the beginning of the stimulus period in 2009 is clearly visible, as is the mean reversion after that.
The sharp rise in transactions in 2012 is evident. Growth in transactions volumes of newly-built
units has been declining since the beginning of 2013, and all four quarters in 2014 show absolute
declines in year-over-year growth.
The short-term volatility in Chinese housing market transactions quantities is markedly
different from the U.S. data, which is depicted in Figure 7. Transactions volumes do fluctuate
widely over the housing cycle in America, but they do so more smoothly over quarterly or even
annual periods. Some of the difference may be due to the Chinese government intervening in the
housing and mortgage markets much more frequently and forcefully than does the U.S.

15

government. That is an area urgently in need of more research.6 This figure also shows that
change in trading volumes led price changes by about 12-18 months, both at the peak and trough
of the cycle. Only time will tell if this pattern holds in the Chinese data, too, but if it does, the
recent declines in trading volumes in land parcels and square footage of new unit sales are
foreboding.

III.

Thinking About Risk: Can Chinese Price Growth Possibly Be Explained by
Fundamentals?
Prices reflect the intersection of supply and demand, so one cannot tell all that much

simply by looking at their levels or rates of growth. Moreover, the very high growth rates of
Chinese house prices need to be kept in perspective. For example, the 1995-2005 U.S. housing
boom saw real prices increase by about 50% at the national level, with so-called ‘bubble
markets’ such as Las Vegas, Phoenix and Miami escalating by from 100% in Las Vegas to 130%
in Miami over the same time span. Those certainly are far lower than what we believe to be
credible data shows for many major Chinese housing markets. However, it is critical to
recognize that prices started from different levels at the beginning of each country’s boom, with
the appreciation in China coming off a very low base. Differences in economic growth across
the two countries also are large. From 2004-2013, Chinese GDP grew in real terms at an average
compound real rate of 10.2% or by over 160% in aggregate. That is roughly four times the 42%
real aggregate growth during the U.S. housing boom years from 1995-2005. And, as we show
just below, real income growth also has been much higher in China, particularly in its urban
markets.

6

See Du and Zhang (2015), Cao, Huang and Lai (2015) for example for some recent research on this topic.

16

While it is challenging to execute a convincing econometric analysis on such a short time
series, there are a number of other metrics by which one can judge the risk that Chinese housing
markets are substantially overpriced. Developing those measures and interpreting them is the
purpose of this section. We start with what we consider the most intuitive: measuring whether
growth in the quantity of housing supplied has outpaced demand as reflected in the number of
households needing a place.

Supply and Demand: Units and Households
It is well known that demand-side fundamentals tend to be quite strong in most Chinese
housing markets. Even without rapid national population growth, an on-going, massive rural-tourban migration underpins strong demand for housing units in Chinese cities. According to the
two latest National Population Censuses by NBSC, the urban population in China increased
from 458.8 million (36.9% of total population) in 2000 to 670.0 million (50.3% of total
population) in 2010, for an average compound growth rate of about 3.9%. Urban household
income also has grown substantially as the Chinese economy has prospered over the past couple
of decades. The average annual compound real growth rate of per capita disposable income for
urban households reached 9.2% between 2004 and 2013 according to NBSC. The importance of
these demand factors are also highlighted in recent research (Chen, Guo and Wu (2011); Fang,
et. al. (2015); Garriga, Wang and Tang (2014); Huang, Leung and Qu (2015); Wang and Zhang
(2014)).
Less is known about the supply side of the housing market, but some research suggests
that high and rising prices are due at least in part to some type of natural constraint or restrictive
behavior by local governments (e.g., Wang, Chan and Xu (2012); Wu, Feng and Li (2014)).

17

Figure 8 begins our documentation of supply side conditions with its plot of the ratio of new
housing supply as a share of the 2010 stock in the 12 major markets for which land price growth
was reported above.7 The first panel shows that residential space is not rising as a share of
overall market size in Beijing and Shanghai, but is in Tianjin and Chongqing. In 2014 alone,
developers in Tianjin delivered new space equal to over 9% of the 2010 stock; in Chongqing,
the analogous figure is nearly 6%.8 The other panels of Figure 8 document rising trends in other
markets such as Xian, Chengdu, and Guangzhou.
Figure 9 gauges supply in another way for these same markets, this time with unsold
inventory held by developers as a share of yearly sales volume in the same market.9 A value of
0.5 implies that unsold inventories equal six months of average sales volumes in the same
market. Consider the series for Beijing in the first panel. There are sharp spikes in unsold
inventories relative to sales volume in 2008 during the global financial crisis and in 2010 and
2011 amidst the national stimulus program. Inventory relative to transactions volume was low in
2012 and 2013, but increased in 2014. This ratio has been trending up in Shanghai since 2007.
Inventories in Shanghai now equal about 24 months of sales volumes. Other markets such as
Dalian, Changsha, and Xian recently have seen multiple years of similarly high levels of unsold
inventory relative to overall market sales volume.
Table 7 provides another perspective that confirms inventory levels have been rising not
just absolutely, but relative to the scale of activity in the market. It reports data on a balanced
7

In this measure, the numerator is the annual volume (in floor area) of newly-built housing completion as reported
by local statistics agency. The denominator, the housing stock in 2010, is calculated based on the per capita living
space of urban households and urban population in 2010, both reported in the National Population Census. Ratios
for all 35 major markets discussed above are available upon request. These dozen cities capture most of the local
variation across the 35 cities.
8
To help put these numbers in perspective, it may be useful to know that housing permits in Phoenix, one of the
U.S. ‘bubble markets’, did not quite reach 6% at the height of its boom.
9
The numerator is the inventory (in floor area) of newly-built housing units held by developers at the end of the
year. The denominator is the transaction volume (in floor area) of newly-built housing units sold during this year.
Both are reported by local housing authorities.

18

panel of 119 property development firms listed on the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock exchanges.
The first column reports average turnover rate as reflected by the mean sales-to-asset ratio for
these firms. Under Chinese accounting rules, a housing developer’s inventory includes all land
parcels purchased and housing units under construction, including those already presold to
households. We adjust that number to exclude all advance payments from presold units and
report it in the second column. Normalized inventory, which standardizes by the level of assets,
is reported in the final column. Absolute and relative inventory levels clearly have risen over
time, with a higher plateau roughly double that experienced in 2004 being reached following the
stimulus period. Those high inventory levels have been maintained over time.
Figure 10 helps us understand the rapid increase of housing inventory held by developers
during recent years. Floor space in aggregate housing starts in the 35 major cities fluctuated
between 200 and 300 million square meters before 2009, but then jumped by about 50% to over
450 million square meters in 2010 following the stimulus. It has remained around this level
since then. One needs more than modest growth in demand to keep pace with a surge in supply
that large. For many cities, that growth did materialize, but not in others. In those places,
inventory started to increase when the huge volume of housing starts were converted to effective
supply in the market.
We also investigated longer-run changes in quantities in our 35 major markets. More
specifically, the increase in the number of households is compared to the number of units
supplied during the same interval. It is surprisingly difficult to estimate these quantities for
Chinese cities for a number of reasons (e.g., urban boundaries change, the housing units of some
local households are torn down so they need a unit even though they did not migrate into the
city, etc.). They require a number of assumptions to be made. Appendix 1 describes them and

19

the entire estimation process in detail. While we obviously made what we consider the best
choices, readers are encouraged to review that section carefully.
Table 8 reports our results. The top row of the table is for the entire nation. In aggregate,
during the decade between 2001 and 2010 growth in the number of households needed a housing
unit exceeded the increase in the supply of units by nearly 14%. However, there was an
oversupply of units relative to households of about 10% in 2011 and 2012, which resulted in
supply falling short of our estimate of demand by about 10% over the full 2001-2012 period.
Once again, that aggregate average masks important heterogeneity across markets. This is
highlighted by contrasting the cases of Beijing and Chongqing, the two cities with the 1st and 2nd
highest land price appreciation rates and the 1st and 3rd highest house price growth rates. Our
calculations suggest that the number of new units supplied in the capital city has been sufficient
to satisfy only 80% of our estimate of the growth in households living in Beijing since 2000.
This stands in stark contrast to the situation in Chongqing. In that city, additions to net new
supply appear to have been almost 90% more than the increase in households. Other markets in
which we estimate that net new supply has exceeded the net increase in households by at least 30
percent include Chengdu, Guiyang, Harbin, Hohhot, Lanzhou, Nanchang, Qingdao, Shenyang,
Wuhan, Yinchuan, and Zhengzhou. Another eight saw net new supply exceed net new demand
by from 10%-30% (Changsha, Fuzhou, Kunming, Nanjing, Nanning, Shijiazhuang Taiyuan, and
Tianjin). That means 15 markets did not see supply outpace demand this century (by more than
10%, a magnitude that we consider well within the range of estimation error). This group
includes many of the largest markets in the East region of China such as Beijing, Guangzhou,
Shanghai, and Shenzhen, as well as other coastal markets such as Hangzhou and Xiamen.

20

Residential Vacancy
If quantity supplied really has outpaced the growth in the quantity of units demanded in a
market, then the vacancy rate should have increased. Measurement of residential vacancy is of
great interest in China, but data limitations once again make it very hard to document
convincingly. There has been no official housing survey that could provide a reliable estimate
since the first National Urban Housing Census in 1985.10 This has led some researchers to
conduct independent surveys on urban households. Perhaps the most well-known is the China
Household Finance Survey (CHFS) at Southwestern University of Finance and Economics (Gan,
2012). For their latest report in 2013, they surveyed 28,000 households around the country, with
each household sampled providing the total number of dwelling units it owned, as well as the
number of units leased out. Presuming that a household occupies only one unit at a time, the
number of vacant units owned by the household can be calculated. Aggregating across
households, they reported a very high nationwide vacancy rate of 22.4% in 2013.11
Other researchers have imputed a vacancy rate indirectly from macro-level statistics. For
example, researchers from China International Capital Corporation (CICC), a leading investment
bank, started with the data from the National Population Census in 2010.12 This source reports
the breakdown of urban households by the number of bedrooms they were: 1) occupying; or 2)
owning and leaving vacant. After making some assumptions on the average number of

10

Sporadic region-level surveys exist such as the housing census conducted in 2007 by the Beijing local
government, but in most cases official statistics were not published and no micro data were released.
11
The results are reported in “The Vacancy Rate of Urban Housing and Trend in the Housing Market” (in Chinese)
released in June 2014 on the official website of CHFS (www.chfs.swufe.edu.cn).
12
The results are reported in “Are Vacancy Rates too High in China” (in Chinese) released on June 19 th, 2014 by
CICC (www.cicc.com).

21

bedrooms per unit, the CICC imputed a housing unit-level vacancy rate of 18.3% for the nation
in 2010.13 A recent update at the end of 2013 indicates a slightly lower level of 17.7%.
We would expect vacancy rates that high to have exerted a material dampening effect on
house price appreciation that one does not see in the data in most markets. Hence, we make an
independent measurement using existing data (not a new survey) that allows us to compute
vacancy rates at the provincial level. More specifically, we use micro data from the Urban
Household Survey (UHS), an official survey designed by the NBSC that is conducted annually
by local statistics bureaus. Annual sample sizes of about 50,000 households are available.
Households are surveyed in each city according to population size (e.g., there are 2,100
households surveyed in Beijing). Within each city, households are randomly sampled using
stratified three-stage (neighborhood, housing complex, and household) PPS random sampling.
More specifically, each household reports the total number of dwelling units it owns, and
identifies its main residence as well as the occupancy status of all other units it owns as either
“occasionally occupied”, “leased out”, or “other”. To be conservative, we consider
“occasionally occupied” and “other” units as vacant.
By law, it is the obligation of any household sampled to participate in the survey and to
provide accurate information. Thus, survey data quality is perceived to be high.14 With support
from the China Data Center at Tsinghua University, we were able to obtain the micro-level data
in nine provinces between 2002 and 2009, including that for Beijing which is a provincial-level
city. Figure 11’s plot shows much lower vacancy rates, with the level across all nine provinces
13

For example, they assumed that for households with three bedrooms, 99% had 1 unit and 1% had 2 units; for
households with four bedrooms, 20% had 1 unit, 75% had 2 units, and 5% had 3 units; for households with five
bedrooms, 20% had 1 unit, 72% had 2 units, and 8% had 3 units; and so on. These assumptions were based on
information on the breakdown of dwelling units by the number of bedrooms from the same census. They also
assumed that a single household could occupy one unit at a time.
14
For example, certain official statistics such as household disposal income and household expenditures on
consumption reported are calculated using UHS data.

22

increasing gradually from 3.9% in 2002 to 5.2% in 2009. There is noteworthy heterogeneity in
vacancy conditions across provinces, too. In 2009 for example, the vacancy rate was highest in
the eastern province of Zhejiang (7.9%), followed by Guangdong (5.5%) and Liaoning (5.3%).
Beijing’s vacancy rate was 5.1%, with the western province of Gansu having the lowest rate at
1.3%.
More recent vacancy rates can be imputed using our supply-demand change results if we
are willing to use the 9-province aggregate to proxy for the nation. Based on the National
Population Census, we can impute that the total number of urban households nationally was
197.95 million in 2009. Using the 5.2% vacancy rate reported just above implies there were
10.86 million vacant units in urban areas that year (197.95 / (1-5.2%) * 5.2% ≈ 10.86),
presuming one household occupies one unit. Based on the same procedures discussed in the
previous sub-section, there was a net increase of 35.56 million households needing housing units
during the four years between 2010 and 2013; on the supply side, the number of housing units
increased by 41.31 million over the same time period. If all the 5.75 million units of excess
supply were left vacant, then the vacancy rate increased to 7.0% by the end of 2013
((10.86+5.75) / (208.81+41.31-12.98) ≈ 0.070).
Both the level and the change need to be interpreted with care because Chinese economic
conditions are fundamentally different from those in the U.S. and most other developed
countries. As an emerging market experiencing rapid growth, the annual flow supply comprises
a substantial share of the housing stock in China. For example, there were about 15.13 million
housing units completed in 2013, which amounts to 5.7% of the total stock of about 265.74
million units at the end of that year in urban markets. In most cases, it would take the purchaser
of a newly-built unit several months to furnish the unit before moving in. In addition, the share

23

of uneconomic or dilapidated housing units is likely to be relatively high in China. The National
Population Census in 2010 reports that 8.7% of the urban housing units were completed before
1979. That is before the reform era, which suggests that many of these units do not meet current
quality standards demanded by urban households. Thus, many of them are likely to be left
vacant. Factors such as these suggest the natural vacancy rate probably is higher in China than in
developed markets such as the United States. That said, it is difficult to believe that the natural
vacancy rate doubled over the past four years, so the recent jump in vacancies is mostly likely
due to oversupply.

Other Metrics: Price-to-Rent and Price-to-Income Ratios
Other metrics such as the price-to-rent and price-to-income ratio can be computed for
Chinese markets. Price-to-rent ratios for the same 12 major markets are plotted in Figure 12
dating back to the third quarter of 2009.15 The underlying data are averages of district-level
prices (in the numerator) and rents (in the denominator), both of which are reported by a data
vendor (www.cityre.cn) based on their collection of micro-level listing prices or rental prices
information in the corresponding cities.
There is a very wide range of ratios, running from the low 20s to just over 50 in the latest
data from the last quarter of 2014. These are high values compared to the U.S. Recent decennial
census data for July 2011 reports ratios from the mid-teens to the mid-40s for the thirty largest
cities in the United States. Sixteen of those 30 areas have price-to-rent ratios below 20; another

15

Data for all 35 major markets are available upon request.

24

eight are between 20 and 30, with five cities in the thirties (New York City, Los Angeles, San
Jose, Seattle, and Washington, DC), and only one above 40 (San Francisco at 44.1).16
Figure 12 shows little evidence of rising trends for this ratio, with Guangzhou being the
exception. Its price-to-rent ratio has increased from just below 30 to just over 40 since 2009.
Other markets such as Shanghai, Tianjin, Chongqing, Wuhan and Dalian show flat trends, while
there are significant declines in Hangzhou, Chengdu, and Xian. The latter cities are evidence
that price-to-rent ratios can compress at least somewhat without prices themselves dropping at
all. Beijing has the highest ratio (along with Shanghai) on average. It has been above 50 since
2013(1).
Poterba’s (1984) user cost model of the rent-versus-own decision can be used in
conjunction with price-to-rent data and information on the costs of occupying a housing unit to
impute the breakeven price appreciation necessary for a new buyer to be indifferent between
owning and renting each year. In the Chinese context, the user cost equation is given by
UC = r + m + β – πe,

(3)

where UC represents the all-in costs of owning your housing unit for a given period of time, one
year typically. Those costs are captured on the right-hand side of equation (3) by the capital cost
(r), maintenance and depreciation cost (m), risk premium associated with housing investment (β),
and the expected housing appreciation (πe), with no property taxes in almost all localities. This
formula is further simplified from the standard Poterba equation because there is no deductibility
of mortgage interest in China.
Following Wu, Gyourko and Deng (2012), we use the 5-year deposit rate as the capital
cost, presume maintenance and depreciation amount to 2.5% of house value annually, and
16

See the story at http://seattlebubble.com/blog/2013/03/29/top-30-cities-price-to-rent-price-to-income-ratios-2011/
for more detail. The underlying U.S. Census data are downloadable at
http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/index.xhtml.

25

impose a 2% risk premium. The first column in Table 9 lists the expected price appreciation
needed for a buyer to be indifferent between owning and renting the unit given the other
assumptions noted just above. The implied expected appreciation rates range from 4.5%
(Xining) to 7.3% (Beijing) as of 2014(4).
Comparing the figures in columns 1 and 2 of Table 9 shows that in eleven cities the
breakeven appreciation rate exceeds the average per annum compound rate realized over the
previous nine years (Chengdu, Dalian, Haikou, Hangzhou, Hefei, Jinan, Nanchang, Ningbo,
Taiyuan, Yinchuan, and Wuhan). Implied expectations seem to be more reasonable in other
cities in the sense that they are within the range of recent experience in most markets. Of course,
these results paint too optimistic a picture if we are underestimating on-going user costs of
ownership. For example, if we use a 5-year loan rate in lieu of the deposit rate, then costs are
about 150-200 basis points higher. In that case, another nine markets would have required price
growth expectations above recent average appreciation. They include some of the largest
markets in China: Harbin, Guiyan, Qingdao, Shenyang, Tianjin, and Xian.
There are no reasonable assumptions that do not leave the implied breakeven rate for
Beijing well below its extremely high recent rates of price appreciation. However, that does not
suggest that housing market price risk in the nation’s capital is low. The contrary is the case, in
fact, and the reason is because the market’s price-to-rent ratio itself is so high. To better
understand this, consider the potential outcome if expected appreciation in Beijing were for any
reason to fall by only one percentage point from 7.3% to 6.3%. In that case, the equilibrium user
cost would increase from 1.9% to 2.9%, implying a drop of price-to-rent ratio from 52.6
(1/0.019≈52.6) to 34.5 (1/0.029≈34.5), all else constant. Absent an offsetting increase in rents,
this implies about a one-third drop in prices. Only modest drops in expected price growth (or

26

rises in interest rates) are needed to generate potentially large price declines because they involve
large percentage changes in (abnormally low) user costs. Large price declines need not occur, of
course, if there are countervailing changes such as rising rents, and we see such cases in markets
such as Hangzhou in Figure 12, where a falling price-to-rent ratio is associated with relatively
flat prices and rapidly rising rents
Figure 13 presents analogous information on the price-to-income ratio.17 Caution is in
order when interpreting these data, as there is substantial ‘gray’ income in China which biases up
measured ratios (Wang and Woo, 2011; Deng, Wei and Wu, 2015). Changes in these ratios
probably are more informative over time, as we have no reason to suspect large, high-frequency
changes in reporting of income. With that caveat in mind, these figures show that price-toincome ratios are extraordinarily high in China. Five is a low number, with Beijing’s being well
over 10. Mortgage underwriting in the U.S. and many other developed countries considers
anything above 3 to be potentially problematic. That said, conditions in China are quite
different. Commercial banks typically consider 50% as the upper bound for the ratio of monthly
debt service to monthly disposable income. Given a typical current mortgage with a 30 year
term, a 30% down payment and a 6.55% interest rate, the maximum implied price-to-income
ratio is about 9.4. Thus, price-to-income ratios in all markets but Beijing and Shanghai are
consistent with current underwriting practices. That does not mean debt service is not high
relative to income in China. It is. However, it is likely that other factors such as expected

17

In the calculation, we use the average newly-built housing price and the average per capita disposable income,
both reported by local statistics agency (either median house price or median income is available in China now).
We then calculate the ratio between the price of a housing unit of 90 square meters in size and a household with
three members (i.e., assuming that the per capita living space is 30 square meters).

27

growth in urban incomes are perceived to make affordability less burdensome.18 Of course, this
highlights how important future income growth is to the health of China’s housing markets.

IV.

House Price Changes and Market Fundamentals: 35 Major Markets
In this section, we estimate simple regression models to determine whether supply and

demand fundamentals like those discussed above can help explain house price variation over
time across Chinese cities.19 In doing so, we construct a panel data model using annual data
between 2006 and 2013 for the 35 major cities listed above. Our price series is an update of the
log change in real constant-quality prices from Wu, Deng and Liu (2014).
We begin with Table 10’s summary results describing how much of real city-level house
price growth can be explained by common versus city-specific factors. Column 1 reports the
findings of a specification that regresses log real price change on year fixed effects. There is a
strong common component in price growth, as year dummies can explain almost 40 percent of
the variation in annual housing price growth. This is consistent with shifts in the macroeconomic
environment, market sentiment, and/or the central government’s housing market intervention
policies playing an important role in all local housing markets. In contrast, column 2’s results
show that the explanatory power of city dummies is a much lower 12%. The adjusted-R2 is so
low that we cannot reject the null that city fixed effects are jointly equal to zero. The final
column in Table 10 shows that these two factors are largely orthogonal to one another. When
both sets of fixed effects are included on the right-hand side, the R2 is 50%.

18

Fang, et. al. (2015) report results consistent with this conclusion. In their study of 120 cities, they find that
households from the lower end of the income distribution still are able to access financing and purchase homes, even
in cities with high house price appreciation.
19
See Ahuja et al (2010), Ren, Xiong and Yuan (2012), Zhang, Hua and Zhao (2012), Dreger and Zhang (2013),
Chow and Niu (2014) for some other recent attempts on modeling housing price dynamics in major Chinese cities.

28

We next investigate the role of relative supply-demand conditions. The first column of
Table 11 adds controls for the ratio of unsold inventory held by developers to total sales in the
relevant market during the previous year and for the ratio of presale permits to total sales in the
previous year.20 Both are negative and statistically significantly different from zero. However,
only the inventory variable remains statistically significant when we add controls for the
previous year’s price level and rate of price growth. One possible reason is that developers could
be adjusting the volume of new housing supply based on current housing prices or price changes.
For example, during a downturn in the market, developers could choose to postpone some new
projects and reduce new housing supply, which would at least partially reduce the magnitude of
price drops. The impact of the inventory-to-sales variable declines modestly, but remains highly
statistically significant.
Interestingly, price growth this year is significantly lower if the price level was higher
last year (column 2 of Table 11). Thus, more expensive markets tend to mean revert in the sense
their rate of appreciation will be lower. Column 3 of Table 11 then adds a number of other
“fundamental” factors to the specification. On the demand side, two reflect exogenous demand
shocks. Expected non-farm employment growth in the city is created using the method
developed by Bartik (1991). This variable, epgrowthi,t, is calculated as the weighted average of
national industrial sector employment growth rates, where the weights reflect each city’s share of
that industry’s aggregate employment. More specifically,
(4)

20

Both variables are calculated based on data provided by local housing authorities.

29

where et is the national employment level in all non-farm industries, ei,j,t is city i’s employment
in industry j in year t,

i,j,t

is the national employment level in industry j outside of city i, and the

j subscript indexes the 18 non-farm employment sectors in China.21
A similar approach is taken to create another variable intended to reflect exogenous
shocks in exports. That variable, exportgrowthi,t, is calculated as:
,
where exporti,t is city i’s export in year t, gdpi,t is city i’s GDP in year t, and

(5)
i,t

is the

national-level export outside of city i in year t.
A credit conditions control is created in an analogous way. The growth in loans,
loangrowthi,t, is defined as
(6)
where loani,t is city i’s total outstanding loan balance at the end of year t, and

i,t

is the

national-level loan balance outside of city i in year t.
We also experiment with a couple of supply side variables. One is the change in
construction costs. The second is the annual residential-usage land supply volume from the
CRLPI to reflect the effect of land supply.22
The findings from this expanded specification show that only the export variable
consistently is statistically significant. A one standard deviation increase in expected export
growth is associated with a 0.15 standard deviation higher rate of local house price appreciation.
That is not nothing and signifies that a positive demand shock does lead to higher house price

21

Unless otherwise stated, the data used in the rest of this section are provided by National Bureau of Statistics of
China and local housing authorities.
22
We never include land prices from the CRLPI because of the obvious endogeneity problems.

30

appreciation. However, the R2 does not increase much from that reported in the first two
columns.
More importantly economically is the fact that the inventory overhang variable remains
statistically and economically significant. Its coefficient implies that a one standard deviation
increase in normalized housing inventory would lead to a 0.45 standard deviation lower rate of
real house price growth. Thus, supply overhangs as proxied for by rising unsold inventories
relative to overall sales activity are associated with economically-meaningful lower rates of price
growth the following year. This correlation remains strong even controlling for time and
location fixed effects, as well as various other controls.

V.

Conclusion
It is routine for people to ask whether Chinese housing is a ‘bubble’. This paper does not

attempt to answer that question, but does take on the challenge of assessing the riskiness of
Chinese housing markets. That turns out to be substantially more difficult than the typical
economist might believe. The first reason is that the data needed for any such analysis is limited.
Hence, more accurate measurement of house prices themselves is the first answer to the question
of ‘what we need to know’ in order to sensibly assess Chinese housing market risk. The official
government price series are of lower quality than those created by private researchers, but data
quality is improving and should continue to do so. Unfortunately, a very short time series for
analysis cannot be improved upon by additional public or private research support. Only the
passage of time will do in that respect.
In the meantime, insight into market risk still can be gleaned from a careful analysis of
supply and demand conditions. We looked at a number of metrics and came to the following

31

conclusions: (1) there is substantial heterogeneity in the volume of supply-demand imbalances
across markets, both over time and in the shorter run; (2) high price level and price appreciation
rate markets such as Beijing and others on the east coast do not look to be oversupplied by our
metrics; there are a number (much more than a handful) of markets, primarily off the coast,
where oversupply looks to be substantial by one or more measures; even absent a negative
economic shock, these markets look very risky, as we would expect weak housing market
fundamentals to lead to weak or negative price growth no matter what; empirically, we report a
correlation showing that a one standard deviation higher inventory overhang in a local market is
associated with nearly a one-half standard deviation lower future growth rate of real prices; (3)
even markets such as Beijing with strong measured fundamentals should be considered risky
because housing units there trade at very high multiples of rent; it only takes a modest
downward shift in expectations (or a commensurate increase in interest rates) to generate sharp
asset value declines when a market is ‘priced to perfection’; naturally, a true negative shock in
terms of a policy intervention or a further downshift in economic growth would compound the
problem.
There are other factors that affect risk which are beyond the scope of this already lengthy
paper. Debt is one example. Negative equity appears to have played a critical factor in the U.S.
housing bust, but there appears to be substantial equity in the Chinese residential housing system.
If there is hidden leverage in the system, that would be problematic, but we leave that possibility
to other research.

32

Selected References
Ahuja, A, Cheung, L, Han, G, et al (2010). “Are House Prices Rising too Fast in China”, IMF
Working Paper WP/10/274.
Ambrose, B, Deng, Y, and Wu, J (2015). “Understanding the Risk of China's Local Government
Debts and its Linkage with Property Markets”, SSRN working paper #SSRN 2557031.
Bartik, T (1991), Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies? Upjohn
Press, Kalamazoo.
Cao, J, Huang, B, and Lai, R (2015), “On the Effectiveness of Housing Purchase Restriction
Policy in China: A Difference in Difference Approach”, SSRN working paper #2584275.
Chen, J, Guo, F, and Wu, Y (2011), “One decade of urban housing reform in China: Urban
housing price dynamics and the role of migration and urbanization, 1995–2005”, Habitat
International, 35(1): 1-8.
Chen, J and Han, X (2014), “The Evolution of the Housing Market and its Socioeconomic
Impacts in the Post‐Reform People's Republic of China: A Survey of the Literature”,
Journal of Economic Surveys, 28(4): 652-670.
Chow, G and Niu, L (2014). “Housing Price in Urban China as Determined by Demand and
Supply”, working paper, Princeton University.
Deng, Y, Gyourko, J, and Wu, J (2012). “Land and House Price Measurement in China,” in:
Property Markets and Financial Stability, Heath, A, Packer, F and Windsor, C, eds., Bank
of International Settlement and Reserve Bank of Australia.
Deng, Y, Gyourko, J, and Wu, J (2014). “The Wharton/NUS/Tsinghua Chinese Residential Land
Price Indexes (CRLPI) White Paper,” working paper, National University of Singapore.
Deng, Y, Wei, S, and Wu, J (2015). “Estimating the Unofficial Income of Officials from
Housing Purchases: The Case of China,” working paper, National University of Singapore.
Dreger, C and Zhang, Y (2013). “Is There a Bubble in the Chinese Housing Market”, Urban
Policy and Research, 31(1): 27-39.
Du, Z, and Zhang, L (2015). “Home-purchase Restriction, Property Tax and Housing Price in
China: A Counterfactual Analysis”, Journal of Econometrics, forthcoming.
Fan, Z, Tao K and Xiao, S (2015). “Credit Risk of Local Government Financing Vehicles in
China”, unpublished working paper, CCER, Peking University.
Fang, H, Gu, G, Xiong, W, and Zhou, L (2015). “Demystifying the Chinese Housing Boom”,
NBER Working Paper 21112, April 2015.
33

Gan, Li (2012). Research Report of China Household Finance Survey 2012. Southwestern
University of Finance and Economics Press.
Garriga, C, Wang, P, and Tang, Y (2014). “Rural-Urban Migration, Structural Transformation,
and Housing Markets in China”, St Louis Fed Working Paper 2014-028A.
Guo, X, Zheng, S, Geltner, D, and Liu, H (2014). “A New Approach for Constructing Home
Price Indices: The Pseudo Repeat Sales Model and Its Application to China”, Journal of
Housing Economics, 25(1): 20-38.
Huang, D, Leung, C, and Qu, B (2015). “Do bank loans and local amenities explain Chinese
urban house prices?”, China Economic Review, 34(1): 19-38.
Poterba, J (1984). “Tax Subsidies to Owner-occupied Housing: An Asset Market Approach”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 99(4): 729-752.
Ren, Y, Cong, X, and Yuan, Y (2012). “House Price Bubbles in China”, China Economic
Review, 23(4): 786-800.
Shen, L (2012). “Are House Prices too high in China?” China Economic Review, 23(4): 12061210.
Tao, K (2015). “Assessing Local Government Debt Risks in China: A Case Study of local
Government Financial Vehicles”, unpublished working paper.
Wang, S (2011). “State Misallocation and Housing Prices: Theory and Evidence from China”,
American Economic Review, 101(5): 2081-2107.
Wang, X and Woo, W (2011). “The Size and Distribution of Hidden Household Income in
China,” Asian Economic Papers, 10(1): 1-26.
Wang, S, Chan, S, and Xu, B (2012). “The Estimation and Determinants of the Price Elasticity of
Housing Supply: Evidence from China,” Journal of Real Estate Research, 34(3): 311-344.
Wang, Z and Zhang, Q (2014). “Fundamental factors in the housing markets of China,” Journal
of Housing Economics, 25(1): 53-61.
Wu, J, Gyourko, J, and Deng, Y (2012). “Evaluating Conditions in Major Chinese Housing
Markets”, Regional Science and Urban Economics, 42 (3): 531-543.
Wu, J, Deng, Y, and Liu, H (2014). “House Price Index Construction in the Nascent Housing
Market: The Case of China”, Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 48(3): 522545.

34

Wu, G, Feng, Q, and Li, P (2014). “Does local governments’ budget deficit push up housing
prices in China?”, China Economic Review, forthcoming.
Zhang, Y, Hua, X, and Zhao, L (2012). “Exploring determinants of housing prices: A case study
of Chinese experience in 1999–2010”, Economic Modelling, 29(6): 2349-2361.

35

Appendix 1: Calculation of the Ratio between Changes in Housing Demand and Supply
Demand Side Indicator
The demand side indicator measures the number of family households needing new
housing units in the city during the decade between 2001 and 2010. It is important to note that
the definition of “family household” in China is not consistent with that in other countries like
U.S. In China, all the three following cases would be counted as one family household in the
National Population Census (NPC): (1) if one family occupies one dwelling unit, it would be
counted as one family household; (2) if two or more families share one dwelling unit, but each of
them occupies at least one bedroom, each of them would be treated as one family household; (3)
if one person occupies one dwelling unit (or one room in the unit) alone, he/she would also be
counted as one family household.
The demand side indicator is calculated as the sum of two components: (1) net increase
in family households living in the urban area and (2) urban family households previously living
in units that were demolished.
(1)

Net increase of family households living in the urban area
The first component measures the net increase of family households living in the urban

area of the city between 2000 and 2010, which may come from either the formation of new
families, or immigration of households from other cities or from rural areas (of the same or other
cities).
The number of urban family households are directly available in the NPCs in both 2000
and 2010: from the 2000 NPC, we obtain the total number of family households living in the
urban area of the city on Nov 1st, 2000, both with and without local “hukou” (residence
registration); similarly, the corresponding figure for Nov 1st, 2010 is available in the 2010 NPC.
Based on these two numbers we calculate the net increase in the number of family households
during the decade. In the city of Beijing for example, there were 3,231,319 households living in
its urban area as reported in the 2000 NPC, and 5,803,085 in 2010, implying a net increase of
2,571,766 (5,803,085 - 3,231,319 = 2,571,766) households.
One potential problem here is that the boundary of the “urban area” in a city is not
necessarily consistent between 2000 and 2010. Due to the continuous urbanization, some
villages at the city edge might be defined as a “rural area” in the 2000 NPC, but then urbanized
36

during the decade and so redefined as an “urban area” in the 2010 NPC. Such a redefinition
would lead to an increase in urban households, but some households in these “villages” might
actually live in exactly the same units in 2000 and 2010. Therefore, it might result in an upward
bias in the demand side indicator.
We try to correct for this bias based on data of households reported as living in a rural
area. Using Beijing as an example, in the 2000 NPC there were 2,533,459 persons with local
hukou living in its rural area. Without any population migration or redefinition of urban area,
these 2,533,459 persons ought to increase to 2,573,766 in 2010, given the natural growth rate of
1.591% in Beijing during the decade; however, the actual population living in the rural area of
Beijing reported in the 2010 NPC was 1,908,652, which implies that there were 665,114
(2,573,766 - 1,908,652 = 665,114) persons which were either re-defined as living in the urban
area, or moved to the urban area of Beijing, or moved out of the city. According to the NPC data,
during the decade there were 209,910 persons who previously lived in the rural area of Beijing
but moved to other cities or the urban area of Beijing, which implies that 455,204 (665,114 –
209,910 = 455,204) persons were re-defined as living in the urban area. Presuming three people
per household, this works out to 150,481 households. Therefore, the actual number of increase
in urban households is 2,421,285 (2,571,766 – 150,481 = 2,421,285).
(2)

Urban family households with previous dwelling units demolished
The second component measures the number of family households living in the urban

area (as of the 2000 NPC) whose dwelling units were demolished in the urban regeneration
process over the decade. These households need to purchase or rent a new unit and thus also
contribute to the demand for new housing supply. Unfortunately, for almost all cities this
number is not directly available, but can only be imputed indirectly. The procedures are as
follows, and again we take Beijing as the example (Table A-1).
1)

In both the 2000 and 2010 NPCs, about 10% of the family households were

sampled to provide additional information, including the building age of their current dwelling
units. We use this information to calculate the demolition rate for each building age category.
For example, there were 4,096,844 family households in Beijing (both urban and rural area) in
2000, of which 402,717 households were sampled to provide additional information. Of these
402,717 households, 18,425 reported that their current dwelling units were built before 1949,
which implies that there were about 187,438 (18,425 / 402,717 * 4,096,844 ≈ 187,438) family
37

households in Beijing with dwelling units built before 1949. Using the same methodology, we
compute that there were only 7,913 such households in 2010. This suggests that there were
106,752 dwelling units of pre-1949 vintage demolished during the decade, or a demolition rate of
56.95% (106,752 / 187,438 ≈ 0.5695).
2)

Analogous demolition rates are calculated for other vintages. For the vintages of

“1990-1999” and “after 2000”, we assume that the demolition rates are 1% and 0%, respectively,
according to a report by Institute of Real Estate Studies, Tsinghua University.
3)

In the 2010 NPC the building age category information is also available for

family households living in the urban area. With the assumption that the demolition rate did not
significantly differ between urban and rural areas, we can use that figure to impute the number of
households with units demolished in each category. For example, in 2010 there were 76,584
urban family households with dwelling units built before 1949, and according to the above
calculation the demolition rate was 56.95%. This implies that there were 101,327 (76,584 / (1 –
56.95%) * 56.95% ≈ 101,327) households in this category with units demolished during the
decade.
In total, we estimate that housing units of 393,159 urban households in Beijing were
demolished during the decade.
(3)

Aggregated number
Based on these calculations, the aggregated demand for new housing units in Beijing is

2.81 million units.

Supply Side Indicator
The supply side indicator measures the number of housing units completed and available
for family households in the city during the decade. There are two components included here:
(1) units developed by firms or institutions; and (2) units built by households themselves.
(1)

Units developed by firms or institutions
We start with the total floor area of housing completed. In Beijing, there were 209.69

million sq.m. of housing completed between Nov 1st, 2000 and Oct 30th, 2010, including private
housing developed by housing developers, public housing developed by governments,

38

institutional housing developed by universities or other institutions, etc., but excluding any
informal housing or units built by households themselves.
However, not all the 209.69 million sq.m. are available for the family households.
Besides the family households, there is also another group of “non-family” households reported
in the NPCs. These so-called “non-family households” refer to those living in one room but are
legally unrelated. Mainly, they include three groups: (1) those who rent and live in dormitories
provided by universities, high schools, factories, construction sites, or other institutions; (2) those
who rent and share one room; (3) unmarried couples.
We deduct their demand from the 209.69 million sq.m. In Beijing, there were totally
1,443,186 persons defined as non-family households in the 2000 NPC. Based on the building
code for institutional housing in 2000, we assume that the per capita living space for them is 6.5
sq.m. in 2000, and thus they need about 9.38 million sq.m. of housing in aggregate. By 2010, the
population of this group increased to 2,892,968 persons and the standard for per capita living
space also increased to 7.0 sq.m., and so they need about 20.25 million sq.m. of housing.
Therefore, their housing demand increased by 10.87 (20.25 – 9.38 = 10.87) million sq.m. during
the decade. Presuming that demand was fully satisfied implies 198.60 (209.47 – 10.87 = 198.60)
million sq.m. of new housing supply available for family households.
Finally, we need to covert the floor area to units. According to the 2010 NPC (10%
sample survey), in Beijing there were 240,996 urban household respondents whose current units
were built after 2000, and the total floor area was 19.69 million sq.m., implying an average unit
size of 81.73 sq.m. This helps us to get the final result of about 2.43 (198.60 / 81.73 ≈ 2.43)
million units completed and available for family households during the decade.
(2)

Units built by households
According to the sample survey mentioned above, in 2000 there were 512,298 urban

households in Beijing who built their own units. In addition, there were 150,481 rural
households re-defined as urban households, and we assume each household occupied one
housing unit. Given the average demolition rate of 11.08% mentioned above, the number would
decrease to 589,374 ((512,298+150,481) * (1-11.08%) ≈ 589,374) in 2010. The corresponding
number reported in the 2010 NPC was 429,589 in 2010. Thus, in Beijing we believe that the
sector of self-built housing units did not contribute to the flow supply during the decade, but it

39

does not necessarily apply to other cities. In particular, this sector is usually more important in
less developed cities.
(3)

Aggregate number
Based on the above calculation, we can get the aggregated supply for new housing units.

For Beijing, the result is 2.43 million units.

Supply-Demand Ratio
Based on the above results we can compare the supply-demand ratio. In Beijing, we get
the result of 82.88% (2.43 / 2.81 ≈ 0.8288).

Updating the Calculation to Post-2010 Years
We also update the supply-demand ratio calculation to 2011 and 2012. Without the
detailed data provided by a NPC, we have to make several assumptions as described below.
(1)

For the component of “net increase of family households living in the urban area”,

we adopt the estimate of urban population at the end of each year (i.e., 2011 and 2012) provided
by the relevant local statistic agency, and assume that the average urban household size kept
changing in the same direction and at the same speed as between 2001 and 2010.
(2)

For the component of “urban family households with previous dwelling units

demolished”, we apply the demolition rate for each building age category calculated based on the
period 2001-2010 to the housing stock in 2010, and assume that the volume of demolition would
be evenly distributed between 2011 and 2020.
(3)

For the component of “units developed by firms or institutions”, we adopt the

volume of annual housing completion reported by the relevant local statistic agency, and assume
that both the percentage for non-family households and the average housing unit size were
consistent with the corresponding numbers in 2001-2010.
(4)

For the component of “units built by households”, we assume that its ratio against

units developed by firms or institutions kept stable, as between 2001 and 2010.

40

Table A-1: Imputing of Urban Households with Previous Dwelling Units Demolished
A. Households in both Urban and Rural Areas
All
Before 1949
Sample
402,717
18,425
2000
Census
Total
4,096,844
187,438
Sample
655,178
7,913
2010
Census
Total
6,680,552
80,685
Change
106,752
Demolishing Rate
56.95%

1950-1959
21,406
217,763
13,829
141,008
76,755
35.25%

1960-1969
16,858
171,497
12,683
129,323
42,174
24.59%

1970-1979
43,577
443,309
35,520
362,181
81,128
18.30%

1980-1989
148,539
1,511,089
135,322
1,379,817
131,272
8.69%

1990-1999
153,912
1,565,748
182,140
1,857,199
1.00%

After 2000
267,771
2,730,339
0.00%

1950-1959
13,061
133,547
35.25%
72,694

1960-1969
10,611
108,496
24.59%
35,382

1970-1979
27,106
277,156
18.30%
62,082

1980-1989
108,066
1,104,963
8.69%
105,123

1990-1999
160,245
1,638,487
1.00%
16,550

After 2000
240,966
2,463,851
0.00%
0

B. Households in Urban Area
Sample
2010
Census
Total
Demolishing Rate
Demolished

All
567,545
5,803,085
393,159

Before 1949
7,490
76,584
56.95%
101,327

41

Figure 1: 35 Major Cities Covered

42

Figure 2: Chinese National Real Residential Land Price Index, 35 Markets,
Constant Quality Series (Quarterly: 2004q1 – 2014q4)
2004q1=100

500
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0

43

Figure 3: Chinese Regional Real Residential Land Price Indexes—
East, Middle and West Regions, Constant Quality Series, 2004h1-2014h2
2004h1=100
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0

East

Middle

West

44

Figure 4: Real Residential Land Price Indexes in 12 Markets,
Constant Quality Series, 2004-2014
2004=100

2004=100

1200

1200

1000

1000

800

800

600

600

400

400

200

200

0

0
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
Beijing
Tianjin
Shanghai

2004=100

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
Chongqing
Nanjing
Hangzhou

2004=100

1200

1200

1000

1000

800

800

600

600

400

400

200

200

0

0
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
Dalian
Wuhan
Changsha

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
Chengdu
Guangzhou
Xian
45

46
2014(4)

2013(4)

2012(4)

2011(4)

2010(4)

2009(4)

2008(4)

2007(4)

2006(4)

2005(4)

2004(4)

2003(4)

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

Figure 5: Quarterly Land Parcel Sales in China (35 Market Aggregate)
2004(1)-2014(4)

2007Q1
2007Q2
2007Q3
2007Q4
2008Q1
2008Q2
2008Q3
2008Q4
2009Q1
2009Q2
2009Q3
2009Q4
2010Q1
2010Q2
2010Q3
2010Q4
2011Q1
2011Q2
2011Q3
2011Q4
2012Q1
2012Q2
2012Q3
2012Q4
2013Q1
2013Q2
2013Q3
2013Q4
2014Q1
2014Q2
2014Q3
2014Q4

Figure 6: Year-Over-Year Growth in Floor Space Sold,
Newly-Built Housing Units, 2007(1)-2014(4)

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%

-20%

-40%

National Level
35 Major Cities

47

Figure 7: Transactions Volume and Prices in the U.S. Housing Market

48

Figure 8: Annual New Housing Supply As a Share of the 2010 Stock in 12 Major Markets
10.00%

10.00%

9.00%

9.00%

8.00%

8.00%

7.00%

7.00%

6.00%

6.00%

5.00%

5.00%

4.00%

4.00%

3.00%

3.00%

2.00%

2.00%

1.00%

1.00%

0.00%

0.00%
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
Beijing

Tianjin

Shanghai

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014

Chongqing

Changsha

Guangzhou

10.00%
9.00%
8.00%
7.00%
6.00%
5.00%
4.00%
3.00%
2.00%
1.00%
0.00%
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
Nanjing

Dalian

49

Hangzhou

Wuhan

Chengdu

Xi'an

Figure 9: Unsold Inventory Held by Developers As a Share of Sales Volume in 12 Major Markets
350%

350%

300%

300%

250%

250%

200%

200%

150%

150%

100%

100%

50%

50%

0%

0%
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
Beijing

Tianjin

Shanghai

2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014

Chongqing

Changsha

Guangzhou

Chengdu

Xi'an

350%
300%
250%
200%
150%
100%
50%
0%
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014

Nanjing

Dalian

Hangzhou

Wuhan

50

Figure 10: Aggregate Space Delivered in Housing Starts, 35 Major Markets
million sq.m.
500

450

400

350

300

250

200
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

51

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

Figure 11: Housing Vacancy Rate Based on Urban Household Survey
between 2002 and 2009
Vacancy Rate
9.00%
8.00%
7.00%
6.00%
5.00%
4.00%
3.00%
2.00%
1.00%
0.00%
2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

9 Provinces

Beijing

Liaoning

Zhejiang

Anhui

Hubei

Guangdong

Sichuan

Shaanxi

Gansu

2009

52

Beijing
Tianjin

2009Q3
2009Q4
2010Q1
2010Q2
2010Q3
2010Q4
2011Q1
2011Q2
2011Q3
2011Q4
2012Q1
2012Q2
2012Q3
2012Q4
2013Q1
2013Q2
2013Q3
2013Q4
2014Q1
2014Q2
2014Q3
2014Q4

Shanghai

Dalian

2009Q3
2009Q4
2010Q1
2010Q2
2010Q3
2010Q4
2011Q1
2011Q2
2011Q3
2011Q4
2012Q1
2012Q2
2012Q3
2012Q4
2013Q1
2013Q2
2013Q3
2013Q4
2014Q1
2014Q2
2014Q3
2014Q4

2009Q3
2009Q4
2010Q1
2010Q2
2010Q3
2010Q4
2011Q1
2011Q2
2011Q3
2011Q4
2012Q1
2012Q2
2012Q3
2012Q4
2013Q1
2013Q2
2013Q3
2013Q4
2014Q1
2014Q2
2014Q3
2014Q4

Figure 12: Quarterly Price-to-Rent Ratios in 12 Major Markets

60
60

55
55

50
50

45
45

40
40

35
35

30
30

25
25

20
20

Chongqing
Changsha

Nanjing
Hangzhou

53
Wuhan

Guangzhou

60

55

50

45

40

35

30

25

20
Chengdu
Xian

Figure 13: Annual Price-to-Income Ratios in 12 Major Markets
20

20

16

16

12

12

8

8

4

4

0

0
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
Beijing

Tianjin

Shanghai

Chongqing

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
Changsha

Guangzhou

Chengdu

Xian

20

16

12

8

4

0
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
Dalian

Nanjing

Hangzhou

Wuhan

54

Table 1: Real House Price Appreciation Based on “Average Selling Price of Newly-Built
Homes”, 35 Major Cities, 2004-2014
Aggregate Real Price Growth (%)
Beijing
Tianjin
Shijiazhuang
Taiyuan
Hohhot
Shenyang
Dalian
Changchun
Harbin
Shanghai
Nanjing
Hangzhou
Ningbo
Hefei
Fuzhou
Xiamen
Nanchang
Jinan
Qingdao
Zhengzhou
Wuhan
Changsha
Guangzhou
Shenzhen
Nanning
Haikou
Chongqing
Chengdu
Guiyang
Kunming
Xian
Lanzhou
Xining
Yinchuan
Urumqi
Aggregated

226.4
141.4
146.2
86.6
206.5
64.4
115.8
84.3
91.0
158.8
149.2
196.6
162.2
215.9
218.6
322.3
147.6
95.8
185.3
131.1
157.6
92.5
164.2
207.1
87.4
79.0
156.9
143.8
121.7
147.4
106.0
109.6
55.4
51.6
153.7
96.4

55

Implied Per Annum Compound
Growth Rate (%)
11.6
8.5
8.7
6.0
11.0
4.7
7.4
5.8
6.2
9.2
8.9
10.6
9.4
11.3
11.4
14.3
8.8
6.4
10.2
8.1
9.2
6.3
9.5
11.0
6.0
5.6
9.2
8.6
7.7
8.8
7.0
7.1
4.2
3.9
9.0
6.5

Table 2: Sample Volume of the Land Transaction Dataset

2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
Aggregated

Number of
Cities Covered
22
24
33
34
35
35
35
35
35
35
35
-

Number of Land
Parcels Sold
675
770
1,123
1,409
964
1,567
1,752
1,675
1,860
1,871
1,186
14,852

56

Table 3: Chinese Residential Land Price Index Growth
35 City Aggregate, 2004(1)-2014(4)
44 quarters
Total Appreciation
357%
Compound Quarterly Growth Rate
3.6%
Annualized Compound Quarterly Rate
15.2%

Table 4: Chinese Residential Land Price Index Growth
Regional Level, 2004h1-2014h2
22 half years
East Region
Middle Region
Total Appreciation
324%
326%
Compound Semi-Annual
7.1%
7.1%
Growth Rate
Annualized Compound
14.8%
14.8%
Semi-Annual Rate

West Region
231%
5.9%
12.1%

Table 5: Land Vs. House Price Growth
12 Major Markets, 2004-2014
Chinese Residential Land
Price Index Series
City

Aggregate
Growth
1036%
248%
201%
449%
101%
169%
273%
348%
342%
332%
102%
78%

Per Annum
Rate
27.5%
13.3%
11.6%
18.6%
7.2%
15.2%
14.1%
13.3%
20.4%
15.7%
7.3%
8.6%

Average Price of NewlyBuilt Homes Series
Aggregate
Growth

Per Annum
Rate

Ratio of
Aggregate Land to
House Price
Growth
Aggregate

226%
11.6%
4.6
Beijing
2.7
Changsha
93%
6.3%
1.4
Chengdu
144%
8.6%
2.9
Chongqing
157%
9.2%
0.9
Dalian
116%
7.4%
1
2.3
Guangzhou
75%
7.5%
1.4
Hangzhou
197%
10.6%
2.3
Nanjing
149%
8.9%
2
3.4
Shanghai
101%
8.3%
2.4
Tianjin
141%
8.5%
0.6
Wuhan
158%
9.2%
1
1.6
Xian
50%
5.4%
Notes:
1. Annual land price data for Guangzhou and Xian are available only from 2007-2014, or
for eight years. Comparable house price data are used for the same period.
2. Annual land price data for Shanghai are available only from 2006-2014, or for night
years. Comparable house price data are used for the same period.

57

Table 6: Real House Price Appreciation, Constant-Quality Index, 2006-2014

Beijing
Tianjin
Shijiazhuang
Taiyuan
Hohhot
Shenyang
Dalian
Changchun
Harbin
Shanghai
Nanjing
Hangzhou
Ningbo
Hefei
Fuzhou
Xiamen
Nanchang
Jinan
Qingdao
Zhengzhou
Wuhan
Changsha
Guangzhou
Shenzhen
Nanning
Haikou
Chongqing
Chengdu
Guiyang
Kunming
Xian
Lanzhou
Xining
Yinchuan
Urumqi
Aggregated

Aggregate Real Price Growth

Implied Per Annum Compound Growth Rate

384.5%
80.2%
149.3%
30.1%
125.5%
74.0%
47.7%
108.3%
66.4%
165.2%
145.3%
72.1%
55.1%
59.7%
201.9%
320.6%
56.7%
27.4%
105.6%
126.3%
55.7%
105.7%
172.3%
110.4%
45.5%
125.4%
104.8%
56.0%
71.7%
131.4%
61.2%
114.6%
92.6%
54.5%
157.1%
138.5%

19.8%
7.0%
11.0%
3.1%
9.7%
6.5%
4.6%
8.7%
6.0%
11.8%
10.8%
6.4%
5.1%
5.5%
13.5%
17.8%
5.3%
2.8%
8.6%
9.8%
5.2%
8.6%
12.1%
8.9%
4.4%
9.7%
8.5%
5.2%
6.4%
10.1%
5.6%
9.1%
7.8%
5.1%
11.4%
10.4%

58

Table 7: Inventory Level of 119 Listed Housing Developers in China, 2006-2013

Average Turnover Ratio
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013

44.30%
40.54%
42.71%
45.20%
33.08%
30.01%
28.97%
24.90%
24.22%
25.26%

Aggregated Inventory
(in billion yuan)
76.00
87.63
136.45
226.93
356.92
377.54
517.44
707.81
815.20
1039.71

Source: authors’ calculations based on firms’ annual financial reports.

59

Average Normalized
Inventory
23.70%
24.69%
28.32%
30.54%
44.65%
37.83%
41.92%
45.74%
44.41%
44.80%

Table 8: Supply vs. Demand over Time, National Level and 35 Major Cities

Nation
Beijing
Tianjin
Shijiazhuang
Taiyuan
Hohhot
Shenyang
Dalian
Changchun
Harbin
Shanghai
Nanjing
Hangzhou
Ningbo
Hefei
Fuzhou
Xiamen
Nanchang
Jinan
Qingdao
Zhengzhou
Wuhan
Changsha
Guangzhou
Shenzhen
Nanning
Haikou
Chongqing
Chengdu
Guiyang
Kunming
Xian
Lanzhou
Xining
Yinchuan
Urumqi

Annual Average Supply
(thousand units)
2001201120012010
2012
2012
6739.32 10559.67 7376.04
243.28
146.88
227.21
114.45
173.62
124.32
41.03
80.99
47.69
37.79
34.90
37.31
41.04
29.50
39.12
99.42
192.02
114.85
56.46
89.12
61.91
46.35
83.38
52.52
105.93
111.88
106.92
258.93
151.51
241.02
58.59
113.51
67.75
72.83
80.12
74.05
63.78
54.59
62.25
46.24
68.74
49.99
51.62
48.95
51.17
54.60
26.43
49.90
30.50
141.41
48.98
35.43
38.76
35.99
66.88
85.35
69.96
52.66
193.33
76.11
68.82
90.27
72.40
50.93
116.92
61.93
138.91
82.90
129.57
181.08
31.43
156.14
37.50
59.56
41.18
11.25
15.28
11.92
223.99
431.22
258.53
100.11
94.14
99.12
37.54
51.98
39.95
51.42
64.82
53.65
59.23
93.80
64.99
36.00
31.80
35.30
16.06
48.85
21.52
36.50
49.15
38.61
46.25
50.36
46.93

Annual Average Demand
(thousand units)
2001201120012010
2012
2012
7768.63 9680.24 8087.23
281.44
311.11
286.39
92.72
159.00
103.77
39.39
55.72
42.11
28.07
45.75
31.02
22.64
24.47
22.94
79.84
86.27
80.92
60.04
72.43
62.11
58.43
61.41
58.93
83.52
46.81
77.40
304.68
489.51
335.48
49.50
105.14
58.77
96.57
152.43
105.88
72.22
117.12
79.70
45.14
53.63
46.55
43.30
62.25
46.46
53.28
56.24
53.77
26.63
49.39
30.42
40.67
52.37
42.62
45.95
66.64
49.40
37.62
57.41
40.91
46.32
79.72
51.89
50.34
60.96
52.11
148.19
214.17
159.19
235.25
201.04
229.55
36.13
39.43
36.68
14.54
17.41
15.02
128.81
181.15
137.54
51.70
78.38
56.15
26.35
38.09
28.31
40.22
53.20
42.39
58.10
67.09
59.60
21.63
39.86
24.67
19.89
37.27
22.79
21.06
27.59
22.15
57.69
68.08
59.42

Supply-Demand Ratio
20012010
86.75%
86.44%
123.44%
104.16%
134.64%
181.30%
124.52%
94.04%
79.33%
126.84%
84.98%
118.37%
75.42%
88.32%
102.45%
119.22%
102.48%
114.52%
87.14%
145.54%
140.00%
148.57%
101.16%
93.74%
76.97%
103.81%
77.37%
173.88%
193.63%
142.45%
127.83%
101.95%
166.43%
80.74%
173.29%
80.16%

Note: See Appendix 1 for the details of how supply and demand were estimated.

60

20112012
109.08%
47.21%
109.19%
145.36%
76.29%
120.53%
222.57%
123.04%
135.79%
239.01%
30.95%
107.97%
52.56%
46.61%
128.17%
78.63%
46.98%
286.30%
74.01%
128.07%
336.77%
113.24%
191.79%
38.71%
15.63%
151.07%
87.76%
238.05%
120.11%
136.46%
121.83%
139.82%
79.79%
131.05%
178.11%
73.97%

20012012
91.21%
79.34%
119.80%
113.25%
120.30%
170.50%
141.94%
99.67%
89.13%
138.15%
71.84%
115.27%
69.93%
78.10%
107.39%
110.16%
92.81%
161.01%
84.45%
141.61%
186.01%
139.52%
118.83%
81.40%
68.02%
112.28%
79.38%
187.97%
176.52%
141.10%
126.57%
109.05%
143.10%
94.45%
174.29%
78.98%

Table 9: Expected Capital Gain Based on the User Cost Model

Beijing
Tianjin
Shijiazhuang
Taiyuan
Hohhot
Shenyang
Dalian
Changchun
Harbin
Shanghai
Nanjing
Hangzhou
Ningbo
Hefei
Fuzhou
Xiamen
Nanchang
Jinan
Qingdao
Zhengzhou
Wuhan
Changsha
Guangzhou
Shenzhen
Haikou
Nanning
Chongqing
Chengdu
Guiyang
Kunming
Xi'an
Lanzhou
Xining
Yinchuan
Urumqi

Expected Capital Gain Equalizing
User Cost and Rent

Per Annum Compound Growth Rate
between 2006 and 2014

7.3%
6.9%
6.5%
5.8%
5.2%
5.7%
5.8%
5.1%
4.6%
7.0%
7.0%
6.5%
6.3%
6.0%
6.3%
7.2%
6.6%
6.2%
6.9%
5.7%
5.6%
5.0%
6.6%
6.9%
5.3%
4.8%
5.5%
5.9%
4.7%
5.7%
5.5%
5.4%
4.5%
5.5%
5.6%

19.8%
7.0%
11.0%
3.1%
9.7%
6.5%
4.6%
8.7%
6.0%
11.8%
10.8%
6.4%
5.1%
5.5%
13.5%
17.8%
5.3%
2.8%
8.6%
9.8%
5.2%
8.6%
12.1%
8.9%
4.4%
9.7%
8.5%
5.2%
6.4%
10.1%
5.6%
9.1%
7.8%
5.1%
11.4%

61

Table 10: Can Year and City Fixed Effects Explain Local Housing Price Growth?
(Dependent Variable: Log Change in Real Annual Housing Price Index)
Independent Variables
Year Fixed Effect
City Fixed Effect
R2
Adjusted R2
F Stat. for the Joint Test of All Year Fixed Effects Equaling 0
F Stat. for the Joint Test of All City Fixed Effects Equaling 0
Number of Observations

(1)
Yes
No
0.39
0.37
25.08***
–
244

Note:* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01

62

(2)
No
Yes
0.12
–0.03
–
0.82
244

(3)
Yes
Yes
0.50
0.41
26.38***
1.34*
244

Table 11: Can Fundamental Factors Explain Local Housing Price Growth?
(Dependent Variable: Log Change in Real Annual Housing Price Index)
Independent Variables
Housing Inventory at the Beginning of this Year
/ Housing Sales in the Previous Year
Housing Receiving Presale Permits in this Year
/ Housing Sales in this Year
Lagged Housing Price Level
Lagged Housing Price Change
Expected Employment Growth
Expected Export Growth
Residential Land Supply Volume
Construction Cost Change
Expected Outstanding Loan Balance Growth
Year Fixed Effect
City Fixed Effect
R2
Number of Observations

(1)
-0.0529
(0.0101)***
-0.0356
(0.0140)**
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
Yes
Yes
0.56
244

(2)
-0.0443
(0.0096)***
-0.0008
(0.0150)
-0.3981
(0.0588)***
0.0428
(0.0650)
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
Yes
Yes
0.70
209

(3)
-0.0421
(0.0099)***
-0.0050
(0.0150)
-0.4040
(0.0584)***
0.0138
(0.0650)
-0.0047
(0.0034)
0.0020
(0.0008)**
-0.0030
(0.0093)
0.2313
(0.3057)
0.0017
(0.0012)
Yes
Yes
0.72
209

Note:* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01

63

