NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BIRTH WEIGHT IN THE LONG RUN
Prashant Bharadwaj
Petter Lundborg
Dan-Olof Rooth
Working Paper 21354
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21354

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2015

Much thanks to Julie Cullen and participants at the NBER Cohort Studies Meeting for comments and
to Matt Gibson for superb research assistance. The authors have no financial interests to disclose. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Prashant Bharadwaj, Petter Lundborg, and Dan-Olof Rooth. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Birth Weight in the Long Run
Prashant Bharadwaj, Petter Lundborg, and Dan-Olof Rooth
NBER Working Paper No. 21354
July 2015
JEL No. I1
ABSTRACT
We study the effect of birth weight on long-run outcomes, including permanent income, income across
various stages of the lifecycle, education, social benefits take-up, and adult mortality. For this purpose,
we have linked a unique dataset on nearly all Swedish twins born between 1926- 1958, containing
information on birth weight, to administrative records spanning nearly entire life time lab or market
histories. We find that birth weight positively affects permanent income and income across large parts
of the life cycle, although there is some evidence of a fade out after age 50. Our results indicate that
lower birth weight children are more likely to avail of social insurance programs such as unemployment
and sickness insurance and that birth weight matters for adult mortality. We supplement our main
analysis with more recent data, which enables us to study how the impact of birth weight on income
and education of young adults has changed across cohorts born almost 50 years apart.

Prashant Bharadwaj
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive #0508
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
prbharadwaj@ucsd.edu
Petter Lundborg
Department of Economics
Lund University
P.O. Box 7082
SE-220 07 Lund
Sweden
petter.lundborg@nek.lu.se

Dan-Olof Rooth
Centre for Labour Market
& Discrimination Studies
Linnaeus University
SE-391 82 Kalmar
Sweden
dan-olof.rooth@lnu.se

1

Introduction
Economic research in the last decade has shown considerable consensus on

the importance of early childhood health in determining various short and long
term outcomes (Almond and Currie 2011; Heckman 2007). Birth outcomes, and
in particular birth weight, has been shown to matter for educational achievement in school, completed years of education, IQ and labor market outcomes
such as employment and earnings. Not only have the economic outcomes examined been numerous, but the settings just as varied, with studies using data
from developed countries like the United States, Canada, and Norway to middle income countries like Chile, China and Taiwan and even in less developed

1

countries like South Africa.

One of the key reasons to examine the role of birth weight over the life cycle
is to answer questions about the persistence of health inequalities at birth.
However, despite the rich number of studies and geographical settings, data
limitations have largely prevented an examination of the role of birth weight
in determining long-term outcomes, such as permanent income, income across
each point in the life-cycle, take up of various social assistance programs, and

2 For example, the income dierences due to birth weight found

adult mortality.

by Black, Devereux, and Salvanes (2007) are measured around age 30; while
this is an important result, it is also useful to examine whether these dierences
persist, increase, or fade with age. The recent literature on in utero assaults (see
Almond (2006), Almond and Mazumder (2011) and Roseboom et al (2001)) has

3

found persistent long run impacts of harm to the fetal environment.

Our paper adds to this important literature by addressing the long term
eects of low birth weight. First, we study the impact of birth weight on per-

manent income. Previous studies have been limited to studying the eect of

1A

sample of these studies in Economics include: Almond, Chay, and Lee (2005), Royer

(2009), Black, Devereux, and Salvanes (2007), Behrman and Rosenzweig (2004), Oreopoulos,
Stabile, Walld, and Roos (2008), Bharadwaj, Eberhard, and Neilson (2014), Lin and Liu
(2009), Cooper and Sandler (1997) and more recently Figlio, Guryan, Karbownik, and Roth
(2015). The literature in medicine and public health on the links between birth weight and
short and long term outcomes is also equally large. Relevant to our study however, it appears
that this literature has not been able to examine birth weight and old age outcomes within a
causal framework.

2 While

other birth outcomes such as gestational age are extremely important in this con-

text, we only examine birth weight in this study since a natural experiment providing us with
arguably exogenous variation in gestational age is not possible in this setting.

3 There

are many more papers that look at long run eects of in utero assaults. A small

sampling of other papers of interest in this area are: Almond, Edlund, and Palme (2009),
Mazumder, Almond, Park, Crimmins, and Finch (2010), Lin and Liu (2012) and Van Ewijk
(2011).

2

4

birth weight on income at relatively young adult ages.

Second, our data allows us to study the impact of birth weight on income
at dierent stages of the lifecycle. In the fetal origins literature, poor early life
environment, as reected by low birth weight, aects long-run health through
programming changes (Almond and Currie 2011). These changes makes people
more susceptible to heart disease and metabolic syndrome and since these outcomes often occur later in life one can expect a stronger eect of birth weight on

5 With our data, we can study if the impact

labor productivity as people age.

of birth weight increases by age due to the fetal origins eect.
Third, we study the eect of birth weight on social assistance takeup. By
doing so, we provide yet another way of quantifying the long term benets of
programs that are aimed at improving birth outcomes (for example see Bitler

6

and Currie (2005)).

Recent work has suggested that social assistance pro-

grams not directly intended to improve early childhood health appear to have
important spillovers (Hoynes, Schanzenbach, and Almond 2012); hence, understanding whether better infant health itself leads to lower social assistance take
up is important.
Fourth, we study the eect of birth weight on adult mortality. While there
are many studies in epidemiology that address the link between birth weight and
adult mortality, these studies largely compute correlations rather than causal

7 Particularly in the instance of examining birth weight and mortality,

estimates.

we know from studies like Almond, Chay, and Lee (2005) that ordinary least
squares estimates tend to be severely overestimated.

4 For

example, Black, Devereux, and Salvanes (2007) examine the relationship between

birth weight and income for people in the age range of 25-35 years, Behrman and Rosenzweig
(2004) use income as observed around age 45 and only for women and Oreopoulos, Stabile,
Walld, and Roos (2008) examine the take up of social assistance between the ages of 18-22. A
recent paper by Bhuller, Mogstad, and Salvanes (2011) suggests that life cycle bias in returns
to education is minimized around age 32 in Norway. Hence, the paper by Black, Devereux,
and Salvanes (2007) is fairly consistent with life cycle earnings estimates.

Specic to our

context in Sweden, Böhlmark and Lindquist (2006) show that life cycle bias is an issue when
analyzing Swedish earnings data.

5 It

is also possible that there are latent eects on productivity that manifest themselves

before the actual health shock occurs.

6 Although

in the Swedish context the term assistance" refers exclusively to welfare, we

use it interchangeably with benets" to imply take up of unemployment insurance, welfare
etc.

7A

recent meta-analysis of the relationship between birth weight and adult mortality found

that birth weight mattered for mortality, and particularly so for mortality due to cardiovascular
reasons (Risnes et al 2011).

However, none of the studies discussed in this meta-analysis

can claim to get close to causal estimates.

However, the upside to these studies is that

they analyze large population based samples, whereas studies in Economics (and this paper
included) examine this question using twins who constitute a smaller fraction of overall births.

3

Finally, we supplement our main analysis (which uses cohorts born between
1926-1958) with more recent data (cohorts born 1973-1982, similar to that used
by Black et al (2007)). Hence, we are able to study how the impact of birth
weight on income and education of young adults has changed across cohorts
born almost 50 years apart. In so doing, we are also able to conrm the ndings
of Black et al. (2007) in a dierent context.
To deal with the endogeneity of birth weight, the predominant solution in
Economics has been to use twins based estimates, taking as random the variation
in birth weight within twin pairs (Almond, Chay, and Lee 2005, Royer 2009,
Black, Devereux, and Salvanes 2007, Behrman and Rosenzweig 2004). We follow
the same strategy in this paper. To answer the main questions we posed earlier,
we need outcomes collected over a very long period of time to allow us to observe
mortality outcomes and life time income, but also a data set that allows us to
use empirical strategies such as twins xed eects to obtain arguably causal
estimates.
Our unique data allows us to do precisely this. Our database contains birth
records matched with mortality and yearly income records (including income
by source) at the individual level for a vast majority of all twins born between
1926-1958 in Sweden. On average, we have 35 years of labor market data for
each twin. The average age of these twins by 2010 (the last year for which we
have mortality records) is 68; the oldest alive twin pairs are 84 and the youngest
alive twin pairs are 54. Since life expectancy in 2010 was around 80 for the entire
population (presumably it was less for the cohorts we examine), we expect a
moderate level of mortality in our sample; indeed we observe approximately
11% mortality in this sample.
In line with Black, Devereux, and Salvanes (2007) and others who have
examined the relationship between birth weight and income in early adulthood,
we nd birth weight to have a positive and statistically signicant eect on
income. We nd positive eects on both permanent income as well as on income
over large parts of the life cycle.

After age 50, however, the eect seems to

fade out. Interestingly, we nd that the impact of birth weight on income has
remained rather constant across cohorts born almost 50 years apart.
In terms of social assistance program take up and mortality, our results show
that lower birth weight twins are more likely to avail of social insurance programs
like unemployment insurance and and sickness pay.

The eects are strongest

during the ages at which the income eects are the largest, suggesting that the
income losses partly works through unemployment and sickness episodes. We

4

nd a signicant eect of birth weight in mortality among males but not among
females. Males with higher birth weight are less likely to die at each period of
time.
We next introduce our empirical strategy. In Section 3, we describe the data
used for our empirical analysis and Section 4 presents the results.

Section 5

concludes.

2

Empirical Strategy
The empirical strategy used in this paper is a straightforward application of

the traditional twins xed eects approach used in prior work. What is dierent
is that in some regressions we use repeated observations over time to obtain a
birth weight eect" at dierent ages. Our baseline specication is as follows:

Yijt = βt BWij + µj + γt Xij + ijt
Yijt

is log income of individual i, belonging to twin pair

(1)

j

at time t;

Xij

are time

invariant individual specic characteristics like education or sex. The coecient
of interest is

βt

which is the birth weight eect at time

t.

The above equation

is estimated at dierent ages (t's) providing us with the life cycle pattern of
the birth weight eect. The key empirical strategy is the inclusion of the twin
pair xed eect (µj ). Including this xed eect controls for all twin-pair specic
factors that might be relevant for birth weight formation as well as income, such
as family background, parental income during pregnancy, nutritional intake of
the mother etc. To see this more clearly, we can express Equation 1 in terms of
within twin dierences (where the other twin is

i0 ):

Yijt − Yi0 jt = βt (BWij − BWi0 j ) + γt (Xij − Xi0 j ) + (ijt − i0 jt )
The operating assumption for
a given point in time

t

is that

(2)

βt to be interpreted as the birth weight eect
BWij − BWi0 j is uncorrelated with ijt − i0 jt .

at
In

some regressions, we replace the birth weight variable with a dummy variable
taking the value of 1 if the twin's birth weight is less than certain treshold
values.

8 In our main specications, we only include birth weight indicators as

controls but in subsequent regressions, we add education and income as controls

8 For

this, we use some of the common classications of birth weight, such as low birth

weight (below 2500 grams) and very low birth weight (below 1500 grams).

5

in some specications. In our regressions, the standard errors are clustered at
the twin pair level.
The question of whether parents react to birth weight or initial endowments
is a subject of recent research (for a recent review see see Almond and Mazumder

9 In the framework of Bharadwaj, Eberhard, and Neilson (2014) and

(2012)).

Conti, Heckman, Yi, and Zhang (2010) (both these papers explicitly use a framework that involves twins), the bias in OLS estimates arise largely from parental
investments that compensate or reinforce initial health dierences. Under their
framework, OLS estimates will tend to overstate initial dierences if parents
act in reinforcing ways, and understate the role of initial dierences if parents
act in compensating ways. To the extent that parents in developed countries
like Sweden might act in more compensatory ways, we interpret our estimates
of the long run eects of birth weight that arise despite parents' best eorts to

10

compensate.

3

Data
We use two dierent sets of data in our empirical analyses. Our most impor-

tant source of data, BIRTH, originates from the Swedish Twin Registry. BIRTH
is part of a project where researchers at the twin registry in Sweden went out
to get the birth records of all twins born in Sweden between 1926-1958. These
birth records were kept in paper form at local delivery archives around Sweden.
Collecting and preserving birth information is/was enforced by law and people
at the twin registry set out to digitize them. The BIRTH sample only includes
twins that survived up to 1972. In 1972, there was a large twin survey conducted
for the twin cohorts born 1926-1958, which formed the basis for the collection of
birth data. Unfortunately we do not have access to the universe of twins used
to obtain the sample interviewed in 1972.

Hence we are unable to construct

weights or assess attrition in any systematic manner. The information we have
on twins interviewed in 1972 include information on birth weight, sex, year of

11

birth and year of death (if after 1972).

9 Some

papers that tackle this issue are: Aizer and Cunha (2012), Conti, Heckman, Yi,

and Zhang (2010), Adhvaryu and Nyshadham (2014), and Bharadwaj, Eberhard, and Neilson
(2014).

10 Another

underlying aspect of twins xed eects estimates is the role of sibling peer eects

or how one twin can aect the other twin's choices. We recognize this as something that might
be occurring in the background, but we are not aware of papers that explicitly address this
issue or how this might drive our results.

11 Since

we only capture twins where both were alive as of 1972, we expect to nd fewer

twins from the 1930's as compared to twins from the 1950's.

6

As a fraction of overall live

Our second data source on birth outcomes is the Swedish medical birth
register.

From this, we get information on birth outcomes for cohorts born

1973 and onwards. The register was founded in 1973 and includes data on the
universe of deliveries in Sweden. The information in the register is collected from
medical records from prenatal, delivery, and neonatal care units. Evaluations
have shown the register to be of high quality; attrition through the period range
between 0.5-3 percent (Socialstyrelsen 2014).

The register covers information

such as weight and height at birth, duration of pregnancy, APGAR score, mode
of delivery, infant diagoses, infant mortality, and maternal diagnoses and lifestyle
factors. By exploiting information on the mothers ID in the register, we are able
to link children born to the same mothers. Since we also have information on
the month and year of birth, we can also identify twins.
It should be noted that prior to 1973, there exists no digitized birth register
in Sweden. The BIRTH sample is an exception, where researchers went out to
collect birth data on twins. Since the BIRTH data only includes data on twins,
and since no other digitized birth data exists prior to 1973, we can only run
analyses on singletons and siblings for the cohorts born 1973 and onwards.
We use the data from the medical birth register for two purposes. First, with
these data, we can check to what extent the eect of birth weight on outcomes
such as education and income have changed across cohorts born many years
apart. By combining the BIRTH sample with the data from the medical birth
register, we are in a unique situation to study changes across cohorts born as
far apart as 1926-1982.

Second, we can replicate the ndings in Black et al.

(2007) for Norway. While the Swedish medical birth register does not entirely
overlap with its Norweigan counterpart, which starts in 1967, it is close enough
to make for an interesting replication.
For both the young and older cohorts, we merge data on individual years of
schooling from the education register (utbildningsregistret, UREG) from 1990 or

12 For

2007, where years of schooling has been imputed based on obtained degree.

the overwhelming majority of people, we thus have register-based information
births we certainly capture fewer twins than perhaps expected from earlier cohorts.

The

fraction of twins (compared to total live births) observed in the data stabilizes around 1940.
Unfortunately, since we do not observe the original universe of twins, it is dicult the assess
the degree to which the earlier cohorts suer from selective survival. As robustness checks,
we test if there have been important changes in the impact of birth weight across early and
late cohorts.

12 If

the information diers between 1990 and 2007, we use the information on highest

attained schooling.

Few individuals change their highest obtained schooling between those

years, however.

7

on schooling. If the person died before 1990, schooling information was taken
from the census of 1970.
Income records at the individual level are available starting in 1968 and
ending in 2007. The income records come from the equivalent of W2 records in
the United States, in that the income is reported by employers and is not based
on self reports. For people with multiple jobs, only the total income is reported.
This same data source also provides information on income by source, such as
unemployment benets, sickness pay and welfare pay. All of our income data is

13

adjusted by 2007 CPI measures to make them comparable.

While we have income data for the BIRTH sample from 1968-2007, there
have been some changes in what is included in our main income measure. Different income sources (labor income, income from social safety nets etc) exist
in the register because they are taxable.

Fortunately, starting in 1974, most

income sources, including the various social benets, were taxable and are included separately in the data. Between 1968-1974 we only have access to income

14

from labor market participation and self employment.

The main income measure we use in this paper is a measure that includes several sources of income. For total income, we use the denition by Statistics Sweden, where it consists of income from work and income from self-employment.
Income from work includes, besides wage income, income from pensions, sickness benets, and other taxable benets. As previously mentioned, this means
that the income measure before and after 1974 are not strictly comparable, as
the pre-1974 period excludes benets. Even though many benets became taxable in 1974, most are not separately shown until later.

Pensions are shown

from 1974, unemployment benets from 1978 and sickness insurance benets

15

from 1981.

It should be noted that it seems common to include social safety net income

16

in the total income measure in papers using Scandinavian data.

13 For

It is also

the cohorts we examine, there does not appear to be much by way of changing

variances in income over time.

14 Recent

work by Bjorklund, Jantti, and Lindquist (2009) suggests that this change in

denition is not of primary concern for our analysis since benets constituted less than 5
percent of total earnings in years prior to 1974.

In any case, we can reproduce our main

analysis restricting the sample to years after 1974 and the basic pattern of results remains
unchanged.

15 Sickness

benets reporting underwent a large change in 1992.

Starting in 1992, only

sickness benets where sick leave was taken for more than 2 weeks were reported in the tax
registry. Hence, for the analysis of sickness benets, we restrict our analysis to the 1992-2005
period.

16 See

for instance Black et al. (2007) and Böhlmark and Lindqvist (2006).

8

important to understand that most benets are related to having worked and
to one's earnings. Sickness benets and unemployment benets are related to
one's labor income and typically 80-90 percent of one's labor earnings are paid
out, although with a cap at some level, which has varied over time. So in some
sense, labor income plus benets paid out will better reect one's contracted
labor earnings that year compared to a measure that only includes labor income.
As an alternative income measure, we focus on pure labor income as an
outcome in some regressions, consisting only of wage income from work or selfemployment, i.e.

net of taxable benets.

It can be of interest to contrast

the ndings using total income with those using labor income, since the latter
does not include compensation paid by the welfare state. If birth weight has
a negative eect on productivity and labor supply, we expect to see a stronger

17

eect of birth weight when using pure labor income as an outcome.

In some of our main analyses, we will use a measure of permanent income as
an outcome. This is dened as average earnings across ages 35-45. We base this
on the paper by Böhlmark and Lindquist (2006), where they show that average
income across these ages is a good proxy for permanent income.
The income data was matched to all twins in the BIRTH sample who were
contacted and alive during the 1972-73 survey. Since the data from the medical
birth register comes from a separate database, the linkage to income is also
slightly dierent. Here, we have the same type of income data as for the BIRTH
sample, but this time from 1990 and onwards. The more limited time period is
not of concern, however, since the oldest cohorts in the medical birth register
would still only be 17 years of age in 1990. We lose less than 1% of the data
due to matching issues across the vital statistics and income registries.
In order to study the eect of birth weight on mortality, we use data from
the Swedish causes of death register. The register started in 1961 and covers all
deaths among individuals who were permanently residing in Sweden, irrespective
of whether the death took place in or outside Sweden.

The register includes

information on the date and cause of death, as well as information on where the
death took place.
For our replication of Black et al. (2007), we follow them as closely as possible when we construct our outcome measures. We dene high school completion
as having at least 12 years of schooling and require that the person was at least

17 While

the benets received in general are related to a person's labor earnings, it is not a

perfect relationship. The cap in unemployment and sickness benets means that high-earners
lose more than low-earners.

9

twenty-one when measured, meaning that we include the cohorts born 1973 to
1982, since the last year of measurement of education is 2003. For income, we
have data until 2006 for the medical birth register sample. The closest we can
get to the analysis in Black et al. (2007), where income at the age range 2535 is used, is thus to use the age range 25-33, born between 1973-1981.
yearly earnings measure used by Black et al.

The

(2007) includes labor earnings,

unemployment insurance payments, sickness benets, parental leave benets,
and pensions. The measure of yearly earnings we use includes labor earnings,
unemployment benets, sickness benets, but does not include parental benets
and pensions. Black et al. (200) also restrict their analysis to full-time employees, based on register information. The Swedish registers do not contain such
information and we are thus unable to impose the same restriction.
The other outcomes we study in our replication are infant mortality and
ve-minute APGAR scores.

The former is measured as mortality during the

rst year of life and is taken directly from the birth register. The APGAR score
is a summary measure of health at birth, ranging from 0-10, including measures
of activity, pulse, grimace, appearance, and respiration (Black et al. 2007). For
the analyses of infant mortality and APGAR we use data for the entire birth
cohorts 1973-2007.
Table 1 provides the essential statistics on the BIRTH sample and the sample
from the medical birth register. For the BIRTH sample, we have 12,888 male
twins and 13,266 female twins in complete twin pairs with non-missing data on
birth weight and education. Note that the number of observations used in the
regressions will dier according to the outcome studied and the ages considered.
Since the income register starts in 1968, we cannot study earnings between ages
35-45 for cohorts born earlier than 1933, for instance.

For some of our main

outcomes, we will show results both for unbalanced and balanced panels. The
statistics in the table are shown for the samples used in studying education as
an outcome, where we need to put no restrictions on the cohorts included. From
the medical birth register, we observe 4,992 and 5,050 male and female twins,
respectively, born between 1973-1982.
From Table 1, we learn that the average birth weight of twins has remained
rather constant over time. The average is slightly higher for the older cohorts,
which reects the fact that the fraction born with very low birth weight has more
than doubled in the younger cohorts. This has occurred due to improvements in
the medical technology to treat low-birth infants. We can also observe that twins
on average have lower birth weight than singletons. The dierence amounts to

10

almost 1 kilogram on average and is consistent with data from other countries
(Black et al. 2007). The average discordance in birth weight among twins has
decreased somewhat over time but the dierence is quite small.

The average

birth weight and discordance across the cohorts born 1926-1958 and 1973-1982
are also illustrated in Figure 1. Figure 2 illustrates the life expectancy at birth
for our cohorts. The average life expectancy increased from 63 to 76 between
1926 and 1982 and the gap between males and females appears to have widened
across cohorts.
Since we are using birth weight data from a time when measurement methods were perhaps less rened, it is likely that birth weight and subsequently
birth weight dierences are measured with more error for the earlier cohorts
than for later cohorts. While we have no direct way of assessing the extent to
which measurement error plays a role, we can use rounding as a proxy for poor
measurement. We do this by examining the fraction of births that are rounded
to 50 gram intervals in Figure 3.

The rst panel shows very clearly that the

number of children where birth weight was a multiple of 50 has reduced considerably between 1926-1982. This is likely due to improvements in birth weight
measurements over time. In addition, the second panel shows that in the early
1930's a much larger fraction of twins were noted to have the same birth weight.
This number falls from around 6-8% in the early 1930's to around 2% in the
1940's and 1% in later cohorts. Because of these dierences across cohorts, we
will check the robustness of some of our main results when rounding all the
birth weight data. In general, we nd no dierence in results when we conduct
these robustness checks.
Table 1 shows that we observe about 14 percent and 10 percent of males and
females in the BIRTH sample dying during the sample period.

Among those

observed to die, the average age of death is about 60.

4

Results

4.1 Replication
We start our empirical analysis by studying the eect of birth weight on
short- and medium-run outcomes for the young cohorts born 1973 and onwards. We then compare some of these estimates with those obtained for the
cohorts born 1926-1958. These analyses serve as a replication of the results in
Black et al. (2007) but also allows us to study to what extent the impact of

11

birth weight have changed across cohorts. For the purpose of the replication,
we closely follow Black et al. (2007) and include both male and female twins
(and both same-sex and mixed-sex pairs) in the regressions and control for gender. The estimates are shown in Table 2, where each coecient represents an
estimate from a separate regression. For the young cohorts, we show results for
both singletons and twins and run both OLS and family xed eects regressions. For the sibling xed eects regressions, we also show estimates when we
restrict the birth weight range to be the same as in the twin sample.

In the

OLS regressions, we control for year and month of birth, mother's education,
mother's year of birth, birth order, and sex of the child.

In the sibling xed

eects regressions, we use the same controls except for mother's education and
mother's year of birth, which do not vary across siblings. The twin xed eects

18

regressions only control for birth weight and sex of the child.

We present our analyses in chronological order and rst examine short-term
outcomes for the young cohorts, including infant mortality and ve-minute APGAR scores. We focus rst on our sample of main interest, the twins, and as
also found in Black et al. (2007) our pooled twins estimates of -180 in Panel A
suggest that higher birth weight decreases infant mortality. The estimates for
one-year mortality are interpreted as a reduction in the number of deaths per
1000 and the magnitude of the eect means that a 10 percent increase in birth
weight would lead to 18 fewer deaths per 1000 births.

The twin xed eect

estimate is substantially smaller, at -55, but is statistically signicant and not
far from the estimate of -41 in Black et al. (2007).
For APGAR scores, our pooled twins and xed eects estimates of 1.53
and 0.47 are also quite similar to those of Black et al.

(1.46 and 0.35).

The

estimates are signicant, again suggesting that higher birth weight leads to
improved health outcomes in the short-term.
Moving on to educational outcomes, we nd that birth weight is positively
related to the probability of high school completition, meaning having at least
12 years of schooling.

Like Black et al.

(2007), we nd that the twin xed

eects estimates are somewhat greater in magnitude compared to the pooled
OLS twins estimates. The former estimate implies that a 10 percent increase in
birth weight increases the probability of high school completion by 7 percentage

18 We

do not include the birth order of the twins in the regressions, since we lack this

information for the older cohorts and since we want to have comparable results. When we
include the birth order of twins as a control variable in the regressions on the young cohorts,
the results are practically unchanged (results available on request).

12

points, which is similar to Black et al's estimate of 9 percentage points.
For income at ages 25-33 our twin FE estimates are substantially greater in
magnitude, around 9 percent, compared to the pooled twins estimates, which
are not signicant. Our twin FE estimate is close to the one obtained for ages
25-35 in Black et al. (2007) and they also found the FE estimate to be greater
in magnitude than the OLS estimate, although the dierence in estimates was
smaller in their case.

As our OLS estimate is rather imprecise, however, we

cannot reject that the estimates are in fact the same.
In Appendix Tables A and B, we show the estimates broken down by gender.
Note that the sum of the observations in the male and female samples of siblings
and twins do not add upp to the numbers in Table 2, since mixed-sex siblings
and twins are now not included. For most of the outcomes, the estimates are
similar across genders.

The estimate for log earnings increase somewhat to

0.12 and 0.14 for males and females, respectively, whereas the estimate for high
school completion stays roughly the same.
Overall, our results are similar to those obtained by Black et al. (2007). This
should not come as a surprise since the countries share many characteristics
and since we use roughly the same birth cohorts.

As in their case, our twin

xed eects estimates are smaller than the corresponding OLS estimates for
short-term outcomes, while the estimates are more similar for the medium-run
outcomes. The dierence in the patterns across short and medium-run results
may reect that compensating parental investments by birth weight aect the
medium-run estimates but not the short-run estimates.
4.1.1

Comparison with singletons

Table 2 also shows the corresponding estimates for our sample of singletons,
with and without controlling for family xed eects. The rst thing to note is
that for our short-term measures, the pooled OLS estimates for the twin sample
are substantially greater in magnitude that the corresponding estimates for the
singleton sample. Second, for the same outcomes, the sibling FE are greater in
magnitude than the twin FE estimates. Both these patterns were obtained in
Black et al. (2007) as well.
For high school completion and income, our OLS estimates on the siblings
and twins sample are much more similar. Moreover, the twin FE estimates are
in this case greater in magnitude than the corresponding sibling FE estimates.
Again, the same pattern was found in Black et al. (2007).
Summing up, the siblings FE estimates are greater for short-term outcomes

13

whereas the twin FE estimates are greater for our medium- and long-outcomes.
4.1.2

Results for the BIRTH cohorts: education and income

We next move back in time and analyze the eect of birth weight on various
outcomes for our sample of main interest; the cohorts born 1926-1958. We focus
rst on education and income as outcomes, as these are the outcomes we are
able to measure for both the old and young cohorts.
Panel B of Table 2 shows the eect of birth weight on educational outcomes
and Panel B ofTables A and B in the Appendix show the same results by

19 For the sake of replicating Black et al. (2007), we show results for

gender.

mixed-sex couples in Table 2, but the results are similar when including only
same-sex pairs (results available on request).
The estimates suggest that higher birth weight has a positive eect on high
school completion, where a ten percent increase increases the probability of
high school completion by 10 percentage points.

This estimate is somewhat

larger than that of the younger cohorts, where the corresponding number was 7
percentage points. The estimate is also quite similar across genders.
Table 2 also includes estimates for years of schooling. Although this outcome
was not included when we ran regressions on the young cohorts, it is of interest
to include for the old cohorts, as we can be quite sure that they have completed
their schooling at the ages when we measure it, which was not the case for
the young cohorts. In addition, in our analyses of income, welfare-takeup, and
mortality, we will run specications including years of schooling as a control
variable. Our estimates for the pooled sample suggest that a 10-percent increase
in birth weight leads to 0.67 additional years of schooling and the estimate is
similar for males and females.
4.1.3

Income

In Panel B of Table 2, we also report results for income between ages 25-

20

33.

19 In
year.

The estimated twin FE eect of birth weight on income during these
the OLS regressions for the old cohorts, we control for the sex of the child and birth
The reason is that we lack information on parents' education, month of birth, birth

order, and mothers' year of birth.

20 Since

the income register starts in 1968, the analyses on income use dierent cohorts than

the ones we use for educational outcomes. For the analyis of income between ages 25-33, the
analyses was restricted to cohorts born 1943 and onwards and for permanent income, analyzed
in section 4.2, the corresponding restriction was those born 1933 and onwards.

We have

checked if the estimates for education are the same when using the same cohort restrictions.
We found this to be the case; in the analysis when we pool same-sex male and female twin
pairs, the eect of birth on years of schooling is 0.60 for the cohort born 1943 and onwards

14

ages, 0.09, is remarkably similar to the estimate we obtained for the younger
cohorts. It thus appears that the impact of birth weight on earnings as a young
adult is rather constant across cohorts born almost 50 years apart. As we show
in Appendix Tables A and B, the estimate is similar across genders, although
less precisely measured for females.

We again nd the OLS estimate to be

insignicant and smaller in magnitude compared to the FE estimate. There is
no statistically signicant dierence between the estimates, however

4.2 Permanent income
We next turn to our measure of permanent income, i.e average income between ages 35-45.

As shown in the second column of Table 3, the twin FE

estimate for this outcome is more or less the same as the ones we obtained in
our earlier analysis on the young and old cohorts, the estimate suggesting that
a 10 percent increase in birth weight leads to a 1 percent increase in permanent
income. The estimate is quite similar between genders and is robust to instead
using labor income as an outcome, as shown in Panel B of Table 3. Controlling
for years of schooling only slightly reduces the magnitude of the estimate. The
corresponding OLS estimates are about half in magnitude but the dierences
are again not statistically signicant.
While using the log of birth weight in our income regressions allows for
some non-linearity in the eect, we can also employ more exible specications.
Figures 4 and 5 plot estimates from specications where we have constructed 100
grams bins of birth weight. We then run OLS and FE regressions including these
bins as dummy variables, the reference category being twins with a birth weight
below 1500 grams. For males, the graph shows an increase in permanent income
by birth weight up until roughly 2500 grams after which the curve attens out.
The corresponding graph for females shows a similar pattern.

Note that the

estimates at the end-points of the graph are quite noisy, which reects that
fewer observations are found at those levels of birth weight.
Another way to explore potential non-linearities is to replace our birth weight
measure with various birth weight tresholds, as shown in Table C in the Appendix.

Here, the coecients displayed are from separate regressions, using

various tresholds. Some of these point estimates are quite large where, for instance, being below 2500 grams results in 2.5 percent reduction in perment
income. The estimates for weighting less than 1500 grams are sometimes large
and 0.59 for cohorts born 1933 and onwards.

15

but suer from low precision.

The estimates are quite similar for permanent

income and permanent labor income.
We can also study if the eect of birth weight on permanent income changes
across cohorts in the BIRTH sample. For this, we divided the data into three
groups, twins born 1933-1939, 1940-1949, and 1950-1958 and interacted the
birth weight variable with the cohort indicators. To gain sucient power, and
since results were fairly similar across genders, we pool males and females. The
results, shown in Table D in the Appendix, show that there are no signicant
dierences in the eect across cohorts. The point estimate for the oldest cohort
suggests a smaller eect that could perhaps reect more measurement error in
the data for the oldest cohorts. To investigate this, the third and fourth columns
show results where we rounded the birth weight measure to the nearest 50 gram

21 This does not aect the estimates in any important way, showing that

bin.

the more prominent rounding of the birth weight measure in the older cohorts
is not a problem.

4.3 Income across the lifecycle
We next ask whether the eect of birth weight on income varies across the
lifecycle. This would for instance be suggested by the Barker hypothesis, where
poor early life environment leads to programming changes that makes people
more susceptible to heart disease and metabolic syndrome as people age.
Figures 6 and 7 show the estimates of the relationship between log birth
weight and log income at each point in the life cycle using both xed eects
and OLS estimation methodologies. The coecients can be interpreted as the
eect on 4 year moving averages since at each age, we use 4 years of data to
smooth the graphs. To be precise, the coecient shown for age 50 uses data
from ages 50-53, the coecient for age 51 uses data from ages 51-54 and so
on. These regressions control for calendar year of observation and nothing else.
In addition, the gures show the dierence in OLS and FE estimates and the
associated condence intervals around this dierence.
For males, the gure suggests that higher birth weight seems to lead to higher
income early in the life cycle, but that the eect declines at older ages. In panel
A of Table 4, we show regression estimates for an unbalanced sample of male

22 The coecient for age

twins where the outcome is 5-year average earnings.

21 Recall

that part of the reason for more measurement error in the data for the old cohorts

was that such rounding was more prominent.

22 The reason that the number of observations change across specications is that the income

16

30, for instance, shows the impact of birth weight on average earnings between

23 At these ages, a 10 percent increase in birth weight (approximately

28-32.

250 grams) leads to a 1.25 percent increase in total income among males. These
estimates are quite similar to our earlier estimates on permament income and
to the ones in Black, Devereux, and Salvanes (2007). This birth weight eect
seems to last until around age 40-50 after which it appears to fade out.

For

parsimony, these regressions do not control for schooling but the results are
similar when doing so.
In order to check if the change in results across the lifecycle reects changes
in the sample compostion, we can restrict the analysis to a balanced sample, as
in Table E. While the point estimates at higher ages are reduced in magnitude,
the precision is also lower due to the smaller sample size and we cannot rule out
that there are large eects also at high ages. The results do not provide any
evidence, however, that the impact of birth weight on income increase by age
due to the fetal programming eect.
The fact that the birth weight eect appears to fade out after age 50 is
perhaps unexpected if we believe that initial labor market dierences tend to
persist. Many studies have found that labor market conditions at the time of
entry are incredibly important for long term outcomes (see for example Kahn
(2010) and Beaudry and DiNardo (1991)). The declining result is not a feature
of the sample itself changing since the results from the balanced panel for ages
30-55 in Table E showed a remarkable decline in the birth weight eect by age
50 and nearly disappearing at older ages. Examining just the results for income
earned from labor market activity, shown in Panels B and D of Table 4 results
in similar results where, if anything, the point estimates at ages 50 an above are
smaller in magnitude.
For females, the patterns across the lifecycle are quite dierent.

Figure 7

suggests that birth weight has a positive eect early on and late during the
lifecycle.

This is also suggested in Table 4, where the eects are largest at

ages 30-35 and 50-60. These results hold up less well when running the same
register starts in 1968 and ends in 2007 and that our cohorts are born 1926-1958. For income
at age 30, for instance, we can only include cohorts born 1938 and onwards. The number of
observations increase until age 45 after which it declines again. The reason is that at age 50
and onwards fewer and fewer of the younger cohorts can be included. At age 55, for instance,
the youngest cohorts included are born in 1952.

23 In

these regressions, we require that both twins are present for the same number of years

when calculating the average. If income is available only for a subset of the years of the 5-year
intervals, we base the calculation on those years. The number of observations in the table is
the number of unique individuals.

17

regression on the balanced panel. The estimates at ages 30 and 35 increase in
magnitude but at older ages the estimates become smaller and imprecise.
Tables F and G explore non-linearity in the birth weight-income relationship across the lifecycle, where the dierent rows show estimates from separate
regressions with dierent tresholds indicated and where Table F show results
for total income and Table G for labor income. While most coecients in these
tables are not signicant, the general pattern suggests some non-linearity in the
birth weight - income relationship.

The coecients on very low birth weight

(VLBW) tend to be larger than the eects for higher thresholds, although the
coecients are rarely statistically signicant.

4.4 Social Benets
Having established that birth weight aects both permanent income and
income at dierent stages of the lifecycle, we next set out to understand the
eect of birth weight on the uptake of various social benets.

Table 5 show

regressions where the dependent variable is the fraction of time spent earning
income from social assistance sources (we examine these in 10 year intervals).
The results suggest that a 10 percent decrease in birth weight is associated with
a 0.0065 increase in the fraction of time between the ages of 35-45 that males
spent on sickness pay. Given a base of 0.22, this suggests an increase of nearly
3 percent. Likewise, between the ages of 45-55, a 10 percent decrease in birth
weight can lead to an increase in unemployment insurance take up of 0.003 which translates to a 3.6 percent increase in the fraction of time spent on UI.
These estimates are almost unchanged when we control for education.

Note

that we do not show specications controlling for income here, as the level of
the benets is mechanically related to one's earnings.
Among females, few of the point estimates show up as signicant and most
are small in magnitude. The exception is time spent on sickness benets during
ages 55-65, where higher birth weight leads to signicant and rather strong
decline in the uptake of sickness benets.
We can relate our ndings on social benets to our earlier ndings on income.
Among males, birth weight is signicantly related to the use of sickness benets
during the same ages at which we obtained signicant eects on permanent
income, i.e.

at ages 35-45.

This suggests that part of the negative eect on

permanent income works through increased use of sickness benets.

This, in

turn, suggests that some of the eect of birth weight on income works through
health-related problems. The fading out of the eect on social benets by age

18

24

is also consistent with the fading out of the income eect.

Among females, our ndings on social benets do not explain the eect
on permanent income to the same degree.

Looking at the lifecycle patterns,

however, we found strong income eects late in the lifecycle, which is also where
we found that birth weight aects sickness benets, i.e. at ages 55-65. It thus
appears that part of the late-life income eect works through poor health, as
expressed through being on sick-leave.

4.5 Mortality
Given the negative eects of birth weight on economic outcomes that we
have found so far, it is natural to ask if this these eects also translate into
reduced longevity. In Figure 8 we illustrate such potential patterns by plotting
the mortality hazard rates of light versus heavy twins, while allowing for the
censoring in the data. These Kaplan-Meier estimates show greater hazard rates
for the lighter twin, suggesting a possible mortality gradient in birth weight.
The pattern is most pronouced for males, where the dierence in hazard rates
start already in the 40s.
In order to obtain more precise estimates of the mortality gradient, we run
Cox proportional hazard models, where we account for twin xed eects by
allowing for twin-pair specic baseline hazards. These models account for the
censoring in mortality and exploit dierences in the timing of death within twin
pairs.

In Table 6, we rst show the Cox estimates with only birth weight as

control and we then subsequently add education and income. These regressions
are based on the entire cohorts born 1926-1958.
For males, we obtain a signicant hazard ratio, where higher birth weight
leads to lower mortality. The hazard rate is 0.51, suggesting that a 10 percent
increase in birth weight halves the instantaneous hazard of dying. The estimate
does not change much when we add education and average income at ages 3842 to the regression, suggesting that income and education are not important

25 , 26

mechanisms through which the eect of birth weight on mortality arises.

24 In

order to shed more light on the reasons for the fading out of the income eect by age,

we have checked if individuals with higher birth weight retire earlier. This would be the case
if such individuals hold more attractive jobs that allow for earlier retirement. We found the
opposite though; birth weight was negatively and signicantly related to the probability of
being retired at ages 50, 55, 60, and 65. These results are available on request.

25 We

chose the age range 38-42 for income in order to maximize the sample size. Including

incomes at other ages, or permanent income, leads to smaller sample size but similar results.

26 We

also ran regressions including controls for welfare use at the dierent age ranges used

in Table 5. This did not change the birth weight coecient in any meaningful way. Welfare
use was in itself linked to increased mortality. We also investigated if the birth weight eect

19

In contrast to the results for males, we nd no signicant eects of birth weight
on mortality for females.
In order to shed more light on what variation across the birth weight distribution that is generating the signicant results for males, Table 6 also shows
specications using birth weight cutos.

Here, the coecients shown are ob-

tained from separate regressions. From these, we see that the hazard ratio for
males is largest for the specication using the 1500 gram cuto, although the
estimate is only signicant at the 10 percent level.

At the bottom row, we

also show results comparing the lighter twin to his heavier counterpart.

The

results mirror those in Figure 8 and show that the hazard of dying signicantly
increases by between 15 to 18 percent for the lighter twin, depending on the

27

covariates included. Again, we obtain no signicant estimates for females.

5

Conclusion
This paper adds to the emerging literature on the long lasting impacts of

birth outcomes by examining the relationship between birth weight and long-run
outcomes, including permanent income, income across the lifecycle, education,
social benets take-up, and adult mortality. Moreover, we add to the literature
by examining how the impact of birth weight has changed across cohorts born
almost 50 years apart and by replicating ndings from another Scandinavian
country.

We nd that birth weight is a predictor of permanent income and

that most of the eects on income appear concentrated in early adulthood. Our
results indicate that lower birth weight children are more likely to avail of social
insurance programs such as unemployment and sickness insurance. We also nd
important eects on longevity among males but not among females. The eects
on income and education at young adulthood are surprisingly constant across
cohorts and similar to the eects found in a previous study in Norway.
Our results are important in highlighting how inequalities at birth play out
over the life cycle and support the idea that part of the health-income gradient
on mortality was dierent for people that used welfare. The interaction between birth weight
and welfare use at dierent age ranges was always insignicant however.

These results are

available on request.

27 We

have also ran linear probability regressions on the eect of birth weight on the prob-

ability of dying rst within a twin pair (on the subsample of twin pairs where we observe at
least one twin dying). For males, a ten percent increase in birth weight lowered the probability of dying rst by 44 percentage points. The estimate was signicant at the 5 percent
level and did not change much when adding education and income to the regressions. Among
females, the corresponding estimate was 28 percentage points but it did not reach statistical
signicance.

20

in adulthood can be explained by health in childhood (Case, Lubotsky, and
Paxson 2001). The extent to which policies or parental investments can remedy
initial deciencies is an important question for researchers to tackle.

A rst

step towards this goal is to understand whether initial dierences have long
lasting impacts and then to examine intermediary channels that might drive
the long run results. We recognize that dierences in early childhood can lead
to dierences in the medium/long term for various reasons and pinning down
which one of these intermediary channels best explains the long run results is
beyond the scope of this paper. We therefore view our results as arising from a
combination of health deciencies at birth and subsequent behavioral responses
that might be aimed at mitigating or exacerbating these initial dierences.
We acknowledge that twins form a small fraction of the overall population
and hence are sympathetic to concerns about the generalizability of these ndings. However, because twins are smaller at birth than singletons, if there are
non-linearities in the true eect of birth weight on various outcomes, then we
can take some comfort in that our eects are over the relevant range of birth
weight. Indeed, as Bharadwaj, Eberhard and Neilson (2014) show, the eects
of birth weight on test scores at least, are quite similar across twins and sibling xed eects for siblings close together in age. In related work, Oreopoulos,
Stabile, Walld, and Roos (2008) examine the eects of birth weight using both
sibling and twin xed eects models; while for social assistance take up it appears that twins and siblings estimates are quite dierent, the eects of birth
weight appear quite similar for schooling related outcomes. Since we lack data
on siblings for our main sample, we are unable to make such comparisons with
our own data.

We do not wish to claim that variation in twin birth weight

is generalizable to the larger population, but rather that there is at least some
indication that this variation might be useful for making broader inferences. Ultimately, variation in birth weight using twins xed eects is the closest we have
to randomly assigned birth weight; however, the extent to which this variation
in relevant for policy is still an open question.

21

References
Adhvaryu, A., and A. Nyshadham (2014).

Endowments and investments

within the household: Evidence from iodine supplementation in Tanzania, forthcoming in Economic Journal.
Aizer, A., and F. Cunha (2012). The Production of Child Human Capital:
Endowments, Investments and Fertility. NBER Working Paper No. 18429.
Almond, D. (2006).

Is the 1918 Inuenza pandemic over?

Long-term ef-

fects of in utero Inuenza exposure in the post-1940 US population. Journal of
Political Economy, 114(4), 672-712.
Almond, D., K. Chay, and D. Lee (2005). The Costs of Low Birth Weight,
The Quarterly Journal of Economics. 120(3), 1031-1083.
Almond, D., and J. Currie (2011).

Killing me softly:

The fetal origins

hypothesis, The Journal of Economic Perspectives. 25(3), 153-172.
Almond, D., L. Edlund, and M. Palme (2009).

Chernobyl's subclinical

legacy: prena- tal exposure to radioactive fallout and school outcomes in Sweden. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4), 1729-1772.
Almond, D., and B. Mazumder (2011).
Environment:

Health Capital and the Prenatal

The Eect of Maternal Fasting During Pregnancy.

American

Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3, 56-85.
Almond, D., and B. Mazumder (2012). Fetal origins and parental responses.
FRB of Chicago Working Paper.
Beaudry, P., and J. DiNardo (1991). The eect of implicit contracts on the
movement of wages over the business cycle: Evidence from micro data. Journal
of Political Economy, 99, 665-688.
Behrman, J., and M. Rosenzweig (2004). Returns to birthweight. Review of
Economics and Statistics, 86(2), 586-601.
Bharadwaj, P., J. Eberhard, and C. Neilson (2014).

Do Initial Endow-

ments Matter only Initially? Birth Weight, Parental Investments and Academic
Achievement. Working Paper, University of California, San Diego.
Bhuller, M., M. Mogstad, and K. Salvanes (2011). Life-cycle bias and the
returns to schooling in current and lifetime earnings.

IZA Discussion Paper

5788.
Bitler, M. P., and J. Currie (2005). Does WIC work? The eects of WIC on
pregnancy and birth outcomes.

Journal of Policy Analysis and Management.

24(1), 73-91.
Bjorklund, A., M. Jantti, and M. J. Lindquist (2009). Family background
and income during the rise of the welfare state: brother correlations in income

22

for Swedish men born 1932-1968. Journal of Public Economics, 93(5), 671-680.
Black, S., P. Devereux, and K. Salvanes (2007).

From the Cradle to the

Labor Market? The Eect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 122(1), 409-439.
Bohlmark, A., and M. J. Lindquist (2006).

Life-Cycle Variations in the

Association between Current and Lifetime Income: Replication and Extension
for Sweden. Journal of Labor Economics, 24(4), 879-896.
Case, A., D. Lubotsky, and C. Paxson (2001). Economic status and health
in childhood: The origins of the gradient. Discussion paper, National Bureau
of Economic Research WP 8344.
Conti, G., J. J. Heckman, J. Yi, and J. Zhang (2010). Early Health Shocks,
Parental Responses, and Child Outcomes. Department of Economics, University
of Hong Kong.
Cooper, P., and D. Sandler (1997). Outcome of very low birth weight infants
at 12 to 18 months of age in Soweto, South Africa. Pediatrics, 99(4), 537-544.
Figlio, D. N., J. Guryan, K. Karbownik, and J. Roth (2014). The Eects
of Poor Neonatal Health on Children's Cognitive Development. American Economic Review, 104, 3921-3955.
Heckman, J. (2007). The economics, technology, and neuroscience of human
capability formation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(33),
13250-13255.
Hoynes, H. W., D. W. Schanzenbach, and D. Almond (2012).

Long run

impacts of childhood access to the safety net. Discussion paper, National Bureau
of Economic Research WP 18535.
Kahn, L. B. (2010). The long-term labor market consequences of graduating
from college in a bad economy. Labour Economics, 17(2), 303-316.
Lin, M., and E. Liu (2012). Does in utero Exposure to Illness Matter? The
1918 In uenza Epidemic in Taiwan as a Natural Experiment," Discussion paper,
Mimeo, University of Houston.
Lin, M., and J. Liu (2009). Do lower birth weight babies have lower grades?
Twin xed eect and instrumental variable method evidence from Taiwan. Social Science & Medicine, 68(10), 1780-1787.
Mazumder, B., D. Almond, K. Park, E. Crimmins, and C. Finch (2010). Lingering prenatal eects of the 1918 inuenza pandemic on cardiovascular disease.
Journal of developmental origins of health and disease, 1(01), 26-34.
Oreopoulos, P., M. Stabile, R. Walld, and L. Roos (2008). Short-, Medium-,
and Long-Term Consequences of Poor Infant Health An Analysis Using Siblings

23

and Twins. Journal of Human Resources, 43(1), 88-138.
Risnes, K., L. Vatten, J. Baker, K. Jameson, U. Sovio, E. Kajantie, M. Osler,
R. Morley, M. Jokela, R. Painter, et al. (2011). Birthweight and mortality in
adulthood:

a systematic review and meta-analysis.

International journal of

epidemiology, 40(3), 647-661.
Roseboom, T., J. Van Der Meulen, A. Ravelli, C. Osmond, D. Barker, and
O. Bleker (2001).

Eects of prenatal exposure to the Dutch famine on adult

disease in later life: an overview. Twin research, 4(5), 293-298.
Royer, H. (2009).

Separated at girth: Estimating the long-run and inter-

generational Eects of Birthweight using Twins. American Economic Journal Applied Economics, 1, 49-85.
Socialstyrelsen (2014). Graviditeter, förlossningar och nyfödda barn  Medicinska födelseregistret 19732013  Assisterad befruktning 19912012. Stockholm:
Socialstyrelsen.
Van Ewijk, R. (2011). Long-term health eects on the next generation of
Ramadan fasting during pregnancy. Journal of Health Economics, 30(6), 12461260.

24

Table 1: Descriptive statistics. Means and SDs.

Birth weight
Less than 1500 grams
Less than 2500 grams

Old cohorts (1926-1958)

Young cohorts (1973-1982)

Twins

Twins
Females

Males

Females

Males

2704.5

2582.1

2641.0

2548.7

3578.1

3476.7

(510.7)

(500.8)

(535.7)

(514.2)

(532.4)

(513.6)

0.0127

0.0252

0.0313

0.00213

0.00232

(0.0814)

(0.112)

(0.157)

(0.174)

(0.0461)

(0.0481)

0.337
337.5
0.388
(0.487)

Years of schooling

10.85
(3.064)

Permanent income
Welfare use 45-55*
Unemploment 45-55*
Sickness benets 45-55*

Age at death**

0.422

0.375

0.442

0.0251

0.0295

(0.494)

(0.484)

(0.497)

(0.156)

(0.169)

325.8

313.4

307.4

412.3

394.9

(273.7)

(274.7)

(268.9)

(350.1)

(341.7)

0.328

0.794

0.845

0.784

0.827

(0.469)

(0.404)

(0.362)

(0.411)

(0.378)

13266

4992

5050

159873

143362

6633

2496

2525

70702

63161

10.81
(2.938)

254442.6

154084.5

(125801.8)

(69114.5)

0.0602

0.0884

(0.191)

(0.235)

0.0585

0.0589

(0.166)

(0.165)

0.161
(0.230)

Fraction observed deaths

Females

0.00667

(278.3)
High school completion

Siblings

Males

(0.473)
Birth weight di.

Young cohorts (1973-1982)

0.230
(0.261)

0.142

0.0991

(0.349)

(0.299)

59.84
(12.92)

Observations

12888

# twin pairs (families)

6444

60.78
(11.93)

Notes: The table shows descriptive statistics for (1) the old cohorts born 1926-1958 and (2)
the young cohorts born 1973 and onwards. The statistics are for the twin sample in the old
cohorts and for the twin and sibling samples in the young cohorts. In the old sample, the
statistics for birth weight, education outcomes, and mortality are based on the entire cohorts
born 1926-1958. For permanent income, welfare use, and unemployment benets, and sickness
benets, the sample size and the cohorts included vary, depending on the data available for the
dierent outcomes, see data section for details. The sample sizes are as follows for males and
females, respectively: Permanent income: 5,607 and 5,687. Unemployment benets: 12,250
and 12,802. Welfare use: 11,842 and 12,366. Sickness benets: 10,060 and 10404. * Measured
as the the fraction of time during ages 45-55 using the benet. ** The statistics for age at
death are for those who are observed to die during the sample period.

Permanent income

is measured as average earnings during ages 35-45. High school completion is measured as
having 12 or more years of schooling. For the siblings sample, the average dierence in birth
weight is based on the dierence in birth weight between the two observed youngest siblings
of the same gender in a family. The statistics for the young cohorts are based on individuals
born between 1973-1982.

25

Table 2: Eects of birth weight on selected outcomes for cohorts born 1973 and
onwards and cohorts born 1926-1958.
Singletons
Dependent

OLS

Sibling FE

variable

Twins
Sibling FE

OLS

Twins FE

restricted

Panel A: Cohorts born 1973One-year mortality

-83.066

-132.561

-122.316

-179.617

-54.961

(1.056)***

(1.662)***

(1.693)***

(6.156)***

(7.728)***

N

2,379,386

Five minute
APGAR score

2,237,795

64,976

0.665

1.033

1.033

1.523

0.470

(0.007)***

(0.010)***

(0.010)***

(0.037)***

(0.059)***

N

2,153,559

2,153,544

59,448

High school

0.048

0.033

0.033

0.042

0.070

completion

(0.004)***

(0.006)***

(0.006)***

(0.017)**

(0.029)**

509,427
ln(earnings)
Ages 25-33

484,038

13,972

0.038

0.041

0.042

0.025

0.090

(0.004)***

(0.007)***

(0.007)***

(0.017)

(0.035)**

N

287,970

273,409

8,352

Panel B: Cohorts born 1926-1958
High school

-

-

-

0.0551***

0.101***

completion

-

-

-

(0.0136)

(0.0225)

N

-

-

-

ln(earnings)

-

-

-

-0.00894

0.0916**

Ages 25-33

-

-

-

(0.0224)

(0.0416)

N

-

-

-

35,046

16,400

Years of

-

-

-

0.322***

0.671***

schooling

-

-

-

(0.0804)

(0.126)

N

-

-

-

Notes:

35,046

The table shows regressions on the relationship between birth weight and selected

outcomes for the cohorts born 1973 and onwards and for cohorts born 1926-1958. The number
of cohorts included depend on the outcome studied, see data section for detailed information.
In the OLS regresssions for cohorts born 1973 and onwards, we control for year and month of
birth, mother's education, birth order, mother's year of birth, and sex of the child. Sibling xed
eect regressions control for all of the above except for mother's year of birth and mother's
education. Twin xed eect regressions control for sex. In the OLS regressions for the cohorts
born 1926-1958, we control sex of the child and birth cohort. The third column shows sibling
xed eect results when restricting the birth weight range to that in the corresponding twin
sample. Clustered standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

26

Table 3: Birth weight and permanent income. Cohorts born 1933-1958.
Pooled

Males

Females

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

OLS

FE

FE

FE

FE

FE

FE

Panel A: Permanent income (age 35-45)
Ln Birth weight

0.0509***

0.104***

0.0736**

0.102***

0.0695*

0.106*

0.0790

(0.0188)

(0.0344)

(0.0339)

(0.0391)

(0.0381)

(0.0560)

(0.0555)

Observations

22,588

22,588

22,588

11,214

11,214

11,374

11,374

# twin pairs

11,294

11,294

11,294

5,607

5,607

5,687

5,687

Panel B: Permanent labor income (age 35-45)
Ln Birth weight

0.0646***

0.125***

0.0893**

0.100**

0.0621

0.148**

0.116*

(0.0216)

(0.0400)

(0.0394)

(0.0487)

(0.0477)

(0.0629)

(0.0622)

Observations

22,376

22,200

22,200

11,060

11,060

11,140

11,140

# twin pairs

11,100

11,100

11,100

5,530

5,530

5,570

5,570

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Control for schooling

Notes: This table shows regressions on birth weight and permanent income for the cohorts
born 1933-1958. Columns (1) to (3) show results for the pooled sample of males and females.
Columns (4) and (5) show results for males and columns (6) and (7) for females.

The co-

ecients in columns (2) to (7) are from twin xed eects models, whereas the coecient in
column (1) is from an OLS regression. Panel A show reults for permanent total income and
Panel B show results for permanent labor income. Income is dened as labor income from
employment and self-employment plus taxable benets, whereas labor income excludes the
latter. Permanent income is calculated as the average income between the ages 35 and 45.
Years of schooling is included in columns (3), (5), and (7) and is controlled for using discrete
categories. The regressions on permanent income include cohorts born 1933-1958. ∗

∗∗

p < 0.05,

∗∗∗

p < 0.01.

27

p < 0.10,

Table 4: Birth weight across the lifecycle.
Age
30

35

40

45

50

55

60

Panel A: Income, males
Log birth weight

0.125***

0.123***

0.107**

0.101**

0.0996*

0.0605

0.0696

(0.0451)

(0.0448)

(0.0447)

(0.0489)

(0.0524)

(0.0580)

(0.0679)

10,636

11,632

12,554

12,368

12,044

9,886

7,292

5,318

5,816

6,277

6,184

6,022

4,943

3,646

0.137***

0.153***

0.0597

0.173***

0.155*

-0.0207

0.160

(0.0473)

(0.0498)

(0.0560)

(0.0667)

(0.0803)

(0.111)

(0.217)

10,518

11,400

12,126

11,712

11,058

8,662

5,840

5,259

5,700

6,063

5,856

5,529

4,331

2,920

0.211*

0.180*

0.0761

0.00323

0.131**

0.163**

0.152**

(0.112)

(0.0971)

(0.0796)

(0.0641)

(0.0593)

(0.0637)

(0.0752)

Observations

9,656

11,064

12,228

12,484

12,434

10,428

8,126

Number of twin pairs

4,828

5,532

6,114

6,242

6,217

5,214

4,063

Log birth weight

0.173

0.215**

0.0732

0.0460

0.153

0.251**

0.270

(0.114)

(0.100)

(0.0875)

(0.0764)

(0.103)

(0.126)

(0.216)

Observations

9,426

10,618

11,526

11,504

10,984

8,666

5,964

Number of twin pairs

4,713

5,309

5,763

5,752

5,492

4,333

2,982

Observations
Number of twin pairs

Panel B: Labor income, males
Log birth weight

Observations
Number of twin pairs

Panel C: Income, females
Log birth weight

Panel D: Labor income, females

Notes: This table shows regressions on birth weight and income across the lifecycle for the
cohorts born 1926-1958.

All coecients are from twin xed eects models.

Panels A and

B show regressions on average 5-year income and average 5-year labor income among males.
Panels C and D shows the corresponding regressions for females. Income is dened as labor
income from employment and self-employment plus taxable benets, whereas labor income
excludes the latter. The ages in the table refer to the midpoints of the 5-year averages. No
controls for schooling. The cohorts included in the regressions vary, see the text for details. ∗

p < 0.10,

∗∗

p < 0.05,

∗∗∗

p < 0.01.

28

29
5,732

Number of twin pairs

-0.0150

3,192

6,384

(0.0375)

5,062

10,124

(0.0334)

-0.00710

(0.0334)

-0.0111

4,952

9,904

(0.0298)

-0.0386

(0.0299)

-0.0455

Welfare

SI

45-55
Welfare

5,030

10,060

(0.0241)

-0.0215

(0.0241)

5,921

11,842

(0.0188)

-0.00132

(0.0188)

-0.00508

6,401

12,802

(0.0157)

0.000129

(0.0157)

0.00211

5,202

10,404

(0.0262)

-0.0291

(0.0262)

-0.0272

6,183

12,366

(0.0221)

0.0145

(0.0221)

0.0117

Panel B: Female twins

6,125

12,250

(0.0159)

-0.0318**

(0.0159)

-0.0244

Panel A: Male twins
-0.0323**

UI

Age

4,860

9,720

(0.0227)

0.00159

(0.0227)

0.00195

4,445

8,890

(0.0233)

-0.0330

(0.0234)

-0.0341

UI

4,810

9,620

(0.0285)

-0.0694**

(0.0285)

-0.0678**

4,375

8,750

(0.0282)

0.00629

(0.0282)

0.00659

SI

55-65

4,859

9,718

(0.0235)

-0.0108

(0.0235)

-0.0151

4,445

8,890

(0.0201)

-0.0119

(0.0201)

-0.0144

Welfare

∗

p < 0.10,

∗∗

p < 0.05,

∗∗∗

p < 0.01.

in 10-year intervals. Years of schooling is controlled for using discrete categories. The cohorts included in the regressions vary, see the text for details.

from twin xed eects models. The regressions show the eect of birth weight on the fraction of time spend using dierent social insurance systems

Notes: This table shows regressions on birth weight and use of social benets across the lifecycle for the cohorts born 1926-1958. All coecients are

11,464

Observations

0.00971
(0.0115)

(control for schooling)

(0.0375)

(0.0115)

B. Log birth weight

-0.0120

0.0117

A. Log birth weight

6,390

5,600

3,195

11,200

Number of twin pairs

(0.0347)

-0.0626*

Observations

-0.0130
(0.0111)

(0.0347)

(control for schooling)

-0.0652*

-0.0120

SI

(0.0112)

B. Log birth weight

A. Log birth weight

UI

35-45

Table 5: Birth weight, social insurance, and welfare

30
NO
NO

Control for schooling
Control for income

NO

YES

6511

YES

YES

6277

12,554

(0.0650)

1.176***

(0.128)

1.139

(0.225)

1.248

(1.640)

2.571

(0.150)

0.470**

(3)

NO

NO

6696

13,392

(0.0566)

0.968

(0.118)

1.064

(0.170)

0.985

(0.368)

0.818

(0.282)

0.843

(4)

NO

YES

6696

13,392

(0.0578)

0.959

(0.120)

1.046

(0.170)

0.960

(0.481)

1.027

(0.296)

0.863

(5)

Females

YES

YES

6114

12,228

(0.0634)

0.946

(0.132)

1.025

(0.192)

1.010

(0.466)

0.945

(0.340)

0.896

(6)

The coecients represent hazard ratios.

The coecients presented in the

∗

p < 0.10,

∗∗

p < 0.05,

∗∗∗

p < 0.01.

dierent rows come from separate regressions. In the regressions controlling for income, we use average income during ages 38-42, see text for details.

models with twin xed eects (twin-pair specic baseline hazards).

Notes: This table shows regressions on birth weight and mortality for the cohorts born 1926-1958. All coecients are from Cox proportional hazard

6511

13,022

(0.0602)

(0.0585)
13,022

1.150***

1.152***

1.122
(0.119)

1.124
(0.116)

1.194
(0.203)

1.114
(0.183)

2.807*
(1.748)

2.750*

(0.155)

(1.606)

0.513**

(0.148)

(2)

Males

0.506**

Number of twin pairs

Observations

E. Lighter twin

D. Less than 2500 grams

C. Less than 2000 grams

B. Less than 1500 grams

A. Log birth weight

(1)

Table 6: Birth weight and adult mortality. Cox proportional hazard models.

Table A: Eects of birth weight on selected outcomes for cohorts born 1973 and
onwards and cohorts born 1926-1958. Males.
Singletons
Dependent

OLS

Sibling FE

variable

Twins
Sibling FE

OLS

Twins FE

restricted

Panel A: Cohorts born 1973One-year mortality

-106.668

-160.822

-160.836

-214.389

-68.971

(1.777)***

(2.599)***

(2.600)***

(10.360)***

(15.569)***

N

965,444

Five minute
APGAR score

965,438

22,456

0.757

1.133

1.133

1.666

0.466

(0.012)***

(0.017)***

(0.017)***

(0.062)***

(0.107)***

N

861,546

861,541

20,522

High school

0.055

0.025

0.026

0.061

0.067

completion

(0.007)***

(0.011)**

(0.011)**

(0.030)**

(0.050)

N

159,873

ln(earnings)
Ages 25-33

159,872

4,992

0.060

0.047

0.047

0.039

0.121

(0.007)***

(0.013)***

(0.014)***

(0.028)

(0.054)**

N

86,365

80,739

3,180

Panel B: Cohorts born 1926-1958
High school

-

-

-

0.0492**

completion

-

-

-

(0.0232)

N

-

-

-

ln(earnings)

-

-

-

0.0165

Ages 25-33

-

-

-

(0.0208)

N

-

-

-

(0.0375)
12,888
0.0827**
(0.0356)
8,232

Years of

-

-

-

0.114

schooling

-

-

-

(0.139)

N

-

-

-

Notes:

0.111***

0.554***
(0.210)
12,888

The table shows regressions on the relationship between birth weight and selected

outcomes for the cohorts born 1973 and onwards and cohorts born 1926-1958. The number
of cohorts included depend on the outcome studied, see data section for detailed information.
In the OLS regresssions, we control for year and month of birth, mother's education, birth
order, mother's year of birth, and sex of the child. Sibling xed eect regressions control for
all of the above except for mother's year of birth and mother's education. Twin xed eect
regressions control for sex. The third column shows sibling xed eect results when restricting
the birth weight range to that in the corresponding twin sample. In the OLS regressions for
the cohorts born 1926-1958, we control sex of the child and birth cohort. Clustered standard
errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

31

Table B: Eects of birth weight on selected outcomes for cohorts born 1973 and
onwards and cohorts born 1926-1958. Females.
Singletons
Dependent

OLS

Sibling FE

variable

Twins
Sibling FE

OLS

Twins FE

restricted

Panel A: Cohorts born 1973One-year mortality

-100.228

-156.437

-156.462

-172.516

-29.857

(1.851)***

(2.760)***

(2.760)***

(10.721)***

(12.733)**

N

877,941

Five minute
APGAR score

877,935

21,754

0.704

1.132

1.132

1.499

0.547

(0.012)***

(0.017)***

(0.017)***

(0.067)***

(0.099)***

N

780,130

780,125

19,750

High school

0.058

0.029

0.029

0.016

0.075

completion

(0.007)***

(0.010)***

(0.010)***

(0.025)

(0.040)*

N

143,362

ln(earnings)
Ages 25-33

143,360

5,050

0.027

0.037

0.037

0.001

0.141

(0.008)***

(0.014)***

(0.015)**

(0.028)

(0.060)**

N

66,937

64,618

2,864

Panel B: Cohorts born 1926-1958
High school

-

-

-

0.0543***

0.0867***

completion

-

-

-

(0.0204)

(0.0325)

N

-

-

-

ln(earnings)

-

-

-

-0.0287

0.100

Ages 25-33

-

-

-

(0.0378)

(0.0753)

N

-

-

-

13,266

8,168

Years of

-

-

-

0.374***

0.604***

schooling

-

-

-

(0.120)

(0.184)

N

-

-

-

Notes:

13,266

The table shows regressions on the relationship between birth weight and selected

outcomes for the cohorts born 1973 and onwards and cohorts born 1926-1958. The number
of cohorts included depend on the outcome studied, see data section for detailed information.
In the OLS regresssions, we control for year and month of birth, mother's education, birth
order, mother's year of birth, and sex of the child. Sibling xed eect regressions control for
all of the above except for mother's year of birth and mother's education. Twin xed eect
regressions control for sex. The third column shows sibling xed eect results when restricting
the birth weight range to that in the corresponding twin sample. In the OLS regressions for
the cohorts born 1926-1958, we control sex of the child and birth cohort. Clustered standard
errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

32

Table C: Birth weight and permanent income (ages 35-45). Non-linear specications.
Pooled
(1)

Males

(2)

Females

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Panel A: Permanent income (age 35-45)
A. Less than 1500 grams

B. Less than 2000 grams

-0.0334

-0.0229

-0.0842

-0.0603

-0.00186

-0.00119

(0.0466)

(0.0459)

(0.0595)

(0.0579)

(0.0695)

(0.0688)

-0.0319*

-0.0283

-0.0414*

-0.0439**

-0.0257

-0.0182

(0.0179)

(0.0176)

(0.0225)

(0.0219)

(0.0270)

(0.0267)

-0.0252**

-0.0206*

-0.0174

-0.0133

-0.0324*

-0.0285

(0.0117)

(0.0115)

(0.0133)

(0.0130)

(0.0191)

(0.0189)

Observations

22,588

22,588

11,214

11,214

11,374

11,374

# twin pairs

11,294

11,294

5,607

5,607

5,687

5,687

C. Less than 2500 grams

Panel B: Permanent labor income (age 35-45)
A. Less than 1500 grams

B. Less than 2000 grams

-0.0819

-0.0688

(0.0540)

(0.0531)

-0.0375*

-0.0328

(0.0208)

(0.0205)

-0.0339**

-0.0286**

(0.0136)

(0.0134)

Observations

22,200

# twin pairs

11,100

Control for schooling

No

Yes

C. Less than 2500 grams

-0.0853

-0.0567

-0.0798

-0.0784

(0.0735)

(0.0719)

(0.0780)

(0.0771)

-0.0209

-0.0229

-0.0484

-0.0386

(0.0281)

(0.0275)

(0.0303)

(0.0300)

-0.0193

-0.0142

-0.0476**

-0.0430**

(0.0166)

(0.0162)

(0.0214)

(0.0211)

22,200

11,060

11,060

11,140

11,140

11,100

5,530

5,530

5,570

5,570

No

Yes

No

Yes

Notes: This table shows regressions on the eect of having a birth weight below dierent
tresholds on permanent income for cohorts born 1933-1958. Columns (1) to (2) show results
for the pooled sample of males and females. Columns (3) and (4) show results for males and
columns (5) and (6) for females. All coecients are from twin FE models. Panel A show reults
for permanent total income and Panel B show results for permanent labor income. Income is
dened as labor income from employment and self-employment plus taxable benets, whereas
labor income excludes the latter.

Permanent income is calculated as the average income

between the ages 35 and 45. Years of schooling is included in columns (2), (4), and (6) and is
controlled for using discrete categories. The regressions on permanent income include cohorts
born 1933-1958. ∗

p < 0.10,

∗∗

p < 0.05,

∗∗∗

p < 0.01.

33

Table D: Eect of birth weight on permanent income by birth cohort categories
(1)

(2)

(3)

Model A
Log birth weight

(4)

Model B

.106***

0.111*

.105***

.109*

(.035)

(.058)

(.035)

(.057)

Log birth weight*C_1940-1949

.008

.013

(.078)

(.077)

Log birth weight*C_1933-1939

-.053

-.051

(.102)

(.100)

Observations

22,588

22,588

22,588

22,588

Number of twin pairs

11,294

11,294

11,294

11,294

Notes: This table shows regressions on the eect of log birth weight on permanent income
(ages 35-45) across cohorts born 1933-1939, 1940-1949, and 1950-1958. All coecients are from
twin xed eects models. Permanent income is calculated as the average income between the
ages 35 and 45. Column 1 shows the estimate for the combined sample of men and women.
Column 2 interacts birth weight with the birth cohort categories. Column 3 and 4 repeats
the analysis in Column 1 and 2, but recodes the birth weight data into 50g bins, i.e., analyzes
whether measurement error matters. ∗

p < 0.10,

34

∗∗

p < 0.05,

∗∗∗

p < 0.01.

Table E: Birth weight across the lifecycle. Balanced panels.
Age
30

35

40

Balanced panels

45

50

55

60

Panel A: Income, males

Log birth weight

0.123**

0.112**

0.106**

0.0762

0.0551

0.0515

-

(0.0485)

(0.0473)

(0.0494)

(0.0542)

(0.0623)

(0.0677)

-

Observations

7,722

7,722

7,722

7,722

7,722

7,722

-

Number of twin pairs

3,861

3,861

3,861

3,861

3,861

3,861

-

0.122**

0.116**

0.110**

0.0994

0.0212

-0.0733

-

(0.0484)

(0.0506)

(0.0539)

(0.0766)

(0.0867)

(0.108)

-

Panel B: Labor income, males
Log birth weight

Observations

6,668

6,668

6,668

6,668

6,668

6,668

-

Number of twin pairs

3,334

3,334

3,334

3,334

3,334

3,334

-

0.358***

0.239**

0.0819

-0.00162

0.0610

0.0894

-

(0.138)

(0.109)

(0.0773)

(0.0581)

(0.0559)

(0.0605)

-

Panel C: Income, females
Log birth weight

Observations

7,722

7,722

7,722

7,722

7,722

7,722

-

Number of twin pairs

3,861

3,861

3,861

3,861

3,861

3,861

-

0.284*

0.193

0.0412

-0.0353

-0.00902

-0.00384

-

(0.153)

(0.122)

(0.0872)

(0.0730)

(0.0908)

(0.135)

-

Panel D: Labor income, females
Log birth weight

Observations

5,536

5,536

5,536

5,536

5,536

5,536

-

Number of twin pairs

2,768

2,768

2,768

2,768

2,768

2,768

-

Notes: This table shows regressions for a balanced panel on birth weight and income across
the lifecycle for the cohorts born 1926-1958. All coecients are from twin xed eects models.
Panels A and B show regressions on average 5-year income and average 5-year labor income
among males.

Panels C and D shows the corresponding regressions for females.

Income is

dened as labor income from employment and self-employment plus taxable benets, whereas
labor income excludes the latter. The ages in the table refer to the midpoints of the 5-year
averages. No controls for schooling. The cohorts included in the regressions vary, see the text
for details. ∗

p < 0.10,

∗∗

p < 0.05,

∗∗∗

p < 0.01.

35

Table F: Birth weight and income across the lifecycle. Non-linear specications.
No control for schooling.
Age
30

35

40

45

50

55

60
-0.0328

Male twins, unbalanced
A. Less than 1500 grams

-0.0430

-0.0424

-0.0827

-0.156**

-0.127

-0.0371

(0.0685)

(0.0684)

(0.0704)

(0.0770)

(0.0835)

(0.0914)

(0.111)

B. Less than 2000 grams

-0.0604**

-0.0376

-0.0246

-0.0237

-0.0539*

-0.0453

-0.0194

(0.0260)

(0.0257)

(0.0257)

(0.0280)

(0.0301)

(0.0335)

(0.0388)

C. Less than 2500 grams

-0.0342**

-0.0291*

-0.0224

-0.0182

-0.0166

0.00564

-0.0204

(0.0153)

(0.0153)

(0.0153)

(0.0168)

(0.0180)

(0.0199)

(0.0234)

10,636

11,632

12,554

12,368

12,044

9,886

7,292

5,318

5,816

6,277

6,184

6,022

4,943

3,646

Observations
Number of twin pairs

Male twins, balanced
-0.0319

-0.0806

-0.0869

-0.0493

-0.127

0.0119

-

(0.0740)

(0.0722)

(0.0753)

(0.0826)

(0.0949)

(0.103)

-

-0.0404

-0.0321

-0.0434

-0.0340

-0.0746**

-0.0808**

-

(0.0283)

(0.0276)

(0.0288)

(0.0316)

(0.0363)

(0.0394)

-

-0.0293*

-0.0193

-0.0113

-0.00627

0.0164

0.0142

-

(0.0164)

(0.0160)

(0.0166)

(0.0183)

(0.0210)

(0.0228)

-

Observations

7,722

7,722

7,722

7,722

7,722

7,722

-

Number of twin pairs

3,861

3,861

3,861

3,861

3,861

3,861

-

-0.288***

A. Less than 1500 grams
B. Less than 2000 grams
C. Less than 2500 grams

Female twins, unbalanced
A. Less than 1500 grams
B. Less than 2000 grams
C. Less than 2500 grams

-0.0626

0.197

0.105

-0.0346

-0.0998

-0.127

(0.138)

(0.121)

(0.1000)

(0.0803)

(0.0744)

(0.0808)

(0.104)

-0.0338

-0.0608

-0.0564

0.0251

0.00187

-0.0590*

-0.0195

(0.0538)

(0.0467)

(0.0385)

(0.0311)

(0.0288)

(0.0307)

(0.0370)

-0.0177

-0.0485

-0.0174

-0.00937

-0.0420**

-0.0417*

-0.0570**

(0.0382)

(0.0332)

(0.0272)

(0.0218)

(0.0203)

(0.0216)

(0.0252)

Observations

9,656

11,064

12,228

12,484

12,434

10,428

8,126

Number of twin pairs

4,828

5,532

6,114

6,242

6,217

5,214

4,063

Female twins, balanced
-0.166

0.172

0.106

0.0302

0.0124

-0.00505

-

(0.175)

(0.137)

(0.0976)

(0.0733)

(0.0705)

(0.0764)

-

-0.0801

-0.0991*

-0.0459

0.0372

0.00232

-0.0109

-

(0.0654)

(0.0513)

(0.0365)

(0.0274)

(0.0264)

(0.0286)

-

-0.0187

-0.0206

0.0206

0.0335*

0.0153

-0.00516

-

(0.0469)

(0.0368)

(0.0262)

(0.0197)

(0.0189)

(0.0205)

-

Observations

6,980

6,980

6,980

6,980

6,980

6,980

-

Number of twin pairs

3,490

3,490

3,490

3,490

3,490

3,490

-

A. Less than 1500 grams
B. Less than 2000 grams
C. Less than 2500 grams

Notes: This table shows regressions on the eect of having a birth weight below dierent
tresholds on average 5-year income at dierent ages. All coecients are from twin xed eects
models. The coecients presented in the dierent rows come from separate regressions. The
ages in the tables refer to the midpoints of the 5-year averages. No controls for schooling. ∗

p < 0.10,

∗∗

p < 0.05,

∗∗∗

p < 0.01.

36

Table G: Birth weight and labor income across the lifecycle. Non-linear specications.
Age
30

35

40

45

50

55

60

Male twins, unbalanced
A. Less than 1500 grams
B. Less than 2000 grams
C. Less than 2500 grams
Observations
Number of twin pairs

-0.0368

-0.0469

-0.0969

-0.307***

-0.427***

-0.0223

-0.0371

(0.0719)

(0.0761)

(0.0871)

(0.104)

(0.130)

(0.181)

(0.358)

-0.0620**

-0.0410

0.00460

-0.0283

-0.129***

-0.0847

-0.125

(0.0273)

(0.0286)

(0.0323)

(0.0383)

(0.0462)

(0.0642)

(0.123)

-0.0447***

-0.0327*

-0.00386

-0.0474**

0.00593

0.0558

-0.0527

(0.0160)

(0.0170)

(0.0191)

(0.0228)

(0.0274)

(0.0375)

(0.0736)

10,518

11,400

12,126

11,712

11,058

8,662

5,840

5,259

5,700

6,063

5,856

5,529

4,331

2,920

-

Male twins, balanced
A. Less than 1500 grams

-0.0177

-0.107

-0.0772

-0.212*

-0.107

0.0496

(0.0756)

(0.0789)

(0.0841)

(0.119)

(0.135)

(0.168)

-

B. Less than 2000 grams

-0.0425

-0.0269

-0.0534*

-0.0560

-0.0863*

-0.0838

-

(0.0286)

(0.0298)

(0.0318)

(0.0452)

(0.0511)

(0.0634)

-

C. Less than 2500 grams

-0.0290*

-0.0163

-0.0183

-0.0194

0.0108

0.0357

-

(0.0160)

(0.0167)

(0.0178)

(0.0253)

(0.0286)

(0.0356)

-

Observations

6,668

6,668

6,668

6,668

6,668

6,668

-

Number of twin pairs

3,334

3,334

3,334

3,334

3,334

3,334

-

Female twins, unbalanced
A. Less than 1500 grams
B. Less than 2000 grams
C. Less than 2500 grams

-0.0710

0.0935

0.0570

-0.127

-0.0379

-0.176

-0.565**

(0.142)

(0.124)

(0.110)

(0.0966)

(0.130)

(0.157)

(0.285)

-0.0175

-0.0632

-0.0464

0.0277

0.0136

-0.0707

-0.158

(0.0550)

(0.0480)

(0.0426)

(0.0374)

(0.0504)

(0.0618)

(0.110)

-0.0175

-0.0575*

-0.0457

-0.0168

-0.0666*

-0.0819*

-0.107

(0.0391)

(0.0342)

(0.0298)

(0.0257)

(0.0347)

(0.0420)

(0.0713)

Observations

9,426

10,618

11,526

11,504

10,984

8,666

5,964

Number of twin pairs

4,713

5,309

5,763

5,752

5,492

4,333

2,982

Female twins, balanced
-0.0980

0.235

0.141

0.0699

0.112

0.0554

-

(0.189)

(0.150)

(0.108)

(0.0901)

(0.112)

(0.167)

-

-0.0572

-0.0550

-0.0332

0.0292

0.00661

0.000876

-

(0.0735)

(0.0584)

(0.0419)

(0.0351)

(0.0436)

(0.0649)

-

-0.0209

-0.0347

0.0194

0.0102

0.0253

-0.0172

-

(0.0513)

(0.0408)

(0.0292)

(0.0245)

(0.0304)

(0.0453)

-

Observations

5,536

5,536

5,536

5,536

5,536

5,536

-

Number of twin pairs

2,768

2,768

2,768

2,768

2,768

2,768

-

A. Less than 1500 grams
B. Less than 2000 grams
C. Less than 2500 grams

Notes: This table shows regressions on the eect of having a birth weight below dierent
tresholds on average 5-year labor income at dierent ages. All coecients are from twin xed
eects models. The coecients presented in the dierent rows come from separate regressions.
The ages in the tables refer to the midpoints of the 5-year averages. No controls for schooling.

∗

p < 0.10,

∗∗

p < 0.05,

∗∗∗

p < 0.01.

37

3000

1000

500

0

30

19

34

19

38

19

42

19

Females

54 58 62 66 70 74 78 82
19 19 19 19 19 19 19 19
Birth year

50

19

Males

46

19

26
19

30
19

34
19

38
19

42
19

Females

54 58 62 66 70 74 78 82
19 19 19 19 19 19 19 19
Birth year

50
19

Males

46
19

Notes: These graph plot average birth weight and average discordance in grams across cohorts born 1926-1958 and 1973-1982.

19

26

3500

Birth weight (grams)
1500
2000
2500

Figure 1: Birth weight and Discordance across Cohorts Born 1926-1982.

500
Birth weight difference (grams)
200
300
400
100
0

38

Birth cohort
Females

Males

Notes: This graph plots average life expectancy at birth for the cohorts born
1926-1958. Source: www.mortality.org.

39

82
19

78
19

74
19

70
19

66
19

62
19

58
19

54
19

50
19

46
19

42
19

38
19

34
19

30
19

19

26

60

Life expectancy at birth
65
70
75

80

Figure 2: Life Expectancy at Birth. Males and Females.

.8

.6

.4

26

30

19

34

19

38

19

42

19

46

19

54 958 962 966 970 974 978 982
19
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
Birth year

50

19

50 gram heaps

26
19

30
19

34
19

38
19

42
19

46
19

54 958 962 966 970 974 978 982
19
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
Birth year

50
19

No birth weight difference

Figure 3: Birth weight Measurement across Cohorts Born 1926-1982.

pairs with zero dierence in birth weight. Cohorts born 1926-1958 and 1973-1982.

Notes: These graph plot fraction of twins where birth weight is measured in 50 gram bins (left panel) and fraction of twin

19

.2

.08
.06
.04
.02
0

40

Figure 4:

Birth Weight and Permanent Income.

Non-Parametric Estimates.

Birth weight
Fixed effects

OLS

Notes: This graph plots estimates from OLS and twin xed eects regressions
on the eect of birth weight on permanent income among males, where birth
weight is measured in 100 grams bins. The reference category is weighting below
1500 grams. Permanent income is calculated as the average income between the
ages 35 and 45. Cohorts born 1933-1958 are included in the regressions.

41

00
45

00

00

43

00

41

39

00

00

37

35

00

00

33

00

31

29

00

00

27

00

25

23

00

00

21

19

00
17

15

00

−.4

Parameter estimates
−.2
0
.2

.4

Males.

Figure 5:

Birth Weight and Permanent Income.

Non-Parametric Estimates.

Birth weight
Fixed effects

OLS

Notes: This graph plots estimates from OLS and twin xed eects regressions
on the eect of birth weight on permanent income among females, where birth
weight is measured in 100 grams bins. The reference category is weighting below
1500 grams. Permanent income is calculated as the average income between the
ages 35 and 45. Cohorts born 1933-1958 are included in the regressions.

42

00
45

00

00

43

00

41

39

00

00

37

35

00

00

33

00

31

29

00

00

27

00

25

23

00

00

21

19

00
17

15

00

0

Parameter estimates
.2
.4
.6

.8

Females.

Figure 6:

Birth Weight and Income over the Lifecycle.

OLS and Twin FE.

Males.

Coefficient

.1
.05

Coefficient

−.05 0
30

35

40

45

50

55

60

−.02 0 .02 .04 .06 .08

OLS Estimates (males)

.15

Twins Estimates (males)

30

35

Age

40

45

50

Age

Diff. in coefficient

−.1 −.05 0 .05 .1 .15

Difference in Estimates (males)

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

Age

Coefficients

Confidence intervals

Notes: The upper panel of the graph plots estimates from twin FE (left) and
OLS (right) regressions on the eect of birth weight on income across the lifecyle
among males. Coecients are interpreted as the eect on 4 year moving income
averages since at each age, 4 years of data are used. The coecient shown for
age 50 uses data from ages 50-53, the coecient for age 51 uses data from ages
51-54 and so on. The OLS regressions control for calendar year of observation
and nothing else. The lower panel plots the dierence in OLS and FE estimates
and the corresponding condence intervals of the dierence.

43

55

60

Figure 7:

Birth Weight and Income over the Lifecycle.

OLS and Twin FE.

Females
OLS Estimates (females)

.05

Coefficient

−.1

−.05

0

.1
0

Coefficient

.2

.1

.3

Twins Estimates (females)

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

30

35

Age

40

45

50

Age

.1
0
−.2 −.1

Diff. in coefficient

.2

Difference in Estimates (females)

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

Age

Coefficients

Confidence intervals

Notes: The upper panel of the graph plots estimates from twin FE (left) and
OLS (right) regressions on the eect of birth weight on income across the lifecyle
among females.

Coecients are interpreted as the eect on 4 year moving

income averages since at each age, 4 years of data are used.

The coecient

shown for age 50 uses data from ages 50-53, the coecient for age 51 uses data
from ages 51-54 and so on.

The OLS regressions control for calendar year of

observation and nothing else. The lower panel plots the dierence in OLS and
FE estimates and the corresponding condence intervals of the dierence.

44

55

60

Figure 8: Birth weight and Mortality. Hazard rates.

0

.005

.01

.015

.02

.025

Hazard rates (males)

20

40

60

80

Age
Light twin

Heavy twin

0

.005

.01

.015

Hazard rates (females)

20

40

60

80

Age
Light twin

Heavy twin

Note: This gure plots Kaplan-Meier mortality hazard rates for the ligher versus
the heavier twin for cohorts born 1926-1958.

45

