                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      FISCAL POLICIES AND THE PRICES OF LABOR:
                          A COMPARISON OF THE U.K. AND U.S.

                                         Casey B. Mulligan

                                        Working Paper 21358
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21358


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2015




I appreciate the financial support of the George J. Stigler Center for the Study of the Economy and
the State and discussions with Kyle Herkenhoff, and comments from David Neumark and an anonymous
referee. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Casey B. Mulligan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Fiscal Policies and the Prices of Labor: A Comparison of the U.K. and U.S.
Casey B. Mulligan
NBER Working Paper No. 21358
July 2015
JEL No. E24,H31,I38

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper measures the 2007-13 evolution of employment tax rates in the U.K. and the U.S., especially
as they are influenced by changes in tax and safety net benefit rules. The magnitudes of the U.S. changes
are greater, in the direction of taxing a greater fraction of the value created by employment, and primarily
achieved with changes in implicit tax rates. Even though both countries implemented temporary “fiscal
stimulus,” their tax rate dynamics were different: the U.S. stimulus increased rates whereas the U.K.
stimulus reduced them. The U.K. later increased the tax on employment during its so-called “austerity”
period. Employer-cost dynamics are also different in the two countries. The tax rates calculated in
this paper are a first ingredient for cross-country comparisons of labor market and fiscal policy dynamics
during and after the financial crisis.


Casey B. Mulligan
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
c-mulligan@uchicago.edu




A data appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w21358
        Many countries of the world experienced an unusually deep and long recession after
2007. Over the same time frame, several facets of fiscal policy were changed, especially policies
related to taxation and safety net programs. The purpose of this paper is to compare changes in
fiscal policy parameters as they affected the incentives of Americans and the British to be
employed. The two countries ostensibly pursued different policies – one under the names of
“stimulus” and “health reform” and the other as “austerity.” The U.S. increased cash and health
benefits for the unemployed and for families with low incomes. The U.K. temporarily reduced
its value-added tax and permanently reduced its basic income tax rate, although by 2011 its
payroll and value-added tax rates were higher than ever before.

        Policies with different labels are not necessarily different in terms of their economic
fundamentals. This paper comparably quantifies fiscal policy in terms of one of the economic
fundamentals: the wedge between the supply price of labor and the demand price of labor. It
finds that the two countries have been different in terms of the evolution of employment taxation,
on average and across demographic groups.                 The British “austerity programme” and the
American “stimulus” law occurred at different points of the business cycle and affected different
groups, but both reduced average incentives to be employed. In contrast, the 2008-9 British
“stimulus” policies enhanced employment incentives.

        The evolution of employment has also been different. Figure 1 displays an index of
employment rates for prime-aged people, separately for the two countries.1 Employment fell
sharply in both countries during the crisis, although less so in the U.K. The U.K. employment
recovery began earlier, and by the end of 2014 the U.K. employment rate had exceeded pre-crisis
levels. Because taxes are one (among many) of the determinants of labor market performance,
comparable tax measures are necessary for carefully investigating and comparing labor market



1
  Both series are from the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (hereafter, OECD), via the St.
Louis Federal Reserve’s FRED database. In 2007-Q4, the U.K. and U.S. employment rates were 81.5 and 79.8,
respectively.
                                                                                                               1
outcomes. This paper provides tax measures, and shows how changes in tax rates are linked to
specific legislation.

        [Figure 1 here]

        Taxes potentially affect work decisions in a variety of dimensions, for example: the
number of weeks worked per year, the number of hours worked per week, whether to work at all
during a year, and the amount of effort to put into work. Due to the prominence of the business
cycle during this period and the sheer size of gross monthly employment flows, this paper
focuses on the weeks-per-year margin holding constant weekly hours and the probability of not
working at all during a calendar year. In the U.K., for example, the single largest quarterly
employment decline for the non-elderly population was 0.3 million, as compared to at least 2.6
million non-elderly people who join or separate from an employer during the average quarter.2
Adding just one week out of work before joining, or after separating, would therefore create a
remarkable net reduction in the number employed at a point in time. Also, the large majority of
unemployment spells last less than 12 months, and some of those lasting 12 months do not
blanket an entire tax year.3

        I follow the usual steps of public finance analysis and first look at the tax wedge – the
gap between supply and demand prices created by a tax or subsidy. The next step, left for future
research, is to draw conclusions about the wedge’s behavioral effects and ultimate incidence.
Thus, with one exception noted below, the estimates in this paper do not require any assumption
about the relative incidence of labor taxes on employers and employees.

        Section I discusses the United Kingdom, demonstrating how many of the tax changes
were offsetting in terms of the employment incentives they created. The primary exception
relates to the subpopulation receiving child tax credits, because the phaseout (sometimes referred
to as “taper”) rate of those credits increased with little change in the range of incomes over
which the phaseout applies. Section II shows results for the United States, where employment

2
  Average quarterly gross flows are from Gomes (2012, Figure 1). Quarterly net employment changes are from the
OECD, via the St. Louis Federal Reserve’s FRED database, and, for comparability with Gomes, for the age 16-64
age group.
3
  The St. Louis Federal Reserve FRED data series UEMPMED shows that the U.S. median duration of
unemployment peaked at 25 weeks in June 2010. Also note that, for example, an 18-month nonemployment spell
lasting from March 2009 to September 2010 nonetheless involves positive weeks worked in both calendar years (tax
years in the U.S. coincide with calendar years).
                                                                                                               2
disincentives have increased over time, especially (but not exclusively) among unmarried
workers. Section III shows the evolution of the employer cost and employee benefit from work
– the gap between the two is the employment tax wedge – by country for workers in the middle
of the wage distribution. Section IV concludes.




    I.       Fiscal Policy and the Reward to Work: the United Kingdom


         A. A Worker’s Tax Year Budget Constraint

         My model of the U.K. worker features a consumption tax, payroll taxes (by both
employer and employee; hereafter, NICs or “National Insurance Contributions,” as they are
called in the U.K.), personal income taxes, benefits based on personal income (such as working
tax credits, child tax credits, and the child benefit), and benefits for the unemployed (including,
but not necessarily limited to, jobless and housing allowances). 4 The weekly employer cost of
worker i, yi, is the sum of weekly earnings wi and employer payroll taxes (wi  ST)f:

                                         𝑦𝑖 = 𝑤𝑖 + (𝑤𝑖 − 𝑆𝑇)𝜏𝑓                                                  (1)



where f denotes the marginal employer NIC and ST < y denotes the earnings threshold for
weekly employer NICs.

         The personal income tax and personal-income-related benefits are based on tax-year
income (the tax year begins in April) but that the NICs and unemployment benefits are weekly.
The link between consumption ci and weekly earnings wi therefore depends on the number of
weeks worked 𝑛𝑖 ∈ [0,52]:5

     𝑐𝑖 = (52 − 𝑛𝑖 )𝑈𝐵𝑖 + 𝑤𝑖 𝑛𝑖 − (𝑤𝑖 − 𝑃𝑇)𝑛𝑖 𝜏𝑒 − 𝑃𝐼𝑇((52 − 𝑛𝑖 )𝑈𝐵𝑖 + 𝑤𝑖 𝑛𝑖 ) − 𝜏𝑐 𝑐𝑖                          (2)

4
  Note that so-called “tax credits” are technically welfare spending programs in the U.K., rather than a credit to
personal income taxes (Office for Budget Responsibility 2015, Tables 4.5 and 4.26). Both tax credits and personal
income taxes are based on the same income concept, which this paper references as “personal income.”
5
  I ignore integer constraints on weeks worked. Also note that many of the tax provisions are administered on a pay-
period basis (e.g., weekly, biweekly or monthly). For a worker paid monthly, my model might be better understood
as a monthly model: e.g., w is monthly employer cost, n  [0,12] is number of months worked, etc.
                                                                                                                  3
where e is the marginal employee NIC rate, UB denotes the weekly unemployment benefit, 6 and
PIT() denotes the combined schedules for personal income taxes, working tax credits, child tax
credits, and the child benefit. 7 PT < y denotes the earnings threshold for weekly employee NICs.
PT is known as the “primary threshold,” as distinct from the “secondary threshold” ST applicable
to employers. 8 Equation (2)’s last term refers to indirect or consumption taxes (primarily VAT,
but also important contributions from excise taxes: see Appendix I), which are levied as a fixed
fraction c of consumption (before tax). Combining (1) and (2), we have consumption as a
function of weekly employer cost and weeks worked:

                                      1 − 𝜏𝑒      𝜏𝑒 𝑃𝑇 + 𝜏𝑓 𝑆𝑇
               (1 + 𝜏𝑐 )𝑐𝑖 = 52𝑈𝐵𝑖 + [       𝑦𝑖 +               − 𝑈𝐵𝑖 ] 𝑛𝑖
                                      1 + 𝜏𝑓          1 + 𝜏𝑓
                                                                                                                (3)
                                                   𝑦𝑖     𝜏𝑓
                                 − 𝑃𝐼𝑇 (52𝑈𝐵𝑖 + [      +       𝑆𝑇 − 𝑈𝐵𝑖 ] 𝑛𝑖 )
                                                 1 + 𝜏𝑓 1 + 𝜏𝑓



The consumption tax rate is assumed to be constant across workers, but UB varies across
workers due to family composition and housing expenses.

        As indicated in equations (1) and (2), a fixed amount of earnings – the “primary” and
“secondary” thresholds (PT and ST, respectively) – can be earned without any NIC owed by
employee or employer.9 The NIC system is therefore equivalent to a truly flat-rate payroll tax
(specifically, without any PT or ST) plus a refund of a fixed amount to each employee and
employer equal to the flat-rate tax that accrued on the first PT (or ST) of earnings. Equation (3)



6
  UBi is zero for someone who is not a job seeker during the weeks that they are not employed. Job seekers
allowances are taxable by the personal income tax, which is why the UB term also appears inside the PIT term.
7
  I abstract from the fact that the personal income tax schedule varies across workers according to their nonlabor
income. I also do not model council tax credits. Over the range of family situations considered in this paper, the
child benefit (not to be confused with the child tax credit) is a flat amount and thereby does not create work
disincentives at the margin.
8
  Technically, the thresholds are different for employee and employer. In fact, PT = ST in 2001-10 and 2014 and
within 1-3 pounds per week (out of 139 or more) in the intervening years (HM Revenue and Customs, 2014a).
9
  As with the U.S. Social Security contributions, the U.K. caps a significant part of its NICs, except that the U.K.
caps are administered per pay period (e.g., weekly) rather than annually. The capped payments, beginning at what is
known as the “upper earnings limit” (UEL) is about 75 percent more than the median weekly earnings of full-time
employees. The UEL and its changes are discussed below in connection with personal income tax thresholds.
                                                                                                                  4
separates the “flat-rate” component from the PT-ST-refund component, with the former
represented by the yi terms and the latter by the ratio with PT and ST in the numerator.

         The U.K. personal income tax is a function of personal income above the “personal
allowance.” There are multiple tax brackets, some of which are created by the phaseout of the
personal allowance. All of these are represented by my PIT notation.

         Unlike U.S. Social Security contributions, the NICs thresholds and rates are administered
each pay period (e.g., weekly) without regard for earnings accumulated so far during the tax
year. As a result, equation (3)’s PT and ST terms enter the budget constraint in the same way
that the UB term does, except with the opposite sign. In effect, the PT-ST-refund component of
my two-part representation of the NIC is, by itself, a weekly employment subsidy.

         An additional week of employment creates value yi, some of which goes to the employee
(to finance additional consumption) and the rest of which goes to the public treasury in the forms
of additional taxes, credits not paid, and other benefits not paid. The employment tax wedge qi is
the public-treasury portion of this value, expressed as a share of weekly employer cost:10

               𝜕𝑐
          𝑦𝑖 − 𝜕𝑛𝑖      1          𝜏𝑖 + 𝜏𝑒 + 𝜏𝑓              𝑈𝐵𝑖 𝜏𝑒 𝑃𝑇 + (1 − 𝜏𝑖 )𝜏𝑓 𝑆𝑇
                  𝑖                                                                                                 (4)
     𝑞𝑖 ≡           =        (𝜏𝑐 +              + ( 1 − 𝜏𝑖 )     −                      )
             𝑦𝑖       1 + 𝜏𝑐          1 + 𝜏𝑓                  𝑦𝑖      (1 + 𝜏𝑓 )𝑦𝑖



where i denotes worker i’s PIT bracket. The PIT brackets vary across workers according to the
amount they earn for the year, although a majority of workers are in the “basic rate” bracket of
20 or 22 percent (depending on the year) plus, for some of the basic-rate workers, a phaseout of
tax credits.11

         Equation (4) has a consumption-tax term multiplying the UB, PT, and ST terms (as well
as the others), thereby giving the impression that a consumption tax increase would reduce the

10
   This is a wedge between productivity y (on the margin of weeks worked) and the worker’s marginal benefit. In a
static model such as equation (2), the latter is the marginal effect on consumption c/n. However, especially when
tax rates vary over time, a worker in a dynamic model may take some of the benefit in terms of future consumption
or leisure. In either model, the worker’s marginal benefit can be interpreted as the marginal rate of consumption-
leisure substitution (in utility) and the tax wedge (4), calculated in this paper, is properly compared with the “labor
wedge” measured from household behavior (Mulligan 2012). As always, it should, for the purpose of this
comparison, be noted whether the consumption expenditure ingredient in the labor wedge includes sales taxes.
11
   HM Revenue and Customs (2014c, Table 2.1).
                                                                                                                      5
contribution of the UB, PT, and ST terms to the tax wedge.                      However, because jobless
allowances and the NIC thresholds are automatically indexed to consumer-price inflation, and
employer cost y is not, the contribution of these two terms to the wedge is independent of the
consumption tax as long as the consumption tax is passed through one-for-one into consumer
prices. 12 To put it another way, the consumption tax rate is expected to increase each ratio UB/y,
PT/y, and ST/y in the same proportion that it reduces the ratio 1/(1+c).




        B. Legislative Changes since 2007: Wage Income Tax Brackets

        Each of equation (4)’s statutory parameters changed after 2007. Moreover, real employer
costs y were changing relative to the sterling-denominated and inflation-adjusted statutory
parameters such as the jobless allowance and the PT. As I show below, many of the parameter
changes are offsetting – perhaps by design – in terms of their effects on the employment tax
wedge q. Because of the various offsets, the VAT (value-added tax) and tax credit changes
ultimately drive most of the changes in the tax wedge.

        Beginning at 17.5 percent, the standard VAT rate was temporarily cut to 15.0 percent for
the last month of 2008 and the entire calendar year of 2009.13 It was 17.5 percent again in 2010.
On January 4, 2011, the rate was permanently increased 20 percent where it is now. The UK
VAT increases are especially interesting for the purposes of labor market analysis because a
VAT reduces the purchasing power of wages without reducing the purchasing power of jobless
benefits because the latter are indexed to the consumer price index (CPI).

        The UK made several adjustments to its personal income tax on earnings, which has been
a three or four-bracket system (plus implicit brackets for the phaseouts of tax credits and the
personal allowance). Effective April 2008, the bottom two non-zero brackets of 10 percent and
22 percent were combined into a single 20 percent bracket, as it is today. Effective April 2010,
the personal allowance was phased out beginning at £100,000 and the upper bracket of 40
percent was split in two brackets: 40 percent and 50 percent. A year later, the income threshold
separating the 20 and 40 percent bracket was cut by three percent in nominal terms (seven

12
   Unemployment benefits were once indexed to the Retail Prices Index and now to the Consumer Price Index. This
paper does not isolate the short-term incentive consequences of that change.
13
   For the dates of VAT rate changes see HM Revenue and Customs (2014b) and KPMG (2013).
                                                                                                              6
percent in real terms), thereby creating a group of taxpayers who experienced a twenty
percentage point increase in their bracket. The 50 percent bracket rate was cut to 45 percent
effective April 2013. 14

        The 2010 income tax changes helped harmonize the PIT with the NIC and thereby
produce a more uniform combined marginal tax rate schedule among most full-year workers.
Figure 2 shows those combined rates (excluding tax credit phaseouts – more on these below) as
summarized on the vertical axis by the first ratio term inside equation (4)’s parentheses. The
horizontal axis shows employer cost, which is the sum of the worker’s annual earnings and the
employer NICs. The black-dotted schedule is from tax year 2007. The schedule dips sharply
between about £42,000 and £49,000 because those workers had exceeded the upper earnings
limit for the NIC but still had low enough income that their PIT bracket had not jumped from 20
to 40 percent.15 By 2009, these two thresholds were, up to rounding error, identical for a full-
year worker.16 These rounding errors are seen as the thin spikes in the red and blue series. 17

        [Figure 2 here]

        One result of the ongoing harmonization of thresholds is that the 2010 and 2011 cuts to
the real-income threshold between the 20- and 40-percent PIT brackets only increased overall
marginal rates by about 10 percentage points for taxpayers with incomes between the old and
new thresholds because much of their 20-point PIT marginal rate increase was offset by being
moved into a lesser marginal NIC rate.

        Effective April 2011, one percentage point was added to both the employer NIC and the
employee NIC (HM Revenue and Customs 2014a). For the workers (they are a majority of
taxpayers and have annual employer cost between £7,000 and £43,000) that would have been in
the 22 percent personal income bracket under 2007 law, the additions to the marginal NIC rate

14
   For the rate changes noted in this paragraph, see HM Revenue and Customs (2014d, 2014e).
15
   The upper earnings limit is analogous to the American earnings cap – a much lower NIC rate applies above the
cap. Note that the upper earnings limit (£817 per week after the cut) was significantly above median weekly
earnings.
16
   Even after 2008, the two thresholds were not harmonized for part-year workers (see Appendix II) because the NIC
is administered according to the pay interval whereas the personal income tax is based on year-to-date earnings.
17
   The threshold between the 20 and 40 percent brackets is an annual income amount, and is not necessarily evenly
divisible by 52 weeks. At the lowest incomes, the PIT and NICs became less harmonized for full-year workers
because the PIT’s personal allowance is no longer equal to 52 times the NIC’s primary threshold. This change is
reflected in Figure 2 for annual employer cost below £11,000 as 2009-11 schedules that go from 0 percent to 30 or
more in multiple (albeit, barely visible) steps.
                                                                                                                7
almost exactly offset the 2-percentage point PIT cut after 2007. As a result, the solid-blue and
black-dotted schedules almost coincide in that range, with the blue 2011 schedule located just 0.4
percentage points below the 2007 schedule.

         Among the relatively few high-income taxpayers, the combined contribution of the PIT
and NIC changes has been to increase the employment tax wedge. The contribution of these PIT
and NIC changes to the overall average employment tax wedge is essentially zero.

         In order to highlight the harmonization of the PIT and NIC brackets, Figure 2 excludes
the phaseout of “tax credits.” Two main tax credits are paid to households: working tax credits
(WTCs) and child tax credits (CTCs). Both credits are a function of annual household income,
and prorated according to the beneficiary’s payment period (weekly or every four weeks). 18 In
2014, the full credits apply for annual household incomes between £0 and £6,420 (HM Treasury
2013). The WTC is phased out between £6,420 and about £18,000, depending on household
circumstances, and at the same rate as the CTCs. Without beginning to count spousal income or
income from job seekers allowances, someone earning the median wage in a full-time full-year
job (hereafter “the median”) would earn about £23,000 and therefore not receive any working tax
credit on the weekly employment margin (4) unless he was out of work much of the year and did
not have significant income from other sources.19                   For this reason, this paper gives more
attention to the CTCs, which are phased out above annual household income of £18,000 (or so,
depending on circumstances) until about £26,000 for one child and £33,000 for two children.20

         Figure 3 shows the income ranges over which CTCs were phased out, in selected years.
Relative to the median wage, the phase-out range widened somewhat between 2007 and 2013.
By 2013, a household with 2 children could have an income of up to £32,400 (at the median
wage, an individual’s 2013 full-time full-year earnings would be only about £22,000) and still be

18
   The tax credits are paid directly to beneficiaries (HM Government 2015a) whereas personal income taxes and
NICs are administered through employers.
19
   The quarterly time series for the median hourly wage among full-time employees is from Office for National
Statistics (2014a).
20
   The child tax credits are not contingent on work. In principle, the working tax credits (WTCs) are withheld
during weeks not at work (with an exception for a four-week spell in between jobs). As a result, if annual income
qualifies a worker for a positive WTC, the WTC has both a positive and negative effect on the weekly employment
tax wedge. The positive-tax effect comes from the effect of a week’s employment on annual income and therefore
the weekly amount of WTC to be received during times of employment. The magnitude of the positive tax effect
depends on the phase-out rate and the number of weeks during the year the person is at work (i.e., equation (4) itself
would depend on n). The negative-tax effect comes from the withholding of WTC payments during weeks not
employed and, for the reasons noted below, is not relevant for my calculations.
                                                                                                                     8
receiving some CTC.21 But the more significant change has been in the increase in the phase-out
rate from 37 percent to 41 percent. As I show below, these four percentage points are a large
part of the work incentive because already in 2007 workers paying the basic rate and receiving
CTC were keeping only 20 percent of their employer’s cost at the margin.

         [Figure 3 here]

         In summary, VAT rates, NIC parameters, personal income tax rules, and tax credit rules
all changed after 2007. The next step is to use equation (4) to determine the direction and
quantitative importance of the changes for incentives to be employed.




         C. Changes since 2007: Overall Employment Tax Rates

         Employment during a week creates income for the tax year and for this reason alone
creates income and payroll tax liabilities – at the rates displayed in the previous section. In
addition, employment is implicitly subsidized by the threshold amounts in the NIC rules and
implicitly taxed by the opportunity for unemployment benefits during weeks not working. The
economic importance of these three policy parameters, represented as UB, PT, and ST in
equations (3) and (4), varies inversely with employer cost y. Table 1 displays each of these
parameters for tax years 2010 and 2011, when some of the larger changes went into effect.

         The top three rows are the NIC parameters. Both employer and employee rates increased
between 2010 and 2011, which made each pound of primary and secondary threshold more
valuable. Moreover, the two thresholds were increased by more than £25 per week. As shown
in the table’s third row, the combination of these changes resulted in a 5.9-pound increase in the
value (in terms of tax savings) of the primary threshold between 2010 and 2011, adjusted for
inflation.

         The next row is the job seekers allowance (JSA). Adjusted for inflation, it fell about one
pound. The difference between the fourth and third rows is the net implicit weekly employment

21
  For simplicity, Figure 2 assumes that, for all years 2007-13, the phaseout of the family element of the CTC begins
exactly at the income level for which the rest of the CTC is exhausted. In practice, this harmonization of phaseout
ranges did not take effect until 2012. Before that, there were incomes for which all of the child element, but none of
the family element, was phased out. Note that Figure 2’s simplifying assumption is of little quantitative significance
because the amount of the family element is less than one quarter of the full CTC amount.
                                                                                                                    9
tax created by the JSA and NIC, holding annual income constant. It fell about seven pounds per
week, adjusted for inflation. Both the JSA and ST values are adjusted for personal income taxes
as specified by equation (4).

         As with any employment tax, the economic importance of the employment taxes shown
in Table 1 depends on their magnitudes relative to the value created by a week of work, which I
measure as employer cost for a 40-hour week at the median of the hourly wage distribution for
full-time workers.22 The next two rows in the Table therefore express the employment taxes as a
percentage of the 2010-11 average employer cost. By this measure of change, which is entirely a
function of the inflation-adjusted statutory parameters, employment tax rates fell more than one
percentage point between 2010 and 2011.

         Real wages and real employer cost were falling during this period, which means that each
pound of implicit employment tax became economically more important over time. I account for
this change by using the variable-weight measures shown in the final row of the table, which use
year-specific employer cost for the ratios PT/y and UB/y. By comparison with the previous row,
we see that falling real employer cost partly, but not fully, offsets the contribution of the growing
value of the NIC thresholds to the weekly employment tax.

         The tax-wedge equation (4) features the sum of four terms inside the parentheses. Figure
4 displays the three non-consumption-tax terms as red, blue, and green, respectively. 23 For the
purpose of calculating the JSA and PT/ST terms, y is taken to be the weekly employer cost of the
median worker (the same as in Table 1). 30 percentage points are added to the JSA term so that
it can be plotted on the same scale as the PIT-NIC term. The policy parameter changes noted
above are readily seen in the figure: the PIT’s basic rate reduction in 2008 (red series), the 2011
addition to the NIC rates (red series), and the 2011 enhancement of the value of the PT (green
series). The PIT-NIC series ends the time period essentially where it began, which leaves the net
effect of the other two terms. The JSA term rises because employer costs grow less than the CPI
(likely the VAT hike had something to do with that).

         [Figure 4 here]

22
   Weekly employer cost is taken to be 40*(median hourly wage) + (weekly employer NIC, accounting for the
secondary threshold).
23
   The (2010 and 2011 values of the) sum of Figure 4’s blue and green series is shown in the last row of Table 1.
                                                                                                                    10
         As with the other tax calculations in this paper, Figure 4 does not include housing
allowances for the unemployed.              The changes over time would be the same if housing
allowances had been included and stayed in a fixed proportion with the weekly employer cost of
the median worker. See Adam and Browne (2013) for discussion of housing allowance policy
changes and Appendix II for list of tax and benefit programs that are included in this paper’s
calculations.

         Table 2’s first column lists all of the tax and benefit programs that contribute to my
calculation of the U.K. employment tax wedge according to equation (4). Among basic rate
payers (of the personal income tax), the only reasons that the results of equation (4) vary across
U.K. workers are: (a) some are having their credits phased out while others are not, (b) they have
different employer cost y, and (c) persons who are both married and long-term unemployed may
receive more JSA than the others do. Of these, only the credit phaseouts are quantitatively
important for determining incentive changes over time. 24 Figure 5 puts all of equation (4)’s
pieces together and shows the log change in the after tax share (1-q) among married basic-rate
payers, separately by employer cost and credit-phaseout status.25 A low-wage (high-wage)
worker refers to one with weekly employer cost 0.4 below (above) the median worker,
respectively.26

         [Table 2 here]


24
   Item (c) refers to the income-based JSA, which is examined in Appendix II. The rest of the paper considers only
the contributory JSA, the amount of which does not depend on marital status (HM Government 2015b).
25
   For some behavioral analysis, the JSA’s should be discounted relative to the PT because the PT affects all
workers, whereas only some of those out of work receive a JSA. During this period, however, changes in JSA per
capita were very close in magnitude to changes in both employment and unemployment (BBC 2015, Office for
National Statistics 2014b). Also note that the level of q matters for Figure 5, which means that the magnitude of the
changes would tend to be greater if housing allowances were included in my estimates.
26
   For low-wage workers, the withholding of WTC during weeks of nonemployment may be relevant, even while it
is not included in my calculations. There are a couple of reasons why it might not be relevant: (a) the worker’s
WTC is zero because annual family income is at least 80 percent of full-time full-year earnings at the median hourly
wage, (b) the worker’s spell between jobs is four weeks or less, or (c) the worker does not or cannot claim WTC
even during weeks of employment (e.g., because the spouse already claims the credit). Moreover, even when
relevant, the withholding of WTC hardly effects incentive changes over time because the WTC amount was not
significantly changed relative to wages.
          Beginning in 2013, the child benefit (not to be confused with tax credits) began to be phased out based on
the annual income of the adult receiving it. This is a new disincentive for workers with annual incomes between
£50,000 and £60,000, which is more than twice the annual income obtained by working full-time full-year at the
median hourly wage (among full-time workers). As a result, the new disincentive, which can add significantly more
than ten percentage points to the marginal tax rate, depending on the number of children, is not reflected in any of
this paper’s exhibits.
                                                                                                                  11
       [Figure 5 here]

       Among those with credits fully phased out (dashed series in Figure 5), the changes are
essentially the same for low-and high-wage workers. The dashed series end in 2013 about where
they began because the consumption tax increase (driven by the VAT change) tends to offset the
combined reduction represented as the sum of Figure 4’s three series. The low-wage dashed
series finished slightly above the high-wage series because the £5 weekly reduction in the tax
value of (JSA  tax value of PT and ST) is a somewhat greater percentage of employer cost for
low-wage employees. Both series have a temporary increase in 2008 and 2009 because of the
temporary VAT cut and because the PIT’s basic rate cut was sudden, and sooner, compared with
the changes in employer cost and the higher NIC rates that would come later.

       The solid series shows incentive changes for “on-credits” individuals with a decision to
work one week more (or less) during the year that affects the amount of their child tax credit.
Specifically, on-credits individuals receive a credit if they work more, but less credit than they
would receive if working less. For them, the reward to working falls significantly because the
benefit reduction rate after 2010 was four points greater than it was in 2007 when their after-tax
share was already as low as 20 percent. The increase in 2008 and 2009 is less than it is for those
“off credits” because the benefit reduction rate increase in 2008 was offsetting the
contemporaneous cut in the basic rate. Lesser employment disincentives emerge for low-wage
workers because the combined value of the NIC thresholds is a nontrivial incentive for them to
work and this value increased after 2007 (recall Figure 4’s green PT/ST series).

       As shown in Figure 3, the threshold for CTCs did not change in exact proportions with
the median wage, which means that even a worker whose wage tracked the median might receive
credits in later years but not in earlier years, or vice versa. Figure 5 omits such workers, but their
incentive changes would be massive because equation (4) evaluated without credit phaseout is
about 55 percent whereas the value with credit phaseout exceeds 80 percent.               These two
situations are relatively rare, though, because the thresholds did not change much relative to the
median wage.




                                                                                                   12
        D. Comparison with previous studies

        Adam and Browne (2013) also look at changes in work incentives between 2010 and
(their forecast for) 2015. The three main differences between our studies are (a) the baseline
against which policies are compared, (b) the type of incentive(s) that we measure, and (c) the
types of individuals considered. On the first point, both their paper and mine note that “earnings
have increased less quickly than benefit rates, which tends to make working less attractive”
(Adam and Browne 2013, p. 1). Equivalently, benefit rates have increased more than wage rates:
is that a policy change or not? This is merely a question of definition, and I refer to any change
in benefit rates relative to wages as a policy change even if prior law would have it that way.
Moreover, because benefit rates have increased relative to wages but decreased relative to the
Retail Price Index (RPI, which prior law had used for indexing benefits), policy reduced the
reward to work by my definition (ignoring the other statutory changes noted above).

        The second difference from Adam and Browne (2013), and from OECD (2012), is that I
calculate (the change in) the reward to working an additional week for people who already work
part of the tax year, which is different than the change in the reward to working an entire tax year
rather than not working at all. 27 An increase in the personal allowance does not affect the reward
to working an additional week except for the small group of people who are working so little
during the year that they have not used up their personal allowance. Or consider a person
earning, for the tax year, in the 20-percent bracket with an income just below the threshold for
the 40-percent bracket. A reduction in that threshold hardly affects the reward to working at all
during the tax year but doubles the disincentive from the income tax for working an additional
week.

        My sample excludes persons not working at all during the year, whereas Adam and
Browne include them. The difference is important because “The majority of the welfare reforms
involve changing the maximum amount of means-tested support that can be received by those
with no other income” (Adam and Browne 2013, p. 10). Persons not working at all during a tax

27
  The reward to working an additional week has a lot in common with the reward to earning more per week, which
Adam and Brown (2013) call the EMTR, except that the latter does not reflect foregone unemployment benefits or
the value of the NIC thresholds. As a result, they find the EMTR to be essentially constant after 2010, whereas my
reward measure falls somewhat, in part because of the contribution of foregone unemployment benefits.
                                                                                                                13
year may not be close to the margin for working in the short run and are thereby less interesting
for short-run behavioral analysis, although excluding them altogether (as I do) errs in the
opposite direction. 28 I look at a variety of skill levels, but, unlike Adam and Browne, not
deviations from the median wage that are so large that some of the workers are still receiving
working tax credits. As a result the phaseout of credits is important for contributing to the time
pattern shown in Figure 5 for workers “on credits.”

        Because the labor market features a rich variety of circumstances and alternative work
situations, all of the tax rate measures are relevant for behavioral analysis. The additional-week
measure deserves some attention for the purpose of understanding employee and employer
decisions of how long to maintain a job or to endure a period of joblessness, which are decisions
that are relevant for business cycle purposes. My paper is also unique in its display of year-to-
year tax-wedge dynamics after 2007.

        The overall level of disincentives is not a focus of this paper or Adam and Browne’s. I
report comparatively higher levels (80+ percent is not uncommon) because of my focus on the
weekly employment margin (e.g., including JSA as an implicit tax) and perhaps because of my
treatment of indirect taxes. Appendix I details my measurement of, and economic assumptions
about, various indirect taxes.




28
  It is also difficult to know what a person not working during the tax year would have earned if he had worked.
This problem is alleviated, but not absent, in samples of workers; we do not know for sure what a worker would
have earned if he had gone back to work a week earlier or had left employment a week later.
                                                                                                                   14
     II.      Fiscal Policy and the Reward to Work: the United States


           The U.S. and the U.K. have broadly similar policy types affecting the reward to work:
payroll taxes, personal income taxes, consumption taxes, unemployment benefits, and safety net
program benefits (recall Table 2). But they differ in terms of administrative details. The U.S.
payroll tax, alternately known as “Social Security contributions” or “old age, survivors,
disability, and hospital insurance contributions,” is administered on a calendar-year basis – as
compared to weekly (or pay period) in the U.K. – and has no analogue to the primary and
secondary thresholds. The U.S. personal income tax is also administered on a calendar-year
basis, and has a bracket structure broadly similar to the U.K., including an annual amount that
can be earned free from personal income tax.

           The U.S. personal income tax includes an “Earned Income Tax Credit” (EITC) that
roughly resembles the U.K.’s Working and Child Tax Credits. 29 In both countries, working full-
time full-year at or near the median wage would still qualify a person for a partial credit, at least
if she had two qualifying children. The EITC is phased out at 7.7 percent for those without
children, 16.0 percent for one-child, 21.1 percent for more than one child, as compared to 41
percent for the U.K. tax credits (Tax Policy Center 2014, rounded to the nearest tenth of a
percentage point). Unlike the U.K. credit phase-out rate, the EITC phase-out rates did not
change after 2007. The EITC phase-out ranges were little changed (see Mulligan 2012 for more
discussion of temporary changes to EITC amounts and thresholds). Other safety net programs
such as Supplemental Security Income and TANF affect tax-wedge levels, but not tax-wedge
changes, because the programs did not have significant changes in their eligibility or benefit
rules. For these reasons, the estimates here of the changes in U.S. work incentives after 2007
consider only food stamps, UI and related programs, health insurance assistance and the payroll
tax (more on these below).




29
  For the purposes of considering non-poor workers, the CTC is a better analogy to the EITC because neither is
withheld during weeks not at work. In both countries, the income concept for tax credits is essentially the same as
the income subject to personal income tax, even though the U.K.’s tax credits are administered as separate benefit
programs.
                                                                                                                  15
         The U.S. unemployment insurance (UI) program offers weekly cash benefits to people
who have lost their jobs and have as yet been unable to start a new one. The benefits expire after
six months, even if the claimant continues to be out of work, although the time of expiration has
been extended during recessions, especially the most recent one. Because UI is contingent on
employment status, it is implicitly an employment tax, as it is in the U.K. The U.S. cash-benefit
system has, at times, included additional kinds of assistance, as noted below.

         The governments in both countries spend on healthcare, but in the U.S. the assistance
creates disincentives because it is income and/or employment tested. Prior to 2014, the bulk of
this assistance for nonelderly people came from the Medicaid program, which is jointly
administered by state and federal governments. In this paper’s study of incentives 2007-13,
Medicaid is treated as a tax on income (and thereby employment) that is constant over time and
disproportionately applicable to unmarried and low-income people.

         The Department of Agriculture’s food stamp program, now known as Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance (SNAP), provides funds to low-income households for the purpose of
buying food. SNAP benefits are potentially available to households earning less than 130 percent
of the prior year poverty line, which is adjusted every fiscal year according to the rate of
inflation. 30 Traditionally, food stamps were also denied to households based on asset ownership
and the program required states to ensure that a sufficient fraction of the able-bodied adult
participants were employed.

         With the exception of a partial payroll tax holiday in 2011 and 2012, few American
taxpayers saw a significant change in the personal income or payroll tax rules during the years
2007-13. But several safety net benefit rules were changed after 2007 in ways that created new
implicit taxes on earnings and employment.                      Most of those rule changes related to
unemployment insurance and SNAP.

         A variety of legislation after 2007 temporarily and significantly added to the weekly
amount of benefits and the duration of time that they could be received, and thereby temporarily



30
  The federal government’s fiscal year is the year ending September 30. The fiscal year indicates when safety net
benefit program parameters are reset, and the nature of the federal budgeting, but not the time frame for performing
the income test.
                                                                                                                  16
increased the tax wedge on employment.31 New legislation also made it easier to claim benefits.
Before the recession, the amount of the UI benefit was about half of the amount earned on the
prior job, up to a state-specific cap amount that tends to be about 60 percent of the median wage.
Although the benefit amounts prior to the recession tended to be proportional to earnings on the
job held before the unemployment spell, the temporary benefit additions were either fixed
weekly dollar amount or a fixed amount of in-kind assistance.                      Thus, with respect to the
employment tax wedge equation (4), the UI benefit rule changes have a lot in common with an
increase in the UB term, which tends to be more significant for low-skill workers (they have a
lesser value for employer cost y). The benefit-duration and other eligibility changes look more
like an increase in UB that is proportional to y, at least for unemployed persons receiving less
than the benefit cap.

        A variety of legislation in and around the recession effectively eliminated some of the
long-standing barriers to SNAP eligibility and participation, leaving primarily the household
income test. The time interval for the income test is not required to be the calendar year, which
means that now many workers who are not poor or near poor while they are employed can
qualify for food stamps during periods that they are out of work. In this regard, the food stamp
rule changes have a lot in common with an increase in equation (4)’s UB term. As such, the
increase is more significant for low-skill workers. However, the UB change associated with food
stamps is less important for married workers because the program’s income test considers the
sum of husband and wife income.

        Figure 6 shows Mulligan’s (2013) results for incentive changes between 2007 and 2010
among non-elderly household heads and spouses, as a function of marital status and potential
monthly earnings, and rescaled to focus on the employment margin.32                         Figure 6 defines a
person’s potential earnings to be what each person would earn in a month of full-time work, as
predicted by their demographic characteristics in a Current Population Survey sample of full-
time working non-elderly household heads and spouses. The middle group in each marital status


31
   The temporary benefit and eligibility rules for UI and food stamps are too numerous to itemize here: see Mulligan
(2012), especially chapter 3.
32
   The tax rates shown in Mulligan (2013) are composites of employment (2/3) and weekly hours (1/3) tax rates.
This paper is focused on employment tax rates only, so Figure 6 reports just the employment component of Mulligan
(2013)’s composite. Because hardly any of the composite tax rate changes come from weekly-hours tax rate
changes, the results in Figure 6 are essentially Mulligan (2013, Figure 7) scaled by 3/2.
                                                                                                                 17
category has weekly earnings potential of $727 plus fringes (that is, $3,148 per month plus
fringes), which is what the median employed non-elderly household head and spouse earned in
constant (fiscal year 2010) dollars during the 2007 Current Population Survey reference weeks.
The other groups have weekly earnings potential of $487, $595, $887, and $1084, which differ
from the middle group’s potential by about -0.4, -0.2, 0.2, and 0.4 log points, respectively. The
vertical axis measures the change in the tax on working in percentage points of employer cost. 33
The Figure also decomposes each group’s employment wedge change into the contributions of
five types program expansions.

         [Figure 6 here]

         All groups had their work incentives eroded between 2007 and 2010, but the amount was
less for married people. In percentage points, the changes are fairly uniform across married skill
groups – except the top one. The changes tend to fall with skill among the unmarried, although
the most skilled unmarried groups still has a change that is similar to even the less-skilled
married groups. In contrast, the more meaningful distinction in the U.K. is having children,
because that raises the possibility of having a partial child tax credit and the 41 percent phase-out
rate that goes with it. British workers without children have incentive changes that are hardly
correlated with skill (and close to zero for the full period 2007-13, as seen in Figure 5 by
comparing the two dashed series.

         Some of the lesser temporary American program expansions began to expire in 2010,
although a significant fraction of the temporary elevation of work disincentives remained until
December 2013 when the maximum allowed duration of unemployment benefits return to its
pre-recession level. But that did not return work disincentives to their previous levels, because
some of the expansions of food stamps and unemployment insurance were permanent, or at least
long lived. 34

         More important, the 2010 Affordable Care Act began in 2014 to pay its most significant
health insurance subsidies. These subsidies are both income tested and employment tested, and
for both reasons have sharply increased work disincentives relative to what they would have

33
   That is, it is the absolute change in q as represented in equation (4).
34
   Food stamp work requirements have been repeatedly waved since 2009 (Mulligan 2015b). Other food stamp
eligibility expansions are permanent in that new legislation would be required for them to return to the pre-recession
eligibility rules.
                                                                                                                   18
been without the law (Mulligan 2014).35 Holding age constant, the ACA disincentives are
greater for low-skill workers, even among married workers. Somewhat fewer married-worker
disincentives are created by the ACA, but not to the degree as with the temporary programs
featured in Figure 5. The disincentives are not monotone with age because older workers are
more skilled but also have greater health expenses that can be subsidized (Mulligan 2015a).




     III.      Conclusions


            The U.S. and the U.K. implemented different fiscal policy changes in the years following
the worldwide financial crisis. The U.S. created or expanded a number of safety net programs
that eroded the reward to work by adding to implicit employment and income taxes. The U.S.
implicit tax changes were faced by a large number of workers, but the disincentives were most
pronounced among unmarried workers. The U.K. changes 2007-13 were less, even for the
relatively small fraction of the workforce facing the new and higher tax credit phase-out rate.
The U.K. had a fiscal stimulus package too, but it involved cutting marginal tax rates on both
personal income and consumption. This difference suggests that the labor market effects of
stimulus packages may differ significantly in magntitude, if not direction, according to the
microeconomic incentives that they create.

            The U.K. tax wedge increased later during the so-called austerity period, leaving it about
where it was before the recession, at least for workers not receiving tax credits. High-income
taxpayers are not the focus of this paper, but the results herein show that the U.K. was unique by
significantly increasing marginal income tax rates for some of them during the 2007-13 time
frame. This suggests that benefit-cutting policies may increase marginal tax rates, especially if
the benefit cuts primarily relate to people with relatively high employment rates or incomes.
Ironically, both austerity and stimulus may create work disincentives.

            Figure 7’s dotted series display quarterly indexes of real employer cost for the median
American worker (blue) and the median British worker (red). The purpose of showing employer

35
  The ACA disincentives more than offset the incentives that were created by the expiration of the aforementioned
temporary assistance programs.
                                                                                                               19
cost is to show the “before-tax wage”, so the British series is deflated with an adjusted CPI that
reflects what the CPI would be if the value-added tax rate had remained constant.36 Both series
are calculated relative to a 0.5 percent per year trend, which is the trend that is consistent with
the U.S. average growth rate of total factor productivity during the four years prior to the
recession. One difference between the two countries is that employer cost rose somewhat above
trend in the U.S. while it fell below trend in the U.K. It is also notable that the downward trend
of real British employer cost is fairly linear once we adjust for the consumption tax rate (as in
Figure 7).

         [Figure 7 here]

         Due to taxation, some of employer cost goes to the public treasury rather than employees
as a reward for their working. The two solid series are an index of the employee reward,
calculated as employer cost times one minus the employment tax wedge. 37 The British reward
series temporarily moves above the corresponding employer cost series as the U.K. temporarily
cut its VAT tax and made personal income tax rate cuts a couple of years before other types of
rate increases would be implemented. Ultimately the two U.K. series finish close to each other
because the employment tax wedge ultimately returns near to what it was in 2007. The U.S.
follows a very different pattern, with the reward index falling far below the employer cost index
in the early years of the recession.

         The two countries’ reward indices finish near each other: well below trend. However,
because the two reward indices fall below trend for fundamentally different economic reasons,
we should not expect employment changes in the two countries to have much in common. The
British reward fell below trend because employer cost fell below trend, whereas the American
reward fell below trend because of a tax wedge that was greater at the end of the period than it
was before the recession.          The tax wedge is symptomatic of redistribution, which has an
aggregate income effect on labor supply of ambiguous sign and probably small magnitude. To
the extent that falling employer cost in the U.K. reflects low productivity growth or an adverse


36
  The adjusted CPI is the official CPI times one plus the consumption tax rate.
37
  In the notation of the paper, the employee reward is (1-q)y. The paper calculates two q series for the median
worker in each country: on credits versus off credits for the U.K. and single versus married for the U.S. For the
purpose of preparing Figure 7, a fixed-weighted average of the two series are used according to the proportions of
each situation in the adult population.
                                                                                                                     20
change in the country’s international terms of trade, it has income and substitution effects on
labor supply that go in opposite directions.

           In this way, country-specific employment tax wedge time series are a first of many
ingredients for cross-country comparisons of labor market dynamics during and after the
financial crisis. At this point, the results of this paper at least suggest the possibility that
different fiscal policies in the U.S. and U.K. may have contributed to the different employment
dynamics shown in Figure 1.




     IV.      Appendix I: Indirect Tax Rate Changes in the U.K.


           This appendix describes the paper’s treatment of non-VAT indirect taxes and VAT
exemptions for the purposes of measuring labor market tax wedges. Almost as much indirect tax
revenue is obtained from non-VAT taxes as from VAT taxes. On average between 2003 and
2007 (the five years prior to the crisis), fuel duty revenue was 32 percent of VAT revenue.
Tobacco duty revenue was 11 percent. “Other” revenue, including alcohol duties and other
excise taxes, was 44 percent, for a combined total of 86 percent of VAT revenue. Moreover, the
rates of the two largest excise taxes – fuel and tobacco – changed significantly. 38

           The excise taxes tend to be multiplicative with the VAT. Suppose, for example, that a
pack of cigarettes would cost £3 at retail without indirect taxes. Assuming 100% pass-through, a
£2-per-pack specific excise tax (paid somewhere in the supply chain) would by itself make the
retail price £5. Adding a 20% VAT, to be paid by the seller, would make the total price £6,
whereas the VAT-inclusive price absent excise tax would be £3.60. In the case of tobacco, there

38
  Fuel and tobacco duty changes are the only non-VAT indirect tax rate changes considered in this paper.
According to Institute for Fiscal Studies (2015), a few other changes occurred 2008-13: alcohol duties increased by
6% in real terms in 2008 and then 2% in real terms each subsequent year until 2013 (partial reversals followed in
2013), a 2011 change in the carbon price floor for electricity generation, a new stamp duty land tax rate on large
properties, and 2012 changes to vehicle excise duties. These changes are of less aggregate importance than those for
fuel and tobacco.
                                                                                                                 21
is also an ad valorem excise tax, which is multiplicative as well because it includes both the
specific tax and the VAT tax as part of its base.

         Given the VAT’s multiplicative implementation, the relative prices of excisable goods
can be calculated without regard for the VAT. For fuel (specifically, unleaded petrol purchased
at retail) and tobacco (specifically, a typically-price pack of cigarettes) in April 2007, I
calculated the ratio of the specific excise rate to the non-tax revenue per unit sold at retail. 39 This
ratio was made into a monthly time series according to proportional changes over time in the
CPI-adjusted excise rate applicable on the first day of the month. One was added to transform
the ratio into a pricing factor. The tobacco-pricing factor was adjusted again by multiplying by
one plus the applicable ad valorem tobacco excise tax. Tax-year averages of the fuel and
tobacco pricing factors are displayed in Figure 8. The tobacco factor rises, especially after 2009,
whereas the fuel factor falls. Both changes are due to changes in the legislated specific tax rates
relative to the CPI.

         [Figure 8 here]

         Because the purpose of this paper is to calculate tax rates that would be relevant for
national labor market analysis, I have calculated fuel-tobacco averages. The averages are shown
in black in Figure 8, both using the relative excise revenue in 2003-7 as weights. These averages
suggest that the tobacco increases approximately offset the fuel decreases from the perspective of
taxing consumption relative to leisure. Based on this finding, and in order to avoid introducing
unimportant complications in the tax-wedge estimation methodology, I therefore treat the non-
VAT indirect-tax rates as constant over time.

         Putting aside non-VAT taxes for the moment, using statutory VAT rates as my model
(2)’s consumption tax rate would exaggerate the amount of revenue actually obtained by the
U.K.’s VAT. The OECD (2014, Table 3.A3.1) finds that the latter has been 44 percent of the
former for each of the years 2008-12. Part of the discrepancy results from the exemption of
small businesses from VAT. If this were the entire discrepancy, then the pricing impact of the
VAT could either be more or less than that of an exemption-free VAT with the same statutory

39
  For fuel, I (a) took the April 2007 retail price, £0.928/liter, reported by Vial (2012), (b) backed out the non-VAT
part of the retail price using the statutory VAT rate of 17.5%, and (c) subtracted the specific excise rate of
£0.5152/liter. For cigarettes, HM Revenue and Customs (2013) reports non-tax revenue per typically-priced pack of
£0.9255 on March 31 2007.
                                                                                                                  22
rate, depending on the relationship between the threshold and the distribution of firm sizes.40
But another part of the discrepancy results from the VAT-exemption of entire markets, such as
health care and financial services, and reduced statutory rates in other markets. If market
exemptions and rate reductions were the only reason that VAT revenue was low relative to the
statutory standard rate, then revenue would be a better indicator than the statutory standard rate
of the wedge created by the VAT between leisure and total consumption. 41                               Lacking the
necessary data and article space to make a full calculation, this paper takes the VAT rate to be 72
percent of the statutory standard rate, because 72 is the midpoint of 100 and the aforementioned
44 percent (based on revenue).

         The overall sales tax rate referenced in the text combines the time-varying VAT rate
(including the factor of 0.72) and a constant rate of 6.6 percent for the other indirect taxes
according to the formula (5):42

                       1 + 𝜏𝑐 = [1 + 0.72(statutory VAT rate)][1 + 0.066]                                          (5)



With the statutory standard VAT rate equal to 15, 17.5, and 20, respectively, c is 18.2, 20.1, and
22.0, respectively. Table 3 displays c and all of the other U.K. tax parameters needed to
calculate the overall employment tax on a quarterly basis according to equation (4).

         [Table 3 here]




40
   Note that sellers above the VAT-registration threshold pay the statutory rate on all of their sales, even the sales
below the threshold (Keen and Mintz 2004, Onji 2009). In theory, sellers might optimally restrict their size to
remain below the threshold, thereby generating no VAT revenue but nonetheless having added marginal costs that
reflect the existence of a VAT.
41
   In other words, a person reducing leisure would pay the statutory VAT rate on some of his consumption, but not
all of it.
42
   0.066 is 0.86*0.44*(statutory VAT rate) for 2003-7. Recall from above that 0.86 is the ratio of 2003-7 non-VAT
revenue to VAT revenue. By using the 0.44 revenue ratio, I am assuming that the non-VAT indirect taxes do not
have the small-seller exemption (or other features that create marginal costs without obtaining revenue).
                                                                                                                    23
     V.      Appendix II: Additional Perspectives on U.K. Employment Tax
             Wedge Changes


          Figure 2 shows how U.K. tax law changes served to harmonize the personal income tax
(PIT) brackets with the national health insurance contribution (NIC) brackets, from the
perspective of a full-year worker. However, Figure 9 shows that gaps between the brackets
remain for part-year workers, because the NIC is administered on a pay-period basis whereas
PIT is based on tax-year income.

          [Figure 9 here]

          The paper shows significantly different employment tax wedge changes for married
versus unmarried workers in the U.S. Holding constant credit status (emphasized in the main
text), no such difference is seen in the U.K. largely because the NIC, the basic PIT, the
contributory JSA, and the VAT are not administered on the basis of household composition.
Persons who have been unemployed more than 26 weeks potentially receive an income-based
job seekers allowance, which pays more to married than to unmarried job seekers if the spouse is
working less than 24 hours per week.43 But, as shown in Figure 10, this provision by itself has
not change enough to produce significantly different (in the economic sense) U.K. incentive
dynamics by type of JSA, which is related to marital status.

          [Figure 10 here]




43
  The income-based JSA is also available to persons with weekly earnings (during periods of employment) less than
about £150, which is far below the range of earnings scenarios considered in this paper.
                                                                                                              24
   Table 1. Implicit Employment Taxes from NICs and the JSA, 2010 and 2011
                                  Tax Year
Policy Parameter                  2010         2011      Change    Units
NICs
  Employer rate                  12.8%        13.8%        1.0%
                                                                   % of earnings above ST or PT
  Employee rate                  11.0%        12.0%        1.0%
  Tax value of PT and ST           20.5         26.4         5.9   2010 British pounds per week
Job Seekers Allowance (tax adjusted)
                                   51.8         51.2        -0.6   2010 British pounds per week
JSA minus Tax value of PT and ST
                                   31.3         24.8        -6.5   2010 British pounds per week
                                  6.5%         5.2%       -1.4%    Percentage of employer cost, FW
                                  6.4%         5.3%       -1.1%    Percentage of employer cost, VW
Addenda
Basic rate for the PIT           20.0%        20.0%        0.0%    Percentage of taxable income
Employer cost                       489         472        -17.5   2010 British pounds per 40-hour
                                                                   week, at the median wage
Note : The JSA and ST values are net of personal income taxes at the margin, assuming the basic rate.
FW ("fixed weight") estimate uses the same 2010-11 average of employer cost for both years'
percentages. The VW ("variable weight") estimate uses the employer cost estimate from the same
column as the reported percentage.
Table 2. Tax and benefit programs included the rate calculations


                      United Kingdom                         United States

Payroll taxes (employer and employee)
                 National Insurance Contributions Old Age, Survivors, Disability, Medicare

Personal Income Taxes
               Four-bracket structure                        Ordinary federal tax (without credits)a
                                                             Ordinary state tax (without credits)a
                                                             Exclusion of UI from taxable income

Consumption taxes
               VAT                                           Alla,b
               All othera

Unemployment benefits
              Jobseekers Allowance                           Unemployment Insurance (UI)
                                                             Federal Additional Compensation
                                                             COBRA subsidy

Family/Safety Net Benefits
                Working Tax Credit                           Food stamps (SNAP)
                Child Tax Credit                             Medicaida
                Child Benefitc                               Debt discharges
                                                             All othera

Notes:
a
    Treated as a time-invariant parameter.
b
    U.S. consumption taxes only appear in Figure 7 (to the extent that they are reflected in
     the price deflator for Personal Consumption Expenditures).
c
Assumed to be independent of income and employment status for the workers represented.
Table 3. U.K. Tax Parameters
For use in equation (4). Pounds are not inflation adjusted.                                    Overall wedge q
                                                                                                   (weekly
                     NIC parameters             y           ti             UB            tc      employment)
                        Employer Employee Employer                     Unempl. Consumption         Off        On
Quarter      PT     ST     rate t f rate t e  cost PIT basic CTC BRR    Benefit     tax rate    credits   credits
2007-Q1     £97    £97     12.8%     11.0%   £445    22.0%     37.0%                  20.1%
2007-Q2    £100   £100     12.8%     11.0%   £446    22.0%     37.0%    £59.15        20.1%     55.7%     79.7%
2007-Q3    £100   £100     12.8%     11.0%   £449    22.0%     37.0%    £59.15        20.1%     55.6%     79.7%
2007-Q4    £100   £100     12.8%     11.0%   £451    22.0%     37.0%    £59.15        20.1%     55.6%     79.7%
2008-Q1    £100   £100     12.8%     11.0%   £464    22.0%     37.0%    £59.15        20.1%     55.5%     79.6%
2008-Q2    £105   £105     12.8%     11.0%   £460    20.0%     39.0%    £60.50        20.1%     54.2%     79.6%
2008-Q3    £105   £105     12.8%     11.0%   £468    20.0%     39.0%    £60.50        20.1%     54.1%     79.6%
2008-Q4    £105   £105     12.8%     11.0%   £474    20.0%     39.0%    £60.50        19.4%     53.8%     79.4%
2009-Q1    £105   £105     12.8%     11.0%   £472    20.0%     39.0%    £60.50        18.2%     53.4%     79.2%
2009-Q2    £110   £110     12.8%     11.0%   £488    20.0%     39.0%    £64.30        18.2%     53.6%     79.3%
2009-Q3    £110   £110     12.8%     11.0%   £482    20.0%     39.0%    £64.30        18.2%     53.6%     79.3%
2009-Q4    £110   £110     12.8%     11.0%   £493    20.0%     39.0%    £64.30        18.2%     53.5%     79.3%
2010-Q1    £110   £110     12.8%     11.0%   £491    20.0%     39.0%    £64.30        20.1%     54.3%     79.6%
2010-Q2    £110   £110     12.8%     11.0%   £494    20.0%     39.0%    £65.45        20.1%     54.4%     79.7%
2010-Q3    £110   £110     12.8%     11.0%   £492    20.0%     39.0%    £65.45        20.1%     54.4%     79.7%
2010-Q4    £110   £110     12.8%     11.0%   £495    20.0%     39.0%    £65.45        20.1%     54.4%     79.7%
2011-Q1    £110   £110     12.8%     11.0%   £497    20.0%     39.0%    £65.45        22.0%     55.1%     80.0%
2011-Q2    £139   £136     13.8%     12.0%   £493    20.0%     41.0%    £67.50        22.0%     55.4%     81.4%
2011-Q3    £139   £136     13.8%     12.0%   £493    20.0%     41.0%    £67.50        22.0%     55.4%     81.4%
2011-Q4    £139   £136     13.8%     12.0%   £502    20.0%     41.0%    £67.50        22.0%     55.3%     81.4%
2012-Q1    £139   £136     13.8%     12.0%   £502    20.0%     41.0%    £67.50        22.0%     55.3%     81.4%
2012-Q2    £146   £144     13.8%     12.0%   £506    20.0%     41.0%    £71.00        22.0%     55.5%     81.4%
2012-Q3    £146   £144     13.8%     12.0%   £510    20.0%     41.0%    £71.00        22.0%     55.4%     81.4%
2012-Q4    £146   £144     13.8%     12.0%   £515    20.0%     41.0%    £71.00        22.0%     55.4%     81.4%
2013-Q1    £146   £144     13.8%     12.0%   £515    20.0%     41.0%    £71.00        22.0%     55.4%     81.4%
2013-Q2    £149   £148     13.8%     12.0%   £524    20.0%     41.0%    £71.70        22.0%     55.3%     81.4%
2013-Q3    £149   £148     13.8%     12.0%   £505    20.0%     41.0%    £71.70        22.0%     55.4%     81.4%
2013-Q4    £149   £148     13.8%     12.0%   £509    20.0%     41.0%    £71.70        22.0%     55.4%     81.4%
                                   Figure 1. The Evolution of Employment Rates in Two Countries
                        102                         Persons aged 25-54, 2005-2014

                        101


                        100


                         99
Index (2007-Q4 = 100)




                         98


                         97                                              U.K.
                                                                         U.S.
                         96


                         95


                         94

                                                                                              Source: OECD
                         93
                          Jan-05          Jan-07        Jan-09            Jan-11     Jan-13
                                                           Quarter beginning
                        Figure 2. UK Income Tax Brackets, Combining PIT & NICs
                            Full-year workers only. Child credit phaseout brackets not shown
              70%

                                                                                             10 %-point hike
              60%



              50%
Tax bracket




              40%

                                                                      Tax year 2007
              30%                                                     Tax year 2009
                                                                      Tax year 2010
                                                                      Tax year 2011
              20%



              10%



              0%
                    0   20,000    40,000     60,000     80,000    100,000    120,000     140,000    160,000    180,000
                                           Annual employer cost in 2010 British pounds
                                   Figure 3. U.K. Child Tax Credit phaseout ranges and rates
                            The CTC is fully phased out at the end of the solid range (1 child) or dashed range (2 children).
                42%                              See the text for the treatment of the family element's phaseout.




                41%
                                                                                 2013
                                                                                 2010
                                                                                 2007
                40%
Phaseout rate




                39%




                38%




                37%




                36%
                      0.7             0.8              0.9                1.0                1.1               1.2    1.3       1.4
                                        Household income, as a ratio to full-time full-year earnings at the median
                        46%
                                            Figure 4. U.K. Employment tax components, 2007-13                                 0%
                              For a worker without tax credits, the employment wedge includes the sum of these three terms.




                        44%                          PIT-NIC term                                                             -2%
                                                     JSA term + 30 %pts (at median wage)
                                                     PT/ST term (at median wage)
PIT-NIC and JSA terms




                        42%                                                                                                   -4%




                                                                                                                                     PT/ST term
                        40%                                                                                                   -6%




                        38%                                                                                                   -8%
                                                                                      2011: One point
                                                                                      added to each NIC
                                          2008: PIT                                   rate
                                          basic rate from                             2011: Expanded PT
                                          22% to 20%                                  and ST
                        36%                                                                                                   -10%
                               2007           2008            2009           2010             2011        2012       2013
                                                                    Year beginning in April
                                                       Figure 5. U.K. Weekly Employment Incentives, 2007-13.
                                                  Among working basic rate payers, as a function of potential earnings and CTC status.

                                        0.05
Log after-tax share, change from 2007




                                           0
                                                2007          2008           2009           2010           2011           2012           2013




                                        -0.05

                                                         Low wage, off credits

                                                         High wage, off credits

                                         -0.1
                                                         Low wage, on credits

                                                         High wage, on credits




                                        -0.15
                                             Figure 6. Components of 2007-10 Employment Tax Wedge Changes
                                                                    U.S., by potential earnings and marital status

                                    14              unmarried                                            married


                                    12
2007-10 change, percentage points




                                    10

                                                                                                                                all other
                                                                                                                                SNAP elg. & ben.
                                     8
                                                                                                                                UI benefits
                                                                                                                                UI modernization
                                     6                                                                                          UI duration


                                     4



                                     2



                                     0
                                         $2,110 $2,578 $3,148 $3,845 $4,697                $2,110 $2,578 $3,148 $3,845 $4,697
                                                                    Potential monthly earnings
                                                   Figure 7. The Two Prices of Labor, by Country
                                 106


                                 104


                                 102
detrended index, 2007-Q4 = 100




                                 100


                                  98


                                  96


                                  94


                                  92                                              Employer cost, US

                                                                                  Employer cost, UK
                                  90
                                                                                  Employee reward to work,
                                  88                                              after taxes and subsidies, UK
                                                                                  Employee reward to work,
                                                                                  after taxes and subsidies, US
                                  86
                                       2007-Q4   2008-Q4    2009-Q4     2010-Q4       2011-Q4         2012-Q4     2013-Q4
                                                 Figure 8. A Comparison of Tobacco and Fuel Excise Changes
                                     5               U.K. pricing factors based on statutory rates, excluding VAT, 2007-13




                                    4.5



                                                                                                          Tobacco
Pricing factor from excise duties




                                     4                                                                    Weighted average (arithmetic)
                                                                                                          Weighted average (geometric)
                                                                                                          Fuel
                                    3.5




                                     3




                                    2.5




                                     2
                                          2007          2008           2009            2010             2011         2012           2013
                                                                              Year beginning in April
                         Figure 9. UK Income Tax Brackets, Combining PIT & NIC
                                 39-week workers. Child credit phaseout brackets not shown
              70%

                                                                                               10 %-point hike
              60%



              50%
Tax bracket




              40%

                                                                        Tax year 2007
              30%                                                       Tax year 2009
                                                                        Tax year 2010
                                                                        Tax year 2011
              20%



              10%



              0%
                    0   20,000      40,000     60,000     80,000    100,000    120,000     140,000    160,000    180,000
                                             Annual employer cost in 2010 British pounds
                           65%
                                                   Figure 10. U.K. Employment tax wedge, 2007-13                                       60%
                                        as a function of JSA type, for basic rate payers, and excluding tax-credit phaseouts.




                           63%                                                                                                         58%
                                                                                               Long-term unemployed with
                                                                                               spouse not working FT
                                                                                               All others (right scale)
Percent of employer cost




                                                                                                                                             Percent of employer cost
                           61%                                                                                                         56%




                           59%                                                                                                         54%




                           57%                                                                                                         52%




                           55%                                                                                                         50%
                                 2007             2008           2009            2010             2011         2012             2013
                                                                        Year beginning in April
Bibliography

Adam, Stuart, and James Browne. "Do the UK Government's welfare reforms make work pay?"
      IFS working paper, no. 13/26 (2013).

BBC. Economy Tracker: Unemployment. January 2015. http://www.bbc.com/news/10604117
      (accessed February 8, 2015).

Brewer, Mike, James Browne, Andrew Hood, Robert Joyce, and Luke Sibieta. "The Short- and
      Medium-term Impacts of the Recession on the UK Income Distribution." Fiscal Studies
      33, no. 2 (2013): 179-201.

Gomes, Pedro. "Labour market flows: Facts from the United Kingdom." Labour Economics 19,
      no. 2 (April 2012): 165-75.

HM Government. "Benefits & credits: Jobseeker's Allowance (JSA)." gov.uk. May 22, 2015b.
     https://www.gov.uk/jobseekers-allowance/print (accessed July 6, 2015).

—. "Tax credits: your payment dates." gov.uk. January 19, 2015a. https://www.gov.uk/when-is-
      your-next-tax-credits-payment (accessed February 13, 2015).

HM Revenue and Customs. "Accounting for VAT when the standard rate of VAT returned to
     17.5 percent." VAT rates, thresholds, fuel scale charges and exchange rates. 2014b.
     http://www.hmrc.gov.uk/vat/forms-rates/rates/rate-changes.htm (accessed January 22,
     2015).

—. "Income Tax Liabilities Statistics 2011-12 to 2014-15." Income Tax Statistics and
       Distributions. 2014c. https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/income-tax-liabilities-
       statistics-tax-year-2011-to-2012-to-tax-year-2014-to-2015 (accessed January 22, 2015).

—. "Income Tax Personal Allowances and Reliefs: 1990-91 to 2014-15." Tax Structure and
       Parameters Statistics. 2014e.
       https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/418665/Ta
       ble-a1.pdf (accessed January 23, 2015).

—. "Main Features of National Insurance Contributions." Tax structure and parameters
     statistics. March 2014a. https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/main-features-of-
     national-insurance-contributions (accessed January 21, 2015).

—. "Rates of Income Tax: 1990-91 to 2014-15." Tax Structure and Parameters Statistics. 2014d.
      https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/418669/Ta
      ble-a2.pdf (accessed January 23, 2015).



                                                                                            25
—. "Tobacco Factsheet." Tax & Duty Bulletins. November 2013.
      https://www.uktradeinfo.com/Statistics/Statistical%20Factsheets/Tobacco_Factsheet_201
      3.xls (accessed July 1, 2015).

HM Treasury. "Tax and tax credit rates and thresholds for 2014-15." Autumn Statement 2013.
     December 5, 2013. https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/tax-and-tax-credit-
     rates-and-thresholds-for-2014-15/tax-and-tax-credit-rates-and-thresholds-for-2014-15
     (accessed July 7, 2015).

Institute for Fiscal Studies. "Tax Measures Introduced in each Budget and PBR since 1979."
        Fiscal Facts. 2015. http://www.ifs.org.uk/uploads/publications/ff/budget_measures.xls
        (accessed July 1, 2015).

Keen, Michael, and Jack Mintz. "The Optimal Threshold for a Value-Added Tax." Journal of
      Public Economics 88, no. 3-4 (March 2004): 559-76.

KPMG. "United Kingdom: VAT essentials." kpmg.com. June 1, 2013.
     http://www.kpmg.com/global/en/issuesandinsights/articlespublications/vat-gst-
     essentials/pages/united-kingdom.aspx (accessed January 22, 2015).

Mulligan, Casey B. "Recent Marginal Labor Income Tax Changes by Skill and Marital Status."
       Tax Policy and the Economy, 2013: 69-100.

—. Side Effects: The Economic Consequences of the Health Reform. (acasideeffects.com), 2014.

Mulligan, Casey B. "The New Employment and Income Taxes." Journal of Policy Analysis and
       Management, 2015b.

Mulligan, Casey B. "The New Full-time Employment Taxes." Tax Policy and the Economy,
       2015a.

—. The Redistribution Recession. New York: Oxford University Press
      (redistributionrecession.com), 2012.

OECD. Consumption Tax Trends 2014. OECD Publishing, 2014.

—. Taxing Wages 2011. Paris: OECD Publishing, 2012.

Office for Budget Responsibility. Economic and Fiscal Outlook - March 2015. Controller of Her
        Majesty’s Stationery Office, 2015.

Office for National Statistics. "Distribution of Gross Hourly Earnings of Employees." Labour
        Market Statistics. December 2014a. http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/lms/labour-market-
        statistics/december-2014/table-earn08.xls (accessed January 20, 2015).



                                                                                                26
—. "Employment, Unemployment, and Economic Inactivity by Age Group." Labour Market
      Statistics. June 2014b. http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/lms/labour-market-statistics/may-
      2014/table-a05.xls (accessed June 27, 2015).

Onji, Kazuki. "The response of firms to eligibility thresholds: Evidence from the Japanese value-
       added tax." Journal of Public Economics 93, no. 5-6 (June 2009): 766-75.

Tax Policy Center. "Taxation and the Family: What is the Earned Income Tax Credit?" The Tax
      Policy Briefing Book. February 12, 2014. http://www.taxpolicycenter.org/briefing-
      book/key-elements/family/eitc.cfm (accessed July 6, 2015).

Vial, Andrea. "UK fuel price: how has it changed over time?" The Guardian, November 12,
       2012: online edition.




                                                                                              27
