                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       WHY THE REFERENTIAL TREATMENT:
                 EVIDENCE FROM FIELD EXPERIMENTS ON REFERRALS

                                          Amanda Pallais
                                        Emily Glassberg Sands

                                         Working Paper 21357
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21357


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2015




We would like to thank David Autor, Felipe Barrera-Osorio, Patrick Bayer, Raj Chetty, Melissa Dell,
David Deming, Itzik Fadlon, Adam Guren, John Friedman, Roland Fryer, Edward Glaeser, Claudia
Goldin, Josh Goodman, Rick Hornbeck, Lisa Kahn, Lawrence Katz, John List, Ben Schoefer, Sarah
Turner, Marty West, seminar participants at Berkeley, Booth, Brookings Institution, Columbia, Duke,
Harvard, Kellogg, and NBER Summer Institute Labor Studies, the New York Federal Reserve, Princeton,
RAND, University of British Columbia, University of Chicago, and Wharton, as well as Jesse Shapiro
and four anonymous referees for their many helpful comments and suggestions. We would like to
thank John Horton and the oDesk Corporation for help running the experiment. Sophie Wang provided
excellent research assistance. Financial support from the Lab for Economic Applications and Policy
at Harvard is gratefully acknowledged. Amanda Pallais's email address is apallais@fas.harvard.edu
and Emily Glassberg Sands's email address is esands@coursera.org. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Amanda Pallais and Emily Glassberg Sands. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Why the Referential Treatment: Evidence from Field Experiments on Referrals
Amanda Pallais and Emily Glassberg Sands
NBER Working Paper No. 21357
July 2015
JEL No. C93,J24,J63,M51

                                              ABSTRACT

Referred workers are more likely than non-referred workers to be hired, all else equal. In three field
experiments in an online labor market, we examine why. We find that referrals contain positive information
about worker performance and persistence that is not contained in workers' observable characteristics.
We also find that referrals performed particularly well when working directly with their referrers. However,
we do not find evidence that referrals exert more effort because they believe their performance will
affect their relationship with their referrer or their referrer's position at the firm.


Amanda Pallais
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
apallais@fas.harvard.edu

Emily Glassberg Sands
Coursera, Inc.
381 East Evelyn Avenue
Mountain View, CA 94041
emily@coursera.org
1       Introduction
A large empirical literature has shown that the majority of jobs are found through informal
contacts, …rms are more likely to hire applicants referred by current employees than non-
referred applicants, and some …rms even give bonuses to employees for successful referrals.1
Yet the literature remains divided on why …rms draw so heavily on referred applicants.
Referrals may provide (positive) information about worker quality, or being referred may
induce a worker to work harder or more productively; alternatively, …rms may hire referrals
for nepotistic reasons or to decrease recruiting costs.2 This paper analyzes a set of …eld
experiments in an online labor market to answer two open questions about referrals: …rst,
do referrals contain information about worker productivity? Second, do referred workers
work harder or more e¤ectively because they are referred?
    Answering the …rst of these questions with observational data is di¢ cult because we only
observe the productivity of workers who are hired. If referrals provide information about
worker quality and …rms (rationally) incorporate this information into their hiring decisions,
hired referred workers may not perform better than hired non-referred workers, even though
the referral provides positive information about worker productivity.
    Our experiments circumvent di¤erential selection of referred and non-referred workers into
employment. By working in an online marketplace (oDesk), we were able to hire workers
directly, allowing us to compare the performance of referred and non-referred applicants, not
just the workers a given …rm chose to hire. oDesk has over 2.5 million workers (Horton,
2013a) and 35 million hours billed in 2012 (oDesk Corporation, 2013). The experiments
took place between January and June 2013. We ran three experiments: the peer in‡uence
experiment, the team experiment, and the selection experiment. To recruit our samples for
the peer in‡uence and team experiments, we …rst hired experienced workers, asked them to
complete a short task unrelated to the experimental tasks, and solicited referrals from those
who complied. We then invited referred workers and a random sample of non-referred workers
to apply, and hired all applicants who met our basic wage criteria. These two experiments
were designed primarily to answer whether referred workers perform better because they are
referred: either because (1) they work harder because they think their performance will a¤ect
their referrers’position at the …rm or their relationship with their referrers (peer in‡uence)3
    1
     See, e.g., Bewley (1999); Ioannides and Datcher Loury (2004); Granovetter (1995); Topa (2011); Fer-
nandez and Weinberg (1997); Peterson et al. (2000); Brown et al. (2012); and Burks et al. (2015).
   2
     See, e.g., Montgomery (1991); Simon and Warner (1992); Heath (2015); Kugler (2003); and Wang (2013).
   3
     Peer in‡uence leads referrals to work harder in Kugler’s (2003) model because referrals face a psychic cost
of exerting less e¤ort than their referrers, while Heath’s (2015) and Dhillon et al.’s (2012) models suggests
that referred workers work hard because if they perform poorly the …rm will punish their referrers. This is
similar to micro…nance group lending wherein a worker’s peers may pressure the worker to repay the loan




                                                       2
or (2) they perform better when working directly with their referrers (team production).4
Four months later, we conducted the selection experiment, designed to test whether referrals
perform better than non-referred workers even without on-the-job interactions with their
referrers. We made job o¤ers from a new …rm to all referred and non-referred workers (but
not referrers) in the peer in‡uence experiment.
    We …nd that referrals do reveal positive information about worker quality independent of
on-the-job interactions with referrers. In the selection experiment, referred workers exhibited
substantially higher performance and lower turnover than did non-referred workers even at a
…rm to which they had not been referred and at which their referrers did not work. Little to
none of the information contained in the referral was otherwise observable to the employer
through workers’resumes.
    The peer in‡uence experiment provides additional evidence that referrals contain infor-
mation about worker quality. In this experiment, referred and non-referred workers tested
an airline ‡ight website by answering questions about the site every other day over 12 days.
The tasks for all three experiments were chosen to be similar to tasks that are common on
oDesk. In particular, many jobs on oDesk require visiting websites and answering questions
about them. Referrals in the peer in‡uence experiment were randomized into two treat-
ments. The non-monitoring treatment was designed to minimize peer in‡uence. Referrals
in this treatment were told their referrers would never know their performance and (after
referring) referrers were told they not be judged on the performance of their referrals. As
in the selection experiment, referred workers in this treatment performed better and had
less turnover than non-referred workers, and these di¤erences could not have been predicted
from workers’observable characteristics. We also use data from this experiment to simulate
a realistic hiring process and to show that we could have obtained misleading results if we
had only compared the performance of applicants employers chose to hire.
    The monitoring treatment of the peer in‡uence experiment was designed to maximize peer
in‡uence. Each referrer in this treatment received an update on her referral’s performance
after each day of work. We implied to each referrer that her referral’s performance and
willingness to continue working for us would a¤ect whether the referrer was promoted. Yet,
we do not …nd that monitored referrals performed signi…cantly better or had less turnover
than non-monitored referrals.
(e.g., Bryan et al., 2014).
    4
      While team production has not been emphasized as an explanation for hiring referrals in the economics
literature, general research on team production implies it may be an important bene…t of referrals. For
example, Bandiera et al.’s (2013) model …nds that when working in teams with their friends, workers are less
likely to free-ride; Bandiera et al. (2005) …nds that workers are more able to cooperate with their teammates
when their teammates are friends; and Costa and Kahn (2003) …nds that Civil War soldiers were less likely
to desert when more of their unit was from their own birthplace.




                                                     3
    The team experiment, however, does suggest that working directly with her referrer
makes a referral more productive. Here, the task was to work with an assigned partner to
create a single, shared slogan for a public service announcement (PSA). Each of the two
partners was given a di¤erent information sheet containing a distinct criterion for the slogan
(e.g., be exactly three words long). We asked the partners to use the chat box provided
on the site to discuss the task and then to each submit the same slogan, which should
have satis…ed both criteria. Workers completed three such PSA tasks, each with a di¤erent
partner. Importantly, each referral completed one task with her referrer and one task with
another randomly-chosen referrer. Referred workers performed substantially better when
paired with their own referrers.
    An important caveat to our …ndings is that while the job tasks performed on oDesk are
representative of important parts of the US economy, employer-employee relationships on
oDesk are typically much shorter than those in o- ine labor markets. We discuss implications
of these di¤erences for the interpretation of our …ndings in Section 5 of the paper.5
    We see our results as reconciling the seemingly inconsistent …ndings from papers com-
paring the performance of referred and non-referred workers. Among call center workers,
Castilla (2005) …nds that referred workers perform better than non-referred workers, while
among bank tellers, Blau (1990) …nds that referred workers perform worse. Studying nine
…rms in three di¤erent industries, Burks et al. (2015) …nds that referred workers perform
similarly to non-referred workers on most metrics, though they have less turnover. We show
that referrals contain information about worker quality, but that if employers utilize that
information in the hiring process, hired referred workers could perform better than, worse
than, or the same as non-referred workers.6
    Other papers directly test predictions of models where referrals contain information about
worker quality. Using …rm data, Brown et al. (2012) …nds results consistent with these
models: referred applicants are more likely to be hired and hired referrals have lower turnover
and higher initial wages, though the wage advantage decreases over time. Dustmann et
al. (2011) …nds similar results using matched employer-employee data and ethnic-minority
groups to proxy for referrals. Inconsistent with these models, however, Pistaferri (1999) and
Bentolila et al. (2010) …nd that workers who …nd jobs through informal networks earn lower
wages. Our paper adds to this literature by directly analyzing worker performance and by
   5
      There are a number of recent papers that use oDesk to learn about general features of labor markets.
See, for example, Horton (2013b), Ghani et al. (2014), Horton (2014), Lyons (2014), Pallais (2014), Stanton
and Thomas (2014), and Gilchrist et al. (2015).
    6
      Burks et al. (2015) shows that referred applicants are more likely to be o¤ered jobs, all else equal. This
is consistent with a model in which referrals contain information about worker quality, but also with other
models like nepotism. The paper also …nds that referred workers are more likely to accept job o¤ers.




                                                       4
constructing a setting (the selection experiment) in which referrals’ superior performance
can’t result from on-the-job interactions with referrers. In an experiment, Beaman and
Magruder (2012) …nd that, when told they will be paid on their referrals’ performance,
employees refer higher-performing workers. Our paper builds on this by showing that referred
applicants perform better than non-referred applicants. Finally, Heath (2015) …nds that
referrers’and referrals’wage changes are highly correlated, consistent with a peer in‡uence
mechanism.7
    There is also closely related research that uses the oDesk platform. Stanton and Thomas
(2014) carefully analyzes oDesk agencies, formal groups of oDesk workers often formed
through o- ine connections. Agency-a¢ liated workers pay a fraction of their earnings to
their agency and, in return, their agency a¢ liation is listed on their resume. The paper …nds
that employers view agency-a¢ liation as a signal that inexperienced workers are produc-
tive. Among inexperienced workers, employers are more likely to hire agency-a¢ liates than
una¢ liated workers and they pay a¢ liates higher wages. Once workers have accumulated
other signals of productivity (in particular employer feedback scores), the importance of this
signal declines. A related paper, Horton (2013b), …nds that oDesk employers value recom-
mendations of whom to hire. Employers who randomly received recommendations about
workers from oDesk itself were both more likely to hire these workers and more likely to hire
anyone for their jobs. Yet, workers hired as a result of these recommendations were not more
successful than other hired workers.
    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the marketplace
and our experimental designs. Section 3 analyzes whether referrals contain information
about worker quality, Section 4 examines whether referrals perform better because they were
referred, and Section 5 discusses external validity. Section 6 concludes, discussing how these
results could inform strategies to improve unconnected workers’labor market outcomes.


2       Experimental Context and Recruitment Design

2.1     Online Labor Market
oDesk is an online labor market where employers, mostly from the United States, hire inde-
pendent contractors from all over the world for jobs that can be completed remotely. The jobs
    7
    A few papers suggest …rms prefer referrals for reasons other than improved productivity. Consistent with
…rms hiring workers’children as a favor to existing workers, Kramarz and Skans (2014) …nds parents’wage
growth drops dramatically exactly when of one of their children is hired. Wang (2013) also …nds evidence
of nepotism in referrals. Holzer (1987) and Burks et al. (2015) …nd that hiring referred workers lowers
recruiting costs.



                                                     5
range from those that require signi…cant skills such as computer programming or software
development to less skill-intensive tasks such as data entry, internet research, or adminis-
trative support. Unlike Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, another online marketplace commonly
used in economics research, oDesk employers have complete discretion in whom they hire
and they have real relationships with hired workers.
    Employers post job listings describing their jobs and any required worker characteristics.
They consider applicants’resumes when deciding whom to hire. (Figure 1 shows a sample
oDesk resume from a worker not in the experiment.) These resumes contain information
about workers’ skills and quali…cations as well as their past experience. The resumes list
previous oDesk jobs, educational degrees, skills tests that workers have passed, and a one-to-
…ve feedback score from previous employers. Employers can also choose to interview workers
remotely before deciding whom to hire, though many employers do not.
    Most jobs on oDesk, including all the jobs in this experiment, are hourly jobs (Pallais,
2014). In these jobs, workers propose an hourly wage when they apply. Workers are then
paid their set hourly wage for all hours worked, regardless of the output, though the employer
can end the job and …re the worker at any time. Workers also post a desired hourly wage at
the top of their resumes, which …rms can observe.
    During the employment relationship, workers and employers communicate through the
oDesk messaging system. They also use non-oDesk methods such as email and Skype.
oDesk allows employers to monitor workers’progress, similar to the monitoring that would
be possible in an in-person environment. Workers log into an oDesk application that shows
employers when they are working. This application provides information about workers’
keystroke volume and shows screen shots of the workers’ computers, taken six times per
hour.
    Most workers state that they are available to work full-time (30+ hours per week), though
others are available part-time or only a few hours per week.8 In general, oDesk workers are
relatively young and well-educated, and, among the lower-wage segment employed in these
experiments, disproportionately likely to be female. Many workers have friends and relatives
who also work on oDesk. Though there is at present no explicit referral mechanism on oDesk,
employers can solicit referrals from their current workers and workers can recommend people
they know to their employers. oDesk also has agencies, formal groups of oDesk workers often
formed through o- ine connections (Stanton and Thomas, 2014).
   8
   This statistic is from personal correspondence with John Horton and is based on calculations using oDesk
administrative data.




                                                    6
2.2     Hiring our Experimental Samples
We hired workers for the peer in‡uence and team experiments in the same way. (The sample
for the selection experiment was a subset of the peer in‡uence experiment sample.) We …rst
invited a random sample of oDesk workers who (1) were from the Philippines, (2) listed an
hourly wage of $5 or less on their resumes, (3) had earned $50 or more on oDesk, and (4)
had an average job feedback score of four or higher to apply to our job. We eliminated
workers with ratings below four because we wanted only referrals from workers we would
actually hire; because most oDesk ratings are very positive, only 16 percent of workers who
met our other criteria had ratings below four. We only included workers from the Philippines
because we wanted all workers in the team experiment to be able to communicate easily and
be in the same time zone and the Philippines is the most common country of residence for
low-wage oDesk workers.9 We told these workers very little about the task, only that we
were hiring "for a variety of ongoing administrative support tasks of varying durations" and
that we were looking for "diligent and highly-motivated individuals who are competent in
the English language and interested in an ongoing relationship with our …rm." We also told
them that the position came with the possibility of promotion to managerial roles. We gave
workers 48 hours to apply and then hired all workers who applied at an hourly wage of $3
or less.10
    Original hires were asked to visit our website to initialize the job. The initialization step
was intended to give workers some connection to our …rm and to weed out the least responsive
workers. (We …red the 5 percent of workers who did not initialize.) We then asked the
workers who initialized to refer up to three other oDesk workers who were "highly-quali…ed"
and whom they thought would "do a good job and be interested in an ongoing relationship
with our …rm." We did not provide workers with …nancial incentives for referring.11 On
each referral form we included questions about how well the referrer knew her referral, how
often they interacted (remotely or in person), and how many people they knew in common.
We also asked if they ever worked in the same room; since referrers might have more easily
monitored or collaborated with referrals working in the same room, we eliminated from our
   9
      That the Philippines is the most common country of residence for low-wage oDesk workers comes from
one of the authors’calculations using oDesk administrative data.
   10
      We chose a $3 wage cuto¤ to minimize the cost of the experiment, while ensuring a su¢ cient sample
size and a sample that was representative of the low-wage segment on oDesk. We initially contacted workers
with wages of up to $5 as many workers are willing to work for wages below those listed on their resumes
(Pallais, 2014). For logistical reasons, we needed to hire workers at the same time. Because oDesk workers
tend to remove their job applications if they do not hear back quickly, we gave workers 48 hours to apply.
Prior experience suggested that 48 hours would maximize the size of the applicant pool.
   11
      Appendix Table 1 describes the characteristics of workers whom we asked to refer. It shows that workers
who referred someone look somewhat more quali…ed than those who did not.




                                                     7
sample any referral who ever worked in the same room as her referrer.
    We invited to our job all referred workers who listed an hourly wage of $5 or less. (All
workers who were referred were located in the Philippines.) We simultaneously invited to
our job a random sample of oDesk workers from the Philippines with hourly wages of $5 or
less.12 We again gave workers 48 hours to apply. Referred workers were much more likely to
apply to our job: 68 percent of referred workers applied versus only six percent non-referred
workers. We then hired all referred and non-referred workers who applied at an hourly wage
of $3 or less.13 We did not tell original hires or their referrals anything about how they
would be treated before the referral was made and the referred worker applied for the job.
For example, original hires and referrals in both treatments of the peer in‡uence experiment
had the exact same information up until the time the referral was hired.
    This recruiting process, used for both the peer in‡uence and team experiments, produced
an experimental sample with three types of workers: referred workers, non-referred workers,
and "referrers" (i.e., workers who made a successful referral). Figure 2 depicts this recruit-
ment process. Workers who did not refer anyone or who referred a worker we did not hire
performed a di¤erent, shorter task and are not included in any performance results. In the
selection experiment, we made job o¤ers to all referred and non-referred workers from the
peer in‡uence experiment; no referrers were included. Figure 3 shows the recruitment of the
selection experiment sample.


2.3     Peer In‡uence Experiment Design
The peer in‡uence experiment was designed primarily to determine whether referrals work
harder as a result of being referred because they think their performance and persistence
will a¤ect either their referrer’s position at the …rm or their relationship with their referrer.
It also allows us to analyze whether referrals contain information about worker quality.
    Panel A of Appendix Table 2 describes the characteristics of the referred and non-referred
  12
     We eliminated from the pool of both referred and non-referred workers any workers who had already been
invited as a potential referrer. We also eliminated from the team experiment anyone who had been invited
in the peer in‡uence experiment. As a result, referred and non-referred workers in the team experiment look
worse on observables than do referred and non-referred workers in the peer in‡uence experiment.
  13
     We designed the recruitment process so that when referrers were submitting their referrals, they had
no information about our actual tasks. The initialization step, for example, was unrelated to the tasks
themselves. From their own invitation to apply and from our request for referrals, referrers did know that
we were hiring "for a variety of ongoing administrative support tasks of varying durations" and that we
were looking for "diligent and highly-quali…ed individuals who are competent in the English language and
interested in an ongoing relationship with our …rm." However, all referred and non-referred workers saw
this same description on our job posting. Since referred workers had no private information about the job
before referring, in our context there is no scope for referrers to choose referrals with high worker-…rm match
quality.




                                                      8
workers in the peer in‡uence experiment. Referred workers had, on average, been on oDesk
for about 18 months and almost three-quarters had prior oDesk employment. They averaged
over 9 previous jobs and $1,382 in prior oDesk earnings. Non-referred workers had been on
oDesk slightly (insigni…cantly) longer, but were less than half as likely to have previously
been hired. Referred workers also had higher feedback scores from prior employers and were
more likely to have passed oDesk tests. Despite being seemingly more experienced than non-
referred workers, referred workers posted wages on their resumes that were 15 percent lower
than those posted by non-referred workers, and they proposed signi…cantly lower wages to
our jobs. Recall that referred workers were also much more likely to apply to our job. This
suggests referrals may reduce recruiting costs by providing a way to identify workers with
good resumes who are interested in the job.
    We designed our task in this experiment to emphasize diligence because showing up to
work and completing tasks in a timely manner are key determinants of success for low-
skilled workers, both in more general labor markets and on oDesk (Holzer, 1999; Regenstein
et al., 1999; and Pallais, 2014). We also designed the task to measure worker turnover since
decreased turnover is emphasized in the literature as a bene…t of hiring referrals (e.g., Brown
et al., 2012; Burks et al., 2015; Dustmann et al., 2011).
    All referred and non-referred workers in the experiment completed the same task. We
told them they would be doing testing for an airline ‡ight website, and asked that they visit
the site every other day for twelve days (six visits total), answering the questions on the site
each day. For each worker on each day, the site displayed a table with a randomly-generated
set of ten ‡ights. Each ‡ight was identi…ed by a ‡ight number and included a departure
and arrival city, price, and number of available seats. Just below the ‡ights table were six
…ll-in-the-blank questions (e.g., the ‡ight number of the cheapest ‡ight). The questions were
the same each day, but the correct answers changed with the set of ‡ights shown. Appendix
Figure 1 displays a sample ‡ights table followed by the questionnaire.
    We told all referred and non-referred workers to complete the task on the assigned day and
asked, but did not require, that they complete each day’s task by 11 am Philippine Time. We
also informed all referred and non-referred workers that we would send performance updates
to a manager after each working day reporting (1) whether they submitted a response on the
assigned day, (2) whether they submitted a response by 11 am on that day, (3) whether they
answered all the questions, and (4) the percentage of working days they had met each of
these three performance criteria. Appendix Figure 2 shows an example performance report.
    Referrers were randomized into the monitoring and non-monitoring treatments. Each
referred worker was assigned the same treatment as her referrer. Appendix Table 3 shows
that the randomization produced balanced samples between the treatment groups within



                                               9
both the referrer and referral samples. Out of 26 comparisons between the two treatments
groups, only one di¤erence is signi…cant at the 10 percent level.14
    The monitoring treatment was designed to facilitate monitoring of the referred worker
by her referrer while the non-monitoring treatment was designed to minimize peer in‡uence.
Referred workers in the monitoring treatment were told that their daily performance statistics
would be sent to their referrer as well as the manager. Referred workers in the non-monitoring
treatment meantime, were explicitly told that their referrer would never see their performance
statistics, only the manager would. The di¤erence in performance and persistence between
referred workers in these treatments is due to peer in‡uence. The di¤erence in performance
between referred workers in the non-monitoring treatment and non-referred workers sheds
light on whether referrals contain information about worker quality. However, even referred
workers in the non-monitoring treatment may have worked harder because they felt grateful
for having been referred or faced informal pressures from their referrers.
    Referrers worked on a di¤erent task. We wanted to employ them for the duration of
their referrals’ contracts and we wanted them to understand the performance metrics we
sent them about their referrals. Thus, we asked them to answer questions on a website every
other day over the same twelve-day period and we assigned them a soft deadline of 2 pm
Philippine Time for submitting. We did not, however, want the referrers to garner insights
from their own task with which they could potentially help their referrals, so we had them
work on a site that had a di¤erent login method, was focused on consumer products rather
than ‡ights, and asked a di¤erent set of questions.
    To strengthen the treatment, we told all referrers before work began that they were
being considered for a higher-paying management position. We implied to referrers in the
monitoring treatment that whether they were promoted would depend on their referrals’
performance.15 Referrers in the non-monitoring treatment were also informed of the man-
agement position, but were assured that they would be "judged on their own merits" and
that the performance of their referral would in no way in‡uence the promotion decision.
As promised, we sent the performance statistics of each referred worker in the monitoring
treatment to her referrer. We also sent the referred and non-referred workers’statistics to a
manager we hired.
    At the end of the task, we invited all referred and non-referred workers to re-apply to
  14
     While there are 28 comparisons in the table, by construction, there is no variation in prior experience
or in having a feedback score among referrers.
  15
     All referrers were told that the management position would require being able to identify "high-ability
workers interested in an ongoing relationship with our …rm." When we told referrers in the monitoring
treatment about the position, we also said that they would receive daily performance updates on their
referrals "because we care about workers’performance." To make sure we were as truthful as possible, we
hired some of these workers for management positions after the experiment.




                                                    10
continue on the same project. We use this as an (inverse) measure of worker turnover. Each
referred and non-referred worker was told that the manager would receive an update on
whether she accepted our o¤er to re-apply. Referred workers in the monitoring treatment
were told this update would also go to their referrers while referred workers in the non-
monitoring treatment were explicitly told their referrers would not see this information. To
strengthen the treatment, when we invited referrers in the monitoring treatment to apply for
the management position, we told them that we had just invited their referrals to continue
on with their task and hoped their referrals would accept the invitation. We invited referrers
in the non-monitoring treatment to apply for the management position as well, but made
no mention at all of their referrals. This experimental design is summarized in Panel A of
Figure 4.


2.4    Selection Experiment Design
The selection experiment was designed explicitly to determine whether referrals contain
information about worker quality. Four months after the peer in‡uence experiment, we
measured the performance and persistence of referred and non-referred workers in a job to
which the referred workers had not been referred. We created a …rm with a di¤erent name,
location, job posting, and writing style from that of the peer in‡uence experiment. We sought
to hire the maximum possible number of referred and non-referred workers. We made direct
job o¤ers to all referred and non-referred workers from the peer in‡uence experiment and
sent three reminders to accept to workers who had not yet responded. None of the referrers
was contacted by this …rm. Panel B of Appendix Table 2 describes the characteristics of
the referred and non-referred workers who accepted our o¤er. (These characteristics were
measured at the time we …rst contacted them for the peer in‡uence experiment.)
    Similar to the peer in‡uence experiment, workers who accepted the job o¤ers were given
a task that measured individual diligence over time. Workers were asked to visit the Twitter
pages of three successful musicians and to answer a ten-question survey about those ac-
counts every day for …ve consecutive days (Monday through Friday). We assured workers
they needed no prior knowledge of Twitter and explained where to …nd the relevant infor-
mation. Most of each day’s task involved reporting on the Twitter activity of the artist from
the day before. Although we asked workers to complete the task on the correct day, we
also accepted retroactive submissions and automatically recorded the time of submissions.
Appendix Figure 3 displays the questionnaire. After the last assigned day of work, we again
invited workers to a continuation of the task and recorded whether they re-applied.




                                             11
2.5     Team Experiment Design
The team experiment was designed to determine whether directly working with their referrers
leads referrals to perform better (team production).16 The task involved brainstorming and
we encouraged teamwork. Each worker was paired with three successive partners and asked
to come up with a slogan for each of three di¤erent public service announcements. We chose
this task because there are many jobs on oDesk that ask low-skill workers to come up with
advertisements, including jobs that speci…cally ask workers to create slogans. The …rst PSA
was to encourage highway drivers to wear seat belts, the second was to encourage children
to practice good dental hygiene, and the third was to encourage college students to get the
‡u vaccine. For each PSA, we asked the worker to use the chat box we provided on our site
to communicate with her partner and to come up with a single slogan that both partners
would submit through our online form. Appendix Figure 4 gives an example of what workers
saw when they logged in to the team task site.
    Though a worker could complete the task without her partner, the task was designed so
that the best output necessitated teamwork. Each partner received a di¤erent sheet with
information relevant to the PSA. For the …rst PSA, for example, one partner received infor-
mation on seat belts’e¢ cacy, while the other received information about highway drivers.
The stated justi…cation was that there was a lot of information to process and that by giving
the partners di¤erent information, each partner would only have to read half as much. We
told workers we wanted them to work with a partner to come up with their slogan because
brainstorming is often more e¤ective in teams.
    Each information sheet contained a speci…c criterion we wanted the slogan to meet as
well as a reason for that criterion. In the …rst round, for example, we told one partner that
we wanted the slogan to be only three words long (so as not to distract drivers) and we
told the other that we wanted the slogan to be in all capital letters (so drivers would be
more responsive to it). In the second round, we told one partner to use an emoticon in
the slogan (to make dental hygiene seem more upbeat) and the other to use the name of
a real or …ctitious person (since kids may respond to role models). In the third, we told
each partner we wanted one of four speci…c words included in the PSA; one partner’s word
choices emphasized that getting the ‡u shot would be quick, the other partner’s word choices
emphasized that ‡u shots are e¤ective. When giving workers their information sheets, we
told them only that the sheets would contain information, not that they would contain
  16
    Panel C of Appendix Table 2 shows the characteristics of referred and non-referred workers in the team
experiment. As in the peer in‡uence and selection experiments, referred workers were more likely than
non-referred workers to have previously been hired and had higher feedback scores from prior employers, but
proposed signi…cantly lower wages to our jobs.




                                                    12
particular criteria for the slogans.
    When workers submitted their slogans, we asked them also to answer a "team question:" a
multiple choice question about the slogan. Each of the three PSA assignments had a di¤erent
team question (what color sign the PSA should be printed on, what type of lettering the
slogan should be written in, and where the PSA should be placed). This question had no
correct answer, but partners were instructed to give the same answer.17
    For comparison with the peer in‡uence and selection experiments, we also collected mea-
sures of individual diligence. We monitored whether each worker logged in to the site and
whether she submitted work. We also asked each worker an "individual question," the an-
swer to which was in her own information sheet (e.g., the fraction of highway drivers who
wear seatbelts). Because workers were instructed that they should complete the task even
if they could not make contact with their partner, workers should have logged in, submitted
work, answered their individual question correctly, and used the criterion from their own
information sheet in their slogan regardless of whom they were partnered with.
    In the experiment, each referrer completed the three di¤erent PSA tasks as part of three
di¤erent types of teams: (1) a Type A team, in which she was paired with her own referral,
(2) a Type B team, in which she was paired with someone else’s referral, and (3) a Type
C team, in which she was paired with a non-referred worker. Panel B of Figure 4 gives an
example of these three team types. Each referred worker worked with her own referrer when
her referrer was in a Type A team and with someone else’s referrer when her referrer was in
a Type B team. (When her referrer was in a Type C team, she worked with another referred
worker in the same position; results from this treatment are not presented.) Non-referred
workers worked with referrers for all three rounds; that is, they were always in Type C teams.
    Comparing the performance of referred workers in Type A and B teams provides the
value of team production: how much better a referred worker performs when working with
her own referrer than with someone else’s referrer. Comparing the performance of workers in
Type B and C teams shows the di¤erence between referred and non-referred workers when
both work with partners they don’t know.
    Because we thought worker performance might be correlated not just between partners,
but also among partners’ partners, we placed workers into blocking groups. Each of the
47 blocking groups contained six referrers, their six referred workers, and two non-referred
workers. By de…nition, every worker in the blocking group only partnered with others in the
same blocking group. In all analyses of the team experiment, we cluster standard errors by
  17
    Because we wanted to measure how e¤ectively workers worked with their partners, we strongly encour-
aged each worker to complete each PSA. Unlike in the peer in‡uence experiment, in which we sent workers
no reminders about the task, in the team experiment we sent two reminders about each PSA to each worker
who had not already submitted work.




                                                  13
blocking group.18 The placement into blocking groups was random, except that a referrer
and her referral were always in the same group.19 Within a blocking group, the ordering of
the type of team workers participated in was random. And, within team type, when relevant,
workers’assigned partners were also random.
    In addition to measuring worker performance, we collected a proxy for worker enjoyment
of the partnered task and willingness to continue working with each partner. After the
worker submitted her last slogan, we asked, "In case we have more tasks like this in the
future, which if any of the partners that you’ve worked with would you be interested in
working with again?" Workers could select all, none, or a subset of their partners.


3      Referrals and Information about Worker Quality
We now examine whether referrals provide information about worker quality. First, we
compare the performance and turnover of referred and non-referred workers in the selection
experiment. Then, we compare non-monitored referred workers with non-referred workers
in the peer in‡uence experiment.


3.1     Selection Experiment
The selection experiment shows that referrals do contain information about worker quality:
even working at a job for which they were not referred at a …rm with which their referrers
were not a¢ liated, referred workers outperformed non-referred workers and had less turnover.
    Table 1 compares the outcomes of the referred and non-referred workers in the selection
experiment. First, we consider workers’likelihood of accepting a job. Panel A includes no
controls. Consistent with the idea that hiring referred workers decreases recruiting costs, even
among workers contacted for the selection experiment –who had previously participated in
an experiment –referred workers were more likely to accept our job o¤er. While 51 percent
of non-referred workers accepted, 68 percent of referred workers did. To determine how much
of the information contained in the referral would have been observable to employers through
workers’resumes, Panels B and C of Table 1 add control variables to the regressions in Panel
  18
     We do …nd evidence of learning from partners, supporting our decision to cluster by blocking group. We
show in Appendix Table 4 that a team performed better when one of its members had previously been in a
Type A team, controlling for the current team type and the task number. Since the task order was random,
this may suggest that when workers are in successful pairings, they learn how to do the task successfully and
use that knowledge in subsequent tasks.
  19
     As in the peer in‡uence experiment, we hired all referred and non-referred workers who met the selection
criteria. However, only one randomly-selected referral from each referrer and only 94 non-referred workers
were included in this experiment.




                                                     14
A. Panel B adds our main covariates: what we call …rst-order controls.20 Panel C adds the
squares of each of the (non-binary) covariates and the interaction of each pair of covariates
(our second-order controls) to the regressions. The table shows that the 17 percentage point
di¤erence in job acceptance is almost entirely explained by observable characteristics (in
particular, prior oDesk experience and prior earnings in the marketplace), leaving only an
(insigni…cant) 4.6 percentage point di¤erence in acceptance rates once we add the …rst- and
second-order controls.
    Next, we consider the performance and persistence of workers who accepted the job o¤er.
Measures of performance and persistence are regressed on a dummy for being a non-referred
worker (the base group is referred workers). We consider three measures of performance:
(1) an indicator for submitting the day’s work, (2) an indicator for submitting it on time,
and (3) the fraction of questions answered correctly (accuracy). Unanswered questions are
marked as incorrect. We also consider whether workers applied for a continuation of the task
as a measure of persistence.
    The table shows that referred workers submitted work on 76 percent of days and the vast
majority of these submissions were made on time. However, non-referred workers were 11
percentage points less likely both to submit work and to submit the work on time. While
82 percent of referred workers re-applied for a continuation of the task, non-referred workers
were 20 percentage points less likely to do so. However, despite the fact that these coe¢ cients
are large and signi…cant, the non-referred dummy explains only a small share of variation in
the outcome measures: just over 1 percent in the case of submission and on-time submission
and approximately 5 percent in the case of persistence.
    Panel A of Figure 5 shows performance over the course of the experiment by worker
type. Submission rates of referred workers were consistently higher than those of non-referred
workers. Both types of workers became less diligent over time, but diligence fell o¤ much
more for non-referred workers. Thus, the performance gap between referred and non-referred
workers grew over the course of the job. Panel A of Appendix Figure 5 shows that the other
performance measures (on-time submission and accuracy) follow similar trends.
    Workers’resume characteristics are predictive of their performance and persistence: the
proportion of variation explained increases to a quarter (for submission) and a third (for re-
application) when the …rst- and second-order controls are added. However, adding covariates
  20
     These are an indicator for having any oDesk experience, total oDesk earnings, the number of previous
oDesk assignments, oDesk feedback score, an indicator for not having a feedback score, the wage listed on
the worker’s resume, the number of days since joining oDesk, an indicator for having passed oDesk tests, an
indicator for having a portfolio, the self-reported English skill level, an indicator for not reporting an English
skill level, an indicator for being a¢ liated with an agency of oDesk workers, and the number of degrees listed
on the resume.




                                                       15
does not change the coe¢ cient on the referral dummy at all. This suggests that while the
referral mostly contained observable information about workers’willingness to accept the job,
most of the information contained in the referral about workers’performance and persistence
was not otherwise observable through the workers’resumes. Panel A of Appendix Table 5
displays the coe¢ cients on the …rst-order controls from Panel B of Table 1. (Coe¢ cients on
the second-order controls are harder to interpret.) Unsurprisingly, the coe¢ cients suggest
that prior oDesk experience, more degrees, and passing oDesk tests – variables on which
referred workers look better than non-referred workers –are positively related to performance
and persistence (though these coe¢ cients are typically not signi…cant). However, all else
equal, the two characteristics that explain the most variation in performance are (1) having
been on oDesk longer and (2) not being in an agency. Referred workers look worse on both
these metrics.


3.2     Peer In‡uence Experiment
Next, we compare the performance and turnover of non-monitored referred workers and non-
referred workers in the peer in‡uence experiment. The results are very similar to those of
the selection experiment. The main di¤erence is that in the peer in‡uence experiment, we
also compare the performance of monitored and non-monitored referred workers. We discuss
this comparison in Section 4.
    Each column of Table 2 presents the results of regressing an outcome on an indicator
for being a monitored referred worker and an indicator for being a non-referred worker.
(The omitted group is non-monitored referred workers.) We use the same performance
and persistence metrics as in the selection experiment – submission, on-time submission,
accuracy, and re-application.21 Panel A includes no controls, Panel B includes …rst-order
controls, and Panel C includes …rst- and second-order controls.
    Referred workers performed better than non-referred workers. Non-monitored referred
workers were 13 percentage points more likely to submit, 8 percentage points more likely
to submit on time, and 23 percentage points more likely to re-apply for the job than were
non-referred workers. Panel B of Figure 5 shows that, as in the selection experiment, the
submission gap between referred and non-referred workers grew with time.22
    Observable characteristics from workers’ resumes explain a lot of the variation in out-
  21
     Two of the three performance metrics we consider are metrics the workers were told the manager would
see daily: an indicator for submitting any response on a given day and an indicator for submitting the
response by 11 am. Workers were also told that the manager would see whether they answered all questions,
but we exclude this metric from our analysis since 99.8 percent of submissions were complete.
  22
     Panel B of Appendix Figure 5 shows that the other performance measures (on-time submission and
accuracy) follow similar trends.




                                                   16
comes, but they do not diminish the predictive power of the referral. The proportion of
variance in performance explained increases from approximately 2 percent to 15 to 20 per-
cent when all the controls are added, but the coe¢ cient on the non-referred dummy remains
constant. Panel B of Appendix Table 3 shows that the coe¢ cients on the …rst-order controls
are similar to the coe¢ cients on these controls in the selection experiment regressions.
    These results suggest that referrals contain information about worker performance that
is not present in workers’resumes. In addition to using workers’resumes, …rms could gain
information about worker quality through interviews or a job test, both of which are costly.23
While we do not know what information …rms would gain through interviews, we can ap-
proximate the information that might be gained from a job test using workers’ initial job
performance. Panel D shows that the referral still has predictive power for worker perfor-
mance on the last day of the contract, conditional on worker performance on all prior days.
Panel D replicates Panel C, limiting the observations to the last day of the contract. Re-
gressions in the …rst three columns now additionally control for the worker’s performance
(on the same metric as measured by the dependent variable) on each of the …rst …ve days.
All di¤erences in performance between referred and non-referred workers remain large and
signi…cant.
    The referral also provides information about worker persistence at the …rm above and
beyond the information provided by the worker’s performance throughout the full contract.
The …nal column of Panel D adds controls for each of our performance measures (submission,
on-time submission, and accuracy) on each of the six days. Even controlling for all our
performance measures on all days, referred workers were 15 percentage points more likely
than non-referred workers to want to continue with the …rm.24
    The results suggest that referrals provide important information about worker quality.
Even when referred workers were not monitored by their referrers, they performed much
better than non-referred workers and were more eager to continue with the …rm. This
information was not present on workers’resumes or in their performance on the majority of
the contract.


3.3    Heterogeneity by Referral Type
The above analysis suggests that referrals contain information. Here, we …nd that some refer-
rals contain more information than others. In particular, referrals made by high-performing
 23
    Even when …rms undertake interviews, …rms have considerable uncertainty about worker productivity
when hiring (e.g., Autor and Scarborough, 2008).
 24
    Unreported coe¢ cients in the …nal column of Panel D show that workers who performed better were
more likely to want to continue with the …rm.




                                                 17
referrers and referrals of workers with strong ties to their referrers are particularly informa-
tive.
    Using data from the peer in‡uence experiment, the …rst column of Table 3 shows that
a referrer’s performance is a strong predictor of her referral’s performance. This is not just
a result of the referrer and her referral facing common shocks. The referrer’s performance
in the peer in‡uence experiment is a strong predictor of her referral’s performance in the
selection experiment, four months later (Column 2, Table 3).
    Some of this can be accounted for by observable characteristics. Appendix Table 6 shows
that workers with better observable characteristics refer workers who also have better ob-
servables. Controlling for the referred worker’s observable characteristics in the regression
of referral performance on referrer performance reduces the point estimate on referrer per-
formance. Nonetheless, the referrer’s performance remains an important predictor of her
referral’s performance. This suggests that higher performers refer workers who perform bet-
ter than would even be expected based on their observable characteristics. It also suggests
that not all referred workers are predicted to outperform non-referred workers. In both the
selection and peer in‡uence experiments, these results suggest that referrals from the worst-
performing 20 percent of referrers are predicted to under-perform non-referred workers and,
in fact, they do.
    We turn now to the relationship between referrers and their referrals. Appendix Table 7
shows the distributions of the three relationship variables we have from referrers’reports at
the time of the referral. Referrers tended to refer workers they were close to. Most reported
knowing their referrals "extremely well" (six on a scale of one to six), while only one percent
said they knew their referral "hardly at all" (one on the same scale). According to referrers,
32 percent of referrals interacted with their referrers more than once a day (in person or
remotely) and another 19 percent interacted about once a day; meanwhile, only 7 percent
interacted once a month or less. Just under half of referred workers knew 20 or more people
in common with their referrers.
    Because the relationship variables are positively correlated and predict performance in
the same way, we build an index of relationship strength and for parsimony focus here on the
resulting estimates.25 In the …nal columns of Table 3, we regress referral performance in the
di¤erent experiments on this index. In each experiment, the coe¢ cients suggest that referrals
with stronger ties to their referrers performed better. These coe¢ cients actually increase
  25
     In building the index, we …rst create dummy variables for reportedly knowing the referred worker well
(responding more than three on a scale of one to six when asked how well she knew the referred worker),
interacting with the referral at least once a day, and knowing at least thirty people in common. Our
relationship index is de…ned as the standardized sum of these three binary variables. We exclude the …ve
referred workers whose referrers did not answer all the relationship questions at the time of the referral.




                                                    18
slightly when we add controls for worker characteristics (Panel B). That is because referrals
with stronger ties to their referrers look worse on paper: they have lower earnings, have
been on oDesk for less time, and have fewer educational degrees. Conditional on observable
characteristics, a referred worker with a one standard deviation stronger relationship with
her referrer was approximately four percentage points more likely to submit work in the peer
in‡uence experiment, …ve percentage points more likely to submit the same slogan as her
partner in the team experiment, and (an insigni…cant) three percentage points more likely
to submit work in the selection experiment.
    These results are consistent with the idea that when workers refer people they know well,
they choose workers who do not look as good on paper, but who perform well in ways that
would not be predicted by their observable characteristics.


3.4     Potential Bias from Employers’Hiring Decisions
To test whether referrals provide information about the expected performance of job appli-
cants, we hired all applicants who met our basic hiring criteria. Here, we use our experimental
data to simulate how our comparisons between referred and non-referred workers might have
been biased had we only observed the performance of workers an employer chose to hire.
    Using data from the peer in‡uence experiment, we …rst simulate which workers employers
would hire if they observed only the characteristics on workers’resumes; we then simulate
whom employers would hire if they additionally observed which workers had been referred.
For comparison, we also show the characteristics of workers hired if employers only observed
workers’ referral status and no other characteristics. We assume that employers want to
maximize the fraction of workers who submit a response on a given day and that they know
the relationship between demographics and referral status, and performance.26 Employers
predict each applicant’s performance using the information they observe and then hire the
half of the applicant pool with the best predicted performance.
    Table 4 shows the results of the simulations. Results in the …rst row simulate hiring
under the assumption that employers only see workers’resumes, not who was referred. The
second row simulates hiring under the assumption that employers only see workers’referral
status, so they hire a random sample of referred workers. Finally, the third row simulates
hiring under the assumption that employers observe workers’resume characteristics and who
was referred.
  26
    In practice, an employer may prefer to hire a referred worker over a non-referred worker who is predicted
to perform slightly better either as a source of compensation to an existing employee or because the referred
worker is predicted to persist longer at the …rm. For simplicity and clarity, we abstract away from any such
considerations here.




                                                     19
    If employers observed only workers’resume characteristics, a higher fraction of referred
(58 percent) than non-referred (39 percent) workers would be hired (Panel A). However, if
employers also observed who was referred, the fraction of referred applicants that would be
hired jumps to 79 percent; meantime, only nine percent of non-referred applicants would be
hired. If employers observed only referral status, they would hire 85% of referred workers
and no non-referred workers.
    Panel B displays the summary measure of the hired workers’observable characteristics.
It shows that when employers observe workers’resumes as well as who was referred, hired
non-referred workers are positively selected on observables relative to hired referred workers.
    Panel C shows the actual submission rates of the workers hired in each scenario. Com-
pared to hiring at random, both (1) hiring using only observable characteristics and (2) hiring
using only referral status substantially improve the performance of hired workers. (Hiring
using these strategies relative to hiring at random improves the performance of hired workers
by seven and six percentage points, respectively.) Observing both referral status and observ-
able characteristics brings slightly larger gains in performance than using either in isolation.
These results suggest that referrals might provide a way for …rms to reduce recruiting costs.
Given that much of the gain from using workers’characteristics in hiring could be obtained
from using referral status alone, if collecting information on workers’characteristics is costly,
employers might choose to forgo collecting these characteristics in favor of using referrals.
    The table also shows that if employers did not observe who was referred, hired referred
workers would be substantially (13 percentage points) more likely to actually submit work
than non-referred workers. However, this di¤erence would be only three percentage points
(and statistically indistinguishable from zero) if employers also observed who was referred.
This suggests that if we had only observed the performance of hired workers and did not
observe all the characteristics employers used in their hiring decisions, we might have mistak-
enly concluded that referrals contained little to no information about worker performance.


4     E¤ect of On-the-Job Interactions with Referrers

We now consider whether being referred actually makes referred workers more productive.
First, we consider whether referrals work harder because they believe their performance
will a¤ect their relationship with their referrer or their referrer’s position at the …rm (peer
in‡uence). Second, we consider whether referrals perform better when working directly with
their referrers (team production).




                                               20
4.1     Peer In‡uence
The peer in‡uence experiment shows that peer monitoring does not have a detectable e¤ect
on performance.
    Anecdotal evidence suggests that referred workers in the monitoring treatment were, in
fact, monitored by their referrers. Many referrers in this treatment replied to our daily
performance reports and indicated a strong interest in their referrals’ performance. They
often apologized when their referrals had not completed the task on the preceding day or had
not completed it by the soft deadline, and assured us they would encourage their referrals
to do better on subsequent days. Yet, Table 2 shows that while the coe¢ cients indicate that
monitored referred workers performed better than non-monitored referred workers, these
di¤erences are much smaller than the di¤erences between non-monitored referred workers
and non-referred workers and are never statistically signi…cant.27 The negative (though
again insigni…cant) coe¢ cient on the monitored referred worker dummy in the …nal column
suggests that monitored referred workers were, if anything, slightly less likely to be interested
in continuing with the …rm, perhaps because they disliked being monitored.
    Panel B of Figure 5 sheds some light on how the performance of monitored and non-
monitored referred workers evolved over time. On the …rst day of work, before any per-
formance reports had been sent, monitored and non-monitored referred workers performed
equivalently. The graph suggests that peer in‡uence may have stemmed the drop-o¤ in
performance in days two, three, and four among monitored referred workers, though the
di¤erences between monitored and non-monitored referred workers on those days is not sig-
ni…cant. By day six, however, monitored referred workers were no more likely than their
non-monitored counterparts to submit work.
    Overall, we do not …nd robust evidence in favor of peer in‡uence, though we cannot rule
out the presence of peer in‡uence, particularly at the beginning of the contract.


4.2     Team Production
The team experiment shows that referred workers perform better when working directly with
their referrers. In particular, referred workers performed much better when working with
their own referrer than with a randomly-selected referrer they did not know.
   We …rst consider the e¤ect of team type on measures that do not rely on teamwork, but
may be indicative of individual diligence. These are indicators for logging in to our site
  27
     Using seemingly unrelated regression, we calculate the variance-covariance matrix between the coef-
…cients in these three performance regressions and test the hypothesis that all three monitored referred
coe¢ cients are equal to zero. We are unable to reject this hypothesis.




                                                  21
to see the given PSA task, submitting work, correctly answering the question about their
own individual reading, and including the criteria from their own information sheets in their
slogans.28
    In Panel A of Table 5, each measure of individual diligence is regressed on an indicator for
being in a Type A team (a referred worker paired with her own referrer) and an indicator for
being in a Type C team (a non-referred worker paired with a referrer). The omitted group
contains workers in Type B teams (referred workers paired with someone else’s referrer).
Thus, the coe¢ cients on the Type A dummy indicate how much better referred workers
perform when paired with their own referrer than with someone else’s referrer; the coe¢ cients
on the Type C dummy indicate how much worse non-referred workers perform than referred
workers when both are paired with someone else’s referrer. Each observation is a partner
pair, but in these diligence measures, we consider only referred and non-referred workers.
Referrers’performance does not vary signi…cantly across team types. First- and second-order
controls for both partners’observable characteristics are included throughout.
    On average, referred workers performed well on these diligence measures. Similar to our
previous results, non-referred workers were less diligent than referred workers, even when
neither group was working with a partner they previously knew.
    Referred workers were …ve percentage points more likely to submit work and to correctly
answer the question about their own reading when they were paired with their own referrer
than when paired with someone else’s referrer. Given that these are measures of diligence
more than teamwork, this could suggest that referred workers exerted more e¤ort when
working with their referrer. This may be because, in this case, their performance a¤ected
their referrers’output. Alternatively, it could result from peer in‡uence if working together
made it easier for referrers to monitor their referrals.
    Panel B compares team performance by team type. Observations are again at the partner-
pair level. Referred workers did particularly well when working with their referrers. Referred
workers were, for example, substantially (29 percentage points) more likely to answer the
team question the same way when working with their own referrers than when paired with
referrers they did not know; of the Type A teams that both submitted responses, only six
percent failed to submit the same response to the team question. The results are consistent
across team performance metrics. The third column shows similar results for submitting
the same slogan. Only about one-third of Type B teams submitted the same slogan, while
Type A teams were more than twice as likely to do so.29 Appendix A shows that in addi-
  28
     If a worker did not answer the question about her reading, she is marked as not answering it correctly.
Similarly, if she did not submit a slogan, she is marked as not including her own criterion in the slogan.
  29
     One hypothesis is that …rms could replicate the bene…t of team production that comes from referrals
by creating teams of workers with similar observable characteristics. However, we do not …nd evidence that




                                                    22
tion to performing better, Type A teams enjoyed their task more, spent more time on the
task, and communicated more. They performed better even conditional on time spent and
communication.


5     External Validity
Completing these experiments in an online labor market provides two major bene…ts. First,
it allows us to observe the performance and persistence of workers without the …lter of …rms’
hiring decisions. Second, it allows us to vary parameters of the jobs to cleanly identify why
referred workers perform better and have less turnover than non-referred workers. As with
any …eld experiment we might run, however, the results of this experiment come from one
particular labor market, in this case an online labor market.
    The types of tasks in our experiments are not uncommon in o- ine labor markets. Autor,
Levy, and Murnane (2003) classi…es tasks into …ve categories, now prevalent in the skills
literature: expert thinking, complex communication, routine cognitive tasks, routine manual
tasks, and non-routine manual tasks. Our selection and peer in‡uence experiments center
on routine cognitive tasks like basic computations and data entry.
    Routine cognitive tasks are prevalent in o- ine labor markets, especially among workers
with a high school degree or some college. Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003) de…nes a
composite measure of routine cognitive tasks which they map to Census occupations using
O*Net data. They …nd that occupations in o¢ ce and administrative support are particularly
heavy in routine cognitive tasks; examples include cashiers, customer service representatives,
and tellers.
    We think the principal di¤erence between oDesk and o- ine labor markets is the incentives
workers face. Because oDesk jobs are typically shorter than o- ine jobs, oDesk workers are
often less tied to any particular employer than are workers in other labor markets. Prior to
our experiment, the average job taken by the referrers in our sample paid $237 and lasted
81 working hours. If oDesk workers are less concerned about their reputations with their
employers than are most workers in o- ine labor markets, this could lead referrals to contain
less information about worker quality and on-the-job interactions with referrers to be less
e¤ective in improving worker performance.
teams in which partners had similar characteristics perform better. We create indicators for whether both
partners were of the same gender (using workers’names and honori…cs), whether they lived in the same city,
and whether they had previously worked at the same oDesk …rm; we also measure the di¤erence between the
partners’wages. Partners in Type A teams look more similar on each of these dimensions than do partners
in Type B teams. None of these similarities positively predicts performance, nor does including measures of
them in the regressions a¤ect the estimated e¤ect of working with one’s own referrer.




                                                    23
     Referrers in our experiments were not provided compensation to provide referrals or to
provide high-quality referrals. They may have received a social bene…t or felt a warm glow
from helping a friend …nd employment (e.g., Beaman et al., 2013). But, their incentive to
make high-quality referrals was implicit: by making high-quality referrals they could improve
their relationship with our …rm. We did try to provide some incentives for workers to care
about their relationship with our …rm by implying that if they performed well, they could
have a long-term relationship with us. Nonetheless, this working relationship was still far
less longsighted than working relationships in most labor markets. The fact that referrals
still contained positive information about worker quality despite referrers’ relatively weak
incentives to refer high-quality workers suggests that referrals are likely to contain positive
(and perhaps even more positive) information about worker quality in other labor markets.
     Relatedly, if referrers are less concerned about their reputations with their employers
on oDesk, they may exert less pressure on their referrals to perform well, weakening the
e¤ect of peer in‡uence. Since we were aware that peer in‡uence might not be as strong a
motivator on oDesk as in other labor markets, we aimed explicitly to maximize the e¤ect of
peer in‡uence in the monitoring treatment of the peer in‡uence experiment. That we …nd
very limited e¤ects of peer in‡uence, then, suggests peer in‡uence is likely not an important
mechanism in this context. Nonetheless, peer in‡uence may still be important in other labor
markets, especially in labor markets in which referrers care more about ongoing relationships
with …rms.


6    Conclusion
The use of social connections is ubiquitous in the labor market. More than half of jobs
are found through informal connections and …rms are more likely to hire referred than non-
referred applicants, all else equal. This suggests that workers without social connections may
be disadvantaged in the labor market (e.g., Calvo-Armengol and Jackson, 2004; Montgomery,
1991). This paper examines why …rms prefer to hire referred workers: do referrals allow …rms
to hire more productive workers because they signal worker quality or because being referred
actually makes workers more productive?
    Understanding why …rms prefer to hire referred workers can inform potential policy
responses that may help unconnected workers. For example, if referrals provide information
about worker quality, then providing unconnected workers with other ways to signal their
abilities may improve their labor market outcomes (as in Pallais, 2014). On the other hand,
if team production actually causes referrals to be more productive, information approaches
may not help unconnected workers. Nepotism may also be harder to eliminate.



                                              24
    We …nd strong evidence that on-the-job interactions between referred workers and their
referrers lead referrals to perform better. While we do not …nd evidence of peer in‡uence,
our results suggest that team production is an important bene…t of referrals. However, we
also …nd strong evidence that referrals contain information about worker performance and
turnover. In our context, referrals contain information about general productivity. In other
contexts, referrals might also signal that a worker is a particularly good match for a given
…rm or job. While this explanation is precluded in our experiments because referrers did
not have information about the job they were referring for, it could be important in other
settings.
    From our experiments, we learn that referrals made by high-performers and referrals
of workers with strong ties to their referrers were particularly informative. Yet, we do
not know why: that is, whether referrers actively choose referrals they know will perform
well (as in Beaman and Magruder, 2012) or whether these results obtain simply because
productive workers have productive friends (as in Montgomery, 1991). Understanding why
referrals contain so much information about worker quality is an important question for
future research.




                                            25
References
Autor, D. H., F. Levy, and R. J. Murnane (2003): “The skill content of recent tech-
 nological change: An empirical exploration,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp.
 1279–1333.

Autor, D. H., and D. Scarborough (2008): “Does job testing harm minority workers?
 Evidence from retail establishments,”The Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 219–277.

Bandiera, O., I. Barankay, and I. Rasul (2005): “Social preferences and the response
 to incentives: Evidence from personnel data,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3),
 917–962.

        (2012): “Team incentives: Evidence from a …rm level experiment,” CEPR Discus-
  sion Paper DP8776.

Beaman, L., N. Keleher, and J. Magruder (2013): “Do job networks disadvantage
 women?: Evidence from a recruitment experiment in Malawi,”Working Paper.

Beaman, L., and J. Magruder (2012): “Who gets the job referral? Evidence from a
 social networks experiment,”American Economic Review, 102(7), 3574–3593.

Bentolila, S., C. Michelacci, and J. Suarez (2010): “Social contacts and occupational
 choice,”Economica, 77(305), 20–45.

Bewley, T. F. (1999): Why wages don’t fall during a recession. Harvard University Press.

Blau, G. (1990): “Exploring the mediating mechanisms a¤ecting the relationship of recruit-
 ment source to employee performance,”Journal of Vocational Behavior, 37(3), 303–320.

Brown, M., E. Setren, and G. Topa (2012): “Do informal referrals lead to better
 matches? Evidence from a …rm’s employee referral system,” FRB of New York Sta¤
 Report 568.

Bryan, G. T., D. Karlan, and J. Zinman (2014): “Referrals: Peer screening and en-
 forcement in a consumer credit …eld experiment,” American Economic Journal: Micro-
 economics, forthcoming.

Burks, S., B. Cowgill, M. Hoffman, and M. Housman (2015): “The value of hiring
 through referrals,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(2), 805–839.




                                           26
Calvo-Armengol, A., and M. O. Jackson (2004): “The e¤ects of social networks on
 employment and inequality,”American Economic Review, 94(3), 426–454.

Castilla, E. J. (2005): “Social networks and employee performance in a call center,”
 American Journal of Sociology, 110(5), 1243–1283.

Costa, D. L., and M. E. Kahn (2003): “Cowards and heroes: Group loyalty in the
 American Civil War,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(2), 519–548.

Dhillon, A., V. Iversen, and G. Torsvik (2012): “Employee referral, social proximity,
 and worker discipline,”Working Paper.

Dustmann, C., A. Glitz, and U. Schönberg (2011): “Referral-based job search net-
 works,”IZA Discussion Paper 5777.

Fernandez, R. M., and N. Weinberg (1997): “Sifting and sorting: Personal contacts
  and hiring in a retail bank,”American Sociological Review, 62(6), 883–902.

Ghani, E., W. R. Kerr, and C. Stanton (2014): “Diasporas and outsourcing: Evidence
 from oDesk and India,”Management Science, 60(7), 1677–1697.

Gilchrist, D., M. Luca, and D. Malhotra (2015): “When 3+1>4: Gift structure and
  reciprocity in the …eld,”Management Science, forthcoming.

Granovetter, M. (1995): Getting a Job: A Study of Contacts and Careers. University of
 Chicago Press, Chicago.

Heath, R. (2015): “Why do …rms hire using referrals?: Evidence from Bangladeshi garment
 factories,”Working Paper.

Holzer, H. J. (1987): “Hiring procedures in the …rm: Their economic determinants and
 outcomes,”NBER Working Paper 2185.

Holzer, H. J. (1999): “Will employers hire welfare recipients? Recent survey evidence
 from Michigan,”Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 18(3), 449–472.

Horton, J. J. (2013a): “Computer-mediated matchmaking: Facilitating employer search
 and screening,”Working Paper.

Horton, J. J. (2013b): “The e¤ects of subsidizing employer search,”Working Paper.

         (2014): “Price ‡oors and employer preferences: Evidence from a minimum wage
  experiment,”Working Paper.


                                          27
Ioannides, Y. M., and L. D. Loury (2004): “Job information networks, neighborhood
  e¤ects, and inequality,”Journal of Economic Literature, 42(4), 1056–1093.

Kramarz, F., and O. N. Skans (2014): “When strong ties are strong: Networks and
 youth labour market entry,”Review of Economic Studies, 81(3), 1164–1200.

Kugler, A. D. (2003): “Employee referrals and e¢ ciency wages,”Labour Economics, 10(5),
 531–556.

Lyons, E. (2014): “Team production in international labor markets: Experimental evidence
  from the …eld,”Working Paper.

Montgomery, J. D. (1991): “Social networks and labor-market outcomes: Toward an
 economic analysis,”American Economic Review, 81(5), 1408–1418.

oDesk Corporation (2013): Slide Deck with Statistics on the oDesk Marketplace.

Pallais, A. (2014): “Ine¢ cient hiring in entry-level labor markets,” American Economic
  Review, 104(11), 3565–3599.

Petersen, T., I. Saporta, and M.-D. L. Seidel (2000): “O¤ering a job: Meritocracy
 and social networks,”American Journal of Sociology, 106(3), 763–816.

Pistaferri, L. (1999): “Informal networks in the Italian labor market,” Giornale degli
  Economisti e Annali di Economia, pp. 355–375.

Regenstein, M., J. A. Meyer, and J. D. Hicks (1999): “Job prospects for welfare
 recipients: Employers speak out,”Urban Institute Series A, No. 25.

Simon, C. J., and J. T. Warner (1992): “Matchmaker, matchmaker: The e¤ect of old
  boy networks on job match quality, earnings, and tenure,” Journal of Labor Economics,
  10(3), 306–330.

Stanton, C., and C. Thomas (2014): “Landing the …rst job: The value of intermediaries
  in online hiring,”CEP Discussion Paper 1316.

Topa, G. (2011): “Labor markets and referrals,”Handbook of Social Economics, pp. 1193–
 1221.

Wang, S.-Y. (2013): “Marriage networks, nepotism, and labor market outcomes in China,”
 American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5(3), 91–112.




                                          28
                                                        Figure'1.'oDesk'Profile'Example'
                                                          Figure 1: oDesk Profile Example
                                                                        '




                                                                                                                                                                           '
'
                                                                              '
                                                                              '
                                                          Figure 2: The Recruitment Process
                                                             Figure 2A. The Experimental Recruitment Process
                               Referrer
                             Recruitment
                          Experienced workers                                     Recruitment process run separately to yield each of
                             invited to apply                                          • the Peer Influence Experiment Sample
                         • Posted wage ≤ $5                                            • the Team Experiment Sample
                         • Earnings ≥ $50                                         !
                         • Average job                                            * All recruited workers located in the Philippines
                           feedback score ≥ 4                                     ** Please see Figure 3 for details on recruiting the Selection Experiment Sample




           Does not qualify                          Qualifies
    •   Does not apply                      •   Applies at wage ≤ $3
    •   Or applies at wage > $3             •   And initializes the job
    •   Or does not initialize job




                                                  Asked to refer
                                                                                                 Referred Worker                          Non-Referred Worker
                                                                                                   Recruitment                                Recruitment
             No valid referral                      Valid referral                                Valid referrals invited                        Random sample of
    •   Refers no one                    •      Referral has posted                                      to apply                               workers invited to apply
    •   Or referral has posted                  wage ≤ $5                                        • Posted wage ≤ $5                             •Posted wage ≤ $5
        wage > $5                        •      And referral does not                            • And referrer does
    •   Or referral works in same               work in same room                                  not work in same
        room                                                                                       room




        Referral does not qualify                Referral qualifies           Does not qualify              Qualifies        Does not qualify             Qualifies
    •   Referral does not apply         •       Referral applies at       •    Does not apply          •   Applies at       • Does not apply         •   Applies at
    •   Or applies at wage > $3                 wage ≤ $3                 •    Or applies at               wage ≤ $3        • Or applies at
                                                                                                                                                         wage ≤ $3
                                                                               wage > $3                                      wage > $3


                                                      Referrers                                      Referred Workers                           Non-Referred Workers




                                                                                      29
        Figure 2B.
        Figure  3: The
                    TheExperiment
                        ExperimentSamples
                                    Samples


            Peer Influence Experiment Sample
                    (Recruitment as in Figure 2)

Referrers              Referred Workers             Non-Referred Workers




                       Receives job offer                 Receives job offer
                         from Selection                     from Selection
                        Experiment firm                    Experiment firm


            Does not accept                 Does not accept
               job offer                       job offer

                         Accepts job offer               Accepts job offer




                      Referred Workers              Non-Referred Workers

                              Selection Experiment Sample




                 Team Experiment Sample
                    (Recruitment as in Figure 2)

Referrers              Referred Workers             Non-Referred Workers




                                30
             Figure 4: Treatments in the Peer Influence and Team Experiments

                                           (Recruitment as in Figure 2)

                                      a. Peer Influence Experiment

                           Referred Workers                                                Non-Referred Workers

                               Randomization


    Monitoring Treatment                   Non-Monitoring Treatment



                Monitored                                 Non-Monitored                         Non-Referred Worker
             Referred Worker                             Referred Worker
                                                Informed that manager (but not
                                                                                                             !
•   Informed that manager and
                                            •                                                   •   Informed that
    referrer will see performance               referrer) will see performance                      manager will see
    updates, and whether the worker             updates, and whether the worker                     performance
    re-applies for continuation of the          re-applies for continuation of the                  updates, and
    job                                         job                                                 whether the worker
•   Referrer informed that
                                            •   Referrer informed that                              re-applies for
    management position available               management position available,                      continuation of the
    with the implication that referral’s        and referrer will be judged on                      job
    performance influences likelihood           own merits (not on referral’s
    of promotion                                performance)
•   Referrer receives updates on
                                            •   Referrer receives no updates on
    referral’s performance, and on              referral’s performance, or on
    whether or not referral re-applies          whether or not referral re-applies



                                           b. Team Experiment

       Type A Team                              Type B Team                              Type C Team
     Referred Worker and                    Referred Worker and                       Non-Referred Worker and
        Own Referrer                       Someone Else’s Referrer                          a Referrer



      Emma         David                    Emma             David                    Emma                  David
     Referrer     Referrer                 Referrer         Referrer                 Referrer              Referrer



     Emma’s        David’s                 Emma’s           David’s                Sue                     Dan
     Referral      Referral                Referral         Referral           Non-Referred            Non-Referred




                                                       31
                                                     Figure 5: Submission Rates by Day


                                 a. Selection Experiment                               b. Peer Influence Experiment
             .9




                                                                              .9
             .8




                                                                              .8
   Fraction Submitting




                                                                              .7
                  .7




                                                                              .6
    .6




                                                                              .5
             .5




                                                                              .4
             .4




                                                                                   Day 1   Day 2   Day 3   Day 4   Day 5   Day 6
                         Day 1    Day 2      Day 3     Day 4     Day 5
                                                                                              Monitored Referred Workers
                                          Referred Workers                                    Non-Monitored Referred Workers
                                          Non-Referred Workers                                Non-Referred Workers



Notes: Error bars denote 95% confidence intervals.




                                                                         32
                                Table 1. Performance and Persistence in the Selection Experiment
                                              Base Group is All Referred Workers


                              Sample: All Referred and         Sample: Referred and Non-Referred Workers Who Accepted Job
                               Non-Referred Workers                                       Offer
                                                                                    On-Time
                                 Accepted Job Offer            Submission          Submission         Accuracy        Re-Application

                                                                            A. No Controls
Non-Referred                          -0.167***                  -0.106**           -0.107**            -0.035           -0.195***
                                       (0.047)                    (0.046)            (0.048)           (0.026)            (0.059)


Observations                             435                       1,325              1,325             1,325               265
R-squared                               0.029                     0.013              0.012              0.003              0.046

                                                                     B. First-Order Controls
Non-Referred                           -0.071                    -0.100*           -0.098*             -0.024             -0.123*
                                       (0.056)                   (0.057)           (0.059)             (0.033)            (0.071)

Observations                             435                      1,325              1,325              1,325               265
R-squared                               0.125                     0.079              0.077              0.048              0.088

                                                               C. First- and Second-Order Controls
Non-Referred                           -0.046                    -0.114*            -0.108         -0.043                -0.172**
                                       (0.064)                    (0.064)          (0.067)         (0.036)                (0.086)

Observations                             435                      1,325              1,325              1,325               265
R-squared                               0.268                     0.236              0.236              0.186              0.349

Base Group Mean                         0.678                     0.763              0.735              0.363              0.815

Notes: Each column in each panel reports the results of a separate regression of the dependent variable (indicated by the
column) on an indicator for being a non-referred worker. Panel A includes no controls; Panel B includes the first-order controls
for worker characteristics listed in footnote 20; and Panel C also includes second-order controls (the square of each non-binary
characteristic in footnote 20 and the interaction of each pair of characteristics in footnote 20). Observations in the first and final
columns (Accepted Job Offer, Re-Application ) are workers, while observations in the middle three columns of regressions
(Submission , On-Time Submission , Accuracy ) are worker-days. Regressions in the first column (Accepted Job Offer ) include
all workers contacted for the selection experiment; regressions in the remaining columns include only workers who accepted the
job offer. Standard errors are clustered at the worker level when observations are worker-days, and Huber-White standard errors
are presented when observations are workers. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                                  33
                        Table 2. Performance and Persistence in the Peer Influence Experiment
                                   Base Group is Non-Monitored Referred Workers

                                  Submission          On-Time Submission            Accuracy           Re-Application

                                                             A. All Days, No Controls
Monitored Referred                   0.036                    0.053                 0.034                   -0.032
                                    (0.042)                  (0.047)               (0.039)                 (0.030)

Non-Referred                       -0.132***                 -0.079*                 -0.101**             -0.225***
                                    (0.042)                  (0.045)                  (0.039)              (0.038)

Base Group Mean                      0.757                      0.563                 0.640                 0.953

Observations                         2,610                      2,610                 2,610                  435
R-squared                            0.027                      0.013                 0.020                 0.085

                                                         B. All Days, First-Order Controls
Monitored Referred                   0.020                      0.038                 0.014                 -0.035
                                    (0.042)                   (0.046)                 (0.040)              (0.034)

Non-Referred                       -0.115**                  -0.080*                 -0.095**             -0.193***
                                    (0.047)                  (0.048)                  (0.043)              (0.044)
Base Group Mean                      0.757                      0.563                 0.640                 0.953

Observations                         2,610                      2,610                 2,610                  435
R-squared                            0.075                      0.061                 0.063                 0.156

                                                  C. All Days, First- and Second-Order Controls
Monitored Referred                   0.004                     0.045                   0.002                -0.044
                                    (0.041)                   (0.047)                 (0.039)              (0.037)

Non-Referred                       -0.135***                   -0.067                -0.100**             -0.196***
                                    (0.049)                   (0.052)                 (0.046)              (0.052)

Base Group Mean                      0.757                      0.563                 0.640                 0.953

Observations                         2,610                      2,610                 2,610                  435
R-squared                            0.181                      0.139                 0.163                 0.264

                               D. Last Day Only, First- and Second-Order Controls & Daily Performance Controls
Monitored Referred                 -0.058                    0.018                -0.046              -0.053
                                   (0.048)                  (0.057)               (0.042)            (0.038)

Non-Referred                       -0.172***                 -0.102*                 -0.103**             -0.149***
                                    (0.053)                  (0.056)                  (0.046)              (0.050)

Base Group Mean                      0.703                      0.500                 0.600                 0.953

Observations                          435                        435                   435                   435
R-squared                            0.614                      0.506                 0.622                 0.434

Notes: Each column in each panel reports the results of a separate regression of the dependent variable (indicated by
the column) on an indicator for being a referred worker in the monitoring treatment and an indicator for being a non-
referred worker. As in Table 1, Panel A includes no controls; Panel B includes the first-order controls for worker
characteristics listed in footnote 20; and Panel C includes first- and second-order controls. Regressions in Panels A, B,
and C include observations on all six days of work. Regressions in Panel D are limited to observations on workers'
last day of work and include first- and second-order controls, as well as daily performance controls; each of the first
three columns includes controls for the worker's performance as measured by the dependent variable on each of the
first five days of work. The final column includes controls for each of the three performance measures on each of the
six days. Observations in the first three columns of regressions (Submission, On-Time Submission, Accuracy ) are
worker-days; observations in the final column (Re-Application ) are workers. Standard errors are clustered at the
worker level when observations are worker-days, and Huber-White standard errors are presented when observations
are workers. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                           34
                                                                  Table 3. Heterogeneity in Referral Performance
                                                   All Experiments, Dependent Variables Indicate Referred Workers' Performance

                                                                                                  A. No Controls

                                     Submission Rate          Submission Rate                       Submission                       Submission                   Same Slogan
                               (Peer Influence Experiment) (Selection Experiment)              (Selection Experiment)        (Peer Influence Experiment)       (Team Experiment)
Referrer's Submission Rate,              0.421***                 0.342***
Peer Influence Experiment                 (0.066)                  (0.084)

Relationship Strength Index
                                                                                                        0.015                            0.030                       0.044**
                                                                                                       (0.026)                          (0.022)                      (0.021)
Dependent Variable Mean                    0.775                       0.763                           0.760                            0.775                         0.520

Observations                                255                         173                             855                             1,512                          560
R-squared                                  0.192                       0.115                           0.001                            0.006                         0.007

                                                                                              B. First-Order Controls

                                     Submission Rate          Submission Rate                       Submission                       Submission                   Same Slogan
                               (Peer Influence Experiment) (Selection Experiment)              (Selection Experiment)        (Peer Influence Experiment)       (Team Experiment)
Referrer's Submission Rate,              0.392***                  0.194**
Peer Influence Experiment                 (0.068)                  (0.084)

Relationship Strength Index                                                                             0.027                           0.036*                       0.046**
                                                                                                       (0.023)                          (0.021)                      (0.020)

Dependent Variable Mean                    0.775                       0.763                           0.760                            0.775                         0.520

Observations                                255                         173                             855                             1,512                          560
R-squared                                  0.266                       0.272                           0.186                            0.098                         0.051

Notes: Each column in each panel reports the results of a separate regression where the dependent variable is indicated by the column. All dependent variables indicate referral
performance. In the first two columns, observations are referred workers. In these columns, referred workers' average performance over the course of the indicated experiment is
regressed on their referrer's average submission rate in the peer influence experiment. Huber-White standard errors are in parenthesis. In the third and fourth columns,
observations are worker-days and standard errors are clustered by worker. In the final column, observations are at the worker-PSA level and standard errors are clustered by
blocking group. In each of the three final columns, the dependent variable is regressed on an index for the strength of the referrer-referral relationship. This index is defined in
Section 3.3 of the text and has mean zero and standard deviation one. Regressions in Panel A include no controls, while regressions in Panel B include the first-order controls for
worker characteristics listed in footnote 20. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                                                         35
                                                                          Table 4. Simulated Hiring
                                                      Peer Influence Experiment: Assuming Top 50% of Applicants Hired

                                                 A. Fraction Hired              B. Measure of Observables                          C. Actual Submission Rate

                                                                                 Hired         Hired Non-            Hired         Hired Non-
                                             Referred      Non-Referred         Referred        Referred            Referred        Referred        All Hired
                                            Applicants      Applicants          Workers         Workers             Workers         Workers         Workers         Difference

Observe Characteristics Only                    58%             39%               80%              78%                 83%             70%            78.5%           13%**
Observe Referral Status Only                    85%              0%               74%              N/A                 77%             N/A            77.5%            N/A
Observe Characteristics & Referral Status       79%              9%               77%              83%                 79%             76%            79.1%            3%

Applicant Pool Average                                                                74%              68%                77%              63%             71%            15%***
Notes: Each row presents the results of a separate hiring scenario. In each scenario, employers use the available characteristics to predict workers’ performance (likelihood of
submitting work) and hire the 50% of workers with the highest predicted performance. The first row simulates hiring under the assumption that employers observe only
workers' resume characteristics, but not their referral status. To calculate a given worker's predicted performance in this scenario, the performance of all other workers
(excluding herself) are regressed on their resume characteristics listed in footnote 20. The estimated coefficients are then used to predict the excluded workers’ own
performance. Throughout the table, this prediction of performance – based on a worker’s observable characteristics alone – is used as the measure of observable characteristics
in Panel B. The second row assumes that employers observe only referral status, so they hire a random sample of referred workers such that 50% of the workforce is hired. The
third row simulates hiring assuming employers observe workers' resume characteristics and referral status. To calculate a given worker's predicted performance here, the
performance of all other workers (excluding herself) are regressed on their resume characteristics and referral status and the resulting coefficients are used to predict the
worker’s performance. For each scenario, Panel A presents the fraction of referred and non-referred workers hired. Panel B presents the estimated probability, based on their
observable characteristics alone, that hired referred and non-referred workers submit work. Panel C presents the actual submission rate of the hired workers. The column
labeled Difference provides the difference in average submission rates of the referred and non-referred workers hired under each scenario. **, *** denote the difference is
significant at the 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                                                       36
                              Table 5. Individual Diligence and Team Performance
       Team Experiment: Base Group is Referred Workers Paired with Someone Else's Referrer (Type B Teams)

                                                                    A. Individual Diligence

                                                                              Individual Question     Own Criterion in
                                           Logged in          Submitted             Correct              Slogan
Referred Worker When Working                 0.018             0.046**               0.053*               0.004
with Own Referrer (Type A)                  (0.018)            (0.018)              (0.030)              (0.035)

Non-Referred Worker When                     -0.082             -0.129**           -0.159***               -0.039
Working with Referrer (Type C)              (0.053)              (0.055)            (0.054)                (0.057)

Base Group Mean (Type B)                     0.883               0.837               0.755                  0.440

Observations                                  846                 846                 846                    846
R-Squared                                    0.419               0.381               0.294                  0.180

                                                                     B. Team Performance

                                                           Team Question                                Same Slogan
                                        Both Submitted        Matches            Same Slogan           & Both Criteria
Referred Worker and Own Referrer           0.099***          0.287***              0.372***               0.103***
Team (Type A)                               (0.024)           (0.030)               (0.034)                (0.025)

Non-Referred Worker and Referrer           -0.122**              -0.062              -0.023                 0.004
Team (Type C)                               (0.058)             (0.054)             (0.055)                (0.036)

Base Group Mean (Type B)                     0.730               0.496               0.337                  0.142

Observations                                  846                 846                 846                    846
R-Squared                                    0.312               0.317               0.313                  0.157

Notes: Each column in each panel reports the results of a separate regression of the dependent variable indicated by the
column on indicators for being in a Type A team and for being in a Type C team. Observations in Panel A are at the
worker-PSA level; only referred and non-referred workers (not referrers) are included. Observations in Panel B are at
the team-PSA level. All regressions include the first- and second-order controls for worker characteristics listed in
footnote 20. Standard errors are clustered at the blocking group level. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and
1% levels, respectively.




                                                           37
Appendix A: Time Spent, Enjoyment, and Communica-
tion in the Team Experiment
One reason that referrals may perform particularly well when working with their referrers
is that they exert more effort in these pairings. They may face a higher return to effort
because their effort also affects their friends’ performance. Alternatively, if they enjoy working
with their referrers, they may face lower cost of effort. While we cannot directly measure
effort, we can analyze the amount of time workers spent on each of the three PSAs. (oDesk
automatically records the time workers spend on the job.) Panel A of Appendix Table 8
shows time worked by team type, first for referrers and then for referred and non-referred
workers.
    When partnered with someone they did not know, referrers spent the same amount of
time (around 37 minutes) on the task regardless of whether their partner was a non-referred
worker or someone else’s referral. When working with their own referral, however, they spent
an average of six extra minutes on the task. Referred workers also spent significantly (13
percent) more time on the task when working with their own referrers.1
    Type A teams also communicated more than the other team types. Panel A of Appendix
Table 9 shows how the team types differed in their communication methods. We regress each
communication outcome on indicators for being in Type A and Type C teams; as before, the
base group is Type B teams. Controls for the characteristics of referred and non-referred
workers are included throughout. The first column considers chat box use, defined as both
partners typing at least one message in the chat box. The second column considers the total
number of messages sent by both partners during the task and is limited to teams that used
the chat box. Because we directly observe what is written in the chat box, both of these
measures are known for all teams and do not rely on worker reports.
    The last two columns consider communication outside the chat box, such as on Skype.
When workers submitted their slogans for each task, we asked if they had used other forms
of communication. We code teams as using other forms of communication if at least one
partner reported using other forms of communication. The third column addresses selection
into answering this question. Here we regress a dummy for whether at least one teammate
answered this question on team type. In the final column, the dependent variable is an
indicator for reporting using other forms of communication. This final specification includes
only teams that answered the communication question.
    Type A teams communicated the most, both in and out of the chat box. Relative to Type

   1
    We do not know exactly what the workers were doing during this time. Referred workers could also have
been more likely to spend working time off task when working with their referrers.



                                                   38
B teams, Type A teams were slightly, though insignificantly, more likely to use the chat box.
When they did use the chat box, Type A teams sent about one-third more messages, though
this difference is also not significant. The biggest difference between the communication
of Type A and Type B teams, however, is in the frequency with which they used other
forms of communication. While 38 percent of Type B teams reported using other forms of
communication, Type A teams were about twice as likely to do so; the magnitude of this
difference implies that the difference itself cannot be driven by the small difference in the
likelihood of answering this question.2
    In general, workers who spent more time on the task and communicated more performed
better. For example, teams that sent the median number of messages in the chat box (eight)
were 18 percentage points more likely to answer the team question the same way and 14
percentage points more likely to provide the same slogan than were teams that did not use
the chat box, all else equal. Teams in which each partner spent an additional five minutes on
the task were, all else equal, three percentage points more likely to have their team question
match and two percentage points more likely to submit the same slogan.
    Even conditioning on the type of communication used, the number of messages sent, and
the minutes spent by each partner, however, Type A teams still outperformed Type B teams.
We replicate the main team performance specifications (from Panel B of Table 5), adding as
controls an indicator for using the chat box, the number of messages sent in the chat box, an
indicator for using other methods of communication, and the number of minutes spent by
each partner.3 Type A teams remained 14 percentage points more likely to provide the same
answer to the team question and 22 percentage points more likely to submit the same slogan
than Type B teams.
    Panel B of Appendix Table 8 shows that workers also preferred being on Type A teams.
After they had completed all three tasks, workers reported which partner(s) they would be
interested in partnering with again; workers could choose as many or as few partners as they
wanted.4 We find that referrers were significantly more likely to want to work again with
referred workers they did not know than with non-referred workers.5 But, referrers were more
than twice as likely to want to partner again with their own referral as with someone else’s

   2
      At least one partner answered this question in 95 percent of Type B teams; Type B teams were
insignificantly more likely to answer this question than either of the other team types.
    3
      If neither partner answered the question about using other forms of communication, we set the indicator
for having reported communication outside the chat box to zero. Thus, this dummy also captures the effect
of having at least one partner submit work.
    4
      Some workers (about 20 percent) did not answer the question, mostly because they did not complete the
third PSA task. But for those who answered, we know whether or not they wanted to work again with each
of their three partners.
    5
      Referrers did not know who, besides their own referrals, had been referred to the firm.



                                                     39
referral. Similarly, referred workers were substantially more likely to want to work again with
their own referrer than with someone else’s referrer.




                                              40
Appendix(Figure(1.(Peer(Influence(Experiment(Task(Site,(Referred(and(Non@Referred(
      Appendix Figure 1: Peer Influence Experiment Task Site, Referred and Non-Referred
Workers(                                 Workers
(




                                                                                (
                                          (
                  Appendix(Figure(2.(Performance(Report(Example(
                                          (




                                          41
                                                  (
                        (
Appendix(Figure(2.(Performance(Report(Example(
  Appendix Figure 2: Performance Report Example
                        (




                      42
Appendix(Figure(3.(Selection(Experiment(Task(Site(
 Appendix Figure 3: Selection Experiment Task Site
                         (




                                                     (
                       (
                       (




                           43
Appendix(Figure(4.(Team(Experiment(Task(Site(
Appendix Figure 4: Team Experiment Task Site
                      (




                                                (
                      (
                      (
                      (
                      (
                      (
                      (
                      (
                      (
                      (
                      (
                      (
                      (
                      (
                      (
                      (
                      (
                      (
                      (
                      (
                      (
                      (
                      (
                     44
                                   Appendix Figure 5: On-Time Submission and Accuracy Rates by Day


                                            a. Selection Experiment                                     b. Peer Influence Experiment




                                                                                         .8
                  .8
    Fraction Submitting On Time
                          .7




                                                                                         .6
              .6




                                                                                         .4
   .5             .4




                                                                                         .2
                                  Day 1   Day 2      Day 3          Day 4   Day 5             Day 1   Day 2     Day 3        Day 4       Day 5   Day 6
                  .5




                                                                                         .7
                                                                                         .6
   Average Accuracy
                 .4




                                                                                         .5
   .3




                                                                                         .4
                                                                                         .3
                  .2




                                                                                              Day 1   Day 2     Day 3        Day 4       Day 5   Day 6
                                  Day 1   Day 2      Day 3          Day 4   Day 5
                                                                                                              Monitored Referred Workers
                                                  Referred Workers                                            Non-Monitored Referred Workers
                                                  Non-Referred Workers                                        Non-Referred Workers




Notes: Error bars denote 95% confidence intervals.




                                                                                    45
                         Appendix Table 1. Descriptive Statistics: Workers Asked to Refer
                                      Peer Influence and Team Experiments
                            Referred Someone          Referred No One         Difference                  Included Referrers
Has Prior Experience               1.00                      1.00                                                1.00
Earnings                         $2,917                    $2,397                ***                            $2,932
Number of Previous Jobs           12.58                     11.07                ***                            12.35
Has Feedback Score                 1.00                      1.00                                                1.00
Feedback Score                     4.80                      4.80                                                4.81
Posted Wage                       $2.84                     $2.77                  *                            $2.85
Days Since Joining oDesk           689                       709                                                 666
Has Passed Tests                   1.00                      0.98                ***                             1.00
Has Portfolio                      0.69                      0.61                ***                             0.69
Has English Score                  1.00                      0.99                 **                             1.00
English Score                      4.79                      4.79                                                4.77
Agency Affiliated                  0.25                      0.24                                                0.21
Number of Degrees                  1.40                      1.35                                                1.41
Proposed Wage                     $2.50                     $2.51                                               $2.51

Observations                            1,246                      1,867                                          455

Notes: Each statistic in the table presents the mean of the characteristic indicated by the row for the sample indicated by the
column. Referred Someone denotes workers who referred at least one other worker to our firm, whether or not we hired
that worker. Referred No One denotes workers who referred no workers to our firm. Included Referrers is a subset of
Referred Someone and includes only those workers whose referral we hired. (See Figure 2 for details of the recruitment
process.) English Score is self-reported English ability on a one-to-five scale, agency-affiliated workers pay a fraction of
their earnings to report they are part of a given group of oDesk workers (an agency), and a portfolio is where a worker
posts prior work. *, **, *** denote that the means of the characteristic for Referred Someone and Referred No One are
significantly different at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                              46
                                             Appendix Table 2. Descriptive Statistics: Referred and Non-Referred Workers

                                        A. Peer Influence Experiment                       B. Selection Experiment                           C. Team Experiment
                                  Referred Non-Referred                            Referred     Non-Referred                      Referred     Non-Referred
                                  Workers    Workers           Difference          Workers        Workers    Difference           Workers        Workers       Difference
Has Prior Experience                0.74       0.34               ***                0.82           0.46        ***                 0.55           0.17           ***
Earnings                           $1,382     $337                ***               $1,807         $539         ***                $389           $384
Number of Previous Jobs             9.22       2.73               ***                11.38          4.25        ***                 2.67           0.76           ***
Has Feedback Score                  0.63       0.29               ***                 0.71          0.40        ***                 0.48           0.16           ***
Feedback Score                       4.62      4.33                 *                 4.63          4.32                            4.45           4.02            *
Posted Wage                         $2.70     $3.19               ***                $2.78         $3.38        ***                $2.46          $3.48           ***
Days Since Joining oDesk             527       573                                    580           639                             401            569            ***
Has Passed Tests                     0.98      0.77                ***                0.99          0.77        ***                 0.96           0.80           ***
Has Portfolio                        0.48      0.27                ***                0.58          0.32        ***                 0.43           0.15           ***
Has English Score                    0.99      0.97                 *                 0.99          0.95         **                 0.99           0.94            **
English Score                        4.71      4.61                                   4.77          4.69                            4.66           4.52             *
Agency Affiliated                    0.07      0.05                                   0.08          0.22         **                 0.16           0.07            **
Number of Degrees                    1.42      1.04                ***                1.38          1.16          *                 1.28           0.96           ***
Proposed Wage                      $2.39      $2.57                ***              $2.45          $2.64        ***                $2.30          $2.63           ***


Observations                         255           180                               173              92                             282            94

Notes: Each statistic in the table corresponds to the mean of the characteristic indicated by the row for the sample indicated by the column. Each observation is a
referred or non-referred worker in the peer influence, selection, or team experiment. (See Figure 2 for details on recruitment of referred and non-referred workers into
the experimental sample). English Score is self-reported English ability on a one-to-five scale, agency-affiliated workers pay a fraction of their earnings to report they
are part of a given group of oDesk workers (an agency), and a portfolio is where a worker posts prior work. Characteristics are recorded at the time we first recruit the
workers to the peer influence or team experiments. *,**, *** denote that the means of the characteristic for Referred Workers and Non-Referred Workers are
significantly different at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                                                    47
                              Appendix Table 3. Randomization Assessment
                                      Peer Influence Experiment

                                          Referrers                              Referred Workers
                                 Monitoring   Non-Monitoring                Monitoring Non-Monitoring
                                 Treatment       Treatment                  Treatment      Treatment

Has Prior Experience                 1.00              1.00                    0.73              0.75
Earnings                            $2,919            $2,996                  $1,396            $1,379
Number of Previous Jobs             12.78             13.09                    8.28             10.14
Has Feedback Score                   1.00              1.00                    0.62              0.64
Feedback Score                       4.80              4.76                    4.66              4.59
Posted Wage                         $2.78             $2.85                   $2.68             $2.72
Days Since Joining oDesk             645               676                     489               566
Has Passed Tests                     1.00              1.00                    0.98              0.99
Has Portfolio                        0.64              0.68                    0.47              0.50
Has English Score                    1.00              1.00                    0.98              1.00
English Score                        4.84              4.79                    4.75              4.66
Agency Affiliated                    0.08              0.08                   0.05*             0.10*
Number of Degrees                    1.50              1.36                    1.34              1.51
Proposed Wage                       $2.53             $2.53                   $2.40             $2.37

Observations                          86                 87                     127              128

Notes: Each cell presents the mean of the characteristic indicated by the row for the sample indicated by
the column. Only workers in the peer influence experiment are included. English Score is self-reported
English ability on a one-to-five scale, agency-affiliated workers pay a fraction of their earnings to report
they are part of a given group of oDesk workers (an agency), and a portfolio is where a worker posts
prior work. * denotes that the Monitoring Treatment and Non-Monitoring Treatment group means are
significantly different at the 10% level.




                                                    48
           Appendix Table 4. Effect of Previously Having Been on a Type A Team on Team Performance
       Team Experiment: Base Group is Referred Workers Paired with Someone Else's Referrer (Type B Teams)

                                                            Team Question                                Same Slogan
                                        Both Submitted         Matches            Same Slogan           & Both Criteria
At Least One Partner Has Previously         0.105*             0.115**               0.055                  0.030
Been on Type A Team                         0.056               0.050                0.058                  0.046

Referred Worker and Own Referrer            0.169***             0.364***           0.409***               0.123***
Team (Type A)                                 0.041                0.041              0.054                  0.046

Non-Referred Worker and Referrer            -0.107*               -0.045             -0.014                  0.008
Team (Type C)                                0.058                0.054              0.056                   0.038

Base Group Mean (Type B)                     0.730                0.496               0.337                  0.142

Observations                                  846                  846                 846                    846
R-Squared                                    0.316                0.321               0.314                  0.169

Notes: Each column in each panel reports the results of a separate regression of the dependent variable indicated by the
column on an indicator for whether at least one partner has previously been on a Type A team (i.e., has partnered with
her referrer or referral). The regressions also include indicators for being on a Type A team and for being on a Type C
team and dummies for this being the second or third task completed. Observations are at the team-PSA level. All
regressions include the first- and second-order controls for worker characteristics listed in footnote 20. Standard errors
are clustered at the blocking group level. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                            49
                     Appendix Table 5. Performance and Persistence with First-Order Controls: Selection and Peer Influence Experiments
                              Base Group is all Referred Workers (Panel A) and Non-Monitored Referred Workers (Panel B)
                                                   A. Selection Experiment                                          B. Peer Influence Experiment

                          Accepted              On-Time                                                               On-Time
                          Job Offer Submission Submission            Accuracy     Re-Application      Submission     Submission      Accuracy     Re-Application

Monitored Referred                                                                                       0.020           0.038         0.014           -0.035
                                                                                                        (0.042)         (0.046)       (0.040)         (0.034)
Non-Referred                 -0.071      -0.100*        -0.098*        -0.024         -0.123*           -0.115**        -0.080*      -0.095**       -0.193***
                            (0.056)      (0.057)        (0.059)       (0.033)         (0.071)            (0.047)        (0.048)       (0.043)         (0.044)
Has Prior Experience        0.163*        0.072          0.064         0.049          0.194**            0.006           0.001         0.009           0.048
                            (0.093)      (0.079)        (0.087)       (0.049)         (0.091)           (0.063)         (0.066)       (0.059)         (0.049)

Earnings/1000              0.214**        0.058          0.051         0.031           -0.026            0.009           -0.016        0.071           -0.003
                           (0.084)       (0.076)        (0.077)       (0.046)         (0.128)           (0.083)         (0.083)       (0.084)         (0.073)
Days Since Joining           0.005       0.009*        0.013**        0.006*           -0.006            -0.005          -0.001        -0.003          0.001
oDesk/100                   (0.006)      (0.005)       (0.005)        (0.003)         (0.008)           (0.005)         (0.005)       (0.004)         (0.005)
Previous Jobs/10             0.011        -0.014         -0.014        -0.006          -0.001            0.013           0.013         0.000           0.003
                            (0.013)      (0.013)        (0.014)       (0.007)         (0.015)           (0.009)         (0.012)       (0.008)         (0.006)
Feedback Score               0.002        0.003          0.027         0.000           0.021             -0.021          0.035         -0.022       -0.064***
                            (0.040)      (0.037)        (0.043)       (0.022)         (0.048)           (0.027)         (0.036)       (0.027)         (0.021)
No Feedback Score           -0.051        0.050          0.163         0.025           0.213             -0.078          0.221         -0.099        -0.231**
                            (0.203)      (0.181)        (0.210)       (0.110)         (0.235)           (0.134)         (0.176)       (0.131)         (0.094)

Posted Wage                  0.002        0.005          0.008         -0.001          0.011             0.008           0.002         0.013           0.008
                            (0.019)      (0.019)        (0.020)       (0.011)         (0.025)           (0.014)         (0.014)       (0.014)         (0.014)

English Score                0.048        0.006          -0.004        -0.010          0.088             -0.028          -0.020        -0.010          -0.006
                            (0.037)      (0.049)        (0.050)       (0.030)         (0.062)           (0.025)         (0.029)       (0.024)         (0.029)
No English Score           0.480**        -0.153         -0.217        -0.118          0.343             -0.139          -0.220        -0.066          0.215
                           (0.228)       (0.297)        (0.300)       (0.171)         (0.351)           (0.174)         (0.185)       (0.167)         (0.173)
Agency Affiliated           -0.080     -0.393***       -0.357***     -0.196***         0.063           -0.278***      -0.215***      -0.234***         -0.065
                            (0.092)      (0.117)         (0.115)       (0.056)        (0.082)            (0.083)        (0.076)        (0.071)        (0.075)

Has Passed Tests             -0.032       0.111          0.124         0.056           0.096           0.200***        0.179***      0.167***        0.291***
                            (0.093)      (0.104)        (0.104)       (0.052)         (0.137)           (0.069)         (0.068)       (0.063)         (0.084)
Has Portfolio               -0.006        -0.035        -0.025        -0.010           0.022            -0.075*       -0.125***      -0.097**          -0.055
                            (0.054)      (0.048)        (0.050)       (0.028)         (0.062)           (0.041)         (0.043)       (0.038)         (0.039)

Number of Degrees           -0.009        0.005          0.004         0.009           0.001             0.023         0.042**         0.019           0.016
                            (0.026)      (0.026)        (0.026)       (0.014)         (0.032)           (0.018)        (0.019)        (0.017)         (0.019)

Constant                     0.322        0.525          0.385         0.288           0.003             0.806           0.319         0.642           0.914
                            (0.287)      (0.290)        (0.313)       (0.175)         (0.404)           (0.197)         (0.233)       (0.186)         (0.177)
Observations                 435          1,325          0.385         1,325            265              2,610           2,610         2,610            435
R-squared                   0.125         0.079         (0.313)        0.048           0.088             0.075           0.061         0.063           0.156

Notes: Panel A replicates Panel B of Table 1, listing out the coefficients on each of the control variables; Panel B replicates Panel B of Table 2, again listing
out the coefficients on each of the control variables. See the Table 1 and Table 2 notes for more details. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and
1% levels, respectively.




                                                                                 50
                    Appendix Table 6. Relationship Between Referrer Characteristics and Referred Worker Characteristics
                                                   Peer Influence and Team Experiments

                                                        Dependent Variable: Referred Worker Characteristic
                             Days Since     Number of                                                     Has                Number
                              Joining        Previous Feedback        Posted     English     Agency      Passed      Has       of         Proposed
                 Earnings      oDesk           Jobs    Score          Wage        Score     Affiliated    Tests    Portfolio Degrees       Wage

Referrer          0.060*      0.264***        0.095*        0.204 0.231*** 0.285***         0.317***      0.002    0.272*** 0.075*        0.367***
Characteristic    (0.034)      (0.049)        (0.052)      (0.180) (0.049)  (0.068)          (0.050)     (0.002)    (0.044) (0.044)        (0.052)

Constant           688.6        289.95         4.637        3.562     1.928       3.319       0.060       0.959      0.296      1.238       1.425
                  (113.3)      (33.337)       (0.685)      (0.867)   (0.146)     (0.333)     (0.011)     (0.015)    (0.035)    (0.069)     (0.134)

Observations        537          537            537          296       537         533         537         537        537        537         537
R-Squared          0.014        0.060          0.009        0.005     0.036       0.057       0.146       0.003      0.064      0.006       0.103

Notes: Each column reports the results of regressing the value of an observable characteristic for a referred worker on the value of the same
characteristic for her referrer. Each column corresponds to a different characteristic, indicated by the column header. All 537 hired referred
workers from the peer influence and team experiments are included, although Feedback Score and English Score are missing for some workers.
English Score is self-reported English ability on a one-to-five scale, agency-affiliated workers pay a fraction of their earnings to report they are
part of a given group of oDesk workers (an agency), and a portfolio is where a worker posts prior work. Huber-White standard errors are in
parenthesis. *, *** denote significance at the 10% and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                                        51
      Appendix Table 7. Characteristics of the Referrer-Referred Worker Relationship
                         Peer Influence and Team Experiments

How Well Referrer Knows Referral
     1 (Hardly at all)                                                   1%
     2                                                                   2%
     3                                                                   5%
     4                                                                  14%
     5                                                                  20%
     6 (Extremely Well)                                                 57%

Observations                                                            535

Frequency of Interaction
      Less than Once a Month                                             2%
      About Once a Month                                                 5%
      Less than Weekly, More than Monthly                                8%
      About Once a Week                                                 13%
      Less than Daily, More than Weekly                                 21%
      About Once a Day                                                  19%
      More than Once a Day                                              32%

Observations                                                            533

Number of People Known in Common
     0 to 4                                                             21%
     5 to 9                                                             16%
     10 to 19                                                           16%
     20 to 29                                                           11%
     30 or more                                                         37%

Observations                                                            535

Notes: This table presents the distributions of referrers' responses to questions about their
relationships with their referrals. Each observation is a referred worker hired in the Peer
Influence Experiment or the Team Experiment.




                                              52
                         Appendix Table 8. Time Spent and Task Enjoyment, by Team Type
        Team Experiment: Base Group is Referred Workers Paired with Someone Else's Referrer (Type B Teams)

                                          A. Time Spent (Minutes)                        B. Wants to Partner Again

                                                       Referred & Non-                                 Referred & Non-
                                      Referrers        Referred Workers               Referrers        Referred Workers
Referred Worker and Own               5.922***             5.142***                   0.556***             0.451***
Referrer Team (Type A)                 (1.811)              (1.644)                    (0.031)              (0.035)

Non-Referred Worker and                 1.135                 -2.993                  -0.100**                0.102
Referrer Team (Type C)                 (1.494)               (3.985)                   (0.042)               (0.081)

Base Group Mean (Type B)               37.482                38.723                     0.406                 0.477

Observations                             846                  846                        717                   612
R-squared                               0.183                0.301                      0.394                 0.308

Notes: Each column in each panel reports the results of a separate regression of the dependent variable on indicators for
being in a Type A team and for being in a Type C team. In Panel A, the dependent variable is the number of minutes the
worker spent on the task while, in Panel B, the dependent variable is an indicator for the worker reporting wanting to work
again with her partner from that task. Observations are at the worker-PSA level. The first regression in each panel includes
only referrers while the second includes only referred and non-referred workers. All regressions include the first- and
second-order controls for worker characteristics listed in footnote 20. Standard errors are clustered at the blocking group
level. *, *** denote significance at the 10%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                            53
         Appendix Table 9. Team Communication and Performance Controlling for Communication and Time Spent
          Team Experiment: Base Group is Referred Workers Paired with Someone Else's Referrer (Type B Teams)

                                                                A. Communication by Team Type

                                                                                        Answered
                                                           Total Chat Messages        Communication         Reported Outside
                                      Chat Box Use         (Conditional on Use)         Question            Communication
Referred Worker and Own                   0.025                    5.098                  -0.028               0.367***
Referrer Team (Type A)                   (0.044)                  (3.178)                (0.017)                (0.042)

Non-Referred Worker and                   -0.052                     1.608                  -0.003                 0.038
Referrer Team (Type C)                    (0.050)                   (3.996)                (0.032)                (0.053)

Base Group Mean (Type B)                   0.408                    13.522                  0.947                  0.378
Observations                                846                       307                    846                    778
R-Squared                                  0.139                     0.250                  0.102                  0.287

                                             B. Team Performance, Controlling for Communication and Time Spent

                                                              Team Question                                Same Slogan & Both
                                     Both Submitted              Matches                Same Slogan             Criteria
Referred Worker and Own                  -0.024                  0.141***                 0.217***                0.021
Referrer Team (Type A)                   (0.025)                  (0.031)                  (0.038)               (0.031)

Non-Referred Worker and                 -0.119***                    -0.063                 -0.030                -0.003
Referrer Team (Type C)                   (0.036)                    (0.043)                (0.044)                (0.030)

Used Chat Box                            0.204***                 0.151***                 0.087*                  0.003
                                          (0.033)                  (0.040)                 (0.046)                (0.047)

Total Chat Messages                        0.000                  0.004***                0.006***                 0.003
                                          (0.001)                  (0.001)                 (0.001)                (0.002)

Used Outside Communication               0.224***                 0.307***                0.350***               0.177***
                                          (0.028)                  (0.032)                 (0.044)                (0.034)

Minutes Spent by Referrer                0.003***                 0.002***                0.002***               0.002***
                                          (0.001)                  (0.001)                 (0.001)                (0.000)

Minutes Spent by Referred or             0.004***                 0.003***                0.002***               0.001***
Non-Referred Worker                       (0.001)                  (0.001)                 (0.001)                (0.000)

Base Group Mean (Type B)                   0.730                    0.500                   0.337                  0.142

Observations                                846                      846                     846                    846
R-Squared                                  0.576                    0.544                   0.522                  0.256

Notes: Each column in each panel reports the results of a separate regression of the dependent variable indicated by the
column on indicators for being in a Type A and Type C teams. Observations are at the worker-PSA level. Chat Box Use is an
indicator for whether each partner typed at least one message in the chat box. Total Chat Messages is the aggregate number
of messages sent between the two partners, and is conditional on chat box use. Answered Communication Question is an
indicator for whether at least one partner responded to the question at the end of the task about how the partners had
communicated. Reported Outside Communication is an indicator for whether either partner reported communicating using
methods other than the chat box and is conditional on at least one partner having answered the communication question.
Regressions in both panels control for the first- and second-order characteristics of referred and non-referred workers listed in
footnote 20. Regressions in Panel B also control for whether the team used the chat box, the number of chat messages sent,
whether either partner reported using other forms of communication, and (separately) the number of minutes spent by both
partners. Standard errors are clustered at the blocking group level. **, *** denote significance at the 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.




                                                               54
