                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         HEALTH AND UNEMPLOYMENT DURING MACROECONOMIC CRISES

                                        Prashant Bharadwaj
                                          Petter Lundborg
                                          Dan-Olof Rooth

                                       Working Paper 21353
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21353


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2015




Much thanks to Julie Cullen, Bhash Mazumder, Karthik Muralidharan and Petra Persson for comments.
The authors have no financial interests relevant to the paper to disclose. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Prashant Bharadwaj, Petter Lundborg, and Dan-Olof Rooth. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Health and Unemployment during Macroeconomic Crises
Prashant Bharadwaj, Petter Lundborg, and Dan-Olof Rooth
NBER Working Paper No. 21353
July 2015
JEL No. I1,J65

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper shows that health is an important determinant of labor market vulnerability during large
economic crises. Using data on adults during Sweden’s unexpected economic crisis in the early 1990s,
we show that early and later life health are important determinants of job loss after the crisis, but not
before. Adults who were born with worse health (proxied by birth weight) and those who experience
hospitalizations (and especially so for mental health related issues) in the pre-crisis period, are much
more likely to lose their jobs and go on unemployment insurance after the crisis. These effects are
concentrated in the private sector that happened to be more affected by the crisis. The results hold
while controlling for individual education and occupational sorting prior to the crisis, and for controlling
for family level characteristics by exploiting health differences within twin pairs. We conclude that
poor health (both in early life and as adults) is an important indicator of vulnerability during economic
shocks.


Prashant Bharadwaj                                   Dan-Olof Rooth
Department of Economics                              Centre for Labour Market
University of California, San Diego                  & Discrimination Studies
9500 Gilman Drive #0508                              Linnaeus University
La Jolla, CA 92093                                   SE-391 82 Kalmar
and NBER                                             Sweden
prbharadwaj@ucsd.edu                                 dan-olof.rooth@lnu.se

Petter Lundborg
Department of Economics
Lund University
P.O. Box 7082
SE-220 07 Lund
Sweden
petter.lundborg@nek.lu.se
1    Introduction

A large literature in economics has examined the causes and consequences
of macroeconomic fluctuations. Given the importance of health human capi-
tal for labor market outcomes, an important facet of the literature on con-
sequences of economic fluctuations has examined whether and how events
like recessions, job displacements and business cycles a↵ect health outcomes
(Ruhm 2000, Stillman and Thomas 2008, Sullivan and Von Wachter 2009, Cur-
rie and Tekin 2011). Some of this work has focused on how such events af-
fect early childhood health or even health at birth (see for example Chay and
Greenstone (2003), Dehejia and Lleras-Muney (2004), and Paxson and Schady
(2005)); this research is especially important given the recent work highlight-
ing the long term economic implications of health in utero and during infancy
(Heckman 2007, Almond and Currie 2011).

While examining the consequences of macroeconomic shocks on health is ex-
tremely important, it is also critical to understand whether people with poorer
health ex ante are more vulnerable to job loss during a crisis. The research
examining who is impacted by economic fluctuations has largely examined
how business cycles and recessions a↵ect labor market outcomes across a wide
range of demographic characteristics such as age, gender, sex, race and edu-
cation (Clark and Summers 1981, Bound, Holzer, et al. 1995, Engemann and
Wall 2009, Cho and Newhouse 2012, Hoynes, Miller, and Schaller 2012). How-
ever, despite the large body of important work in this area, there appear to
be few studies examining whether pre-determined health, such as health at


                                      2
birth, dictate the degree to which one is a↵ected during economic downturns.
In this paper, we build on the literature examining who is a↵ected during a
crisis to show that pre-crisis health (both, health at birth and health in adult-
hood) is an important marker for labor market vulnerability during economic
downturns.

We study the e↵ects of health on job loss before and after an arguably exoge-
nous and dramatic increase in unemployment in Sweden in the early 1990s,
when unemployment went from 2% to 8% in less than 2 years. This increase
in unemployment was largely the result of layo↵s rather than voluntary quits
(Skans, Edin, and Holmlund 2009). This crisis is referred to as one of the “Big
Five” downturns along with that of Spain, Norway, Finland, and Japan accord-
ing to Reinhart and Rogo↵ (2008). Many observers of the Great Recession in
2008 compared it to the Swedish crash of the 1990s, and they especially noted
the ways in which Sweden recovered from the crisis (New York Times, Septem-
ber 22, 2008; Time, September 24, 2008). While much has been written about
the causes and consequences of the crisis in the Nordic countries during the
early 1990s (Englund 1999, Jonung, Kiander, and Vartia 2009, Gorodnichenko,
Mendoza, and Tesar 2012), the main import from these studies appears to be
that the unexpected crisis was the result of a combination of various factors in-
cluding, monetary policies in the 1980s, budget deficits, financial deregulation,
and collapse of trade. We make a crucial distinction here by examining the
e↵ects of the crisis in the public and private sector. Prior work has shown that
the e↵ects of such economic crises di↵er across the public and private sectors
(Kopelman and Rosen 2015), and the Swedish case was no exception. Our


                                       3
own data and the work of others (Lundborg 2001) show that a larger share of
workers were displaced from the private sector than the public sector.

We use two measures of health, observed at two very di↵erent points during an
individual’s life, to highlight the wide reaching consequences of pre-determined
health. Using birth weight as an indicator of health at infancy,1 we examine
how adults who were born with lower birth weight fare during the Swedish cri-
sis. We find that adults who were born with poorer health at birth were much
more likely to face job loss and go on unemployment insurance (UI) during the
crisis. While this result is true for individuals who work in the private sector,
it does not hold for individuals who work in the public sector (despite the fact
that the public sector also experienced job reductions during this period). This
suggests that the private sector is able to respond to macroeconomic shocks by
laying o↵ ostensibly weaker individuals (those with lower birth weight) more
so than the public sector. Recognizing that birth weight likely represents nu-
tritional inputs and other attributes of the mother and the family that might
   1
     A large literature has examined the associations between birth weight and various health
and labor market outcomes. Birth weight is the result of both, maternal nutritional intake
and maternal behaviors such as smoking and prenatal care visits, and is therefore the fo-
cus of many policy e↵orts in developing and developed countries. In an excellent summary
of some of this literature on the impacts of birth weight, Hack, Klein, and Taylor (1995)
conclude that, “Although the vast majority of low birth weight children function within
the normal range, they have higher rates of subnormal growth, health conditions, and in-
ferior neurodevelopmental outcomes than do normal birth weight children.” Moreover, at
least since Barker, Osmond, and Law (1989), the idea that fetal growth restrictions due to
nutritional deficiencies in early life have long term health impacts (i.e. the “fetal origins
hypothesis”) has been popular among various disciplines and the subject of many research
studies. Since we examine birth weight di↵erences within twins in this setting, the variation
in birth weight is more likely due to fetal nutritional intake rather than maternal behaviors
(Royer 2009). While other measures of health at infancy are sometimes used (APGAR
scores, for example), given the historical nature of the data, we only have birth weight data
available to us.




                                             4
confound such long term analysis, we examine plausibly exogenous variation
in birth weight within twin pairs similar to prior studies (Almond, Chay, and
Lee 2005, Black, Devereux, and Salvanes 2007, Royer 2009).

We use the same setting (twins comparisons, and analyzing public and private
sector employees separately) to examine the role of adult health before and
after a crisis. While the identifying assumptions in this instance (relative to
the assumptions required when examining twin di↵erences in birth weight) are
stronger, at the very least, it provides a useful way of controlling for time in-
variant family level characteristics (we expand on these assumptions in Section
3). Using information on individual hospitalizations, we show that individuals
with poorer adult health prior to the crisis were significantly more likely to
face job loss after, but not before, the crisis. This is again largely true for
individuals working in the private sector, and for workers who were hospital-
ized for mental health conditions prior to the crisis. Hence, we show that both
early life health and adult health matter for job loss during a crisis.

We then explore why poorer health might make individuals more susceptible to
job loss during crises. We find that the relationship between pre-crisis health
and UI take up during the crisis is not mediated via factors like educational
attainment or pre-crisis selection into occupations. For example, since the
private sector and the manufacturing industry were hit extensively by the
crisis, one hypothesis might be that individuals with worse health select into
sectors and occupations that just happened to be more a↵ected by the crisis.
However, our results hold when we examine twin pairs who worked in the same



                                       5
sector, 3 digit or 5 digit occupation code (while magnitudes are similar for all
three, we lose statistical significance due to smaller samples when restricting
the data to same occupation codes), and for twins who have the same level
of education.2 While job tenure is argued to be a determinant of hiring/firing
decisions in the Swedish context, we unfortunately do not observe job tenure in
the data. However, we can confirm that our results are not driven by relatively
younger adults who might be more likely to lose their jobs under a “last in-first
out” policy.3

Examining the relationship between pre-determined health and unemploy-
ment, before and after economic shocks, requires rather unique data. Most
electronic birth records, even in countries known for their excellent adminis-
trative records (for example Norway), start in the late 1960s. For this reason,
examining how pre-determined health endowments a↵ect job attachment dur-
ing major crises has been under-explored since subjects for whom we have
reliable birth data are generally too young to be observed for a substantial
period in the labor market before and after the crisis. In the case of Sweden,
we use a unique source of twin birth records collected for nearly the entire
population of births between 1926-1958. These unique birth records are then
matched to individual yearly income (including income from sources such as
unemployment insurance, disability, sickness etc) records from 1981-2005 and
to hospitalization records starting in 1987. Hence, most of our sample is ob-
   2
     While birth weight itself might be a factor that determines adult health, educational
attainment, and occupational sorting, we find that these interlinkages are not first order in
out setting. We discuss this in greater detail in Section 5.
   3
     We provide additional information on the weak enforcement of employment protection
laws in Sweden in the Appendix.


                                             6
served while they were active in the labor market for several years before and
after the crisis.

This paper underscores the importance of health in determining labor market
outcomes via the notion that health matters more for job attachment during
economic crises. Our paper documents that better health at infancy and in
adulthood can be particularly protective during periods of economic fluctua-
tions. Recent work has shown the importance of social assistance programs
in improving early childhood health, as well as the long run e↵ects of early
exposure to social safety nets (Bitler and Currie 2005, Hoynes, Schanzenbach,
and Almond 2012). We add to these papers the idea that there could be early
childhood health-related spillovers of safety net programs, as children born
with better health are themselves less likely to take up social assistance later
in life. This study is also important for highlighting the role of social assis-
tance more broadly during a crisis. One of the fundamental questions about
the design of optimal insurance policy is the extent to which it can mitigate
morally arbitrary misfortunes of nature. By exploiting random variation in
birth weight and variation in adult health not explained by family level un-
observables, we are able to show that social assistance, at least in the case
of Sweden, appears to come to the aid of those who have a health disadvan-
tage.




                                       7
2       Background

2.1     The 1990s crisis in Sweden

Unlike most European countries, unemployment in Sweden remained low dur-
ing the 1980s and fluctuated between 2 to 4 percent. In the later part of the
decade the Swedish economy experienced a boom which pushed unemploy-
ment further down to a low of 1.5 percent in 1989. This exceptionally good
period in the Swedish labor market was followed by the worst recession since
the 1930s as unemployment increased from 2 percent in 1990 to 8 percent in
1993. The open unemployment rate then remained at this level until it started
to fall in 1997. The decrease in employment occurred in both the private and
the public sector, with the private sector being more a↵ected (Lundborg 2001).
The sectoral spread of UI take up in our twins sample confirms these findings
and is shown in Figure 1. We describe the roots of the Swedish crisis, relying
heavily on Englund (1999) and Holmlund (2011), in the Appendix.



2.2     The UI System in Sweden

The basic rules that regulate the right to reimbursement from unemployment
funds have largely been the same since the 1930s.4 The government subsidies
    4
    One has to be at least 16 years of age, able to work, and had to have reported as
seeking a job at the Swedish Public Employment Service. In addition to these, between
1973 and 1994, there was an employment requirement in place. This required an individual
to have been a paying member of the unemployment fund for at least 12 months prior to
becoming unemployed. For full compensation, it has also been required that the reason for
unemployment is due to involuntary unemployment. Unemployment benefits could still be
paid to workers who quit their job and become unemployed or to workers who get fired due


                                           8
to the unemployment funds are substantial; in the early 1990s, the subsidies
covered about 95 percent of all unemployment benefits paid out (Carling et
al. 2001). The monthly membership fees, which are typically small, cover
only a small part of the benefits paid out. During the same period, about 80
percent of the recorded unemployed workers were members of an unemploy-
ment fund. Unemployed non-members could, between 1976 and 1997, receive
a so called “cash assistance” (Kontant Arbetsmarknadsstod in Swedish) from
the government, but the benefits paid out was much lower than those of the
unemployment funds and the entitlement period substantially shorter.

By international standards, the replacement rate in the Swedish unemploy-
ment insurance has historically been generous. Whereas the 80s and early
90s saw replacement rates of about 90 percent of earnings, there was a ceiling
on the benefit level. This meant that the actual replace rate may have been
much lower than 90 percent, and especially so for high-earning workers. In
1996, it was for instance estimated that 75 percent of employees had monthly
earnings exceeding the ceiling. From 1974 and onwards, unemployed workers
could receive unemployment benefits for a total of 300 days; however, workers
aged 55 and above could receive benefits for 450 days. The unemployment
insurance system became somewhat less generous in 1993. On July 1st, 1993,
the replacement rate was first reduced to 80 percent and then further reduced
to 75% in 1996 but then increased to 80 percent again in 1997 (Carling et
al, 2001). In 1994 the working requirement was also changed such that one
to misbehavior, but the rules then become less generous. In such cases, the rules allow the
unemployment funds to subtract days of compensation to the person. In 2007, for instance,
a worker who voluntarily quit his job, lost 45 days of unemployment benefits.


                                            9
needed to have worked for at least 75 hours per month during a five month
period, or alternatively, for 65 hours per month during a 10 month period.
This had the e↵ect that part time workers and youths found it more difficult
to qualify for unemployment benefits. The duration of unemployment benefit
payments was, however, not changed.

In summary, although it became more difficult to qualify for UI during the pe-
riod after the crisis, it is important to reiterate that our twins based method-
ology implies that both twins face the exact same labor market conditions
and rules regarding UI. Moreover, any e↵ects on UI that we do find, would be
despite the fact that it became more difficult to qualify for UI.




3    Theoretical Framework

In this section we write down a simple framework where employers observe
and make hiring, firing, and compensation related decisions based on a com-
posite index (I) of an employee’s characteristics (we think of these as being
a “productivity” index of the individual as in Heckman (1998)). This index,
in our simplified framework, depends on health (H) and other factors such
as education (Ed). Since the focus of the paper is on examining the role of
health, we ignore the interlinkages between health and education for the time
being and think of current health as a function of past health.

Hence at time t, we formalize the above as follows (to be precise, since we
typically observe individuals over the age of 30 we can also assume that all


                                      10
education related investments have already taken place by the time we observe
them in the labor market; i.e. education stops at an age k, where k < t):




                                    It = q(Ht , Edk )                         (1)

                            Ht = f (H0 . . . Ht 1 )                           (2)


Health at time t is a function of health at birth H0 as well as health at all
points since, until the previous period, Ht 1 . A simple, linear representation of
equation 1 results in the following expression for productivity at time t:




                                    n=t
                                     X1
                   I t = ↵ 0 H0 +          ↵n Hn + ⌧ Edk + ✏t                 (3)
                                     n=1



We consider employers making hiring and firing decisions based on cuto↵s
of the productivity index I. In particular, we assume that employers fire
employees if It < c, where c is some minimum level of productivity necessary
to obtain and/or maintain a given job. During an economic crisis, standards
for keeping workers might become more stringent, and therefore employers
fire individuals whose productivity is below c0 where c0 > c. In our case,
hiring and firing decisions are captured by the individual’s observed take up
of unemployment insurance (U I), and we can estimate for each given point in
time t (also, we only observe one measure of post birth health, so we further
simplify equation 3 from above), under di↵erent hiring/firing conditions:


                                           11
                 U It =     t H0   +   t Ht 1   + ⇣t Edk + ✏t               when         It < c   (4)

   U It+1 =   t+1 H0   +   t+1 Ht 1    + ⇣t+1 Edk + ✏t+1               when         It+1 < c0     (5)



The above equations represents our main equations of interest: the impact
of health at birth and health in adulthood on unemployment before (t) and
after (t + 1) the requisite exit conditions for work change (from c to c0 ). In
other words, our goal is to compare             t   to   t+1 ,   and    t   to   t+1 .   The underly-
ing hypothesis is that when employment conditions become more strict (i.e.
under condition c0 ), those with poorer health ex ante (implying lower overall
productivity indices) are more likely to lose their jobs and take up UI.

We wish to highlight a few aspects about estimating equations 4 and 5. One
main concern is that for any given individual, there are aspects hidden in the
unobserved component ✏ that drive both, health at various points in time, as
well as unemployment. These unobserved aspects could be family specific or
individual specific. Our methodology of using twin fixed e↵ects is crucial for
purging from equation 4 and 5, all family specific time invariant characteris-
tics. These would include aspects such as parental education and health, which
one could easily claim as a↵ecting the health of the child and subsequent em-
ployment opportunities. Individual specific attributes, such as general ability,
however, are not purged while using twins fixed e↵ects.

It should be noted that the assumptions required when examining adult health



                                                12
di↵erences within twin pairs are particularly stronger relative to examining
twin di↵erences in birth weight. Twin variation in birth weight is due to
causes beyond those that the children concerned or the mother can control,
and hence, considered largely exogenous. Adult health di↵erences within a
twin pair, however, could well be the result of individual level behaviors and
actions, which could also a↵ect the outcome variable of interest. Hence, while
twins fixed e↵ects go some distance towards controlling for family specific char-
acteristics, we cannot rule out that there could be other factors that are corre-
lated with health di↵erences and labor market outcomes that might be driving
the results. This worry however, is mitigated when we compare twin fixed ef-
fects estimates from the pre-crisis period to the post-crisis period, similar to a
di↵erence-in-di↵erence design. In that instance, we need the assumption that
the individual and time varying drivers of health and labor market outcomes
would have led each twin to have the same trends in job attachment before the
crisis. Unfortunately the data on hospitalizations during the pre-crisis period
exist for too short a time period to examine parallel trends.

Second, there are several possible interlinkages that the current specification
glosses over. For example, as stated earlier, it is easy to imagine that education
is also a function of health. Hence, for most of our analysis we present results
not controlling for education and allowing the reduced form impacts of health
to reflect health and education impacts (although we show results including
education as well). Third, adult health (captured by Ht        1   above) can also
be a function of early life health (H0 ). Hence, we present results where we
separately include H0 and Ht     1   and also when we include them jointly. It


                                        13
turns out that both these concerns are not first order.




4     Data and Econometric Specification

4.1    Data

We use data from a number of administrative registers. Data on birth weight
comes from the BIRTH register, which collects data on birth outcomes of
all twins born in Sweden between 1926-1958. The data originates from a
project at the Swedish twin registry, where researchers set out to digitize birth
records that were kept in paper form at local delivery archives around Sweden.
Since municipalities are/were required by law to collect and preserve birth
information, the researchers where able to obtain data for a high fraction of
twins. The data includes essential birth information, such as birth weight, sex,
geographical markers, birth length (but lack information typically included in
modern registers, such as APGAR scores), and personal identifiers, where the
latter means that the data can be merged to other administrative registers in
Sweden.

Due to the way in which the birth data was collected, the sample of twins
only includes twins that survived up to 1972. The reason is that in 1972, an
extensive survey on the twin cohorts born 1926-1958 was conducted. Since the
data from this survey contained variables deemed important for twins research,
the surveyors set out to collect birth data only for twins participating in the
survey. Fortunately, the response rate was high (86%). Since we do not have

                                       14
access to the universe of twins born in 1926-1958, we are unable to construct
weights or assess attrition in any systematic manner.5

For our measure of adult health, we use data on hospitalizations from the
Swedish National Patient Register (NPR). The register covers all hospitaliza-
tions from 1987 and onwards and contain detailed data on diagnoses (ICD
codes) and length of stay. Information to NPR is delivered to the Centre for
Epidemiology (EpC) at the National Board of Health and Welfare from each
of the 21 county councils in Sweden. In our analyses, our main measure is a
binary indicator of having any hospitalization in the pre-crisis period. Since
the hospitalization data is collected after 1987, we use any hospitalizations
during 1987 and 1988 as the basis for examining the role of adult health on
labor market outcomes during 1989 and 1990 (pre-crisis). For the post-crisis
period, we use the full data on any hospitalizations between 1987-1990.

With the use of the personal identifiers, the BIRTH data was linked to both the
NPR and the Income and Taxation register (IoT). The income (labor market
earnings plus all taxable benefits such as unemployment benefits, sickness pay
and welfare pay) records we have access to start in 1968 and end in 2007 and
are present at the yearly level. We lose less than 1 percent of the data due
to matching issues across the twins data and the income register. The labor
market earnings records come from the equivalent of W2 records in the United
States, in that the income is reported by employers and is not based on self
reports. Taxable benefit income is reported directly by the administrative
   5
    Since we only capture twins where both were alive as of 1972, we expect to find fewer
twins from the 1930’s as compared to twins from the 1950’s. As a fraction of overall live
births we certainly capture fewer twins than expected from earlier cohorts.


                                           15
agency. Hence, combined, we consider income measures in this data to be
accurate. All of our income data is adjusted by the 2007 CPI measure to
make them comparable across years.

We use two primary measures to capture an individual’s job loss status before
and after the crisis. First, we create a binary variable indicating take up of
any unemployment insurance in a given year (this is an “extensive” measure of
UI). Second, we measure the fraction of income coming from unemployment
insurance out of total income (we consider this as an “intensive” measure
of UI). In order to shed light on possible mechanisms through which health
a↵ects unemployment, we use information on schooling and occupation. We
obtain information on individual years of schooling from the education register
(utbildningsregistret, UREG) from 1990 (or from 2007 for those individuals
missing in the 1990 data), where years of schooling has been imputed based
on obtained degree. We use data on occupation from the censuses in 1985 and
1990. These data contain 4-digit codes on occupation and sector of employ-
ment (public or private).



4.2    Summary Statistics

In our analyses, we impose a number of necessary restrictions that a↵ect the
sample size (Table 1). First, from the BIRTH register, we select twin pairs
where both twins have non-missing records on birth weight. This reduces the
sample size from 46,618 (23,309 twin pairs) to 35,318 individual twins (17,659
twin pairs). Second, we restrict our sample to same-sex twin pairs, further


                                      16
reducing the sample size to 26,418 individual twins. Third, since we are in-
terested in estimates by sector of work, we select twin pairs where both twins
are in the labor force before the crisis and where data on occupation is non-
missing. This further reduces the sample to 20,190 individual twins (10,095
twin pairs) when conditioning on non-missing data on sectoral employment in
1990 (the comparable number conditioning on non-missing data on sectoral
employment in 1985 is 20,738 individuals, or 10,369 twin pairs). The sample
sizes conditioning on both twins working in the same sector brings the sample
size down to 7,077 twin pairs (using sectoral classification in 1985) and 6,816
twin pairs (using sectoral classification in 1990). Appendix Table 1 shows de-
scriptive statistics for the twin samples. The twins are approximately 44 years
old, have between 10-12 years of schooling (based on sector of employment)6
and have an average birth weight between 2,593-2,666 grams (again, depend-
ing on sector of employment). It is also important to note that in our sample
only 20% of the employees in the public sector are male, while around 75%
of the employees in the private sector are male. Hence, there are significant
sectoral di↵erences based on gender composition of the workforce in Sweden
(in line with the findings in Rosen (1997)).

In order to shed light on the external validity of our results, we compare the
characteristics of twins to that of the general population born in the same
time period. The sample of twins look very similar to the non-twin population
   6
     That the average education for twins in the public sector is about two years higher
than the one for twins employed in the private sector is something we find also for the
full population. When calculating the same numbers for the full population using the 1990
Census, and using the same cohorts (1926-1958), average years of education is 12.2 for those
employed in the public sector and 10.6 for those employed in the private sector.


                                            17
(Table 2) along important observable characteristics. Columns 1 and 2, show
for example, that the full population and the twin population born in the
decade between 1926-38 are quite similar in terms of years of schooling and
income. Twins and non-twins born in other cohorts (born 1939-48, or born
1949-58) also appear similar along these margins.

Another way to examine how twins di↵er from the full population is to compare
the returns to schooling among twins and non-twins. In the lower panel of
Table 2, we estimate Mincerian returns to schooling.7 Again, the twin and
non-twin samples appear similar (in fact there appears to be a general decline
in returns to schooling across cohorts, in both the twin and non-twin samples)
with the exception that for cohorts born 1949-1958, we observe lower returns
to schooling in the twin sample.



4.3     Econometric Specification

We follow other papers that have used twins fixed e↵ects as the basis for
our empirical specification. For a given outcome Y (take up of unemployment
insurance for instance) for person i belonging to family j in year t, we estimate
the following relationship in the case of birth weight as the main independent
variable of interest:


                        Yijt =   t Hij0   + ⇠t Xijt + µj + ✏ijt                    (6)
  7
    The Mincerian income/earnings regressions are estimated by OLS and include years of
schooling, age, age squared, and an indicator for male.




                                              18
In this equation H0 is log birth weight measured in grams or a measure of
low birth weight (less than 2500 grams for example, or less than some specific
threshold) and X’s are individual specific variables, which in our case includes
years of education, occupation categories, and sector of employment. ⌘j is the
twin or family fixed e↵ect. In other words,          t   can be interpreted as the coeffi-
cient on the di↵erence in birth weight within twins in a given calendar year t.
We estimate equation 7 for years before and after the crisis for the regression
tables (our “pre-crisis” period covers 1986-1990 and our “post-crisis” period
covers 1993-1997)8 and for each year for the graphs. We cluster standard errors
at the family level. This equation is estimated separately for twins working in
the private and public sector.

In the case of adult health as the main independent variable of interest, we
estimate a variant of equation 6:


                       Yijt =   t Hijt 1   + ⌘t Xijt + µj + vijt                         (7)


Here, Ht    1   captures the health of the individual in adulthood (measured as
any hospitalization event) prior to the crisis. Other inputs in equation 7 have
the same interpretation as the inputs in equation 6 (see above). The only
di↵erence is that our pre-crisis period in this instance covers 1989-1990 and
post-crisis period covers 1993-1997; and hence to examine pre-crisis labor mar-
   8
    Our choice of the 5 year period between 1993-1997 in the post-crisis era is motivated
by the fact that the crisis a↵ected the public sector later (compared to the private sector).
Note that our headline private sector results are not sensitive to the choice of examining
just these five years post-crisis. Results using 1993-1994, 1994-1995 and 1995-1996 as our
post-crisis years yield very similar results (available upon request).



                                              19
ket outcomes we use information on hospitalizations from 1987-1988 and for
post-crisis labor market outcomes use information on hospitalizations from
1987-1990.9




5       Results

5.1     Early life health

We begin by examining the relationship between unemployment insurance
payments (UI) as a fraction of total income (TI) and birth weight in the years
leading up to and after the crisis, by sector of employment. Figures 2 and 3
show the twins fixed e↵ects estimates of estimating equation 6 for each year
between 1983 and 2005, by sector. The independent variable of interest in this
case is the natural log of birth weight.

Figure 2 very clearly shows the main point of this paper: adults who were
relatively higher birth weight than their twin counterparts in the private sec-
tor have lower UI payments relative to total income (hereafter referred to as
UI/TI) after the crisis. Birthweight does not seem to play an important role
in determining UI payments as a fraction of total income in the public sector
after the crisis (Figure 3). Figure 2 also shows that the birth weight-UI/TI
relationship is persistent after the crisis. Those that happened to go on UI
after the crisis appear to stay on it for many years. While the standard errors
    9
    The main results are similar when using the 1987-1988 pre-crisis period for examining
post-crisis labor market outcomes.



                                           20
in this figure seem large, pooling pre and post-crisis years improves precision.
The estimates in Tables 3 and 4 show this relationship by combining a few
years before the crisis (1986-1990) and few years after the crisis (1993-1997).10
The years 1991 and 1992 are transitionary years before the full e↵ect of the
crisis hit, and while the figures include it, we omit them in the regressions
since it is unclear whether they should be included in the pre or post-crisis
years.

Table 3 shows in regressions that birth weight matters significantly for UI/TI
after the crisis but only in the private sector. As noted earlier, the private
sector was more a↵ected during the crisis than the public sector. Table 3
shows that a 10% increase in birth weight reduces the fraction of total income
coming from UI by 6% in the post-crisis period in the private sector (the OLS
results, presented in Appendix Table 2, underestimate these impacts suggest-
ing an important role for controlling for unobserved family characteristics).
The di↵erence-in-di↵erence estimate (comparing the pre and post-crisis e↵ect
within sectors) shows a statistically significant post-crisis e↵ect for the private
sector, but not for the public sector. This pattern is reinforced when ex-
amining the results for discordant twins (twins whose birth weight di↵erence
is more than 10%). Note that our sample in the post-crisis period consists
of di↵erent individuals, mainly due to people switching across occupational
sectors or retiring from the workforce. However, a balanced sample analysis
presented in Appendix Table 3 shows similar results in magnitude, albeit with
  10
    Since UI is only available to people who were previously employed, we condition the
“pre” years on being employed in 1985 and the “post” years on being employed in 1990.
Note that we only have direct employment and occupational data from 1985 and 1990.


                                          21
less precision.

We also examine the extensive margin of UI take up, since UI/TI could also
reflect the fact that lower birth weight decreases the ceiling of UI payments
eligible before the crisis (if lower birth weight weight individuals worked fewer
hours or earned less pre-crisis). Table 4 presents the results from examining
the relationship between birth weight and UI take up (a binary variable in-
dicating any income from UI during the pre and post-crisis periods). The
results are presented in the same format as Table 3 and imply while birth
weight has a larger e↵ect on UI take up in the post-crisis period, the di↵erence
in e↵ects across sectors are not as stark as in the case of UI/TI (the di↵erence-
in-di↵erence coefficient is -0.0491 in the private sector and -0.0372 in the public
sector). Examining discordant twins in Table 4, we see significant di↵erences
in post versus pre-crisis take up of UI in the private sector and smaller e↵ects
in the public sector (not statistically significant). The di↵erence in sectoral
e↵ects across Tables 3 and 4 is likely due to the fact that individuals in the
public sector were quicker to move out of UI after an initial period of being on
UI after the crisis. Finally, while sickness benefits before the crisis was some-
times used in lieu of unemployment benefits, our analysis shows that both UI
and sickness benefits (calculated as the share of total income from both UI and
sickness benefits (SB)) has no correlation with birth weight before the crisis
(see Figures 4 and 5, regression results available upon request). Hence, our
main UI results are not simply the result of misclassifying the type of benefit
prior to the crisis.




                                        22
Appendix Table 4 examines whether there are any non linearities in the birth
weight-UI/TI relationship before and after the crisis. While most of the coef-
ficients are not significant at the conventional levels, the magnitudes indicate
some strong non-linearities in this relationship especially in the private sector
post-crisis. Most of the e↵ects appear concentrated in the below 2000 gram
range. For example, being less than 1500 grams (Very Low Birth Weight)
increases the fraction of income coming from UI after the crisis by nearly 71%
(coefficient of 0.048 o↵ a base of 0.067). Appendix Table 5 shows that birth
weight measurement error issues that are discussed in Bharadwaj, Lundborg,
and Rooth (2015) are not a concern in this context. Even if we mechanically
introduce measurement error by rounding all birth weight data to the nearest
50 gram, our results are unchanged.



5.2    Adult health

Turning to the e↵ects of adult health on job loss, we see very similar pat-
terns to what we observed for birth weight in Table 3. As mentioned earlier,
our measure of adult health is a binary variable indicating ever having been
hospitalized. Table 5 shows that in the public sector, ever having been hos-
pitalized has no impact on UI as a fraction of income either before or after
the crisis. In the private sector, however, the impacts are quite large after
the crisis. In the post-crisis period, ever having been hospitalized in the pre-
crisis period (1987-1990) increases the UI/TI ratio by 1.4 percentage points.
O↵ a base of 6.7%, this is a magnitudinally meaningful increase of 21%. The


                                       23
di↵erence-in-di↵erence coefficient in the private sector is of similar magnitude
and statistically significant. Turning to Table 6, we find similar results for UI
take up. Again, there are small e↵ects in the public sector, but any hospital-
izations in the pre-crisis period results in a 2.5 percentage point increase in the
probability of UI take up in the post-crisis period.11 This is a 17% increase
from the mean take up of UI during this period. Hence, the results confirm
that adult health is an important factor of job vulnerability in the private
sector.

Table 7 shows that a major factor in the determination of job vulnerability
is hospitalization for mental illnesses.12 Once again, this table shows that in
the public sector, mental illness hospitalizations in the pre-crisis period do not
matter for UI/TI in the post-crisis period. However, this is not true in the pri-
vate sector. Hospitalization for mental illnesses pre-crisis leads to a significant
increase in the fraction of income coming from UI post-crisis. Appendix Ta-
bles 7a and 7b show broad categories of hospitalization causes that we observe
in the data. While the point estimates for UI/TI and UI take up for these
other diagnosis are positive and magnitudinally meaningful, none are statisti-
cally significant. Finally, we can also examine an alternative measure of adult
health – number of hospitalizations, instead of whether any hospitalization
occurred. These results shown in Appendix Table 8, are consistent with Table
5.

As mentioned in Section 2, we need to consider the extent to which early life
     11
    A balanced sample analysis is presented in Appendix Table 6 with similar results.
     12
    Although, if we exclude hospitalizations due to mental illness from our main specifica-
tions in Table 5, our results are still statistically significant.


                                            24
health itself a↵ects later life health. Since the regressions in Table 5 do not
control for early life health, we present estimates where both, hospitalization
incidence and birth weight are included in the same regression. Appendix
Table 9 reveals nearly identical results to that in Tables 3 and 5. Hence, it
appears that the impact of birth weight on the component of adult hospital-
izations that matter for UI take up is minimal.



5.3     Mechanisms

Table 8 examines whether the e↵ect of pre-crisis health on UI related pay-
ments after the crisis is explained by intermediate factors such as educational
attainment and occupational sorting prior to the crisis. For example, if indi-
viduals with lower birth weight attain less education and if the less educated
are more vulnerable to job loss during economic crisis, then the e↵ects observed
in Table 3 would simply proxy for education rather than a broad measure of
early childhood health. Alternatively, the less educated could have worse adult
health and hence, the results in Table 5 could again reflect fewer educational
investments. Similarly, if individuals with worse health are likely to sort into
occupations that are more likely to be hit by the crisis, then the e↵ects are
driven purely by the relationship between pre-crisis health and occupational
sorting, rather than health and on the job vulnerability.13

Columns 1 and 2 in Table 8 control for education linearly and then non-linearly.
The magnitudes of the coefficients remain largely unchanged suggesting that
  13
    The e↵ects of birth weight on education and occupational sorting, and hospitalizations
on occupational sorting are statistically significant; these results are available on request.


                                             25
education is not a first order intermediary factor. Columns 3, 5 and 6 control
for various aspects of occupational choice such as sector of employment (there
are 5 sectors of employment defined even within the private sector), and de-
tailed 3 and 4 digit occupation codes. The results are quite stable across these
di↵erence specifications; hence, it does not appear that birth weight specific
educational sorting, and overall health specific occupational sorting explains
much of the results seen in Tables 3 and 5.

To examine this idea further, columns 4 and 7 in Table 8 restrict the sample to
twins who share the same sector of employment (5 categories within the pri-
vate sector), or 3 digit occupation code. Restricting the sample to twins in the
same sector results in larger magnitudes; for twins in the same 3 digit occupa-
tion code (Column 7), the birth weight and adult health e↵ect is statistically
insignificant (this is likely due to the small number of observations where both
twins are in the same occupation). The overall results of the this table suggest
that the e↵ect of birth weight and adult health on unemployment after the
crisis is not operating through the channels of pre-crisis investments in edu-
cation, the e↵ect of education on adult health, or via pre-crisis occupational
sorting.

An important concern while examining unemployment in Sweden is the possi-
bility that our e↵ects are purely driven by the Swedish Employment Protection
Act (SEPA), rather than health per se. For example, a prominent feature of
the Swedish employment law is the idea of “last in-first out”, according to
which employers dismiss people based on job tenure rather than productivity



                                      26
or other considerations (Von Below and Thoursie 2010). This a↵ects our in-
terpretation if individuals with worse health enter the labor force later than
healthier twin counterparts. The strength of these employment protection acts
have been debated in the Swedish context and we refer the reader to the Ap-
pendix for an in-depth discussion of these issues. The main take away from our
examination of the literature surrounding SEPA is that the “last in-first out”
principle basically has lost its initial intentions and rendered unclear practice
governing dismissals. While we unfortunately do not observe job tenure in our
data, in Appendix Table 10 we show that e↵ects of birth weight and hospital-
izations are not statistically di↵erent across older cohorts and younger cohorts
– if the employment protection issues were driving our results, we might have
expected to see that the main results are driven by job loss in the younger
cohorts (since they presumably start their jobs later than people in the older
cohorts).

Finally we examine results by zygosity in Appendix Table 11. Prior work ex-
amining the relationship between birth weight and labor market outcomes has
found little heterogeneity in the e↵ects by zygosity or twin gender (a proxy for
zygosity as used in Royer 2009 and Black, Devereaux and Salvanes 2007). Our
results are inconclusive about the role of zygosity or gender in determining the
health-UI relationship. Examining just the private sector results, Appendix
Table 11 shows that our main e↵ects for birth weight and hospitalizations, and
birth weight and UI/TI are of similar magnitude for monozygotic female twins
and dizygotic male twins post-crisis. Another reading of this table reveals that
our results are also inconclusive by gender as it is not obvious whether the ef-


                                       27
fects are concentrated among males or females.



5.4    Role of the safety net

In Table 9 we examine, in the same framework as Table 3 and Table 5, the
e↵ects of health on total income (income inclusive of labor and benefit pay-
ments) across sectors, before and after the crisis. Table 9 shows that despite
the large increase in UI take up in the private sector after the crisis, the e↵ect
of birth weight and hospitalizations on total income before and after the crisis
are nearly identical (the di↵erence in di↵erence estimates shows that these are
not statistically di↵erent). This is an important finding as it suggests that
despite the high level of unemployment during this period and the new struc-
tural level of unemployment reached after the crisis, those with worse health
did not see a di↵erential drop in their total income, but rather just a di↵er-
ential increase in the fraction of income coming from UI. This suggests the
importance of a social safety net in mitigating the e↵ects of poorer health on
labor market outcomes during economic downturns.




6     Conclusion

A growing literature has shown the deleterious e↵ects of major economic crises
on health. However, no prior work has examined whether pre-existing health,
such as health at birth, is a determinant of who is a↵ected during large re-
cessions. This paper shows that health at birth, as proxied by birth weight,


                                       28
and adult health as proxied by hospitalizations, are important sources of job
vulnerability during macroeconomic crises. Using data on Swedish twins to
control for family level unobservables that might a↵ect both health (as infants
and as adults) and subsequent job attachment, we find that individuals with
worse health are more likely to become unemployed after the crisis. These
e↵ects are concentrated in the private sector, which was more a↵ected by the
crisis.

While education and occupational sorting are factors behind who becomes
unemployed, these variables do little to mediate the health impacts. Hence,
it is likely, that factors such as cognitive development (which is linked to
birth weight in studies such as Figlio, Guryan, Karbownik, and Roth (2014)
and Bharadwaj, Eberhard, and Neilson (2013)), or non-cognitive development
(also linked to birth weight in the work of Conti, Heckman, Yi, and Zhang
(2010)) might play an important role in addition to health in determining job
vulnerability during recessions.




                                      29
References

Almond, D., K. Chay, and D. Lee (2005): “The Costs of Low Birth
  Weight,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3), 1031–1083.

Almond, D., and J. Currie (2011): “Killing me softly: The fetal origins
  hypothesis,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(3), 153–172.

Barker, D., C. Osmond, and C. Law (1989): “The intrauterine and early
  postnatal origins of cardiovascular disease and chronic bronchitis.,” Journal
  of Epidemiology and Community Health, 43(3), 237–240.

Bharadwaj, P., J. Eberhard, and C. Neilson (2013): “Health at birth,
  parental investments and academic outcomes,” University of California at
  San Diego Working Paper Series.

Bharadwaj, P., P. Lundborg, and D.-O. Rooth (2015): “Birth Weight
  in the Long Run,” Working Paper.

Bitler, M. P., and J. Currie (2005): “Does WIC work? The e↵ects of
  WIC on pregnancy and birth outcomes,” Journal of Policy Analysis and
  Management, 24(1), 73–91.

Black, S., P. Devereux, and K. Salvanes (2007): “From the Cradle to
  the Labor Market? The E↵ect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes,” The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1), 409–439.

Bound, J., H. J. Holzer, et al. (1995): Structural changes, employ-
  ment outcomes, and population adjustments among whites and blacks: 1980-


                                      30
  1990, no. 1057. Institute for Research on Poverty, University of Wisconsin–
  Madison.

Calleman, C. (2000): Turordning vid uppsägning. Norstedts Juridik AB,
  Stockholm.

Carling, K., B. Holmlund, and A. Vejsiu (2001): “Do benefit cuts boost
  job finding? Swedish evidence from the 1990s,” The Economic Journal,
  111(474), 766–790.

Chay, K. Y., and M. Greenstone (2003): “The impact of air pollution
  on infant mortality: evidence from geographic variation in pollution shocks
  induced by a recession,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3), 1121–
  1167.

Cho, Y., and D. Newhouse (2012): “How did the great recession a↵ect
  di↵erent types of workers? Evidence from 17 middle-income countries,”
  World Development.

Clark, K. B., and L. H. Summers (1981): “Demographic Di↵erences in
  Cyclical Employment Variation.,” Journal of Human Resources, 16(1), 61–
  79.

Conti, G., J. J. Heckman, J. Yi, and J. Zhang (2010): “Early health
  shocks, parental responses, and child outcomes,” University of Chicago
  Working Paper.

Currie, J., and E. Tekin (2011): “Is the foreclosure crisis making us sick?,”
  NBER Working Paper Series, 17310.


                                     31
Dehejia, R., and A. Lleras-Muney (2004): “Booms, busts, and babies’
  health,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(3), 1091–1130.

Engemann, K. M., and H. J. Wall (2009): “The e↵ects of recessions
  across demographic groups,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Working
  Paper Series.

Englund, P. (1999): “The Swedish banking crisis: roots and consequences,”
  Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 15(3), 80–97.

Figlio, D., J. Guryan, K. Karbownik, and J. Roth (2014): “The
  E↵ects of Poor Neonatal Health on Children’s Cognitive Development,”
  American Economic Review, 104(12), 3921–55.

Glavå, M. (1999): Arbetsbrist och kravet på saklig grund. Norstedts Juridik
  AB, Stockholm.

Gorodnichenko, Y., E. G. Mendoza, and L. L. Tesar (2012): “The
  finnish great depression: From russia with love,” The American Economic
  Review, 102(4), 1619–1643.

Hack, M., N. K. Klein, and H. G. Taylor (1995): “Long-term develop-
  mental outcomes of low birth weight infants,” The Future of Children, pp.
  176–196.

Heckman, J. (2007): “The economics, technology, and neuroscience of hu-
  man capability formation,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
  ences, 104(33), 13250–13255.




                                     32
Heckman, J. J. (1998): “Detecting discrimination,” The Journal of Eco-
  nomic Perspectives, pp. 101–116.

Holmlund, B. (2011): “Svensk arbetsmarknad under två kriser,” Talous &
  Yhteiskunta (Economy & Society), (3).

Hoynes, H. W., D. L. Miller, and J. Schaller (2012): “Who su↵ers
  during recessions?,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Re-
  search.

Hoynes, H. W., D. W. Schanzenbach, and D. Almond (2012): “Long
  run impacts of childhood access to the safety net,” Discussion paper, Na-
  tional Bureau of Economic Research.

Jonung, L., J. Kiander, and P. Vartia (2009): The great financial crisis
  in Finland and Sweden: the Nordic experience of financial liberalization.
  Edward Elgar Publishing.

Kopelman, J. L., and H. S. Rosen (2015): “Are Public Sector Jobs
  Recession-Proof? Were They Ever?,” Public Finance Review.

Lundborg, P. (2001): “Konjunktur-och strukturproblem i 90-talets ar-
  betslöshet,” Ekonomisk debatt, 29(1), 7–18.

Paxson, C., and N. Schady (2005): “Child health and economic crisis in
  Peru,” The World Bank Economic Review, 19(2), 203–223.

Reinhart, C. M., and K. S. Rogoff (2008): “Is the 2007 US sub-prime
  financial crisis so di↵erent? An international historical comparison,” Dis-
  cussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

                                     33
Rönnmar, M. (2001): “Redundant because of lack of competence? Swedish
  employees in the knowledge society,” International Journal of Comparative
  Labour Law and Industrial Relations, 17(1), 117–138.

Rosen, S. (1997): “Public employment, taxes, and the welfare state in Swe-
  den,” in The Welfare State in Transition: Reforming the Swedish Model,
  pp. 79–108. University of Chicago Press.

Royer, H. (2009): “Separated at girth: Estimating the long-run and in-
  tergenerational E↵ects of Birthweight using Twins,” American Economic
  Journal - Applied Economics.

Ruhm, C. J. (2000): “Are recessions good for your health?,” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 115(2), 617–650.

Skans, O. N., P.-A. Edin, and B. Holmlund (2009): “Wage dispersion
  between and within plants: Sweden 1985-2000,” in The Structure of Wages:
  An International Comparison, pp. 217–260. University of Chicago Press.

Stillman, S., and D. Thomas (2008): “Nutritional Status During an Eco-
  nomic Crisis: Evidence from Russia,” The Economic Journal, 118(531),
  1385–1417.

Sullivan, D., and T. Von Wachter (2009): “Job displacement and mor-
  tality: An analysis using administrative data,” The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 124(3), 1265–1306.

Von Below, D., and P. S. Thoursie (2010): “Last in, first out? Esti-
  mating the e↵ect of seniority rules in Sweden,” Labour Economics, 17(6),


                                    34
  987–997.

Wilhelmsson, K. (2001): Kan turordningsreglerna anses fylla sin funktion
  som skydd mot godtyckliga uppsgningar? Dissertation, Department of Law,
  Lund University.




                                   35
7       Appendix

7.1     The Swedish Crisis

In this section, we summarize the roots of the Swedish crisis, relying heavily
on Englund (1999) and Holmlund (2011). At the beginning of the 1980s the
Swedish economy was characterized by a regulated credit market, a fixed ex-
change rate, and fiscal policies that aimed at full employment. Inflation, to a
large extent driven by rapidly increasing wages, was consistently higher com-
pared to the neighboring economies and reached a high of over 10 percent in
1990 (Holmlund 2011). In order to protect its export industry from increasing
costs, Sweden devalued the Swedish krona on six occasions between 1973 and
1982.

Despite high inflation, the real interest rate was extremely low, and sometimes
even negative, as a result of a tax system with high marginal tax rates com-
bined with generous opportunities for interest deductions. The Swedish credit
market had been tightly regulated since WWII, but during the first half of
the 1980s the credit market was deregulated. The increased ability to borrow,
combined with a tax system that made loans cheap, created a price bubble in
real estate. Further, and as discussed earlier, unemployment was low through-
out the decade, and extremely low in the second half, and probably lower than
equilibrium level of unemployment (Holmlund 2011). Overall, these circum-
stances led to sharp increases in prices and wages in the Swedish market in
the late 80s.


                                      36
Then a series of factors - mostly policy-driven - interacted to create a sharp
contraction of the Swedish economy. We make no statement about which
factors were most important and only aim to describe them. First, in 1991 a
new tax system with lower marginal tax rates and reduced opportunities for
interest deductions was introduced. This implied an increase in real interest
rates, resulting in a sharp fall in property prices. In downtown Stockholm,
the price of real estate decreased by 35 percent in 1991 (Englund, 1999, pp.
90). Between 1988 and 1992 household savings increased by 12 percentage
points, which constituted an important reason for the sharp decline in domestic
demand between 1990 and 1993 (Holmlund, 2011, pp. 4).

Second, the central bank decided to defend a fixed exchange rate. This implied
that devaluations of the Swedish currency were no longer going to be used to
compensate for the negative e↵ect of wage inflation on the competitiveness
of the export industry. In the end of the 80s, production and employment
in the export industry started to fall rapidly. The central bank defended
the fixed exchange rate until November 1992 when they finally decided the
Swedish Krona to float, which in practice led to a devaluation of the currency.
The defense of the fixed exchange rate also led to increased interest rates,
but internationally higher interest rates as a result of the German unification
and the introduction of the new tax system also played a role in this increase
(Englund, 1999, pp. 89).

Third, the crises coincided with a dramatic reduction in labor demand in the
public sector. This was caused by large deficits in public finances during this



                                      37
period, leading to cuts in public spending. Instead of compensating for the fall
in private section labour demand, as was often done in the past, the reduction
in public employment instead contributed to the fall in overall employment
during the crisis.

The crisis lasted until the late 1990s. The reason for this prolonged period of
the crisis was a desire to keep restrictive fiscal and monetary policies. Mon-
etary policy had to be restrictive in order to create credibility for the new
low-inflation regime, while fiscal policy had to deal with the budget deficit by
increasing taxes and cutting costs. During the late 90’s both fiscal and mon-
etary policy became less restrictive, while at the same time the international
economy improved.



7.2    Employment Protection Laws in Sweden

Numerous theses and articles have been written in the field of law during the
last ten years concerning the Swedish Employment Protection Act (SEPA).The
consensus in this literature seems to be that SEPA has gradually, since its start
in 1982, lost its original intention on how to protect employees in the case of
dismissal. The intent was to force employers to use objective standards (so
called “turordningsregler” in Swedish) when deciding on who to dismiss, but
cases/practice in court has turned to increasingly meet employer’s interest in
choosing subjectively who to fire.

The SEPA actually consists of two criteria: dismissals made for personal rea-
sons and dismissals made due to a redundancy of labor. We start by discussing

                                       38
the latter, since it is likely to be the more common one being implemented
during the crisis. The SEPA dictates that a shortage of work ought to be the
main justification for laying o↵ workers and that a dismissal by the employer
must be made on objective grounds. When a firm decides to layo↵ some of
its employees for this reason it is not allowed to choose at will, instead the
protection of employees is met by implementing a seniority rule, the so called
“last in - first out” principle.

However, the SEPA contains a number of possibilities to circumvent this prin-
ciple, making it possible for employers to subjectively choose whom to dismiss.
For example, if the firm is bound by collective agreements, and a clear majority
of firms in Sweden are, the workforce at the firm can be divided into smaller
units based on their union affiliation and work task, and the “last in - first
out” principle could then apply to each such unit separately. This implies that
during a crisis, layo↵s can be directed towards a specific unit within the firm,
and hence, making it possible to keep those workers that are important to the
firm, and dismiss those that are not (see von Below and Skogman Thoursie
(2010) for more details).

Furthermore, the SEPA also allows the employer to discriminate based on
personal reasons, for example that a worker’s education or another type of
qualification is insufficient, when deciding who to dismiss. The employer can
even be allowed to dismiss workers based on personal characteristics, if these
same characteristics can be motivated as being important for doing the job.
Wilhelmsson (2001) presents a large number of situations that have been ruled



                                      39
in the Labor Court in line with the view of the employer. A worker’s low per-
formance, insufficient customer focus and results orientation has been ruled
by the Labor Court as acceptable for a termination due to incompetence or
lack of professional skills, a worker’s lack of judgment as a basis for a dis-
missal because of negligence, and a worker’s poor health or inadequate body
constitution forms the basis for a dismissal because of reduced work capacity.
However, after reading a few of these court cases ourselves it is fair to say that
the Labor Court sometimes rule in line with the employer, but also in line with
the employee being dismissed. For example, in case AD 1993:42 a company
was allowed to dismiss two employees who due to work related injuries could
no longer perform some common work tasks. In another case, AD 1994:115,
an employee had undergone rehabilitation for a long time and could only work
part-time. The employer dismissed him due these factors, but this was turned
down by the court. To summarize, Glavå (1999), Rönnmar (2001), Calleman
(2000) and Wilhelmsson (2001) all argue that the “last in - first out” principle
basically has lost its initial intentions and rendered unclear practice governing
dismissals in the Swedish labor market.

Surprisingly, given the amount of political debate over SEPA in Sweden there
has been very little work on the causal e↵ect of the SEPA on hiring and
dismissal strategies of firms; hence it is hard to answer the question of whether
the seniority rule is truly binding or not. However, we have found one study for
Sweden looking exactly at whether the separation strategies of firms changes
when SEPA was reformed. In 2001 there was a reform of the SEPA targeted
at smaller firms, making it possible for firms with ten employees or fewer to


                                       40
withdraw two of its employees from the ranking list of who to dismiss. Hence,
the rules governing dismissals with respect to seniority became more lenient
after the reform. von Below and Skogman Thoursie (2010) use this reform in
a di↵erence in di↵erence framework and analyze whether the reform changed
the dismissal due to seniority di↵erently for small (2-10 employees) and large
(11-15 employees) firms. They find that the e↵ect of the reform was smaller for
workers with long tenure (5 years or longer, making up around 15-18 percent
of the data) compared to workers with short tenure (0-4 years, see Panel C in
their Table 3). Since the exemption rule was expected to make it easier for
firms to layo↵ workers with long seniority, one interpretation of this result is
that the seniority rule was not in e↵ect even before the reform.




                                      41
Figure 1: Take up of UI by year and sector (Twins Sample)




                           42
Figure 2: E↵ects of Log Birth Weight in the Private Sector




Figure 3: E↵ects of Log Birth Weight in the Public Sector




                           43
Figure 4: E↵ects of Log Birth Weight in the Private Sector




Figure 5: E↵ects of Log Birth Weight in the Public Sector




                           44
                            Table 1. Sample Size Table

Sample                                               Observations   Twin pairs
A. Raw BIRTH Data                                        46,618      23,309

B. with information on birthweight (and only             35,318      17,659
keeping pairs where information on both twins is
available)
C. only same sex twins                                   26,418      13,209

D. Information on sector of employment in 1985           20,738      10,369

E. Information on sector of employment in 1990           20,190      10,095

F. Both twins employed in public or private sector       14,154       7,077
in 1985
G. Both twins employed in public or private              13,632       6,816
sector in 1990
H. Data from hospitalizations                            13,632       6,816




Table 2. Comparison of the twin sample with the full population
                                                        1926-1938                          1939-1948                      1949-1958
                                                          1             2           3               4              5                    6
                                                       Full pop       Twins      Full pop         Twins         Full pop              Twins
A. Descriptive statistics
Male                                                      49.5        48.0         51.0            48.3           51.3                50.0
Age                                                       58.5        57.3         46.2            46.1           36.6                36.6
                                                          (3.5)       (3.8)        (2.8)           (2.8)          (2.9)               (2.9)
Years of schooling                                        10.5        10.7         11.3            11.4           11.6                12.0
                                                          (2.2)       (2.4)        (2.4)           (2.5)          (2.3)               (2.6)
Ln Income                                                 7.13        7.16         7.29            7.27           7.18                7.18
                                                          (.72)       (.68)        (.66)           (.63)          (.68)               (.67)

B. Return to education
Years of schooling                                       .103***     .084***      .078***         .065***        .067***          .044***
                                                          (.000)      (.003)       (.000)          (.002)         (.000)           (.002)

Nr of observations                                       908,269      7,949      1,078,529        13,354        1,031,995         13,133

Notes: The comparison in descriptive statistics between the full population and twin sample is made using information from the 1990 Census.
Both samples contain the population born 1926-1958. The Mincer type earnings regressions are estimated by OLS and include, other than years
of schooling, also age, age squared and an indicator for male. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. Standard errors in parentheses.
Table 3. Birth weight and UI/Total Income, 1986-1990 vs 1993-1997. Twin fixed effects.

                                      Public sector                    Private sector
                                Pre Crisis      Post Crisis       Pre Crisis     Post Crisis
                               (1986-1990)     (1993-1997)       (1986-1990) (1993-1997)
All twins
Log birth weight                 -.0002               -.0039        -.0002          -.0367**
                                 (.0004)              (.0165)       (.0004)          (.0187)

Mean Outcome                       .000                .026           .000               .067
No of twin pairs                  2,405                2,346         4,672              4,470

DiD                                         -.0037                           -.0365**
                                            (.0165)                           (.0187)
                                                                              p=.051

Discordant twins
Log birth weight                  0.0001              -0.0015      -0.0001         -0.0395**
                                 (0.0003)             (0.0171)     (0.0004)         (0.0192)

No of twin pairs                  1,142                1,099         2,337              2,227

DiD                                         -.0014                           -.0394**
                                            (.0171)                           (.0192)
                                                                              p=.041

Notes: This table shows regressions of the share of unemployment insurance payments of total
income (UI/TI) on birth weight for the private and public sector, before (1986-1990) and after
(1993-1997) the crisis. All coeffcients are from a twin fixed effects model using same sex
twins, including both men and women. Cohorts are born 1926-1958. The table also shows the
difference-in-difference estimates calculated using the estimates from before/after the crisis.
"Discordant twins" only include twin pairs which differ more than 10%, that is, 264g, in
birthweight. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. Clustered standard errors in parentheses.
Table 4. Birth weight and UI Take Up, 1986-1990 vs 1993-1997. Twin fixed effects.

                                       Public sector                         Private sector
                                Pre Crisis       Post Crisis          Pre Crisis        Post Crisis
                               (1986-1990)      (1993-1997)          (1986-1990)       (1993-1997)
All twins
Log birth weight                  -.0025              -.0397           -.0045                -.0536*
                                  (.0037)             (.0340)          (.0036)               (.0317)

Mean Outcome                       .002                 .068             .002                 .139
No of twin pairs                   2.405               2.346            4,672                 4,470

DiD                                         -.0372                                -.0491
                                            (.0342)                               (.0319)
                                                                                   p=.11

Discordant twins
Log birth weight                 -0.0021              -0.0316          -0.0043               -0.0621*
                                 (0.0037)             (0.0352)         (0.0037)              (0.0327)

No of twin pairs                   1.142               1.099            2.337                 2.227

DiD                                         -.0295                                -.0578*
                                            (.0354)                               (.0329)
                                                                                  p=..079
Notes: This table shows regressions of UI take up (an indicator for having received any UI payments
during the period) on birth weight for the private and public sector, before (1986-1990) and after
(1993-1997) the crisis. For additional information, see the notes to Table 3. * p < .10, ** p < .05, ***
p < .01. Clustered standard errors in parentheses.




Table 5. Adult health and UI/Total Income, 1989-1990 vs 1993-1997. Twin fixed effects.
                                       Public sector                         Private sector
                                Pre Crisis       Post Crisis          Pre Crisis        Post Crisis
                               (1989-1990)      (1993-1997)          (1989-1990)       (1993-1997)
All twins
Ever Hospitalized pre             -.0001              -.0009           .0003**               .0144**
crisis
                                  (.0002)             (.0055)          (.0001)               (.0061)

Mean Outcome                       .000                 .026             .000                 .067
No of twin pairs                   2,382               2,346            4,601                 4,470

DiD                                         -.0008                                .0141**
                                            (.0055)                                (.0061)
                                                                                   p=.021
Notes: This table shows regressions of the share of UI payments of total income (UI/TI) on whether
having been hospitalized pre crisis for the private and public sector, before (1989-1990) and after
(1993-1997) the crisis. Ever hospitalized pre crisis is measured for the years 1987-1988 for the 1989-
1990 analysis, and during 1987-1990 for the 1993-1997 analysis, see section 4 for details. For
additional information, see the notes to Table 3. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. Clustered standard
errors in parentheses.
Table 6. Adult health and UI Take Up, 1989-1990 vs 1993-1997. Twin fixed effects.

                                                 Public sector                          Private sector
                                          Pre Crisis        Post Crisis         Pre Crisis         Post Crisis
                                         (1989-1990)       (1993-1997)         (1989-1990)        (1993-1997)
All twins
Ever Hospitalized pre crisis               -.0019               .0006           .0053***              .0255**
                                           (.0023)             (.0111)           (.0019)               (.0105)

Mean Outcome                                .002                .068               .002                .139
No of twin pairs                            2,382              2,346              4,601                4,470

DiD                                                   .0025                                 .0202*
                                                     (.0113)                                (.0107)
                                                                                            p=.060
Notes: This table shows regressions of UI take up (an indicator for having received any UI payments during the
period) on whether having been hospitalized pre crisis for the private and public sector, before (1989-1990) and
after (1993-1997) the crisis. Ever hospitalized pre crisis is measured for the years 1987-1988 for the 1989-1990
analysis, and during 1987-1990 for the 1993-1997 analysis, see section 4 for details. For additional information,
see the notes to Table 3. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. Clustered standard errors in parentheses.




Table 7. Adult mental health and UI/Total Income, 1989-1990 vs 1993-1997. Twin fixed effects.
                                                 Public sector                          Private sector
                                          Pre Crisis        Post Crisis         Pre Crisis         Post Crisis
                                         (1989-1990)       (1993-1997)         (1989-1990)        (1993-1997)
All twins
Ever Hospitalized for mental health         -.0012             .0019              .0004               .0468*
pre crisis
                                           (.0012)             (.0242)           (.0003)              (.0276)

Mean Outcome                                .000                .026               .000                .067
No of twin pairs                            2,382              2,346              4,601                4,470

DiD                                                   .0031                                 .0464*
                                                     (.0242)                                (.0276)
                                                                                            p=.093
Notes: This table shows regressions of the share of UI payments of total income (UI/TI) on whether ever been
hospitalized for mental health diagnosis pre crisis for the private and public sector, before (1989-1990) and after
(1993-1997) the crisis. Ever hospitalized for mental health diagnosos pre crisis is measured for the years 1987-
1988 for the 1989-1990 analysis, and during 1987-1990 for the 1993-1997 analysis, see section 4 for details. For
additional information, see the notes to Table 6. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. Clustered standard errors in
parentheses.
Table 8. Examining mediating factors for the relationship between health and UI/Total Income. Private sector, 1993-1997. Twin fixed effects.
                                                       1              2              3              4              5             6             7

Log birth weight                                   -.0374**       -.0386**       -.0378**       -.0503**       -.0402**      -.0330*         -.0150
                                                    (.0187)        (.0186)        (.0186)        (.0223)        (.0186)      (.0190)         (.0374)

Ever Hospitalized (1987-1990)                      .0143**         .0139**       .0140**         .0131*        .0141**       .0140**          .0152
                                                    (.0061)         (.0061)       (.0061)        (.0071)        (.0061)       (.0062)        (.0122)

                                                                                                                                        Both twins
                                                   Years of        Years of      Sector of   Both twins Occupation                     have the same
                                                                                                                           Occupation
                                                  schooling       schooling     employment have the same                                  3 digit
Controls
                                                                                              sector of                                 occupation
                                                   (linearly)    (indicators)     (5 cat.)  employment    3 digits           4 digits     3 digit
                                                                                                         (105 cat.)         (287 cat.)
No of twin pairs*                                   4,470           4,470          4,470       3,209       4,470              4,470         961


Note: This table shows regressions of the share of UI payments of total income (UI/TI) on birthweight and whether having been hospitalized pre crisis
exlusively for the private sector and the post crisis years (1993-1997). Coefficients on birth weight and ever hospitalized are obtained from separate
regressions. The first column adds a linear years-of-schooling variable, while the second column add indicators for each year of schooling. Column 3-7
instead adds information on pre-crisis employment. Column 3 adds indicators measuring what sector (within the private sector) the person worked in in
1990, while column 4 forces both twins to be working in the same sector of employment in 1990. Column 5 and 6 add indicators for the occupation held
in 1990 (3 and 4 digit level, respectively), while column 7 forces both twins to be working in the same type of occupation in 1990. For additional
information see notes to Table 3. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. Clustered standard errors in parentheses.
Table 9: Health and Total income (including income from benefits), pre
and post crisis for the private sector. Twin fixed effects.


                                                                    Post Crisis
                                                   Pre Crisisa,b   (1993-1997)
All twins

Log birth weighta                                    0.0949*         0.0907
                                                     (0.0495)       (0.0579)
DiD                                                          -.0042
                                                            (.0762)

Ever Hospitalized pre crisisb                        -.0551**          -.0445**
                                                      (.0223)           (.0178)
DiD                                                           .0106
                                                             (.0285)
No of twin pairs (different sample sizes since
pre crisis defined differently for birth weight    4.672/4,601          4,470
and hospitalizations, see footnotes a and b)


Note: Coefficients on birth weight and ever hospitalized are obtained from
separate regressions. This table shows regressions of total income on
birthweight and whether ever been hospitalized pre crisis exlusively for the
private sector, analysing the years before (see a and b below) and after (1993-
1997) the crisis. Total income include annual earnings and all work-related
benefits, e.g., unemployment insurance, sickness benefits and parental leave
benefits. For additional information see notes to Table 3 and 5. * p < .10, ** p
< .05, *** p < .01. Clustered standard errors in parentheses.
a) The pre crisis period for analysing the effect of birthweight uses data from
1987-1990.
b) Ever hospitalized for the pre crisis analysis uses hospitalization data from
1987-1988, and UI/TI data from 1989-1990. We use hospitalization data from
1987-1990 for the post crisis analysis.
Appendix Table 1. Descriptive statistics of the analysis sample.
                                                    Public employees               Private employees
                                                 Pre-crisis    Post-crisis      Pre-crisis      Post-crisis
                                                  sample        sample           sample          sample
Birth weight                                       2,593         2,605            2,666           2,665
                                                   (499)         (499)            (507)           (499)
Male                                                 .20           .18              .75             .75
Age in 1990                                         44.2          43.9             44.9            44.0
                                                   (8.0)         (7.7)            (8.4)           (7.8)
Years of schooling                                  12.3          12.2             10.2            10.3
                                                   (3.0)         (3.0)            (2.6)           (2.6)
UI/TI                                               .000          .026             .000            .067
UI take up                                          .002          .068             .002            .139

Indicators of some hospitalization: 1987-1988
Any cause                                          .140           .222            .110             .175
Mental and Behavioral conditions (ICD-8            .011           .013            .011             .012
and ICD-9: 290-319, ICD-10: F00-F99)
Diseases in the Nervous system (ICD-8 and
                                                   .003           .005            .001             .003
ICD-9: 320-359 ICD-10: G00-G99)

Heart disease (ICD-8: 390-444.1, 444.3-458,
                                                   .011           .016            .012             .019
782.4. ICD-9: 390-459. ICD-10: I00-I99)
Accident                                           .012           .020            .015             .027
All other causes                                   .103           .168            .071             .114

Nr of twin pairs                                   2,405          2,346           4,672           4,470


Appendix Table 2. Health and UI/Total Income. OLS Estimates.
                                                     Public sector                   Private sector
                                                Pre Crisisa,b Post Crisis      Pre Crisisa,b   Post Crisis
                                                               (1993-1997)                      (1993-1997)
All twins
Ln Birthweighta                                    .0002         -.0017           .0001          -.0133
                                                  (.0002)        (.0084)         (.0002)         (.0094)



Ever Hospitalized pre crisisb                      .0000          .0063           .0003          .0089*
                                                  (.0001)        (.0042)         (.0002)         (.0050)


No of observations (birth
weight/hospitalizations) see footnotes a and   4,810/4,764        4.692       9,344/9,202         8,940
b

Notes: Coefficients on birth weight and ever hospitalized are obtained from separate regressions. * p < .10,
** p < .05, *** p < .01. Clustered standard errors in parentheses.
a) The pre crisis period for analysing the effect of birthweight uses data from 1987-1990.
b) Ever hospitalized for the pre crisis analysis uses hospitalization data from 1987-1988, and UI/TI data
from 1989-1990. We use hospitalization data from 1987-1990 for the post crisis analysis.
Appendix Table 3. Birth weight and UI/Total Income, 1986-1990 vs 1993-1997. Balanced panel.
                                      Public sector                  Private sector
                               Pre Crisis       Post Crisis    Pre Crisis      Post Crisis
                              (1986-1990)      (1993-1997)   (1986-1990)      (1993-1997)
All twins
Log birth weight                 -.0001            .0093        -.0004           -.0244

                                    (.0004)             (.0169)         (.0003)             (.0194)

No of twin pairs                     1,821              1,821           3,661               3,661
DiD                                           -.0094                              -.0240
                                              (.0174)                             (.0194)
                                                                                  p=.108

Notes: See notes to Table 3.


Appendix Table 4. Birth weight categories and UI/Total Income. Twin fixed effects.
                                     Public sector                     Private sector
                               Pre Crisis       Post Crisis     Pre Crisis       Post Crisis
                              (1986-1990)      (1993-1997)    (1986-1990)       (1993-1997)
Birth weight < 1500g             .0002            .0269            .0000           .0480*
                                (.0002)          (.0267)          (.0000)          (.0256)
Birth weight < 2000g             .0000            -.0051         .0006**           .0168*
                                (.0000)          (.0076)          (.0003)          (.0095)
Birth weight < 2500g             .0002            .0007           -.0001            .0029
                                (.0002)          (.0062)          (.0001)          (.0063)
Birth weight < 3000g             .0000            .0005           -.0001            .0002
                                (.0003)          (.0068)          (.0001)          (.0067)

No of twin pairs                     2,405              2,346           4,680               4,470


Notes: See notes to Table 3. Coefficients are obtained from running separate regressions for being
born with a birthweight below each cutoff in the table. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. Clustered
standard errors in parentheses.
Appendix Table 5. Birth weight and UI/Total Income, 1986-1990 vs 1993-1997.
Measurement error analysis. Twin fixed effects.
                                      Public sector                    Private sector
                                 Pre Crisis    Post Crisis        Pre Crisis     Post Crisis
                                (1986-1990) (1993-1997)          (1986-1990)    (1993-1997)
All twins
Log birth weight                   -.0002              -.0038       -.0002              -.0371**
                                   (.0004)             (.0162)      (.0004)              (.0184)

Mean Outcome                        .000               .026           .000                .067
No of twin pairs                    2,405              2,346         4,680               4,470

DiD                                          -.0037                           -.0369**
                                             (.0165)                           (.0184)
                                                                               p=.046
Notes: See notes to Table 3. Birthweight is recoded into 50g bins for the full data.


Appendix Table 6. Adult health and UI/Total Income, 1989-1990 vs 1993-1997. Balanced
panel. Twin fixed effects.
                                      Public sector                    Private sector
                                 Pre Crisis    Post Crisis        Pre Crisis     Post Crisis
                                (1989-1990) (1993-1997)          (1989-1990)    (1993-1997)
All twins
Ever Hospitalized pre crisis       -.0001              -.0027       .0002*              .0147**
                                   (.0003)             (.0052)      (.0001)              (.0066)

Mean Outcome                        .000               .017           .000                .061
No of twin pairs                    1,821              1,821         3,661               3,661

DiD                                          -.0026                            .0145
                                             (.0052)                          (.0066)
                                                                              p=.028
Notes: See notes to Table 5.
Appendix Table 7a. Hospitalization Event and UI/Total Income. Only post crisis, 1993-1997, 1993-1997. Twin
fixed effects.
                                                         Ever hospitalized (1987-1990) for:
                                                           Diseases of the
                                                  Mental                      Heart
                                   Any cause                  Nervous                   Accidents All other causes
                                                  Health                     disease
                                                               system

Private Sector
Twin Fixed effect                   .0144**       .0468*          .0359             .0237     .0211     .0026
                                     (.0061)      (.0276)        (.0448)           (.0173)   (.0137)   (.0070)

Mean Outcome                                                                .067
No of twin pairs                                                           4,470

Public Sector
Twins Fixed Effect                  -.0009         .0019         -.0561             .0040    -.0126     .0029
                                    (.0055)       (.0242)        (.0389)           (.0104)   (.0135)   (.0060)

Mean Outcome                                                                .026
No of twin pairs                                                           2,346

Notes: See notes to Table 5 and Appendix Table 1 for ICD classifications used for each column.

Appendx Table 7b. Hospitalization Event and UI Take Up. Only post crisis, 1993-1997, 1993-1997. Twin fixed
effects.
                                                         Ever hospitalized (1987-1990) for:
                                                           Diseases of the
                                                  Mental                      Heart
                                   Any cause                  Nervous                   Accidents All other causes
                                                  Health                     disease
                                                               system

Private Sector
Twin Fixed effect                   .0255**       .0810*          .0759             .0474     .0397     .0043
                                     (.0105)      (.0430)        (.0739)           (.0300)   (.0261)   (.0121)

Mean Outcome                                                                .139
No of twin pairs                                                           4,470

Public Sector
Twins Fixed Effect                   .0006         .0202         -.0957            -.0028    -.0308     .0077
                                    (.0111)       (.0522)        (.0649)           (.0283)   (.0254)   (.0123)

Mean Outcome                                                                .068
No of twin pairs                                                           2,346


Notes: See notes to Table 6 and Appendix Table 1 for ICD classifications used for each column.
Appendix Table 8: Adult health (number of hospitalizations) and UI/Total Income, 1989-1990 vs
1993-1997. Twin fixed effects.
                                        Public sector                         Private sector
                                 Pre Crisis        Post Crisis          Pre Crisis       Post Crisis
                                (1989-1990)       (1993-1997)          (1989-1990)      (1993-1997)
All twins
Number of hospitalizations         .0000               -.0044             .0000              .0035*
pre crisis
                                   (.0000)             (.0037)           (.0001)             (.0019)

Mean number of                      .233                   .384            .194                 .318
hospitalizations
No of twin pairs                   2,382                   2,346          4,601               4,470

DiD                                          -.0044                                 .0035
                                             (.0037)                               (.0019)
                                                                                   p=.066

Notes: This table shows regressions of UI/TI (the share of unemployment insurance payments of total
income) on the number of hospitalizations for the private and public sector, before (1986-1990) and
after (1993-1997) the crisis. See also notes to Table 5.


Appendix Table 9. Health and UI/Total Income. Birth weight and hospitalizations jointly
estimated. Only post crisis, 1993-1997. Twin fixed effects.


                                           Public sector                       Private Sector
All twins
Log birth weight                   -.0039              -0.0038          -.0367**             -.0365*
                                   (.0165)             (0.0165)          (.0187)              (.0187)
Ever Hospitalized pre crisis                           -0.0009                               .0144**
                                                       (0.0055)                               (.0061)

Mean Outcome                        .026                    .026          .067                 .067
No of twin pairs                   2,346                   2,346          4,470               4,470


Notes: This table shows regressions of UI/TI (the share of unemployment insurance payments of total
income) on birth weight and hospitalizations for the private and public sector post crisis. Column 1 and
3 includes only the estimate for birthweight (as in Table 3), while columns 2 and 4 shows the estimates
for birthweight and ever hospitalized pre crisis (1987-1990) when being jointly estimated. * p < .10, **
p < .05, *** p < .01. Clustered standard errors in parentheses.
Appendix Table 10. Health and UI/Total Income by cohort groupings.
Private sector, 1993-1997. Twin fixed effects.
Post crisis analysis only
                                      Born 1926-1942           Born 1943-1958
Log birth weight                           -.0648*                    -.0243
                                           (.0341)                    (.0223)

Ever Hospitalized (1987-1990)               .0102                     .0167**
                                           (.0101)                     (.0076)


No of twin pairs                            1,392                      3,078
Notes: See notes to Table 8

Appendix Table 11. Health and UI/Total Income in the private sector, pre and post crisis. Zygosity by
gender. Twin fixed effects.
MZ Twins                                                    Males                             Females
                                         Pre Crisis   a,b            Post Crisis   Pre Crisis a,b   Post Crisis
                                                                    (1993-1997)                    (1993-1997)

Log birth weighta                          -.0007                      .0486        -.0007          -.1059**
                                           (.0007)                    (.0334)       (.0009)          (.0500)

Ever Hospitalizedb                           na                        .0036        .0004*           .0311**
                                                                      (.0090)       (.0002)           (.0139)

No of twin pairsa,b                     1,361/1,340                    1,300        501/498            500

DZ Twins                                                    Males                            Females
                                          Pre Crisis                 Post Crisis   Pre Crisis      Post Crisis
                                                                    (1993-1997)                   (1993-1997)



Log birth weighta                           .0001                    -.0937***      -.0017           -.0081
                                           (.0005)                     (.0286)      (.0017)          (.0493)

Ever Hospitalizedb                          .0003                     .0209**        .0009            .0001
                                           (.0003)                     (.0100)      (.0006)          (.0185)

No of twin pairsa,b                     2,079/2,051                    1,996        647/633            610



Notes: Coefficients on birth weight and ever hospitalized are obtained from separate regressions. See notes to
Table 3 and 5 for birthweight and ever hospitalized, respectively. Due to perfect collinearity (must be right??)
we are not able to arrive at an estimate of ever hospitalized for MZ males in the pre crisis period.
a) The pre crisis period varies for when analysing the effect of birthweight (using 1987-1990) and ever
hospitalized (using 1989-1990).
b) Ever hospitalized pre crisis is measured during 1987-1988 for the pre crisis analysis and during 1987-1990
for the post crisis analysis.
