NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PRECAUTIONARY SAVINGS, RETIREMENT PLANNING AND MISPERCEPTIONS
OF FINANCIAL LITERACY
Anders Anderson
Forest Baker
David T. Robinson
Working Paper 21356
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21356

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2015

Previously circulated as "Optimism, Financial Literacy and Participation." We are grateful to
Johan Almenberg, Enrica Bolognesi, Harrison Hong, Olivia Mitchell, Terry Odean, Richard Sias,
Paul Smeets, Zheng Sun, and seminar participants at Stockholm School of Economics, Stockholm
Business School, BI Oslo, Gothenburg, Georgia Tech, Lund, Maastricht, Tilburg, Duke
University, the 2014 UNSW Australasian Banking and Finance conference, the 2015 WFA
meetings, the 2015 Behavioral FinanceWorking Group Conference at the University of London,
for useful comments and we thank Susan Sumida for excellent research assistance. This research
does not express the views of LinkedIn and has been funded by Vinnova and the Nasdaq OMX
Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Anders Anderson, Forest Baker, and David T. Robinson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Precautionary Savings, Retirement Planning and Misperceptions of Financial Literacy
Anders Anderson, Forest Baker, and David T. Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 21356
July 2015, Revised July 2016
JEL No. G02
ABSTRACT
We measure financial literacy among LinkedIn members, complementing standard questions with
additional questions that allow us to gauge self-perceptions of financial literacy. Average
financial literacy is surprisingly low given the demographics of our sample: fewer than two-thirds
of CFOs, CEOs, and COOs complete the test correctly. Financial literacy, precautionary savings
and retirement planning are positively correlated, but this is mostly driven by perceived, not
actual, literacy: controlling for self-perceptions, actual literacy has low predictive power.
Perceptions drive decision-making among low-literacy respondents and are associated with
mistaken beliefs about financial products and less willingness to accept financial advice.

Anders Anderson
Stockholm School of Economics
Drottninggatan 98
Stockholm, Sweden
Anders.Anderson@hhs.se
Forest Baker
LinkedIn Corporation
San Francisco, CA
fbaker@linkedin.com

David T. Robinson
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
100 Fuqua Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
davidr@duke.edu

1. Introduction
As retail financial markets grow increasingly opaque and the responsibility for financial
planning shifts more towards individuals, greater and greater amounts of financial sophistication are required just to make ordinary household financial decisions. Yet financial
literacy appears to be in short supply (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2005). Given that financial
literacy has been shown to be positively correlated with a number of important household
financial behaviors, such as retirement planning and precautionary savings, this places
financial literacy at the center of a broad national discussion about consumer financial
protection (Hastings, Madrian and Skimmyhorn, 2013) and household financial security
(Lusardi, Schneider and Tufano, 2011).
At the same time, a large body of work in behavioral economics and psychology demonstrates that people hold biased self-perceptions. These biases are likely to be especially
important in the domain of household finance, where simple heuristics are used in complex
decision environments, and where meaningful feedback about the efficacy of these heuristics
is noisy and infrequent. In such environments, individuals can persistently hold (and act
on) mistaken beliefs about their own financial acumen.
In this paper we connect behavioral finance to household finance by asking how misperceptions of financial literacy relate to household precautionary savings and retirement
planning decisions. While it is well established that observed financial literacy is correlated
with savings and retirement planning, our central message is this: how financially literate
people think they are is a better predictor of their precautionary savings and retirement
planning decisions than how financially literate people actually are.
We also show that people who are more miscalibrated about their own financial literacy
are more likely to be wrong about financial matters that fall outside the standard financial
literacy test. Thus, their misperceptions may lead them to make suboptimal financial decisions. In addition, lower scoring individuals appear to be unaware that they lack financial
literacy. At the same time, miscalibrated individuals are also less open to accepting financial planning advice. This sheds light on why their behaviors may be disproportionately
difficult to change with education- or advice-oriented interventions.
We connect behavioral biases to household decision-making through a financial literacy
1

survey administered to a large sample of LinkedIn subscribers as part of a larger, monthly
omnibus survey conducted by the LinkedIn corporation. We administer a standard financial
literacy test, augmenting the “Big 3” financial literacy questionnaire pioneered by Lusardi
and Mitchell (2005, 2009) with two additional questions that have been extensively used in
the previous literature, including in the 2009 and 2012 U.S. National Financial Capability
Study (NFCS). Following Hastings et al (2013), we collectively label these questions the
“Big 5”.
Next we measure how respondents think they did on the test. We adapt the methodology of Moore and Healy (2008) by asking respondents to report how likely it is that they
got all five questions, four questions, three questions, etc., correct. By effectively eliciting a
probability distribution over possible test outcomes, we can distinguish two different types
of misperceptions about ability. By comparing the actual score to the subjective expected
score, we can recover what Moore and Healy (2008) call overestimation, which is when a
person thinks they are better than they actually are. Second, by observing how subjective
probability is spread over the possible outcomes, we can measure the degree of precision
that they attach to those beliefs. This methodology allows us to measure how certain
people are of their expected performance, regardless of whether they think they did well
or poorly.
We can group our findings into four main sets of results. The first concerns the observed
degree of financial literacy in our sample. Although average financial literacy in our sample
is a good deal higher than what has been found in previous work—a fact which owes at
least in part to the nature of our sample—we find clear evidence of widespread financial
illiteracy. More than one-third of CFOs, CEOs, and COOs in our sample do not answer all
five questions correctly. Only about twenty-five percent of students gets all five correct, and
fewer than half of Director, Managing Director or Department Head level members receive
perfect scores. In addition, most individuals think past performance is more important than
fees when choosing mutual funds. Given that our sample consists of tech-savvy, white-collar
professionals, a large fraction of whom make more than twice the U.S. national average
income, it is reasonable to ask whether the financial literacy rates we measure should not
be a great deal higher.

2

The second set of findings concerns the connection between perceived literacy and actual
financial literacy. In general, respondents who lack financial literacy think they are more
literate than they actually are. As in many other studies, we find that women score lower
on this type of test compared to men, but unlike men, they are less likely to overestimate
their financial literacy.
Kruger and Dunning (1999) argue that possession of a skill is in fact necessary to
make correct judgements of competence in that same domain, giving rise to systematic
bias in self-assessments. Such individuals not only reach mistaken conclusions, but their
incompetence also robs them of the ability to realize their mistakes. This meta-cognition
is an important element of our findings as well. A large number of perfect-scorers attach
100% probability to getting all five answers correct: they know that they know. However,
among less than perfect scorers, lower scorers are at least as likely to be certain of their
outcome as higher scorers, and those who do are much more likely to be wrong. In short,
low scorers do not know that they do not know.
Our second set of results relates real and perceived financial literacy to precautionary
savings and retirement planning. In particular, we ask respondents whether they have set
aside funds for emergencies, as well as whether they had attempted to compute how much
they would need for retirement, whether they are sole decision-makers of their housholds,
and whether they were in favor or opposed to receiving financial advice. These correspond
to questions used extensively in existing work on financial literacy.5
The main result from this section is that beliefs are at least as important for predicting
precautionary savings and retirement decisions as actual literacy. In fact, when we control
for beliefs, the well documented tendency for women to participate less in financial market
decisions becomes much weaker.6 In general, respondents’ mistaken beliefs about their
financial literacy drive their behavior to a at least the same degree as their actual literacy.
Our final set of results asks whether mistaken beliefs are good or bad for the people who
harbor them. We introduce a financial knowledge question about mutual funds: whether it
5

See, for example, Ameriks et al. (2003), Hilgert et al. (2003), Lusardi and Mitchell (2011b), and Lusardi
and Mitchell (2011a).
6
See Lusardi and Mitchell (2008) for evidence on women and financial planning.

3

is better to focus on fees or past performance. The exact language of this question closely
mirrors financial advice promulgated by the SEC on their website.7 Holding constant actual
financial literacy, people who overestimate their score are less likely to respond that they
do not know the answer, but more likely to get the answer wrong. These respondents are
also less likely to be receptive to financial advice.
Establishing the distinction between financial competence and financial confidence suggests a number of possible mechanisms connecting financial literacy and financial planning
decisions that are new to the literature. One is that self-perceptions directly lower the
perceived costs of engaging in financial planning decisions in the same way that actual
knowledge does—an individual thinks it is easy to plan for retirement, therefore they do,
whereas someone with a greater appreciation of the pitfalls of retirement planning is reluctant to begin the task in the first place. Indeed, self-confidence has been shown to be
an important driver of behavior in a variety of different market settings (see Camerer and
Lovallo (1999), Hong et al. (2004), or Barber and Odean (2000).) A second possible mechanism is that individuals attempt to plan for retirement or set aside savings, and these
actions either rightly or wrongly imbues them with a sense of financial literacy. In other
words, financial planning causes actual financial literacy by stimulating a sense of perceived
literacy.
Our data set is not the first that allows for self-perceptions and actual financial literacy
to be compared. The NFCS includes questions about an individual’s broad sense of financial
knowledge.8 Lusardi and Mitchell (2014) report that many individuals who score low on
financial literacy tests report that they think they are knowledgeable. Allgood and Walstad
(2012), Parker et al. (2012) and Van Rooij et al. (2011) also relate actual literacy and
perceived knowledge to one another. One key difference between our paper and these papers
is that we explicitly anchor the respondents’ self-assessment on their financial literacy test
score, rather than a broad pre-conceived notion of their financial knowledge.9 Our results
7

See http://investor.gov/investing-basics/investment-products/mutual-funds#Fees.
In the online appendix we develop similar results to the ones in this paper using the 2012 State-by-State
NFCS.
9
Our work is also distinct from the literature that considers role of broad-based measures of optimism
or other pro-social behaviors in shaping retirement planning and savings decisions. See Puri and Robinson
(2007) or Hong et al. (2004) and cites therein for examples.
8

4

are also helpful in explaining the dispersion of beliefs compared to scores, as we tie them
to established results from psychology.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2 we detail the data collection
issues surrounding our survey instrument and the sample that responded to our survey, as
well as present details on the techniques we use to elicit beliefs. Section 3 presents our
results on actual and perceived financial literacy, and Section 4 connects them to our
measures of financial behavior. In Section 5 we discuss whether mistaken beliefs are good
or bad for the people who hold them, while section 6 concludes.
2. Measuring Financial Literacy, Beliefs, and Financial Behaviors
Most research in financial literacy has focused on a small set of questions that are meant
to capture peoples’ overall financial knowledge, and cover topics such as compounding,
inflation, interest, diversification, and bond pricing.10 These questions form the baseline
starting point for our analysis.
–Table 1 about here–
Table 1 display the five (first three) questions which we refer to as the “Big 5” (“Big
3” ), following the labelling of Hastings et al. (2013). A large body of work links the score
of these questions to different financial behaviors, and find that more financially literate
people are more likely to save, plan for retirement, pick up credit information, and have
better diversified portfolios. We opt to use the same set of questions in order to be able to
compare our results to the 2012 State-by-State NFCS, which is designed to be representative
of the U.S. population.
2.1. The LinkedIn Sample
To measure financial literacy among LinkedIn subscribers, we augmented the January
and July, 2014, versions of a monthly omnibus survey that LinkedIn sends to its membership
base.11 We added the Big 5 financial literacy questions to their standard omnibus survey
10

Lusardi and Mitchell (2014) and Hastings et al. (2013) provide overviews.
LinkedIn is an online professional networking website founded in 2003 in which members can post
resume information and work profiles. See www.ourstory.linkedin.com for details.
11

5

and included additional questions that measured financial knowledge, beliefs and financial
behaviors.
Subjects were invited to take the survey with an e-mail that contained a link to a
webpage with the omnibus survey questions. We surveyed twice: in January and July,
2014. There were 223,768 and 247,543 members invited in the two waves, respectively.
This is a random sample of U.S. LinkedIn users who had logged into their account at least
once in the last year and had not been asked to take a survey in the last 30 days. We
deleted incomplete responses, including those who reported “Don’t know” or “Prefer not
to answer” to the beliefs question, as well as those finishing the survey under two minutes.
Our full sample consists of 5,814 responses, of which 2,393 (3,421) appeared in the first
(second) wave. Respondents spent 8:41 (12:18) minutes:seconds to complete the survey in
the first (second) wave, on average. The response rates we received are typical for this type
of survey.
Table 2 presents the sample statistics on demographics for our LinkedIn sample, along
with statistics for the U.S. population taken from the 2012 U.S. Census Bureau (denoted
“U.S. Pop.”), as well as the 2012 NFCS State-by-state study (intended to be a representative sample). LinkedIn members are clearly not representative of the U.S. population.
Only one third are women. The median age in our sample is 47 compared to 37 in the
overall population, but the partition across age groups in Table 2 reveals that this is mainly
due to the fact that most LinkedIn members are found in the working-ages between 35 to
64, and many fewer among those likely to be retired over 65 or still studying under 25. A
striking difference to the population in general is the higher income and education in our
sample. Two thirds of the LinkedIn members have a university degree, where one third
hold a Bachelor’s, and one third at least a Master’s degree. In the overall population, 19%
hold a Bachelor’s, and only 12% have earned a Master’s degree or more. Similarly, almost
a quarter of LinkedIn members have yearly household income exceeding $150 K, whereas
only 9% in the U.S. population. Through their LinkedIn profiles, we also have statistics on
respondents profession, and find that 12% report that they work in the financial industry,
and we identify 17% to be entrepreneurs (small business owners or self-employed).
—Table 2 about here—
6

Our sample is tilted towards higher income, well educated males. We believe that the
demographics of our survey respondents closely match the underlying demographics of the
LinkedIn population of users. LinkedIn does not collect data on age, gender or income
from their members, but confirm that our results are broadly consistent with what is found
in other analysis of their customer base. In untabulated results, we find that women have
higher representation in the higher education categories, but do not exceed 40%. The
demographics between the two waves are very similar, so we combine them in the following
analysis, treating them as one sample.
In what follows, we focus our analysis on respondents aged 25-64 to zero in on those
most likely to be concerned with financial planning decisions. For our purposes, it is less
meaningful to use responses of, for example, retirement decisions from very young people,
or those who are already in retirement. We therefore opt to drop 918 observations from
the full sample, and use 4,896 responses in the remainder of the paper. All of our results
remain, but are statistically stronger, when the young and old are included.
In summary, the prototypical LinkedIn subscriber is a tech-savvy, white-collar working professional. Hence, compared to the average U.S. citizen, this demographic group
may be more representative of the underlying financial knowledge on a consumption- or
participation-weighted basis in the economy.
2.2. Measuring Beliefs and Behaviors
The psychology literature offers three distinct definitions of overconfidence. The first is
the overestimation of one’s actual ability, performance, or chance of success. The second
variety of overconfidence is excessive certainty regarding accuracy of ones beliefs, or what
we will henceforth call precision. The third variety, which we do not explore in this paper,
is what is generally referred to as the better-than-average effect or overplacement, in which
one think of oneself as doing better than others. Most research in behavioral finance does
not explicitly measure or identify which particular form of overconfidence that drives the
behavior under study. Rather, as noted by Shiller (1999), it is referred to as a general
mechanism to explain a wide variety of financial behavior, including trading, risk-taking,
forecasting, and stock market overreaction.

7

There are at least two challenges associated with measuring self-confidence in our setting. The first challenge is to elicit beliefs with accuracy. A common way to elicit broadbased beliefs about financial literacy is to ask subjects to rank their overall competence of
financial decision-making, as in is done in the NFCS. The problem with such a methodology
is that it may capture other aspects of financial literacy not covered by the test, making this
information complementary to the test score. Instead, our approach is intended to capture
beliefs about overall performance on the test itself, which in turn facilitates measurement
of the psychological constructs.
The second challenge is to distinguish overestimation from confidence. When asking
respondents to report their confidence in getting a specific question right, overestimation
and precision are one and the same thing. Being excessively sure you got the item right
reflects both overestimation of your performance and excessive confidence in the precision
of your knowledge. Therefore, such a methodology can not distinguish between the two,
and it does not allow measuring the prevalence of underestimation.
In this paper, we circumvent these challenges by building on the work of Moore and
Healy (2008), who propose a method to elicit two separate measures of overconfidence.
After completing the financial literacy questions, respondents are asked to state the probability that they got a certain number of answers correct.12 Figure 1 displays a screenshot
of the question used in our survey.
–Insert Figure 1 here–
The responses then give us a complete distribution of beliefs, which allows us to define
three key concepts used in the paper:
• Perceived score. The mean of the belief distribution, or self-assessed expected score.
• Overestimation. The difference between a subject’s expected score and actual score.
Overestimation therefore measures the mismatch between the subject’s expected score
and the actual outcome. In particular, while we use the term overestimation to
keep with the psychology literature, it is important to note that this measure can
12

The survey software required respondents to supply a range of numbers that summed to 100%.

8

be positive or negative: indeed, some respondents think they are worse than they
actually are.
• Precision. The sum of squared weights of the belief distribution. This is similar to
a Herfindahl index, and is bounded from above by one, as perfect confidence implies
putting all mass in one particular category.
Asking respondents to provide a probability distribution over the total number of questions has several advantages relative to alternative scoring schemes. As noted above, asking
respondents to assess the probability of each individual question correct would not allow
us to form distinct but connected measures of optimism and confidence. The two measures
also allows for a more comprehensive analysis of scores and self-perceptions.
To this, we include a number of questions about important financial decision-making
behaviors. In keeping with prior work, we include standard questions about precautionary
savings and retirement planning borrowed from the NFCS, and in addition, a question
about and household investment decision-making. In sum, these questions are:
• Savings: Have you set aside emergency or rainy day funds that would cover your
expenses for three months, in case of sickness, job loss, economic downturn, or other
emergencies? (Wave 1 and Wave 2)
• Retirement: Have you ever tried to figure out how much you need to save for your
retirement? (Wave 1 and Wave 2)
• Decision-maker : Which of the following best describes your role in making financial
investment decisions? (Wave 2 only)
For the decision-maker question, respondents were asked to choose between three responses: that they were the primary decision-maker, that they shared responsibility, or
that someone else had responsibility. The exact language is discussed in Section 4. In the
second wave of data collection, we also added a number of questions that allowed us to
gain insight into the mechanisms behind the connections between beliefs, financial literacy,
and decision-making. We describe these in greater detail in Section 5.

9

3. Financial Literacy: Perception and Reality
3.1. Comparing Actual and Perceived Financial Literacy
Figure 2 reports Actual and Perceived financial literacy for the overall sample. The
average perceived score is computed using the probability weights across scores. These are
plotted against actual scores in the same figure. The dotted 45-degree line benchmarks
perfect alignment of expectations.
–Include Figure 2 here–
The fact that the solid line is above the 45-degree line for the lower-ability part of
the sample means that those with lower scores tend to overestimate the outcome of the
test. This is a very general result that has been found in numerous studies and tested in
a variety of domains, see for example Lichtenstein et al. (1982). People who face difficult
questions tend to overestimate their ability to know the correct answer, while the reverse
is true for easy tasks. Our results confirm these findings on a general level, since average
miscalibration is much higher for those with lower scores, compared to those with the
highest, implying that there is a systematic effect when sorting on outcomes of the test.
Specifically, the flatness of the solid line in Figure 2 presents a clear illustration of the
Kruger-Dunning effect. Kruger and Dunning (1999) attributes this feature to the fact that
skills that engender competence in a certain domain are the very same skills necessary to
evaluate competence. Hence, those with low knowledge tend to overstate their score, which
is also found in laboratory experiments by Moore and Healy (2008). Table 3 shows the
means of the Average and Perceived score are very similar, 4.09 compared to 4.00. This
could well be a consequence of the financial literacy test to be considered an easy task
for most people in our sample. We still find that a slight majority of respondents, 54%,
overestimate their score.
In support of this interpretation, the bars in Figure 2 displays the effect of metacognition by measuring the fraction of respondents who report a Precision score equal to
one: those who are certain of the outcome of the test. The bars are broken up on being
either correct or wrong about this assessment (see also Panel A of Table 3). We find that
32% of all our respondents report that they are certain of their test score, of which 20%
10

correctly put all probability mass at the actual outcome. The remaining 12% were wrong,
meaning that they put all probability mass at some other outcome. This effect is systematic
across levels of score. Of those with full score, 44% were absolutely confident of their actual
score, of which 40% were correct. Of those who scored two or less, 27% were certain of
it, but 19% actually wrong. For all groups, except those having full score, certainty is
therefore generally associated with being wrong rather than correct, and this effect grows
larger as scores become lower.
–Include Table 3 about here–
Panel B of of Table 3 display the correlations between the variables, and show that
Precision is very highly correlated with being sure, 78%, whereas the relation to Perceived
score and Overestimation is much weaker, measured to be 31% and 20%. Perceived score
is positively correlated with being sure about the outcome, but since self-assessed scores
are highly correlated with actual outcomes, the correlation masks the residual component
of accuracy. Overestimation shows a much higher correlation with being sure and wrong
(23%), than being sure and correct (5%). These preliminary results therefore suggest
that overestimation captures an additional effect that goes beyond the channel of financial
literacy: the responses from those thinking they know, but are actually wrong.
To get a better sense of the distribution of Perceived scores, we plot the joint distribution
of Perceived and Actual scores in Figure 3. The graph is helpful when interpreting many
of our key results with respect to explaining our measures of financial behavior. When
we control for the effect of Actual score in the regressions and include our measure of
beliefs, one can think of this as holding the vertical dimension constant in Figure 3, and
investigating the separate effects of beliefs in the horizontal dimension.
–Include Figure 3 about here–
Figure 3 shows a clear pattern in which those who score very low or very high display
more confidence in their assessment of beliefs. If assessments across scores were similar,
we would expect a ridge going from the lower left corner of the graph to the upper right.
This is clearly not the case. Precision is a measure of this effect. Column (4) of Panel
11

A in Table 3 shows that Precision is 0.79 and 0.65 for those who scored 5 and 4, falling
to 0.58 for those scoring 2 or less. There is a slight tendency for those who score zero to
report higher Precision, but there are few observations in this group. We therefore treat
the group scoring 0 to 2 as one category. There are 1,847 respondents answering all five
questions correctly, 2,022 scored four, 713 score three, leaving the remaining 314 responses
in the lower three categories zero to two correct.
In the analysis that follows, we depart from the mainstream literature in financial literacy by introducing Precision, Perceived score, and Overestimation as additional explanatory variables to determine how financial literacy and self-perceptions interact with financial
decision-making. Since the majority of LinkedIn members appear financially savvy, we also
analyze those with lower scores separately.
3.2. The Demographics of Financial Literacy in LinkedIn
Table 4 tabulates the proportions of correct responses to the Big 3 and Big 5 questions
along with financial literacy scores and beliefs by the demographic background of respondents. We include the results of the 2012 NFCS for the purpose of comparison. Overall,
76% of LinkedIn respondents answer the Big 3 questions correctly, compared with fewer
than half in the NFCS. Only 38% of LinkedIn respondents get all five questions correct,
but this is more than twice the average that is reported in the NFCS.
Financial literacy is increasing in age, education and income. As in the NFCS, the
youngest respondents are the least financially literate in our sample; however, the average
score of 25 to 34 year olds in our sample is much higher than that found in the NFCS.
Differences between our data and the NFCS are less pronounced as age and income increases, but we still find that our respondents score better than those found in the NFCS
in every education category. Table 4 also shows that men are more financially literate than
women both in our sample and in the 2012 NFCS; our data show that they have higher
overestimation and are more confident about their scores than women. These results therefore support the findings in the previous literature that documents gender differences in
self-confidence, such as Barber and Odean (2001).
–Include Table 4 about here–
12

Our results are closest to the NFCS among the highest income earners and most educated. This suggests that an important component of the large average difference between
our respondents and those found in other studies is attributable to the fact that the prototypical LinkedIn subscriber is a tech-savvy, white-collar working professional. In support for
this claim, untabulated results reveal considerably higher average financial literacy scores
when we restrict the NFCS sample to only include those who use online banking, where the
proportion correctly answering the Big 3 questions rises from 0.37 to 0.45. Still, technological sophistication measured in this way does not eradicate the differences between LinkedIn
members and the NFCS. When we compare the same fractions for those with a Bachelor’s
or Master’s degree, we still find that the results from the NFCS are 10 percentage points
smaller, and the same is true for all sortings across every income level.
It is possible that these differences capture something unobservable, which goes beyond
Internet adaption, income, and education. It is possible that people who sign up for
LinkedIn actually display higher financial literacy, or simply pay more attention to the
test. Our relatively short survey, with only 22 questions, may also be more successful in
eliciting more accurate responses because it places a lower cognitive load on the respondent
than the 2012 NFCS, which contains 100 questions.
Table 5 puts the results of the previous tables into a multivariate regression. As found
in many previous studies, actual financial literacy score is positively related to age, income,
education, but lower for women.13 We also find it reassuring that having a finance career
is associated with higher financial literacy.
–Include Table 5 about here–
Turning to the results of our measures of beliefs, we find that women display significantly
lower overestimation of their own scores, and they are more uncertain of their scores. These
results echo those of Lusardi and Mitchell (2008), who argue that women display less selfconfidence, measured as the propensity to report not knowing the answer, compared to
men. High income individuals and those with finance careers are more likely to state
13
Throughout the paper, we only include a linear age term in our specifications. Restricting the sample
to those aged 25-64 removes any nonlinear effects of age that are otherwise present in the full sample.

13

high precision. The university educated display less overestimation and higher precision.
Entrepreneurs tend to assign higher scores to the test as well as being more precise. Even
if the average score on the financial literacy questions are considerably higher than found
in other studies, the cross-sectional variation stand well in comparison with the stylized
facts of previous research in both financial literacy and behavioral finance.
3.3. Financial literacy Scores, Beliefs, and Seniority
Another way to understand the dispersion in financial literacy and beliefs in our data
is to look at the result by job qualification. Table 6 reports demographic traits along
with financial literacy measures broken out by self-described employment situation. We
find a tilt towards respondents having more senior positions. Around one third of the
respondents report having C-level jobs (CFO, CEO, and COO). On the other hand, we do
find representation in a variety of jobs. There are, for instance, 97 students, 128 retirees,
194 currently unemployed, 649 individual contributors, and 458 small business owners in
the ages 25 to 64.
–Include Table 6 about here–
Table 6 shows that both income and education (measured as the fraction of having at
least a Bachelor’s degree), varies substantially across employment. We also find that age
varies with seniority and score of the financial literacy test, where younger, and less senior respondents display lower scores. Executive level employees display the highest average
financial literacy but also the highest degree of overestimation and confidence. Perhaps surprisingly, fewer than 60% of senior-level executives get all five questions correct. Similarly,
self-employed individuals and small business owners report higher perceived than actual
scores. They also report higher precision in their estimates compared to the average. This
squares with the common perception that entrepreneurs are optimistic and overconfident
across a wide variety of domains (see, for example, Puri and Robinson (2013)).

14

4. Connecting Beliefs, Financial Literacy and Behaviors
4.1. Planning for Retirement
Retirement planning is one of the cornerstones of long-term household financial security. This has taken on increasing importance across the globe in the wake of many structural changes that shift the responsibility of retirement planning to individuals through
the transition from Defined Contribution to Defined Benefit plans. Across the globe, researchers have found a positive correlation between retirement planning and financial literacy.14 Lusardi and Mitchell (2007) show that individuals who have planned more for
retirement arrive at retirement with higher net worth and savings.
To understand how financial literacy and retirement planning are correlated in our
survey, we asked respondents, “Have you tried to figure out how much you need to save
for retirement?” Possible answers are “Yes”, “No”, “Don’t Know”, or “Prefer not to say”.
By framing the question in terms of figuring out retirement rather than actually saving
for it, the question is intended to hone in on retirement awareness rather than previous
retirement savings, and thereby avoids obvious correlation problems with age and income.
Only about 3% of the sample is non-responsive, and about 75% of all respondents reported
that they had tried to determine this amount.
–Include Table 7 here–
Column (1) of Table 7 reports results from a Probit model of answering “Yes” to
the question above on financial literacy and demographic controls. In keeping with prior
literature, Column (1) shows that financial literacy is associated with increased retirement
planning, even controlling for income and other demographic controls. Point estimates in
Table 7 are reported as marginal effects, so the point estimate indicates that at the mean,
getting an additional question correct is associated with about an 8% higher probability to
have contemplated retirement needs. In all specifications, older, higher income respondents
are more likely to have saved, as are more educated respondents, and respondents with
careers in finance.
14

Van Rooij et al. (2012) show that financial literacy is related to retirement planning in a sample of
Dutch households. Bucher-Koenen and Lusardi (2011) finds similar evidence in Germany.

15

We add our measure of overestimation and precision to the specification in Column
(2). When we include beliefs about financial literacy, we find that the effect of actual
financial literacy is cut in half. Most of the correlation between retirement planning and
financial literacy works through beliefs about one’s own financial literacy. Because the
loading on Perceived score is larger than that of Actual score, Column (2) indicates that
more miscalibrated respondents, not more financially literate ones, are more likely to have
thought about how much to save for retirement. Our results indicate that much of the
retirement planning decision is driven not by financial literacy itself, but by inaccurate
self-perceptions of financial literacy. To gauge the economic significance of this effect,
consider only those respondents with an actual score of 3 on the test: only about half of
those who thought they scored 2 or below had done retirement calculations, whereas three
out of four who thought they scored 4 or higher had done this calculation.
In Column (3), we include dummies for actual financial literacy scores and replace the
perceived score with overestimation (the difference between Perceived and Actual score).
This addresses the fact that perceived scores among those with perfect actual scores can
only reflect underestimation, while perceived scores for those with zero scores can only
reflect overestimation. Introducing a dummy for Actual score changes the interpretation
of the overestimation variable slightly, because it essentially asks how variation along the
x-axis of Figure 3 is correlated with financial decisions. Even after controlling for actual
financial literacy non-parametrically, we see that more miscalibrated people are more likely
to have thought about their retirement planning needs.
In Columns (4) through (6) we repeat this analysis but focus attention to the set of
respondents who got three or fewer questions correct—the low financial literacy sample.
There are two reasons for analyzing this subsample: one policy oriented in nature, the other
statistical in nature. On the policy front, low financial literacy respondents are presumably
those who stand the most to gain by policies aimed at making financial markets friendlier for
consumers. On the statistical front, the correlation between actual and perceived literacy
is negative for the high financial literacy respondents because the score is bounded from
above. Because this runs counter to the overall correlation in the data, it potentially lowers
the power of our tests.

16

When we focus attention on the low financial literacy sample, we see even stronger
results than in Columns (1) through (3). Among low literacy respondents, the link between
actual financial literacy is statistically insignificant when we control for Perceived score.
Because the point estimate associated with Perceived score is higher than Actual score,
when we turn in Column (6) to the direct measure of Overestimation, we again find that
more miscalibrated individuals are more like to have planned for retirement.
4.2. Precautionary Savings Behavior
Table 8 examines how real and perceived financial literacy is correlated with precautionary savings decisions. The omnibus questionnaire included a question “Have you set
aside emergency or rainy day funds that would cover your expenses for 3 months, in case of
sickness, job loss, economic downturn, or other emergencies?” Potential answers are “Yes”,
“No”, “Don’t Know” and “Prefer not to Say.” About two-thirds of respondents report
“Yes” to this question, and only a handful prefer not to say. While these fractions are
significantly higher than those reported in Lusardi et al. (2011), this difference presumably
owes to the large differences in wealth between our sample and others. About half of the
respondents in our sample reporting income below $50,000 annually have saved, but over
two-thirds reporting income levels above that respond affirmatively to this question.
–Include Table 8 here–
Table 8 presents the results, which echo the findings from the previous subsection. In
particular, the effect of actual financial literacy is essentially cut in half when we include
perceived financial literacy, and the relative magnitude of the loadings indicates that more
miscalibrated individuals, not more financially literate ones, are more likely to have saved.
Specifically, in Column (1) we find that getting one additional question correct on the
actual score raises the probability of answering yes to the precautionary savings question
by about 8%. In Column (2), we add our measure of overestimation and precision to
the specification. When we include beliefs about financial literacy, we find that the effect
of actual financial literacy is cut in half. Most of the correlation between precautionary
savings and financial literacy works through beliefs about one’s own literacy. Our results
indicate that much of the propensity to save for a rainy day is driven not by financial
17

literacy itself, but by inaccurate self-perceptions. Those who are more miscalibrated are
more likely to have set aside funds for a rainy day, and controlling for self-perceptions cuts
the effect of actual financial literacy roughly in half.
In Column (3), we include dummies for actual financial literacy scores and replace the
perceived score with Overestimation (the difference between perceived and actual score).
Again, even after controlling for actual financial literacy non-parametrically, we find that
more miscalibrated people are more likely to have saved for a rainy day.
In Columns (4) through (6) again repeats the analysis but focuses attention to the
set of respondents who got three or fewer questions correct—the low financial literacy
sample. Among low literacy respondents, the connection between financial literacy and
precautionary savings is considerably weaker than in the full sample, but its statistical
significance disappears entirely when we control for perceptions.
4.3. Who Makes Investment Decisions in the Household?
Although precautionary savings and retirement planning are two of the most important
facets of financial decision-making faced by most households, focusing only on these behaviors may lead to an incomplete picture of the connection between financial literacy and
household financial decision-making. For instance, the framing of the retirement planning
question incorporates the possibility that someone has thought about the problem, but does
not know how to take action. For precautionary savings, it may or may not be optimal
from a utility maximization point of view to set aside funds for the future, especially for
very low income individuals. At the other end of the spectrum, some individuals with high,
steady income might have ready access to abundant liquidity in case of hardship, and thus
might have little need to use traditional savings vehicles.
To deal with these possibilities we expand our measure of financial behavior by adding
one question onto the survey. One of the simplest measures of financial sophistication is
whether someone is responsible for financial decisions in their home or whether instead
this is delegated to someone else. We connect the degree of actual and perceived financial
literacy to whether someone has sole responsibility for financial investment decision-making
in their household as a way of measuring behavior that is robust to the caveats laid out
above. In the second wave, our survey asks “Which of the following best describes your role
18

in making financial investment decisions?” Answers are “I am the primary . . .”, “I share
responsibility”, and “Someone else in the family makes financial investment decisions.”
These results are presented in Table 9. The table reports Probit regressions where
the dependent variable takes the value of one if the response to the question is “I am the
primary decision maker in the household. The results in Column (1) reveal that household
decision-makers are more likely to be young and work in finance. Among LinkedIn users,
women are less likely to be sole investment decision-makers in the household. Income
is negatively correlated with sole investment decision-making, which presumably reflects a
combination of the fact that high-earning individuals have both significant time constraints
and more complicated investment decisions.
–Include Table 9 here–
Column (2) shows that the connection between actual financial literacy and household
financial decision-making loses statistical significance when we include our measure of perceived financial literacy. In a horse-race between actual and perceived score, perceptions of
literacy drive out actual financial literacy. Put differently, the comparison of the two point
estimates on actual and perceived financial literacy indicates that those who think they are
more literate than they actually are are the respondents most likely to have responsibility
for their home finances. In Column (3), we include dummies for each level of score, and
again find that overestimation remain strongly significant
In Columns (4) through (6), we focus on the low financial literacy sample, but with
considerable fewer observations than in the previous tables. Still, actual score along with
income and finance career is statistically significantly related to having sole decision responsibility. When we include beliefs in Columns (5) and (6), the results are very similar
to those of the full sample. Holding constant actual financial literacy, those who think they
are more literate are much more likely to be decision-makers.
While these results comport with our analysis of precautionary savings and retirement
planning, it is important to acknowledge a number of serious challenges associated with
using household financial investment decision-making as a dependent variable. Concerns
with reverse causality are likely to be severe here, as someone tasked with making financial
19

decisions may as a result actively seek out and acquire financial knowledge. Moreover, we
have life cycle savings models to guide our analysis of retirement planning and precautionary
savings, but we have no such models to predict whether someone should or should not be
a household financial decision-maker. A more traditional approach would simply be to
control for whether an individual was a decision-maker when running regressions connecting
financial literacy, precautionary savings and retirement planning. Indeed, all the results in
this paper are robust to such a filter. Nevertheless, with these caveats notwithstanding, the
correlation we observe between beliefs, literacy and household financial decision-making
provides further support for the idea that beliefs are an important mechanism through
which decision-making and financial literacy are connected.15
4.4. Robustness checks
In untabulated results, we find that our analysis remains unchanged when controlling
for the time spent on completing the survey, as well as including dummies for job seniority
(see Table 6). We obtain very similar results when using OLS in place of those reported
from a Probit model. We also ran the regressions in Table 7 through 9 separately for women
only, and those with college education or having income below $50,000. Overestimation is
significant for all specifications except household decision-making, but here the sample is
also considerably smaller.
In order to further investigate if our results are indeed driven by respondents not knowing the correct answer, we repeat the analysis as in Table 7 through Table 9, but in which
we treat the response “Don’t know” as a correct answer when counting scores on the financial literacy test. As we obtain similar results, we conclude that is mainly the the variation
stemming from responding that you think you know the right answer that explains our results, not stating that you do not know. In another specification, we also opted to include
the number of “Don’t know” responses separately along with our explanatory variables
in the regressions above, all in which the coefficient for Overestimation remains strongly
significant.
15

We thank the referee for pointing out these issues.

20

5. Informed Choice and Financial Advice
The results so far indicate that while respondents are well calibrated on average, there is
substantial cross-sectional variation in both real and perceived financial literacy, and that
perceptions more than reality drive important financial planning decisions. In this section
we ask whether these mistaken beliefs that seem so important for financial planning are
likely to be good or bad for the people who harbor them.
In the second wave of data collection, we added a question to gauge whether respondents
were aware of common advice about financial markets:
• When selecting a mutual fund, it is generally more important to consider past performance of the fund than it is to consider the management charges. Please select
one.
(a) Agree [N =1,188]
(b) Disagree [N =967]
(c) Don’t know [N =659]
(d) Prefer not to say [N =68]

The wording of this question closely mirrors the language that policymakers use in
attempts to make investors aware of the implication of fees and how to invest wisely.
For example, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission’s website Investor.gov advises
users to pay attention to fees using almost identical language.16 The correct answer to this
question according to most sources is to focus on fees, not past performance. In fact, a
larger number of respondents answer “Agree,” indicating that they think past performance
is more important than management fees. This is maybe particular striking considering
that the responses come from a pool of mainly white collar, college educated, high income
earners.
–Include Table 10 here–
In Table 10 we explore how the answers to this question relate to overestimation. Holding constant the actual literacy score with fixed effects for number correct, a one standard
16

See http://investor.gov/investing-basics/investment-products/mutual-funds#Fees.

21

deviation spread in Overestimation induces a 6% lower probability of responding that they
do not know the answer to the question. Given that about 23% of the sample does not
know the answer, this effect is large. Yet in Column (2) when we run a Probit that equals
1 if the respondent got the answer wrong, 0 otherwise, we find that more miscalibrated
respondents are about 2% more likely to get the answer wrong. Thus, believing that one is
more financially literate than they actually are is associated with more certainty but less
accuracy about domains of financial literacy not captured by the Big 5.
To push this further, we make use of questions that measure willing to accept advice.
Accessing and acting on financial advice has been shown to be one method by which financially literate households plan and prepare for future events like retirement (Lusardi
and Mitchell, 2011). In particular, our survey included the question “How satisfied or
dissatisfied would you be if financial planning advice or information (e.g. articles, videos,
infographics) occasionally appeared in your LinkedIn news stream?” Responses included
“Very satisfied”, “Somewhat satisfied”, “Neither satisfied nor unsatisfied”, “Somewhat dissatisfied”, “Very dissatisfied”, and “Don’t know” or “Prefer not to say”.
LinkedIn may not be perceived as a natural provider of financial advice by many respondents, nevertheless the context in which the question is being asked is important to
consider: this is being asked to a sample of active LinkedIn members who in turn have
actively self-selected into taking the survey. They are therefore much more likely to have
a positive view on LinkedIn and the services they provide compared to people in general.
Column (3) of Table 10 tabulates the results from a Probit regression where the dependent variable takes the value one if the respondent reported being somewhat or very
dissatisfied with receiving advice. We find that respondents who overestimate their scores
are more likely to avoid advice. This is a problematic finding from a policy perspective
because prior work has demonstrated that more financially literate people are more likely
to use advisors to help with financial planning tasks.
One possible concern about this conclusion is that high income earners, which are
over-represented in our sample, are more likely to possess skills to manage their personal
finances, or already have established channels for doing so. Therefore, a reluctance to
receive advice can well be driven by the fact that affluent people are less likely to find

22

information on LinkedIn very useful. If the same people also tend to overestimate their
financial knowledge, we are likely to overstate the reluctance to accept advice.
To meet this concern, we exclude those with an annual income above $100,000. A
motivation for choosing this cut-off is found in Table 2, which reveals that the group
earning more than that is overrepresented in our sample compared to the U.S. population,
and so can of course be important in driving the overall result.
Column (4) of Table 10 report the results, where we find some evidence of this, since
the coefficient for Overestimation remain significant, but drops by more than one quarter
when we exclude the most affluent respondents. When we cut income at lower levels, we
lose statistical power, even though the point estimate remain positive.
Our results confirm that the negative relation between self-perceptions and willingness
to accept advice is not only driven by those who likely have other sources of financial information among LinkedIn members. In conjunction with the mistaken beliefs about mutual
funds, this suggests that mistaken beliefs about financial literacy can be as problematic as
low literacy itself.
6. Summary and Conclusions
Financial literacy has been placed front and center in policy discussions attempting to
reform retail financial markets in the wake of the financial crisis. A growing consensus
suggests that Americans have low financial literacy, and that this in turn is associated with
low levels of participation in the kinds of planning and savings decisions that are needed
to build a sound financial future. We study these issues using a novel dataset of largely
tech-savvy, white collar professionals who use the LinkedIn professional networking website.
We find that the link between financial literacy, precautionary savings, and retirement
planning hinges critically on self-perceptions. Savers and planners are those who believe
they are financially informed, not necessarily those who are informed. Mistaken beliefs
about financial literacy are as important as actual financial literacy itself.
Thus, our results heap more trouble onto the plate of policy makers who are interested
in improving literacy in order to facilitate household financial planning and savings. Our
findings indicate that mistaken beliefs about financial literacy may be as problematic as
23

financial illiteracy itself. And this occurs in a sample where individuals score about twice
as high in financial literacy on average than previous studies have found.
It is important to stress the descriptive nature of our findings. Our results do not show
that mistaken beliefs cause people to save or plan for retirement. Indeed, a fascinating
possibility is that taking up these decisions causes mistaken beliefs. Under this explanation
for the observed correlation between beliefs and these behaviors, small amounts of variation
in the initial level of overconfidence or optimism could cause individuals to participate
in financial decisions, while their planning and savings activity could in turn create a
type of learning-by-doing that both imparts literacy but also amplifies self-perceptions.
Understanding how beliefs, literacy and financial planning behaviors play out in a dynamic
context over the life cycle is a fascinating and important area for future work.
Our findings suggest that there is much more to be learned about household financial
decision-making by the ongoing work that incorporates findings from behavioral psychology
and economics into studies of household finance. Planning effectively for retirement requires
making long-range planning decisions, which by their very nature, offer feedback at low
frequencies. Understanding how behavioral biases affect these decisions is an important
question for future research.

24

Allgood, S., Walstad, W.B., 2012. The effects of perceived and actual financial literacy
on financial behaviors. National Financial Capability Study Roundtable, The George
Washington School of Business.
Ameriks, J., Caplin, A., Leahy, J., 2003. Wealth accumulation and the propensity to plan.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 1007–47.
Barber, B.M., Odean, T., 2000. Trading is hazardous to your wealth: The common stock
investment performance of individual investors. Journal of Finance 60, 773–806.
Barber, B.M., Odean, T., 2001. Boys will be boys: Gender, overconfidence, and common
stock investment. Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 261–92.
Bucher-Koenen, T., Lusardi, A., 2011. Financial literacy and retirement planning in Germany. Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 10, 565–84.
Camerer, C., Lovallo, D., 1999. Overconfidence and excess entry: An experimental approach. American Economic Review 89, 306–18.
Hastings, J.S., Madrian, B.C., Skimmyhorn, W.L., 2013. Financial literacy, financial education, and economic outcomes. Annual Review of Economics 5, 347–73.
Hilgert, M.H., Hogarth, J.M., Beverly, S.G., 2003. Household financial management: The
connection between knowledge and behavior. Annual Review of Economics 89, 309–22.
Hong, H., Kubik, J.D., Stein, J.C., 2004. Social interaction and stock-market participation.
Journal of Finance 59, 137–63.
Kruger, J., Dunning, D., 1999. Unskilled and unaware of it: How difficulties in recognizing
one’s own incompetence lead to inflated self-assessments. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 77, 1121–34.
Lichtenstein, S., Fischhoff, B., Phillips, L.D., 1982. Calibration of probabilities: The state
of the art to 1980, in: Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., Tversky, A. (Eds.), Judgement under
Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, M.A., pp.
306–34.
Lusardi, A., Mitchell, O.S., 2005. Financial literacy and planning: Implications for retirement wellbeing. Michigan Retirement Research Center, WP 2015-108.
Lusardi, A., Mitchell, O.S., 2007. Baby boomer retirement security: The roles of planning,
financial literacy, and housing wealth. Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 205–24.
Lusardi, A., Mitchell, O.S., 2008. Planning and financial literacy: How do women fare?
American Economic Review 98, 413–7.
Lusardi, A., Mitchell, O.S., 2009. How ordinary consumers make complex economic decisions: Financial literacy and retirement readiness. National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper 15350.

25

Lusardi, A., Mitchell, O.S., 2011a. Financial literacy and retirement planning in the United
States. Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 10, 497–508.
Lusardi, A., Mitchell, O.S., 2011b. Financial literacy around the world: An overview.
Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 10, 497–508.
Lusardi, A., Mitchell, O.S., 2014. The economic importance of financial literacy: Theory
and evidence. Journal of Economic Literature 52, 5–44.
Lusardi, A., Schneider, D.J., Tufano, P., 2011. Financially fragile households: Evidence
and implications, in: Romer, D.H., Wolfers, J. (Eds.), Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity. Brookings Institution Press, Washington, D.C., pp. 83 – 134.
Moore, D., Healy, P.J., 2008. The trouble with overconfidence. Psychological Review 115,
502–17.
Parker, A.M., de Bruin, W.B., Yoong, J., Willis, R., 2012. Inappropriate confidence and
retirement planning: Four studies with a national sample. Journal of Behavioral Decision
Making 25, 382–9.
Puri, M., Robinson, D.T., 2007. Optimism and economic choice. Journal of Financial
Economics 86, 71–99.
Puri, M., Robinson, D.T., 2013. The economic psychology of entrepreneurship and family
business. Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 22, 423–44.
Shiller, R.J., 1999. Human behavior and the efficiency of the financial system, in: Taylor,
J.B., Woodward, M. (Eds.), Handbook of Macroeconomics. Elsevier Science, Netherlands, pp. 1305–40.
Van Rooij, M., Lusardi, A., Alessie, R., 2011. Financial literacy and stock market participation. Journal of Financial Economics 191, 449–72.
Van Rooij, M., Lusardi, A., Alessie, R., 2012. Financial literacy, retirement planning and
household wealth. Economic Journal 122, 449–78.

26

Table 1: The Big 5 Financial Literacy Questions
This table presents the five financial literacy questions used in this paper taken from two previous surveys. The
first three (“Big 3” ) questions appear in the 2004 Health and Retirement Study. The two last questions were added to the
first three in the 2009 and 2012 National Financial Capability Survey, and collectively referred to as the “Big 5”.
1. Compounding. Suppose you had $100 in a savings account and the interest rate was 2% per year. After 5 years, how
much do you think you would have in the account if you left the money to grow? Please select one.
• More than $102
• Exactly $102
• Less than $102
• Don’t know
• Prefer not to say
2. Inflation. Imagine that the interest rate on your savings account was 1% per year and inflation was 2% per year.
After 1 year, how much would you be able to buy with the money in this account? Please select one.
• More than today
• Exactly the same as today
• Less than today
• Don’t know
• Prefer not to say
3. Diversification. Buying a single companys stock usually provides a safer return than a stock mutual fund. Please
select one.
• True
• False
• Don’t know
• Prefer not to say
4. Mortgage. A 15-year mortgage typically requires higher monthly payments than a 30-year mortgage, but the total
interest paid over the life of the loan will be less. Please select one.
• True
• False
• Don’t know
• Prefer not to say
5. Bond Pricing. If interest rates fall, what should happen to bond prices? Please select one.
• They will rise
• They will fall
• They will stay the same
• There is not relationship between bond prices and the interest rate
• Don’t know
• Prefer not to say

27

Table 2: The Demographics of LinkedIn Respondents
This table presents summary statistics on the demographics of the full sample of 5,814 survey respondents. Wave 1
corresponds to averages and sample proportions for the 2,393 responses in the wave conducted in January, 2014. Wave 2
refers to the 3,421 responses in the survey conducted in July, 2014. The column labeled “NFCS” corresponds to sample
averages and proportions from 25,509 responses to the 2012 State-by-State National Financial Capability Survey. The
column labeled “U.S. Pop.” reports corresponding values from the 2013 U.S. Census Bureau Income Survey with 122,459
observations.

Wave 1

Wave 2

Total

NFCS

U.S. Pop.

Gender
Male
Female

0.66
0.34

0.64
0.36

0.65
0.35

0.45
0.55

0.49
0.51

Age
18-24
25-34
35-44
45-54
55-64
65 or Older

0.07
0.18
0.18
0.26
0.21
0.09

0.06
0.18
0.20
0.23
0.23
0.10

0.06
0.18
0.19
0.24
0.22
0.10

0.10
0.17
0.17
0.20
0.19
0.17

0.05
0.16
0.18
0.20
0.19
0.22

Education
Bachelor’s
Master’s & PhD’s

0.32
0.33

0.32
0.34

0.32
0.33

0.21
0.13

0.19
0.12

Income
Less than 15K
15K-24K
25K-34K
35K-49K
50K-74K
75K-99K
100K-149K
More than 150K

0.03
0.03
0.03
0.07
0.14
0.13
0.20
0.24

0.02
0.02
0.03
0.07
0.13
0.14
0.21
0.24

0.02
0.02
0.03
0.07
0.13
0.14
0.20
0.24

0.13
0.12
0.11
0.15
0.19
0.12
0.11
0.07

0.14
0.12
0.11
0.14
0.18
0.12
0.12
0.09

Profession
Finance
Entrepreneur

0.12
0.17

0.12
0.17

0.12
0.17

0.08

-

28

Table 3: Perceived Score, Overestimation, and Precision across Actual Score
This table presents means and correlations for key variables for respondents aged 25-64. Perceived score is the expected number of correct answers
P5 on the literacy test, where subjective probability weights are used to compute the
expectation: formally, this is
0 Ij pj , where Ij is an indicator associated with getting j ∈ [0, 5] correct answers on the
test, and pj is the subjective probability the respondent attaches to getting that many correct. Overestimation is the
difference between Actual and Perceived score. Precision ranges from 0 to 1
is computed as the sum of the squared
Pand
5 2
probability weights assigned to each potential number of correct answers, or
0 pj . “Proportion Sure” reports the fraction
of respondents giving the full weight to one outcome only (pj = 1 for some j), broken out separately for whether they were
correct or incorrect in this assessment. Panel A provides averages grouped according to the actual number of correct items.
The final column in Panel A provides the number of respondents overall (4,896) as well as the number with certain score
ranges. Panel B provides correlations between key variables.

Overall Mean

Actual
4.09

Averages
PerOverceived estimation
4.00
-0.08

Proportion Sure
Pre(Precision=1)
cision All Correct Incorrect
0.69 0.32
0.20
0.12

N
4,896

Panel A: Means by Actual Answers Correct
All Five Correct
Four Questions Correct
Three Questions Correct
Two or Fewer Correct
Panel B: Correlations
Actual
1.00
Perceived
Overestimation
Precision
Sure All
Sure Right
Sure Wrong

4.56
3.98
3.29
2.53

-0.44
-0.02
0.29
0.79

0.79
0.65
0.59
0.58

0.44
0.25
0.24
0.27

0.40
0.08
0.08
0.07

0.04
0.17
0.16
0.19

0.58
1.00

-0.39
0.53
1.00

0.26
0.53
0.33
1.00

0.15
0.31
0.20
0.78
1.00

0.30
0.32
0.05
0.56
0.73
1.00

-0.16
0.06
0.23
0.42
0.54
-0.19
1.00

29

1,847
2,022
713
314

Table 4: The Demographics of Financial Literacy
This table reports the proportion of the total 4,896 respondents aged 25-64 with correct scores, broken out by the
demographics reported in Table 2. Columns labeled “LinkedIn’” correspond to the sample proportions of each row correctly
answering the “Big 3” (questions on compounding, inflation, and diversification); and “Big 5” (adds the questions on bond
prices and mortgages). The corresponding results from the 2012 State-by-State NFCS are reported in the columns labeled
“NFCS” based on 18,147 responses from respondents of the same age group. The last three
report the LinkedIn
P5 columns
2
sample averages of Actual score, Perceived score, and Precision. Precision is calculated as
0 (pj ) , where j subscripts the
number of correct answers. This measures how tightly the distribution of beliefs is centered around the modal response.

Overall

Proportion Correct
Big 3
Big 5
LinkedIn NFCS LinkedIn NFCS
0.76
0.37
0.38
0.16

Actual
4.09

Average Scores
Percieved Precision
4.00
0.69

Gender
Male
Female

0.83
0.63

0.49
0.28

0.45
0.25

0.22
0.10

4.27
3.77

4.25
3.57

0.73
0.62

Age
25-34
35-44
45-54
55-64

0.70
0.73
0.77
0.81

0.25
0.36
0.40
0.46

0.30
0.34
0.39
0.46

0.08
0.14
0.17
0.22

3.89
4.01
4.14
4.26

3.73
3.92
4.06
4.24

0.60
0.67
0.71
0.76

Education
Bachelor’s
Master’s & PhD’s

0.77
0.79

0.48
0.62

0.39
0.44

0.23
0.33

4.13
4.20

4.03
4.08

0.68
0.69

Income
Less than 15K
15K-24K
25K-34K
35K-49K
50K-74K
75K-99K
100K-149K
More than 150K

0.55
0.51
0.59
0.55
0.67
0.74
0.80
0.87

0.16
0.22
0.25
0.33
0.39
0.50
0.56
0.66

0.19
0.18
0.21
0.22
0.25
0.31
0.39
0.52

0.04
0.06
0.09
0.11
0.15
0.23
0.27
0.39

3.40
3.41
3.62
3.60
3.84
4.01
4.17
4.40

3.36
3.30
3.33
3.49
3.72
3.87
4.09
4.34

0.56
0.58
0.58
0.58
0.63
0.68
0.70
0.75

Profession
Finance
Entrepreneur

0.81
0.79

.
0.45

0.52
0.43

.
0.20

4.33
4.20

4.27
4.22

0.76
0.73

30

Table 5: Demographics, Financial Literacy, and Self-Assessed Measures of Performance
This table reports OLS regressions of the key variables of interest on demographic variables. “Actual Score” records the
number of “Big 5” questions answered correctly. Overestimation
is the difference between the respondent’s subjective mean
P5
2
score and their actual score. Precision is calculated as
0 (pj ) , where j subscripts the number of correct answers. This
measures how tightly the distribution of beliefs is centered around the modal response.

VARIABLES
Age
Female
ln(Income)
Finance Career
Degree
Entrepreneur
Constant

(1)
Actual Score

(2)
Overestimation

(3)
Precision

0.013***
(0.001)
-0.466***
(0.028)
0.093***
(0.011)
0.243***
(0.036)
0.308***
(0.028)
0.070**
(0.032)
3.007***
(0.083)

0.003***
(0.001)
-0.180***
(0.028)
-0.018
(0.011)
0.031
(0.035)
-0.059**
(0.029)
0.085***
(0.032)
-0.062
(0.081)

0.005***
(0.000)
-0.095***
(0.008)
0.010***
(0.003)
0.077***
(0.011)
0.018**
(0.008)
0.020**
(0.010)
0.429***
(0.023)

Observations
4,896
4,896
R-squared
0.133
0.016
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

31

4,896
0.088

Table 6: Financial Literacy and Employment Experience
This table presents summary statistics of key demographic and financial literacy variables based on the self-reported employment status of survey respondents. Income is reported in thousands and is based on taking the midpoints of the ranges listed in Table 2. Perceived
score is the expected number of correct answers on the financial
P
literacy test, where subjective probability weights are used to compute the expectation: formally, this is 50 Ij pj , where Ij is an indicator associated with getting j ∈ [0, 5] correct
P
answers on the test. Precision ranges from 0 to 1 and is computed as the sum of the squared probability weights assigned to each potential number of correct answers, or 50 p2j .

32

Student
Individual contributor
Senior individual contributor
Manager or equivalent
Senior Manager or equivalent
Director or equivalent
Dept. Head, VP or Equiv
Pres., Man. Dir., or Equiv
C-Level Exec. or Equiv
Small Business Owner
Self-employed
I am retired
Other
I am not currently employed

Total

Literacy Score
Actual Perceived

N

Age

Female

Income

Degree

% Big 5

97
649
799
741
354
395
310
128
102
458
374
128
167
194

31.90
39.97
43.66
43.49
46.07
45.52
48.16
52.40
49.57
49.69
50.38
59.96
45.93
45.64

0.54
0.51
0.32
0.35
0.27
0.39
0.26
0.24
0.19
0.26
0.43
0.23
0.58
0.45

39.58
80.64
108.66
107.03
127.17
152.46
170.41
217.87
241.43
160.27
93.34
92.07
85.09
70.97

0.88
0.68
0.69
0.64
0.65
0.73
0.76
0.62
0.75
0.61
0.62
0.44
0.55
0.66

0.26
0.27
0.36
0.35
0.38
0.43
0.48
0.48
0.59
0.46
0.39
0.38
0.28
0.35

3.71
3.85
4.14
4.02
4.16
4.20
4.30
4.31
4.44
4.31
4.07
4.13
3.65
3.93

3.63
3.63
4.04
3.95
4.01
4.07
4.27
4.36
4.35
4.32
4.09
4.25
3.55
3.83

0.57
0.60
0.69
0.68
0.69
0.70
0.75
0.79
0.79
0.75
0.71
0.75
0.64
0.68

4,896

45.53

0.36

118.66

0.67

0.38

4.09

4.00

0.69

Precision

.

Table 7: Retirement Planning, Real and Perceived Financial Literacy
This table presents Probit regressions modeling the probability that the respondent answered “Yes” to the question,
“Have you ever tried to figure out how much you need to save for your retirement?” Independent variables are defined in
Table 2. Point estimates are reported as marginal probabilities. Columns (1) through (3) report results from the whole
sample; Columns (4) through (6) from the low-financial literacy subsample, excluding those with scores higher than 3.

(1)

(2)

0.082***
(0.007)

0.044***
(0.008)
0.069***
(0.008)
0.014
(0.026)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.070***
(0.024)

0.037
(0.026)
0.062***
(0.016)
-0.002
(0.056)

(6)

VARIABLES
Actual Score
Perceived Score
Precision
Overestimation
Age
Female
ln(Income)
Finance Career
Degree
Entrepreneur

Observations
Literacy dummies
Pseudo R2

0.006*** 0.006***
(0.001)
(0.001)
-0.010
0.019
(0.013)
(0.013)
0.028*** 0.026***
(0.005)
(0.005)
0.062*** 0.053***
(0.018)
(0.018)
0.049*** 0.043***
(0.014)
(0.014)
0.006
-0.004
(0.017)
(0.017)

0.072***
0.064***
(0.008)
(0.016)
0.006*** 0.009*** 0.009*** 0.009***
(0.001)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
0.019
-0.027
0.003
0.000
(0.013)
(0.033)
(0.033)
(0.034)
0.026*** 0.059*** 0.062*** 0.060***
(0.005)
(0.015)
(0.015)
(0.015)
0.051*** 0.120** 0.114**
0.104*
(0.018)
(0.053)
(0.053)
(0.054)
0.042***
0.050
0.047
0.047
(0.014)
(0.033)
(0.034)
(0.034)
-0.003
-0.030
-0.038
-0.039
(0.017)
(0.047)
(0.047)
(0.047)

4,896
4,896
4,896
1,027
No
No
Yes
No
0.0762
0.0933
0.0952
0.0531
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

33

1,027
No
0.0644

1,027
Yes
0.0697

Table 8: Precautionary Saving and Perceptions of Financial Literacy
This table presents Probit regressions modeling the probability that the respondent answered “Yes” to the question,
“Have you set aside emergency or rainy day funds that would cover your expenses for 3 months, in case of sickness, job loss,
economic downturn, or other emergencies?”. Independent variables are defined in Table 2. Point estimates are reported as
marginal probabilities. Columns (1) through (3) report results from the whole sample; Columns (4) through (6) from the
low-financial literacy subsample, excluding those with scores higher than 3.

(1)

(2)

0.084***
(0.008)

0.044***
(0.009)
0.065***
(0.010)
0.108***
(0.030)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.048*
(0.026)

0.040
(0.027)
0.020
(0.016)
0.104*
(0.057)

(6)

VARIABLES
Actual Score
Perceived Score
Precision
Overestimation
Age
Female
ln(Income)
Finance Career
Degree
Entrepreneur

Observations
Literacy dummies
Pseudo R2

0.080***
0.025
(0.009)
(0.016)
0.006*** 0.005*** 0.005*** 0.008*** 0.007*** 0.007***
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
-0.059*** -0.027*
-0.027* -0.068** -0.057*
-0.055
(0.015)
(0.015)
(0.015)
(0.033)
(0.034)
(0.034)
0.035*** 0.033*** 0.034*** 0.058*** 0.059*** 0.060***
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.016)
(0.016)
(0.016)
0.077*** 0.062*** 0.063***
0.054
0.049
0.052
(0.020)
(0.020)
(0.020)
(0.056)
(0.057)
(0.057)
0.086*** 0.081*** 0.078*** 0.122*** 0.124*** 0.122***
(0.016)
(0.016)
(0.016)
(0.034)
(0.034)
(0.034)
-0.025
-0.037*
-0.036*
-0.018
-0.019
-0.020
(0.019)
(0.019)
(0.019)
(0.047)
(0.047)
(0.047)
4,896
4,896
4,896
1,027
No
No
Yes
No
0.0647
0.0809
0.0799
0.0427
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

34

1,027
No
0.0469

1,027
Yes
0.0450

Table 9: Who Makes Household Investment Decisions?
This table reports Probit analysis of a dummy variable for whether the respondent has primary responsibility for
financial investment decision-making in their household. The question asks “Which of the following best describes your role
in making financial investment decisions?” Answers are “I am the primary . . . ”, “I share responsibility”, and “Someone
else in the family makes financial investment decisions.” Independent variables are defined in Table 2. Point estimates are
reported as marginal probabilities. Columns (1) through (3) report results from the whole sample; Columns (4) through (6)
from the low-financial literacy subsample, excluding those with scores higher than 3.

(1)

(2)

0.043***
(0.011)

0.013
(0.012)
0.050***
(0.013)
0.049
(0.040)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.057*
(0.032)

0.035
(0.034)
0.044**
(0.020)
-0.000
(0.072)

(6)

VARIABLES
Actual Score
Perceived Score
Precision
Overestimation
Age
Female
ln(Income)
Finance Career
Degree
Entrepreneur

Observations
Literacy dummies
Pseudo R2

0.057***
(0.012)
-0.003*** -0.003*** -0.003***
0.001
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.002)
-0.126*** -0.105*** -0.105***
-0.001
(0.020)
(0.021)
(0.021)
(0.041)
-0.030*** -0.032*** -0.032*** -0.073***
(0.009)
(0.009)
(0.009)
(0.020)
0.097*** 0.090*** 0.093***
0.143**
(0.027)
(0.028)
(0.028)
(0.069)
-0.005
-0.011
-0.011
-0.002
(0.021)
(0.021)
(0.021)
(0.042)
-0.017
-0.024
-0.024
-0.056
(0.026)
(0.026)
(0.026)
(0.058)
2,882
2,882
2,882
650
No
No
Yes
No
0.0244
0.0312
0.0310
0.0215
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

35

0.000
(0.002)
0.022
(0.043)
-0.072***
(0.021)
0.139**
(0.069)
-0.007
(0.043)
-0.060
(0.058)

0.044**
(0.020)
0.000
(0.002)
0.021
(0.043)
-0.073***
(0.021)
0.146**
(0.070)
-0.007
(0.042)
-0.062
(0.058)

650
No
0.0270

650
Yes
0.0280

Table 10: Overestimation, Financial Knowledge, and Advice
This table presents Probit regressions of answers associated with the question “When considering mutual funds, it
is more important to pay attention to past performance than to consider the management fees.” Column (1) models the
probability that the respondent answered ”Don’t know”, and Column (2) models the propensity to respond with the wrong
answer. In Column (3), the dependent variable takes the value one if the respondent answered favorably to the question,
“How satisfied or dissatisfied would you be if financial planning advice or information (e.g., articles, videos, infographics)
occasionally appeared in your LinkedIn news stream?”; zero otherwise. Column (4) repeats the previous regression, but in
which we exclude individuals earning more than $100,000 per year. Demographic controls include those in Tables 7 through
9, and includes dummy variables for Actual score. Point estimates are reported as marginal probabilities.

VARIABLES

Overestimation

Observations
Demographic controls
Literacy dummies
Pseudo R2

(1)
Don’t know

(2)
Wrong answer

(3)
No Advice
(All)

(4)
No Advice
(Income<$100K)

-0.0607***
(0.009)

0.0221*
(0.012)

0.0216***
(0.007)

0.0155*
(0.009)

2,882
2,882
4,896
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.165
0.0201
0.0191
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

36

2,594
Yes
Yes
0.0361

LinkedIn Survey

Page 1 of 1

Figure 1: Questionnaire
This picture dispalys an actual screenshot of the question where probabilities are solicited from respondents with
respect to how they think they scored. The disctrbuions of beliefs are used to construct measures of Overestimation and
Precision.

51%

For the previous five multiple choice questions, you could have answered between zero and five correctly. We would like to
know how many you think you got correct. Please assign a probability for each possible outcome below.
Enter whole numbers and total should add to 100.

Total
Probability that I have all five correct

0

%

Probability that I have exactly four correct

0

%

Probability that I have exactly three correct

0

%

Probability that I have exactly two correct

0

%

Probability that I have exactly one correct

0

%

Probability that I have no correct answers

0

%

Don't know
Prefer not to answer
Total: 0 %

Continue »

Privacy Policy - Help

37

Figure 2: Actual vs. Perceived Scores
This figure shows the proportion of respondents being certain of their score (“Proportion sure”) by putting all
probability mass at one outcome, separately for those being correct and incorrect with respect to the actual outcome (bars,
right scale). The solid line traces out the average estimated correct score, labelled “Perceived score” (left scale). The dotted
45-degree line indicates a perfect match between Actual and Perceived score.

1

5
Proportion sure, correct (Right scale)
Proportion sure, incorrect (Right scale)
Perceived Score (Left scale)
45‐degree line

0.8

3

0.6

2

0.4

1

0.2

0

0
0

1

2

3
Actual Score

38

4

5

Proportions

Perceived Score

4

Figure 3: Distribution of Beliefs Across Scores

Probability, %

This graph plots average reported probabilities, sorted on actual score.
The distrbuions of beliefs are used to
construct measures of Overestimation (using the average) and Precision (using the dispersion).

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

5
4
3

0
1

2
2

Perceived Score

1

3
0

4
5

39

Actual Score

Appendix A. Internet Appendix: FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION
Appendix A.1. Responses To The Big 5 Financial Questions
• Compounding: Suppose you had $100 in a savings account and the interest rate
was 2% per year. After 5 years, how much do you think you would have in the account
if you left the money to grow? Please select one.
Answers
Wave 1 Wave 2 Total Freq
More than $102
1,892
2,689 4,581 94%
Exactly $102
39
57
96
2%
Less than $102
51
85
136
3%
Don’t know
30
44
74
1%
Prefer not to say
2
7
9
0%
• Inflation: Imagine that the interest rate on your savings account was 1% per year
and inflation was 2% per year. After 1 year, how much would you be able to buy
with the money in this account? Please select one.
Answers
Wave 1
More than today
66
Exactly the same
60
Less than today
1,823
Don’t know
58
Prefer not to say
7

Wave 2 Total Freq
87
153
3%
100
160
3%
2,578 4,401 90%
112
170
4%
5
12
0%

• Diversification: Buying a single companys stock usually provides a safer return
than a stock mutual fund. Please select one.
Answers
Wave 1 Wave 2
True
33
56
False
1,770
2,417
Don’t know
197
391
Prefer not to say
14
18

Total Freq
89
2%
4,187 86%
588 12%
32
0%

• Mortgage: A 15-year mortgage typically requires higher monthly payments than a
30-year mortgage, but the total interest paid over the life of the loan will be less.
Please select one.
Answers
Wave 1 Wave 2 Total Freq
True
1,909
2,702 4,611 94%
False
68
127
195
4%
Don’t Know
34
50
84
2%
Prefer not to say
3
3
6
0%
• Bond Prices: If interest rates fall, what should happen to bond prices?

40

Answers
They will rise
They will fall
They will stay the same
There is no relationship between . . .
Don’t know
Prefer not to say

Wave 1 Wave 2
944
1,283
446
603
69
112
130
208
411
658
14
18

Total Freq
2,227 45%
1,049 21%
181
4%
338
7%
1,069 22%
32
1%

Appendix A.2. Comparison with the NFCS
Table A.11: Data Comparison
This table presents the fraction of correct answers to each of the five literacy questions in the survey among individuals aged 25 to 64 years old along with the results from the 2012 State-by-State National Financial Capability Study
(NFCS) conducted via Internet on a random sample of individuals between 25 to 64 years old in the U.S. The 2010 U.S.
Health and Retirement Study (HRS) is conducted on respondents over 50 years old, and the 2009 SAVE+ study across a
random sample in Germany. The fraction of respondents who had all correct answers to the first three and all five questions
is reported separately, where applicable. Sample description denote from which pool subjects were drawn.

Question
1. Compunding
2. Inflation
3. Diversification
4. Mortgage
5. Bond Prices

Wave I
94%
91%
88%
95%
47%

This study
Wave II
93%
89%
84%
94%
45%

Total
94%
90%
86%
94%
45%

Sample description
All 1-3 correct
All 1-5 correct

78%
40%

Age 25 to 64
74%
76%
36%
38%

Observations

2,014

2,882

4,896

41

NFCS
2012
77%
64%
51%
79%
29%

HRS
2010
69%
81%
63%
n/a
n/a

SAVE+
2009
82%
78%
62%
n/a
n/a

37%
16%

Age +50
42%
n/a

Age +18
53%
n/a

18,637

1,269

1,059

42

Observations
State dummies
Psuedo R2

College Edu.

Income

Age

Females

S-R Knowledge

Actual Score

VARIABLES

18,147
Yes
0.125

-0.0557***
(0.008)
0.0362***
(0.003)
0.0885***
(0.002)
0.0758***
(0.009)

(1)
Saver

18,147
Yes
0.128

0.0184***
(0.003)
0.0776***
(0.003)
-0.0318***
(0.008)
0.0301***
(0.004)
0.0775***
(0.002)
0.0532***
(0.009)

(3)
Saver
-0.0033
(0.005)
0.0689***
(0.004)
-0.0399***
(0.010)
0.0176***
(0.004)
0.0665***
(0.002)
0.0442***
(0.010)

(4)
Saver

-0.0346***
(0.007)
-0.0115***
(0.003)
0.0725***
(0.002)
0.1143***
(0.009)

(5)
Retire

18,147
10,393
18,147
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.152
0.131
0.0913
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

-0.0415***
(0.008)
0.0306***
(0.004)
0.0835***
(0.002)
0.0617***
(0.009)

0.0273***
(0.003)

(2)
Saver

18,147
Yes
0.102

-0.0089
(0.008)
-0.0218***
(0.003)
0.0638***
(0.002)
0.0903***
(0.009)

0.0493***
(0.003)

(6)
Retire

18,147
Yes
0.115

0.0431***
(0.003)
0.0549***
(0.003)
-0.0013
(0.008)
-0.0228***
(0.003)
0.0590***
(0.002)
0.0846***
(0.009)

(7)
Retire

10,393
Yes
0.0900

0.0324***
(0.005)
0.0496***
(0.004)
0.0036
(0.009)
-0.0161***
(0.004)
0.0485***
(0.002)
0.0684***
(0.010)

(8)
Retire

This table presents Probit regressions modeling the probability that the respondent answered “Yes” to two financial decision-making questions in the 2012 State-byState National Financial Capability Study: (1) “Saver: “Have you set aside emergency or rainy day funds that would cover your expenses for 3 months in the event . . . ; and (2)
“Retire”: “Have you ever tried to figure out how much you need to save for your retirement?” Actual Score represents the number of correct answers to the finacial literacy
test (0 to 5), S-R Knowledge denote the self-reported level of general financial knowledge from the survey on a scale from 1 (Very low) to 7 (Very high). Age and Income are
scalars from 1 to 7 that assign respondents into age and income brackets. Female and College Edu. takes the value of one for female and college educated respondents, and zero
otherwise. Regressions are specified with dummy variables for U.S. State responses. There are 25,509 respondents in the original panel, of which 18,147 reported self-assessed
financial knowledge belonging to the age group 25-64. Columns (4) and (8) restricts the sample to those who scored below 4 on the financial literacy test. Point estimates are
reported as marginal probabilities with p-values reported below in parentheses.

Table A.12: Financial Literacy Test Score and Self-Assessed Financial Knowledge in the 2012 NFCS Panel

