                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 WHAT DO EXPORTERS KNOW?

                                         Michael J. Dickstein
                                          Eduardo Morales

                                        Working Paper 21351
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21351


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2015




We thank Tim Bresnahan, Lorenzo Caliendo, Jan De Loecker, Dave Donaldson, Liran Einav, Alon
Eizenberg, Guido Imbens, Ariel Pakes, Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, James Tybout and seminar participants
at the CEPR-JIE conference on Applied Industrial Organization, Dartmouth College, LMU, the NBER
ITI meeting, Pennsylvania State University, Princeton University, the Stanford/Berkeley IO Fest, Stanford
University, UCLA, University of Virginia, and Wharton School for helpful suggestions. All errors
are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Michael J. Dickstein and Eduardo Morales. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
What do Exporters Know?
Michael J. Dickstein and Eduardo Morales
NBER Working Paper No. 21351
July 2015
JEL No. F14

                                              ABSTRACT

Much of the variation in international trade volume is driven by firms' extensive margin decision to
participate in export markets. To understand this decision and predict the sensitivity of export flows
to changes in trade costs, we estimate a standard model of firms' export participation. In choosing
whether to export, firms weigh the fixed costs of exporting against the forecasted profits from serving
a foreign market. We show that the estimated parameters and counterfactual predictions from the model
depend heavily on how the researcher specifies firms' expectations over these profits. We therefore
develop a novel moment inequality approach with weaker assumptions on firms' expectations. Our
approach introduces a new set of moment inequalities --odds-based inequalities-- and applies the revealed
preference inequalities introduced in Pakes (2010) to a new setting. We use data from Chilean exporters
to show that, relative to methods that require specifying firms' information sets, our approach generates
estimates of fixed export costs that are 65-85% smaller. Counterfactual reductions in fixed costs generate
gains in export participation that are 30% smaller, on average, than those predicted by existing approaches.


Michael J. Dickstein
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
mjd@stanford.edu

Eduardo Morales
Department of Economics
Princeton University
310 Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
ecmorales@princeton.edu
1        Introduction
In 2013, approximately 300,000 US firms chose to export to foreign markets.1 The decision of
these firms to sell abroad drives much of the variation in trade volume from the US.2 Thus, to
predict how aggregate exports may change with lower trade costs, exchange rate movements,
or other policy or market fluctuations, researchers need to understand firms’ extensive margin
decisions to participate in export markets.
        A large literature in international trade focuses on modeling firms’ export decisions.3 Em-
pirical analyses of these decisions, however, face a serious data obstacle: the decision to export
depends on a firm’s expectations of the profits it will earn when serving a foreign market, which
the researcher rarely observes. Absent direct data on firms’ expectations, researchers must
impose assumptions on how firms form these expectations. For example, researchers com-
monly assume firms’ expectations are rational and depend on a set of variables observed in
the data. The precise specification of agents’ information, however, can importantly influence
the overall measurement, as Manski (1993, 2004), and Cunha and Heckman (2007) show in
the context of evaluating the returns to schooling. In the export setting, the assumptions
on expectations may affect both the estimates of the costs firms incur when exporting and
predictions of how firms will respond to counterfactual changes in these trade costs.
        In this paper, we first document that estimates of the parameters underlying firms’ export
decisions depend heavily on how researchers specify the firm’s expectations. We compare the
predictions of a standard model in the international trade literature (Melitz, 2003; Helpman
et al., 2008) under two different sets of assumptions on how exporters form their expectations:
the “perfect foresight” case, under which firms perfectly predict their profits when exporting,
and a limited information specification in which firms only use a specific observed set of
variables to predict their own export profits. Under each assumption on firms’ information,
we recover values for the fixed costs of exporting and predict changes in exports across markets
in reaction to a policy that reduces these fixed costs by 40%. Finding important differences
in the predictions from the two models, we then develop a new empirical model of export
participation that places fewer restrictions on firms’ expectations.
        Under our new approach, firms may gather different signals about their productivity rela-
tive to competitors, or about the evolution of exchange rates, trade policy, political stability
abroad, and foreign demand; we do not require the researcher to have full knowledge of each
exporter’s information set. Instead, the researcher need only specify a subset of the variables
that agents use to form their expectations about their profits conditional on exporting. The
    1
      Department of Commerce (2015)
    2
      According to Bernard et al. (2010), approximately 70% of the cross-sectional variation in exports comes
from firms entering a market rather than changing their export volume
    3
      See for example Das et al. (2007), Arkolakis (2010), Moxnes (2010), Eaton et al. (2011), Ruhl and Willis
(2014), Arkolakis et al. (2014a), and Cherkashin et al. (2015). A recent literature also focuses on the decisions
of importers; e.g. Antràs et al. (2014).


                                                       1
researcher must observe this subset, but need not observe any remaining variables that affect
the firm’s expectations. The set of unobserved variables may vary flexibly across firms, mar-
kets, and years. In contrast, standard estimation approaches require the researcher to fully
specify and observe all variables in exporters’ information sets. The trade-off from specifying
only a subset of the firm’s information is that we can only partially identify the true param-
eters of interest. To do so, we develop a new type of moment inequality, which we label the
odds-based inequality, and combine it with inequalities based on revealed preference.4 Using
these inequalities, our empirical burden is twofold. First, we must show that placing fewer as-
sumptions on expectations matters both for the estimates of the parameters of the exporter’s
problem and for the predictions of export flows under counterfactual trade policy. Second, our
robust approach must generate bounds on the model’s parameters and on predicted exports
that are small enough to be informative.
    We perform our empirical analysis in the context of a standard partial equilibrium, two
period model of export participation.5 We estimate this model using data on Chilean exporters
in two industrial sectors, the manufacture of chemicals and food products.
    We proceed in three steps. First, we demonstrate the sensitivity of both the estimated
fixed costs of exporting and the predictions of firms’ export participation to assumptions the
researcher imposes on firms’ profit forecasts. Specifically, using maximum likelihood methods,
we estimate a perfect foresight model under which firms predict perfectly the revenues they
will earn upon entry. Under this assumption, for example, we find export costs in the chemicals
sector from Chile to Argentina, Japan, and United States to equal $894,000, $2.8 million, and
$1.7 million, respectively. We compare these estimates to an alternative approach, developed
in Willis and Rosen (1979), Manski (1991) and Ahn and Manski (1993), in which we assume
that firms’ expectations are rational and specify that firms form their expectations using only
three variables: distance to the export market, aggregate exports from Chile to that market in
the prior year, and the firm’s own productivity from the prior year. The estimated fixed costs
of exporting under this limited information approach are approximately 20-30% lower than
those found under the perfect foresight assumption, in both the chemicals and food sector.
    That the fixed cost estimates differ under perfect foresight and the limited information
approach reflects a possible bias in the estimation. Both the limited information procedure
and the perfect foresight approach require the researcher to specify precisely the content
of the agent’s information set. If firms actually employ a different set of variables—either
   4
     A growing empirical literature employs moment inequalities derived from revealed preference arguments,
including Ho (2009), Crawford and Yurukoglu (2012), Ho and Pakes (2014), Eizenberg (2014), Wollman (2014),
and Morales et al. (2015). This work generally follows the methodology developed in Pakes (2010) and Pakes
et al. (2015); our revealed preference inequalities apply this methodology in a new setting with a distinct error
structure.
   5
     By combining the insights in this paper with the Euler’s perturbation method introduced in Morales et al.
(2015), we could similarly perform our analysis in the context of a fully dynamic export participation model à
la Das et al. (2007).



                                                       2
more information or less— to predict their potential export profits, the estimates of the
model parameters will generally be biased. Thus, our second key step is to employ our new
types of moments inequalities to partially identify the exporter’s fixed costs under weaker
assumptions. Here, we again assume that firms know the distance to the export market, the
aggregate exports to that market in the prior year, and their own productivity from the prior
year. However, unlike the limited information approach described earlier, the inequalities we
define do not restrict firms to use only these three variables when forecasting their potential
export profits. We require only that firms know at least these variables. We chose this set
of three variables in our specification because they are contained either in firms’ own balance
sheets or in official government statistics. It seems reasonable, therefore, to assume all firms
might know at least these variables. We can, however, go further and test the null hypothesis
that the potential exporters’ information sets satisfy this minimal requirement. Specifically,
conditional on the model, we use the specification test suggested in Andrews and Soares (2010)
to test our assumption that these three variables are in the firm’s information set.6
       Under the traditional maximum likelihood methods, we estimate the fixed costs for exports
from Chile to Argentina, for example, to equal $594,000 or $894,000 in the chemicals sector,
depending on the specification of the information set. Using our inequalities approach, we find
much lower fixed costs, between approximately $270,000 and $298,000 in the chemicals sector.
This range is small enough to be informative for policy. In addition, in model specification
tests using data from both the chemicals and food sectors, we cannot reject the null hypothesis
that exporters know at least distance, lagged productivity, and lagged aggregate exports when
making their export decisions. To address further the question of “what do exporters know?”,
we repeat this test under the same model and data, but placing one additional variable in the
firm’s information set. In this alternative, we assume the firm also knows the productivity of
other firms that export to each destination country. Repeating the test, we now reject the
null that firms knew this information when making their export decision at the 4% level in
the chemicals sector and the 1% level in the food sector. Similarly, we can also reject the
assumption of perfect foresight at any generally used significance level.
       Finally, as a third key step, we conduct counterfactuals using our inequalities, imposing
the same minimal requirements on firms’ information sets as we imposed in estimation. Our
counterfactual predictions are also set-identified. We provide bounds that indicate how firms
would respond to a counterfactual policy that reduces the fixed costs of exporting by 40%.
Starting with the approaches that require explicit assumptions on the exact content of each
firm’s information set, we find that the results differ substantially with these assumptions. For
example, compared to predictions under perfect foresight, the predicted export participation
under the alternative procedure that assumes firms know only distance, lagged aggregate
   6
    Alternative specification tests for partially identified models defined by moment inequalities have been
provided in Romano and Shaikh (2008), Andrews and Guggenberger (2009), and Bugni et al. (2015).



                                                     3
exports and lagged productivity is 3% and 20% higher for Argentina and Japan and 12%
lower for the United States, in the chemicals sector. Comparing the predictions from these
two models to those computed using our moment inequalities, in the latter we predict gains
in export participation from counterfactual reductions in fixed costs that are 30% smaller on
average, depending upon the destination market and manufacturing sector.
        We illustrate our contribution using the exporter’s problem. Our approach, however,
provides a robust methodology to estimate the parameters of many decisions in economics
that depend on agents’ forecasts of key variables. For example, when a firm develops a new
product, it must form expectations of the likely future demand (Bernard et al., 2010; Bilbiie et
al., 2012; Arkolakis et al., 2014b). To determine whether to invest in research and development
projects, the firm must form expectations about the success of the research activity (Aw et al.,
2011). On the consumer side, Greenstone et al. (2014) examine the enlistment of soldiers in
the US Army; the decision to reenlist depends on the soldiers’ expectations about the riskiness
of the task assigned. Similarly, a retiree’s decision to purchase a private annuity (Ameriks
et al., 2015) depends on her expectations about life expectancy. In education, the decision
to attend college crucially depends on potential students’ expectations about the difference
in lifetime earnings with and without a college education (Freeman, 1971; Willis and Rosen,
1979; Manski and Wise, 1983). In these settings, even without direct elicitation of agent’s
preferences (Manski, 2004), our approach can recover bounds on the economic primitives of
the agent’s problem without imposing strong assumptions on agents’ expectations.
        We proceed in this paper by first describing our model of firm exports in Section 2, building
up to an expression for firms’ export participation decisions. In Sections 3 and 4 we describe
our data, empirical setting, and three alternative empirical models. We first outline the
maximum likelihood procedures that require the researcher to have full knowledge of agents’
information sets. We then introduce our moment inequality estimator and discuss how to build
these inequalities as well as conduct counterfactuals with possibly set-identified parameters
and with only partial knowledge of agents’ information sets. In Section 5, we compare the
parameter estimates resulting from the alternative empirical models. In Section 6, we use our
inequality approach to predict the effect on export participation and export volume from a
reduction in fixed export costs. Section 8 concludes.


2        Export Model
We begin with a model of a firm’s export decisions. All firms located in country h may choose
to sell in every export market j. We index the firms located in h and active at period t by
i = 1, . . . , Nt .7 We index the potential destination countries by j = 1, . . . , J.
        We model firms’ export decisions using a two-period model. In the first period, firms choose
    7
        For ease of notation, we will eliminate the subindex for the country of origin h.


                                                           4
the set of countries to which they wish to export. To participate in a market, firms must pay
a fixed export cost. When choosing to export, firms may differ in their degree of uncertainty
about the profits they will obtain upon exporting. In the second period, conditional on
entering a foreign market, all firms observe supply and demand conditions and set their prices
optimally.

2.1   Demand
Every firm i faces an isoelastic demand in country j in year t:

                                                   p−η
                                                    ijt Yjt
                                          xijt =              ,                              (1)
                                                   Pjt1−η

where p is the price firm i sets in destination country j at time t, Y is the total expenditure
in country j at time t in the sector in which firm i operates, and P is the ideal price index:
                                          "Z                      #    1
                                                                      1−η

                                  Pjt =                p1−η
                                                        ijt di              ,
                                             i∈Ajt


where Ajt denotes the set of all firms in the world selling in j. This specification implies that
every firm faces a constant demand elasticity equal to η in every destination country.

2.2   Supply
Firm i produces one unit of output with a cost-minimizing combination of inputs that costs
ait ct , where c represents the cost of this bundle in country h and ait is the number of bundles
of inputs that firm i uses to produce one unit of output. Thus, the inverse of ait denotes firm
i’s productivity level in t. A cumulative distribution function Gt (a) describes the distribution
of a across firms located in h in year t. This distribution function may vary freely across time
periods. We also allow firms’ productivity to be correlated over time.
   When i wants to sell in a foreign market j, it must pay production costs and two additional
costs: a transport cost, τjt , and a fixed cost, fijt . We adopt the “iceberg” specification of
transport costs and assume that firm i must ship τjt units of a product from country h for
one unit to arrive to j. The fixed export costs are

                                   fijt = β0 + β1 distj + νijt ,                             (2)

where distj denotes the distance from country h to country j, and νijt is an aggregate of all




                                                   5
remaining determinants of fijt that the researcher does not observe.8 We assume that

                                               νijt ∼ N(0, σν2 ),                                         (3)

where σν2 measures the unobserved heterogeneity in fixed export costs across firms, countries
and time periods.9

2.3       Profits conditional on exporting
Conditional on entering a destination market j, every seller behaves as a monopolistically
competitive firm. When setting the optimal price in each destination market in which a firm
enters, firms know their demand function, transport costs and own marginal production costs.
Therefore, the demand and supply assumptions above imply that the optimal price firm i sets
in j is

                                                       η
                                             pijt =       τjt ait ct .                                    (4)
                                                      η−1

As a result, the total revenue that i will obtain in country j is
                                                                1−η
                                                 η τjt ait ct
                                      rijt   =                           Yjt ,                            (5)
                                               η − 1 Pjt

and the export profit (gross of fixed costs) is η −1 rijt . Therefore, export profits conditional
on entry are a function of (a) market size in the destination market, Yjt ; (b) competition by
other suppliers, as captured by the price index, Pjt ; (c) production costs, cit ; (d) exporters’
productivity, ait ; and, (e) transport costs, τjt . These variables are rarely observed in standard
datasets. However, Appendix A.1 shows that, given the assumptions in Sections 2.1 and 2.2,
we can rewrite the potential export revenue of i in j, rijt , as a function of variables that are
typically observed in standard trade datasets: (a) the domestic revenues of every active firm i,
riht ; (b) the aggregate export flows from the home country h to any destination country j, Rjt ;
and, (c) an indicator for whether each of the active firms exports to j at t, dijt . Specifically,
   8
     We assume that the fixed export costs, fijt , are independent of the previous export experience of firm i
in country j. However, given that the time process of the term ait is unrestricted, our model can match any
observed persistence in export status. One can also allow fixed exports costs to depend on previous export
experience and apply the moment inequalities introduced in Section 4.2 to the corresponding dynamic export
problem.
   9
     None of the results presented in this paper depends on the assumption that ν is normally distributed.
The only restriction necessary for the moment inequalities introduced in Section 4.2 to be valid is that the
distribution of ν is known to the researcher up to a scale parameter and is log-concave.




                                                         6
the revenue that firm i would obtain in country j at period t conditional on entering is

                                                           Rjt
                                       rijt = PNt                          ,                               (6)
                                                  s=1 dsjt (rsht /riht )

where Nt denotes the set of active firms in country h at period t. This expression allows us
to obtain a measure of the revenues that each firm i would obtain in each destination j in
period t conditional on entry. We can compute this measure both for firms that we observe
exporting to j in t and for those that choose not to export.

2.4       Decision to export
Once we account for the fixed costs of exporting, the remaining export profits that i will
obtain in j are

                                           πijt = η −1 rijt − fijt .                                       (7)

Firm i will decide to export to j if and only if       E[πijt |Jijt ] ≥ 0, where the vector Jijt contains
all of the information firm i knows about the determinants of πijt and fijt at the time it
decides whether to export to j in year t.
               1{E[πijt |Jijt ] ≥ 0}, where 1{·} denotes the indicator function. We assume
       Let dijt =
firms’ expectations are rational, and thus E[·] denotes the expectation with respect to the
data generating process. Assuming further that all determinants of fixed export costs are
known to firms when they decide whether to export—i.e. (distj , νijt ) ∈ Jijt —we can rewrite
dijt as

                                  dijt = 1{η −1 E[rijt |Jijt ] − fijt ≥ 0},                                (8)

where again rijt is export revenue conditional on entry and fijt is the fixed export cost.10
We define an agent’s expectational error as εijt , where εijt = rijt − E[rijt |Jijt ]. Under our
assumptions, it holds that

                                              E[εijt |Jijt ] = 0.                                          (9)

That is, assuming that firms’ expectations are rational implies that their expectational error
in predicting export revenues is mean independent of any variable used to form this prediction.
       Among all the variables contained in firms’ information sets, only a subset of them will
  10
    Equation (8) assumes that all firms know the demand elasticity η when deciding whether to export to j at
t. This assumption is not crucial. The moment inequalities introduced in Section 4.2 are also valid in the case
in which firms have imperfect information about the demand parameter η. The key restriction is that all firms
must face the same elasticity of demand in every country and time period.



                                                       7
generally be used to predict export revenues conditional on entry. We denote this subset as
Wijt . Therefore,

                        Wijt ⊂ Jijt         and       E[rijt |Wijt ] = E[rijt |Jijt ].              (10)

For example, Wijt will include any variable that firms might use to forecast either the demand
level in j at t, Yjt , or their own productivity, ait . Specifically, if, for example, firm i knows
the exact demand level it will face in a country j, then Yjt ∈ Wijt .11
       We introduce Wijt to highlight a key assumption needed for the moment inequality ap-
proach we introduce in Section 4.2. Recall, νijt is the component of fixed export costs that
firms know but researchers do not observe. In the inequality approach, νijt must be indepen-
dent of all other determinants of the export choice, dijt :

                                            νijt ⊥ (Wijt , distj ).                                 (11)

Thus, although νijt ∈ Jijt , it is independent of the elements of the information set used to
form expectations. As Section 4.1 shows, this independence assumption is also imposed in
standard discrete choice models (e.g. probit or logit).
       For simplicity of notation going forward and without loss of generality, we will assume
that distj ∈ Wijt . Given equations (3), (10), and (11), we can write the probability that i
exports to j conditional on Wijt as
                                    Z
              P(dijt = 1|Wijt ) =       1{η−1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj − ν ≥ 0}φ(ν)dν         (12)
                                    ν
                               = Φ σ −1 η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj
                                                                                 
                                                                                      ,             (13)

where φ(·) and Φ(·) are, respectively, the standard normal probability density function and
cumulative distribution function. Equation (13) indicates that, after integrating over the
unobserved heterogeneity νijt , we can write the probability that a firm i exports to a country
j at period t as a probit model whose index depends on firm i’s expectations of the gross
profits it will earn in j at t upon entry. Equations (6) and (13) capture all implications of the
export model that will be important both for estimation and computing counterfactuals.
       As is clear from equation (13), even if we were to observe firms’ actual expectations,
E[rijt |Wijt ], data on export choices alone do not allow us to identify the scale of the parameter
vector (σ, η, β0 , β1 ). That is, if we multiply these four parameters by the same positive number,
the probability Pijt remains constant. To normalize by scale the parameter vector in export
entry models, researchers typically use additional data to estimate or calibrate the demand
  11
    For now, we impose no restriction on the content of Wijt . In Section 4, we describe the requirements
alternative empirical models impose on Wijt .



                                                      8
elasticity η. In our estimation, we set η = 5.12 For simplicity of notation going forward, we
use θ to denote the remaining parameter vector (σ, β0 , β1 ).13

2.5        Effect of change in export fixed costs
We study the effect of a policy that, for the firms located in country h, reduces the systematic
part of export fixed costs by 40%. We denote the counterfactual value of β0 as β01 = 0.6β0
and the counterfactual value of β1 as β11 = 0.6β1 . We assume that h is a small country and,
therefore, for all possible destination countries j, the price index Pjt and the potential export
revenues of every firm rijt are invariant to the change in (β0 , β1 ). Therefore, the only vari-
ables the policy affects are the set of export participation dummies, {dijt , i = 1, . . . , Nt } and,
through them, the total exports from h to j, Rjt . We show in Section 6 how different assump-
tions on the information firms use to form expectations, Wijt , lead to different predictions of
the number of exporters and total exports under the counterfactual policy.
         With our counterfactual policy, we capture in a stylized way the effect of export promo-
tion programs on the fixed costs of exporting and ultimately on export participation. Such
programs are common. Van Biesebroeck et al. (2015) discuss Canadian Trade Commissioner
Service measures that lower entry barriers to increase export participation. Volpe Martincus
and Carballo (2008) and Volpe Martincus et al. (2010) document similar measures in Peru and
Uruguay targeting the extensive margin decision of firms to export. According to Lederman et
al. (2009), typical programs include country image building (advertising, promotional events,
advocacy), export support services (exporter training, technical assistance on logistics, cus-
toms, and packaging), and marketing (trade fairs, follow-up services offered by representatives
abroad). It is hard to quantify the precise savings in fixed export costs that these services
imply; our choice of a 40% reduction in fixed costs in the counterfactual is meant to illustrate
one possible level. We then emphasize how the assumptions that researchers impose on the
content of the information set Wijt will affect the policy predictions.


3         Data
Our data come from two separate sources. The first is an extract of the Chilean customs
database, which covers the universe of exports of Chilean firms from 1995 to 2005. The second
is the Chilean Annual Industrial Survey (Encuesta Nacional Industrial Anual, or ENIA), which
    12
     This elasticity of substitution is within the range of values estimated in the literature. See, for example,
Simonovska and Waugh (2014) and Head and Mayer (2014) and the references cited therein.
  13
     The choice of η will affect the magnitude of the parameter vector θ and, therefore, the value estimated
for the fixed export costs in each destination country. However, in this paper we emphasize the sensitivity
of our estimates to different assumptions on the content of firms’ information sets, Wijt ; the choice of η does
not affect the ratio of the fixed export costs estimated under these different assumptions nor does it affect the
comparison across counterfactuals.



                                                       9
surveys all manufacturing plants with at least 10 workers. We collect the annual survey data
for the same years observed in the customs data. We merge these two datasets using firm
identifiers, allowing us to examine the export participation and export volume of each firm
along with their domestic activity.14
       The firms in our dataset operate in one of two sectors: the manufacture of chemicals and
food products.15 These are the two largest Chilean export manufacturing sectors by volume.
In Table 1, we report summary statistics, by year and sector, on the share of domestic firms
exporting, the mean and median exports per exporting firm, the mean domestic revenues per
firm and per exporting firm, and the mean and median number of markets the exporting
firms enter. We focus our analysis on countries which saw at least five firms exporting to that
destination in all years of our data. Across the time period used in our empirical analysis,
this restriction leaves 22 countries in the chemicals sector and 34 countries in the food sector.
We use this set of destinations in our estimation in Section 5.
       We observe 266 unique firms across all years in the chemicals sector; on average, 38% of
these firms participate in at least one export market in a given year. In Table 1, we report the
mean firm-level exports in this sector, which are on average $2.18 million in 1996 and grow
to $3.58 million in 2005, with a dip in 2001 and 2002.16 The median level of exports is much
lower, at around $120,000 to $200,000. In the food sector, we observe 372 unique firms, 30%
of which export in a typical year. The mean exporter in this sector is much larger, with an
average across years of $7.7 million per exporter. The median exporter across all years exports
approximately $2.24 million. Relative to the chemicals sector, firms also typically export to a
greater number of destination markets. The median exporting firm exports to 5-6 markets in
the food sector. In the chemicals sector, the median exporting firm chooses to export to 3-4
countries.
       In our empirical exercises, we illustrate our findings using three destination countries—
Argentina, Japan, and the United States. For the three countries, the total volume of exports
across all years of the data in the chemicals sector equals $205 million, $112 million, and $475
million and the total number of firms that export at least once during the sample period is
105, 13 and 61, respectively. The mean annual volume per exporter equals $412,000, $1.86
million, and $2.48 million, respectively, for Argentina, Japan, and the United States. In the
  14
      We aggregate the information from ENIA across plants in order to obtain firm-level information that
matches the customs data. There are some cases in which firms are identified as exporters in ENIA but do not
have any exports listed with customs. In these cases, we assume that the customs database is more accurate
and thus identify these firms as non-exporters. We lose a number of small firms in the merging process because,
as indicated in the main text, ENIA only covers plants with more than 10 workers. Nevertheless, the remaining
firms account for around 80 percent of total export flows.
   15
      The chemicals sector (sector 24 of the ISIC rev. 3.1) includes firms involved in the manufacture of chemicals
and chemical products, including basic chemicals, fertilizers and nitrogen compounds, plastics, synthetic rubber,
pesticides, paints, soap and detergents, and manmade fibers. The food sector (sector 151 of the ISIC rev. 3.1)
includes the production, processing, and preservation of meat, fish, fruit, vegetables, oils, and fats.
   16
      The dollar values we report in this paper are US dollars in year 2000 terms.



                                                        10
                                         Table 1: Summary Statistics
 Year       Share of     Exports per      Exports per        Domestic sales    Domestic sales per     Destinations per
           exporters   exporter (mean)   exporter (med)     per firm (mean)     exporter (mean)       exporter (mean)
                                                  Chemical Products
 1996        35.7%          2.18               0.15              13.23                 23.10                4.24
 1997        36.1%          2.40               0.19              13.29                 22.99                4.54
 1998        42.5%          2.41               0.17              14.31                 22.25                4.35
 1999        38.7%          2.60               0.19              14.43                 23.95                4.53
 2000        37.6%          2.55               0.21              14.41                 25.93                4.94
 2001        39.8%          2.35               0.12              12.89                 21.92                4.68
 2002        38.7%          2.37               0.15              13.25                 23.73                4.95
 2003        38.0%          3.08               0.17              10.41                 19.54                5.11
 2004        37.6%          3.27               0.15              10.05                 18.70                5.17
 2005        38.0%          3.58               0.11              12.50                 21.65                5.19
                                                          Food
 1996        30.1%           7.47              2.59               9.86                 13.68                5.93
 1997        33.1%           6.97              2.82              10.56                 15.32                6.23
 1998        33.3%           7.49              2.86              10.05                 14.80                6.34
 1999        32.3%           6.71              2.37               9.67                 14.88                6.74
 2000        30.6%           6.49              2.21               8.44                 13.33                5.93
 2001        28.0%           6.48              1.74               8.70                 14.08                6.09
 2002        27.2%           7.82              2.01               7.83                 13.59                6.86
 2003        29.8%           7.60              1.68               7.15                 12.79                6.15
 2004        28.5%           9.25              1.68               8.05                 13.85                6.69
 2005        25.8%          10.72              2.43              9.88                  16.27                7.05
 Notes: All variables (except “share of exporters”) are reported in millions of USD in year 2000 terms.



food sector, the total volume of exports and number of exporting firms is lower for Argentina
($184 million and 85 unique exporters) but much larger for the United States ($1,931 million
and 122 unique exporters) and Japan ($2,656 million and 126 unique exporters). The average
per firm export volume in the food sector to these three countries equals $484,000, $4.09
million, and $3.25 million, respectively.
         Our data set includes both exporters and non-exporters. Furthermore, to minimize the
possibility of selection bias in our estimates, we use an unbalanced panel that includes not
only those firms that appear in ENIA in every year between 1995 and 2005 but also those
that were created or disappeared during this period. Finally, we obtain information on the
distance from Chile to each destination market from CEPII.17


4         Empirical Approach
In the model we describe in Section 2, firm i’s export revenue to destination market j at time
t, rijt , is a function of market size Yjt ; the degree of competition, as captured by the price
    17
    Available at http://www.cepii.fr/anglaisgraph/bdd/distances.htm. Mayer and Zignago (2006) provide a
detailed explanation of the content of this database.


                                                          11
index Pjt ; firm i’s productivity ait ; production costs at home ct ; transport costs τjt ; and the
elasticity of demand η. Firms may know only some of these variables when deciding whether
to export to j at t. They therefore form expectations of potential export revenues using
only their information set, Wijt . In the theoretical model, we did not impose assumptions
on the content of the information set. In estimation, however, we need to place restrictions
on Wijt to identify the parameter vector θ and perform counterfactuals, as Manski (1993)
demonstrates.18
    We discuss three alternative empirical approaches to recover the parameters of the firm’s
export decision when these decisions depend on unobserved expectations. First, we specify
a model with perfect foresight. Under perfect foresight, exporters face no uncertainty; when
deciding whether to export, firms have all the information they need to predict perfectly the
gross profits they’ll earn upon entry.19 We denote the information set imposed under this
             1 . Here, W
approach as Zijt                1
                         ijt = Zijt = rijt , where rijt is the export revenue the firm would
earn upon entry.
                                                               1 is likely to be strictly larger
    For most firms and in most destination countries, the set Zijt
than firms’ true information sets. That is, at the time firms decide whether to serve a foreign
market, they often lack perfect knowledge of the revenue they’ll earn upon entry. Thus, we
specify a second empirical model in which potential exporters forecast their export revenues in
every foreign market using only information on three variables: (1) their own lagged domestic
sales, which serves as a proxy for productivity; (2) lagged aggregate exports to the destination
country j; and (3) distance from the home country to j. We denote this information set
                              2 = (r
with a superscript 2, Wijt = Zijt    iht−1 , Rit−1 , distj ). This information set is likely to
be strictly smaller than the actual information set firms possess when deciding to export. In
addition, this model assumes all potential exporters base their entry decision on the same set
of covariates. It does not permit firms to vary in the types of information they use.
    Under both of these approaches, the researcher assumes that exporters’ true information
sets Wijt correspond exactly to a vector of covariates Zijt that the researcher observes. Section
4.1 shows how to estimate the parameter vector θ under these assumptions. Ideally, one would
like to estimate θ and perform counterfactuals without imposing such strong assumptions on
firms’ information sets. Thus, in our third approach, described in Section 4.2, we propose a
moment inequality estimator that can handle settings in which the econometrician observes
only a subset of the elements contained in firms’ true information sets. That is, instead of
  18
     Specifically, Manski (1993) shows that different assumptions on Wijt might still generate identical likelihood
functions for a given set of covariates. Under these different assumptions, each reduced form parameter has
a different structural interpretation. Thus, one cannot use common goodness-of-fit measures to discriminate
among models that impose different assumptions on agents’ information sets.
  19
     The assumption of perfect foresight is common in static general equilibrium models of export and import
participation. E.g. Arkolakis (2010), Eaton et al. (2011), Arkolakis et al. (2014b), Antràs et al. (2014). The
model described in Section 2 is partial equilibrium. Whether we can extend our flexible treatment of firms’
information sets to general equilibrium models is left for future research.



                                                        12
                 2 , as in the second model above, we require only that Z 2 ⊂ W . The
assuming Wijt = Zijt                                                     ijt   ijt
remaining elements in Wijt need not be observed by the researcher. Those unobservable
elements of firms’ information sets can vary flexibly by firm and by export market.
   Finally, before proceeding to estimation, we comment on the availability of data on export
revenue. To carry out any of the three procedures above, the researcher needs a direct measure
of rijt , the potential export revenue for firm i in country j and year t. We observe revenue
for periods and markets in which i chooses to export. We have no direct measure of rijt when
the firm chooses not to export.
   We rely on the assumptions of the model described in Section 2 to define a perfect proxy
for rijt using the following information: (a) the domestic revenues of firm i in year t, riht ; (b)
the aggregate export flows from the home country h to the destination country j in year t,
Rjt ; (c) a vector of indicators for whether each of the active firms in year t exports to j at t,
{dijt ; i = 1, . . . , Nt }. We observe these variables both for firms that choose to export and for
those that do not. In Sections 4.1 and 4.2, we use the expression in equation (6) to generate
an observed measure of rijt for every firm i, country j and year t.
   As an alternative to the theoretical model, one can instead use the observed data on
export revenue, rijt , observed for those firms that choose to export in market j and time
t. This procedure would involve estimating a new equation for revenue as a function of
observable covariates, such as the firm’s domestic sales. One could then predict the potential
revenue for firms that choose not to export as a function of the estimated parameters and
the observables of the non-exporting firms. However, this approach will generate a selection
problem: those firms that choose to export likely have a larger unobserved determinant of
export revenue. How to fix this problem depends on the researcher’s assumptions about the
firm’s information. When the researcher assumes she observes all variables that enter the firm’s
information set—i.e. Wijt is equal to a vector Zijt —Heckman (1979) provides a procedure to
recover the parameters of both the revenue equation and the equation for the entry decision.
If the researcher instead assumes only that the vector of observed covariates Zijt is a subset of
exporters’ true information sets Wijt , we show in Appendix A.7 how to extend the estimation
procedure in Section 4.2 to obtain bounds for the parameters in both equations.

4.1   Perfect Knowledge of Exporters’ Information Sets
Under the assumption that the econometrician’s observed vector of covariates Zijt equals the
firm’s information set,   E[rijt |Zijt ] is a perfect proxy for E[rijt |Wijt ] and one can identify θ as




                                                  13
the value of the unknown parameter γ that maximizes a standard log-likelihood function

                                               L(γ|d, Z, dist) =
          hX                                                                                   i
       E
                                                    
                   dijt log P(djt = 1|Zijt , distj ) + (1 − dijt ) log P(djt = 0|Zijt , distj ) ,          (14)
             j,t


where the expectation is taken over individuals in the population, Zijt is the assumed infor-
mation set of firm i when it decides whether to export to j at t, and

                     P(djt = 1|Zijt , distj ) = Φ γ2−1 η −1 E[rijt |Zijt ] − γ0 − γ1 distj
                                                                                                
                                                                                                           (15)

The vector γ = (γ0 , γ1 , γ2 ) denotes an unknown parameter vector whose true value is θ =
(β0 , β1 , σ).20
    The key assumption underlying this procedure is that the researcher correctly specifies the
agent’s information set. When the researcher’s choice of information set, Zijt , is incorrect—
that is, when   E[rijt |Wijt ] 6= E[rijt |Zijt ]—then the estimator of θ under this procedure will be
biased. We denote the difference between the two revenue projections as ξijt : E[rijt |Zijt ] =
E[rijt |Wijt ] + ξijt . In this case, one can identify θ as the parameter that maximizes the
likelihood function in equation (14) but with

                                               P(dijt = 1|Zijt , distj ) =
                      Z
                            1{η−1 E[rijt |Zijt ] − γ0 − γ1 distj − ν̃ ≥ 0}f (ν̃|Zijt , distj )dν̃,         (16)
                       ν̃

where ν̃ = η −1 ξ + ν and f (ν̃|Z, dist) denotes the density of η −1 ξ + ν conditional on Z and
dist. When comparing equation (15) to equation (16), it is clear that wrongly assuming that
E[rijt |Wijt ] = E[rijt |Zijt ] will generate biased estimates of θ unless f (ν̃|Z, dist) is normal with
mean zero and variance σν2 . This is true only when ξijt = 0 for every firm i, destination j
and period t. The direction of the bias for each element of θ depends on the shape of the
distribution of η −1 ξ + ν conditional on Z and dist.
    Biased estimates of the structural parameter of interest θ will translate into biased esti-
mates of fixed export costs and into incorrect predictions of the effect of the counterfactual
changes in the environment. We show in Section 5 that wrongly assuming a specific infor-
mation sets generates an upward bias in the estimated fixed export costs. We provide some
intuition for the direction of the bias here.
    Take, for example, the case in which researchers assume perfect foresight. Under per-
fect foresight, rijt =         E[rijt |Wijt ]. Yatchew and Griliches (1985) provide an analytical form
  20
     In order to use the expressions in equations (14) and (15) to estimate the θ, one first needs to estimate
the function E[rijt |Zijt ]. See Manski (1991) and Ahn and Manski (1993) for additional details on this two-step
estimation approach.


                                                           14
for the bias under a particular distribution for the error between the true expectations
and the researcher’s assumption. Specifically, if firms’ true expectations are normally dis-
tributed,    E[rijt |Wijt ] ∼ N(0, σe2 ), and the expectational error is also normally distributed,
ξijt |(Wijt , νij ) ∼ N(0, σξ2 ), there is an upward bias in the estimates of the fixed costs pa-
rameters β0 , β1 and σ. The upward bias increases in the variance of the expectational error
σξ2 relative to the variance of the true unobserved expectations σe2 . That is, the worse the
researcher’s proxy for the true expectations, the greater the bias.
       When either firms’ true expectations or the expectational error are not normally dis-
tributed, there is no analytic expression for the bias of the maximum likelihood estimator of
θ. However, we present simulations in Appendix A.2 to show that the upward bias appears
fairly general. Assuming perfect foresight when firms’ expectations are actually imperfect
generates an upward bias in the estimates of β0 and β1 under many different distributions of
firms’ true expectations and expectational error. This upward bias in β0 and β1 translates
into an upward bias in the estimates of fixed export costs.21

4.2      Partial Knowledge of Exporters’ Information Sets
Finding a set of observed covariates that exactly correspond to agents’ unknown information
sets is, in most empirical applications, difficult. Conversely, it is usually quite simple to define
a smaller vector of observed covariates that is contained in such information sets. For example,
in each year, exporters will likely know past values of both their domestic sales, riht−1 , and
the aggregate exports from their home country to each destination market, Rjt−1 . The former
is a variable reported in firms’ accounting statements, and the latter is included in publicly
available trade data. Similarly, firms can also easily obtain information on the distance to
each destination country, distj , which might potentially affect both fixed and transport costs.
Therefore, while it may be unrealistic to assume that the agent’s information set is exactly
                                                2 = (r
identical to the vector of observed covariates Zijt   iht−1 , Rit−1 , distj ), for example, the
                 2 is contained in every potential exporters’ information set may well be
assumption that Zijt
  21
    The intuition for upward bias in the maximum likelihood estimates of β0 , β1 , and σ caused by wrongly
assuming perfect foresight shares the same basis as the well-known attenuation bias affecting OLS estimates in
linear models when a covariate is affected by classical measurement error (see page 73 in Wooldridge (2002)).
Rational expectations implies that firms’ expectational errors are mean independent of their unobserved true
expectation and, therefore, correlated with the ex-post realization of the variable whose expectation affects
firms’ decisions. In our setting, this implies that the expectational error is correlated with the realized export
revenues. Thus, if we were in a linear regression setting, wrongly assuming perfect foresight and using the ex-
post realized revenue, rijt , as a regressor instead of the unobserved expectation, E[rijt |Wijt ], would generate
a downward bias on the coefficient on rijt . The probit model in equation (15) differs from this linear setting
in two dimensions. First, we normalize the scale by setting the coefficient on the covariate measured with
error, E[rijt |Wijt ], to a given value. This implies that the bias generated by the correlation between the
expectational error, εijt , and the realized export revenue, rijt , will be reflected in an upward bias in the
estimates of the remaining parameters β0 , β1 and σ. Second, the direction of the bias depends not only on the
correlation between εijt and rijt but also on the functional form of the distribution of unobserved expectations
and expectational error.


                                                       15
accurate. In this section, we show that, given a vector of observed covariates Zijt that is
contained in the information set that every firm uses to forecast its gross export profits, i.e.
Zijt ⊂ Wijt , we can form moment inequalities that partially identify the parameters of the
firm’s entry decision. In the model described in Section 2, these parameters compose the
firm’s fixed costs of exporting.
    As we show in Appendix A.3, given the model described in Section 2, the assumption that
the researcher observes a subset of a firm’s true information set, i.e. Zijt ⊂ Wijt , is not strong
enough to point-identify the parameter vector θ. However, the assumption that researchers
partially observe firms’ information sets has enough power to identify a set that contains the
true value of the parameter, θ. We describe below two new types of moment inequalities that
define such a set.22
    In Section 5, we further show how one can use specification tests for partially identified
models (e.g. Andrews and Soares (2010)) to test the null hypothesis that the model defined in
Section 2, combined with different assumptions on the content of exporters’ information sets,
Wijt , is consistent with the data available to us. We test our main specification that presumes
 2 ∈ W . We also test two models that impose different informational assumptions. In the
Zijt  ijt
first, we add the productivity of other exporters to Zijt , and then test whether firms in fact
know their competitors’ productivities when deciding whether to export. In the second, we
test the perfect foresight assumption, under which rijt ∈ Wijt .

4.2.1    Odds-based moment inequalities

For any Zijt ⊂ Wijt , we define the conditional odds-based moment inequalities as
                                            "                                     #
                                                ml (dijt , rijt , distj ; γ)
                         M(Zijt ; γ) = E                                       Zijt ≥ 0,                   (17)
                                                mu (dijt , rijt , distj ; γ)

where the two moment functions are defined as

                                 1 − Φ γ2−1 η −1 rijt − γ0 − γ1 distj
                                                                      
                   ml (·) = dijt                                     − (1 − dijt ),                    (18a)
                                   Φ γ2−1 η −1 rijt − γ0 − γ1 distj
                                          Φ γ2−1 η −1 rijt − γ0 − γ1 distj
                                                                           
                   mu (·) = (1 − dijt )                                       − dijt .                 (18b)
                                        1 − Φ γ2−1 η −1 rijt − γ0 − γ1 distj

We denote the set of all possible values of the parameter vector γ as Γ. As in earlier sections,
                                                       
we denote the true parameter vector as θ = β0 , β1 , σ . The following theorem contains the
  22
     Whether the bounds defined by the moment inequalities in Sections 4.2.1 and 4.2.2 are sharp is left for
future research. However, as the results in Section 5 show, in our empirical application, they generate bounds
that are small enough to be informative on two dimensions. We can learn both about biases in the parameter
estimates that arise when misspecifying the agent’s information set and about the effect on export participation
and trade volume from counterfactual changes in the economic environment.



                                                        16
main property of the inequalities defined in equations (17), (18a) and (18b):

Theorem 1 For all θ ∈ Γ, M(Zijt ; θ) ≥ 0.

Theorem 1 indicates that the odds-based inequalities are consistent with the true value of the
parameter vector. A formal proof of Theorem 1 is in Appendix A.4. Briefly, the inequalities
arise because we do not observe the true expectation,                    E[rijt |Wijt ]. If we did, we could simply
take the first order condition of the likelihood function conditional on Wijt . Its expectation
should be equal to zero at the true value of the parameter vector:
                                                                                                
                             1−Φ(σ −1 (η −1 rijt −β0 −β1 distj −η −1 εijt ))
                       dijt                                                  − (1 − dijt )
                E            Φ(σ −1 (η −1 rijt −β0 −β1 distj −η −1 εijt ))
                                      Φ(σ −1 (η −1 rijt −β0 −β1 distj −η −1 εijt ))
                                                                                             Zijt  = 0,      (19)
                       (1   − dijt ) 1−Φ(σ−1 (η−1 rijt −β0 −β1 distj −η−1 εijt )) − dijt

where here we replace         E[rijt |Wijt ] in the score function with the equivalent expression, rijt −
εijt . The score function looks identical to the inequalities in (18a) and (18b), but with the
εijt term included, where εijt is the expectational error firm i makes when forecasting the
potential revenue from exporting to j at t. In the proof in Appendix A.4, we show that
equation (17) is weakly larger than equation (19) and thus would be weakly larger than zero
when evaluated at the true value of the parameter vector. This result is a direct application
of Jensen’s inequality. We rely on two properties of the distributions of the errors to apply
Jensen’s inequality. First, the expectational error εijt has a mean equal to zero conditional on
the vector Zijt . This follows from the assumptions that firms have rational expectations and
Zijt ⊂ Wijt . Second, both 1 − Φ(·)/Φ(·) and Φ(·)/(1 − Φ(·)) are globally convex.23
       Even though both moment functions in equations (18a) and (18b) are derived from the
score function, they are not redundant. In order to gain intuition about the identifying power
of each of these moments, we can focus on identification of the parameter γ0 . Given observed
values of dijt , rijt , and distj , and given any arbitrary value of the parameters γ1 and γ2 , the
moment function ml (·) in equation (18a) is increasing in γ0 and, therefore, will identify a
lower bound on γ0 . With the same observed values, mu (·) in equation (18b) is decreasing in
γ0 and will identify an upper bound on γ0 . Therefore, both moments are necessary to bound
γ0 . The same intuition applies for identifying parameters γ1 and γ2 .
       In the particular case in which agents’ expectations are perfect (i.e. εijt = 0) and the
vector of instruments Zijt includes all variables that agents use to predict either the ex post
profits or the fixed export costs, i.e. Zijt = Wijt , the set Θ is a singleton and identical to the
true value of the parameter vector, θ. The size of the set Θ increases monotonically in the
  23
    The assumption of normality of the structural error term is not necessary for the existence of odds-based
inequalities. As long as the distribution of the structural error ν is log-concave, inequalities analogous to those
in equation (18), with the correct cumulative distribution function Fν (·) instead of the normal cumulative
distribution function Φ(·), will also satisfy Theorem 1. The explanation of this result is that, for any log-
concave distribution, both Fν (·)/(1 − Fν (·)) and (1 − Fν (·))/Fν (·) are globally convex.



                                                             17
variance of the expectational error. That is, as the variance of the difference between firms’
expected revenues     E[rijt |Wijt ] and the ex post realization of such revenues rijt grows, so does
the size of Θ .

4.2.2       Revealed preference moment inequalities

For any Zijt ⊂ Wijt , we define the conditional revealed preference moment inequality as
                                            "                                      #
                                                mrl (dijt , rijt , distj ; γ)
                        M (Zijt ; γ) = E
                            r
                                                                                Zijt ≥ 0,                  (20)
                                                mru (dijt , rijt , distj ; γ)

where the two moment functions are defined as

                                                         φ γ2−1 (η −1 rijt − γ0 − γ1 distj )
                                                                                            
                            −1
  mrl (·)
                                                      
         = −(1 − dijt ) η rijt − γ0 − γ1 distj + dijt γ2                                      , (21a)
                                                         Φ γ2−1 (η −1 rijt − γ0 − γ1 distj )
                                                         φ γ2−1 (η −1 rijt − γ0 − γ1 distj )
                                                                                             
   r             −1
                                      
  mu (·) = dijt η rijt − γ0 − γ1 distj + (1 − dijt )γ2                                          .
                                                       1 − Φ γ2−1 (η −1 rijt − γ0 − γ1 distj )
                                                                                                  (21b)

 We again denote the set of all possible values of the unknown parameter vector γ as Γ, and the
                                          
true parameter vector as θ = β0 , β1 , σ . The following theorem contains the main property
of the inequalities defined in equations (20), (21a) and (21b):

Theorem 2 For all θ ∈ Γ, Mr (Zijt ; θ) ≥ 0.

We provide a formal proof of Theorem 2 in Appendix A.5. Theorem 2 indicates that the
revealed preference inequalities are consistent with the true value of the parameter vector, θ.24
In general, the set of parameter values that satisfies both the revealed preference inequalities
and the odds-based inequalities will contain values of the parameter vector γ other than the
true parameter, θ. However, as we show in our empirical application in Section 5, the set
of parameter values that are consistent both with the odds-based and revealed preference
inequalities is small enough to allow us to draw economically meaningful conclusions.
       Heuristically, the two moment functions in equations (21a) and (21b) are derived using
standard revealed preference arguments. We focus our discussion on moment function (21b);
the intuition behind the derivation of moment (21a) is analogous. If firm i decides to export
to j in period t, so that dijt = 1, then by revealed preference, it must expect to earn positive
returns; i.e. dijt η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj − νijt ≥ 0. Taking the expectation of this
                                                             

  24
     The assumption of normality of the structural error term is sufficient but not necessary for the existence
of revealed preference inequalities analogous to those in equations (20), (21a) and (21b) that correctly bound
the true parameter vector. As long as the distribution of the structural error ν is such that both fν (·)/Fν (·)
and fν (·)/(1 − Fν (·)) are globally convex, we may write inequalities that also satisfy Theorem 2. For example,
in addition to the normal distribution, the type I extreme value distribution also satisfies this property.


                                                          18
inequality conditional on (dijt , Wijt ), we obtain

                             dijt η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj + Sijt ≥ 0,
                                                                     
                                                                                                              (22)

where Sijt =      E[−dijt νijt |dijt , Wijt ]. The term Sijt is a selection correction and accounts for
the fact that firms might decide whether to export to j at t based partly on determinants of
profits that are not observed by the researcher, including the term νijt in the model described
in Section 2.25 We cannot directly use the inequality in equation (22) because it depends on
the unobserved agents’ expectations,                E[rijt |Wijt ], both directly and through the term Sijt .
However, the inequality in equation (22) becomes weaker if we introduce the observed ex-post
profits, rijt , in the place of the unobserved expectations                 E[rijt |Wijt ] and take the expectation
of the resulting expression. Similar to the odds-based inequalities, we then apply Jensen’s
inequality and conclude that the inequalities in equations (20) and (21b) hold at the true
value of the parameter vector. Again, to apply Jensen’s inequality, we rely on two conditions.
First, the difference between the unobserved true firms’ expectations and the realized revenues
has mean equal to zero conditional on the vector Wijt . Second, φ(·)/Φ(·) and φ(·)/(1 − Φ(·))
are globally convex .
       The moment functions in equations (21a) and (21b) follow the revealed preference inequal-
ities introduced in Pakes (2010) and Pakes et al. (2015), and previously applied in Eizenberg
(2014) and Morales et al. (2015). We apply the inequalities to a setting with a specific error
structure not present in previous empirical examples. The novelty of the revealed preference
moment inequalities introduced in equations (20) and (21) is that they allow for structural
errors νijt that may vary across i, j and t and that might have unbounded support. The cost
of allowing for this flexibility is that we need to assume the distribution of νijt , up to a scale
parameter. In addition, the inequalities we define only apply to binary choice problems.26
       The distribution of νijt affects the functional form of the selection correction term, Sijt .
In our empirical application, we find σ > 0. Therefore, accounting for the selection correction
term Sijt in our empirical application is important. Given that Sijt ≥ 0 whenever σ > 0, if we
had generated revealed preference inequalities without the term Sijt , we would have obtained
weakly smaller identified sets than those found using the revealed preference inequalities in
equations (20) and (21).
  25
       Appendix A.5 shows that, under the assumptions in Section 2,

                                                  φ σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )
                                                                                               
                          Sijt = (1 − dijt )σ
                                                1 − Φ σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )
                                                                                                  

  26
    It is an open question whether the odds-based and revealed preference inequalities introduced in Sections
4.2.1 and 4.2.2 could be extended to discrete choice problems in which the choice set contains three or more
elements. We leave this for future research.




                                                             19
4.2.3      Combining inequalities for estimation

For our estimation approach, we combine the odds-based and revealed preference moment
inequalities described in equations (17) and (20). As indicated in Section 4.2.1, the set de-
fined by the odds-based inequalities is a singleton only when firms make no expectational
errors and the vector of instruments Zijt is identical to the set of variables firms’ use to form
their expectations. In this very specific case, the revealed preference inequalities do not have
any additional identification power beyond that of the odds-based inequalities. However, in
all other settings, the revealed preference moments can provide additional identifying power
beyond that provided by the odds-based inequalities.27
       The set of inequalities we define in equations (17) and (20) condition on particular values of
the instrument vector, Z. In empirical applications in which at least one of the variables in the
vector Z is continuous, the sample analogue of these moment inequalities will likely involve
an average over very few observations (if any). Therefore, for estimation, it is necessary
to work with unconditional moment inequalities. Andrews and Shi (2013) and Armstrong
(2015) define unconditional moments that imply no loss of information with respect to their
conditional counterpart. We describe in Appendix A.6 the exact unconditional moments that
we use to compute the estimates presented in Section 5.

4.3       Deriving bounds on choice probabilities
As Sections 4.2.1 and 4.2.2 show, we can set identify and estimate the structural parameter
vector, θ, without the need to fully specify and observe agents’ information sets. However, in
addition to measuring export fixed costs, another key motivation for estimating export entry
models is to predict export participation and trade volume in counterfactual environments.
In this section, we show that one can perform these counterfactual exercises without imposing
additional assumptions beyond those needed to define the odds-based and revealed preference
inequalities.
       We derive bounds on the probability that a firm exports to each market. Choice proba-
bilities are not point identified in our setting for two reasons. First, even if we were to know
the true value of the parameter vector, θ, we only observe a subset Zijt of the variables in the
true information set firms use to predict export revenues. Thus, we cannot compute firms’
unobserved expectations,       E[rijt |Wijt ], exactly and therefore cannot compute the export prob-
abilities in equation (13). Second, we do not recover the true value of the parameter vector θ
in our estimation, but only a set that includes it. As the following theorem shows, under these
circumstances we may still derive bounds on the expected probability that firm i exports to
  27
     How the identified sets defined by each type of inequality compare in size is difficult to characterize gen-
erally. We show in simulations—available upon request—that there are cases in which the revealed preference
inequalities have additional identification power beyond that of the odds-based inequalities.



                                                       20
country j at period t, conditional on Zijt . Here, Θall represents the set of parameter vectors
that satisfy all of the inequalities—both the revealed preference and odds-based inequalities.

Theorem 3 Suppose Zijt ∈ Wijt and define P(Zijt ) =                   E[Pijt |Zijt ], with Pijt defined in
equation (13). Then,

                                    Pl (Zijt ) ≤ P(Zijt ) ≤ Pu (Zijt ),                              (23)

where

                                                             1
                                   Pl (Zijt ) = min                     ,                            (24)
                                               γ∈Θall 1 + Bl (Zijt ; γ)
                                                        Bu (Zijt ; γ)
                                   Pu (Zijt ) = max                      .                           (25)
                                               γ∈Θall 1 + Bu (Zijt ; γ)


and

                                        1 − Φ γ2−1 η −1 rijt − γ0 − γ1 distj
                                                                                 
                     Bl (Zijt ; γ) = E                                      Zijt ,                 (26)
                                          Φ γ2−1 η −1 rijt − γ0 − γ1 distj
                                          Φ γ2−1 η −1 rijt − γ0 − γ1 distj
                                                                                 
                     Bu (Zijt ; γ) = E                                        Zijt .               (27)
                                        1 − Φ γ2−1 η −1 rijt − γ0 − γ1 distj



The proof of Theorem 3 is in the Appendix A.8. We highlight two features of these bounds.
First, as described above, even if we were to know the true value of the parameter vector, θ,
then would still find bounds on the probability of exporting, P(Zijt ):

                                    1                         Bu (Zijt ; θ)
                                               ≤ P(Zijt ) ≤                   .
                             1 + Bl (Zijt ; θ)              1 + Bu (Zijt ; θ)

Second, equation (23) defines bounds on export probabilities conditional on a particular value
of the instrument vector Zijt . However, using equation (23) we may also define bounds on the
expected export probability for any subset of firms defined by a particular set Z of values of
the instrument vector Zijt as

              Pl (Zijt )1{Zijt ∈ Z} ≤         P(Zijt )1{Zijt ∈ Z} ≤         Pu (Zijt )1{Zijt ∈ Z}.
        X                               X                             X
                                                                                                     (28)
        ijt                             ijt                           ijt


For example, if we define the Z to be a dummy variable selecting a particular country j ∗ and
year t∗ , Z =     1{j = j ∗ , t = t∗ } equation (28) will yield bounds on the expected number of
exporters to country j ∗ in year t∗ . In Section 5.1, we use the bounds in equation (28) to test
the fit of the model for different countries and years. We show in Appendix A.9 how to use
equation (28) to compute bounds for the counterfactual scenario described in Sections 2.5.

                                                      21
5     Results
We estimate the parameters of exporters’ participation decisions using the three different
empirical approaches discussed in Section 4.1 and 4.2. First, we use maximum likelihood
to estimate the components of the exporter’s fixed costs of serving a foreign market under
perfect foresight: we assume the firm perfectly predicts the level of revenue it will earn upon
entry. Second, we again use maximum likelihood methods, but under the two-step procedure
described in Willis and Rosen (1979), Manski (1991) and Ahn and Manski (1993) in which
we project realized revenues on the set of observable covariates that we assume compose a
                                                                                             2
firm’s information set. In practice, we include the three variables described as the vector Zijt
in Section 4.1: (a) the total aggregate exports from Chile to the destination country in the
prior year, (b) the distance from Chile to the destination country, j, and (c) the firm’s own
domestic sales from the previous year. Finally, third, we carry out our moment inequality
approach. For comparison purposes, we assume the firm knows the same three variables
as in the two-step approach. However, unlike the two-step approach, the inequalities allow
additional unobserved variables to enter the firm’s true information set, and these variables
may vary idiosyncratically by firm, market, and time period.
    We first discuss the parameter estimates and illustrate the baseline predictions of the
models in comparison to the data. We then explore the robustness of our moment inequality
estimator.

5.1   Estimates and predicted exports
In Table 2, we report the estimates and the confidence regions for the parameters of our entry
model. The first coefficient, σ, represents the variance of the probit structural error affecting
the fixed export costs. The remaining coefficients represent a constant component and the
contribution of distance to the level of the fixed costs. We normalize the demand elasticity
of substitution, η, to equal five. From the raw coefficients, it is clear that the estimates from
models that require full knowledge of the exporter’s information sets produce much larger fixed
export costs than does our moment inequality approach. For example, consider the coefficient
on the distance variable in models estimated using data from the chemicals sector. Under the
moment inequality approach, the set of parameter values that satisfy the moments imply an
added cost of $428,000 to $479,000 when the export destination is 10,000 kilometers farther
in distance. Under the two maximum likelihood procedures, the estimates of the added cost
equal $1,180,000 and $812,000 for the same added distance.
    We translate these coefficients into an estimate of the fixed costs of exporting by country
and, for clarity of exposition, report the results in Table 3 for three countries out of the 22
destinations in the chemicals sector and 34 countries in the food sector used in our estimation.
We focus on Argentina, Japan, and the United States. Total exports to these countries account


                                               22
                                       Table 2: Parameter estimates
                                        Chemicals                                             Food
    Estimator               σ              β0                 β1               σ               β0               β1
 Perfect Foresight       1074.0            760.9           1180.1           2039.2           2675.4            266.4
      (MLE)               (46.7)          (36.7)           (53.2)           (71.6)           (96.1)           (23.6)
   Limited Info.          701.9            502.2            812.3           1567.8           2087.2            198.1
      (MLE)               (24.3)          (20.2)           (30.0)           (48.4)           (65.7)           (18.1)
                      [311.7, 341.0] [218.3, 245.8] [428.3, 479.0] [247.7, 264.9] [332.9, 380.1] [143.7, 173.4]
Moment Inequality     (178.6, 465.1)   (121.1, 316.3)   (237.1, 651.2)   (219.2, 307.7)   (283.8, 473.8)   (108.6, 191.9)
Notes: All variables are reported in thousands of year 2000 USD. For the two ML estimators, standard errors are
reported in parentheses. For the moment inequality estimates, extreme points of the identified set are reported in
square brackets and extreme points of the confidence set are reported in parentheses. Confidence sets are computed
using Andrews and Soares (2010).



for 29% of total exports of the Chilean chemicals sector and 56% of the food sector in the
sample period. In addition, these three nations span a wide range of possible distances to
Chile and thus provide a good illustration of how export participation and volume relate to
different fixed export costs.
   Under perfect foresight, we estimate the fixed costs in these three countries in the chem-
icals sector to equal $894,000, $2.80 million, and $1.74 million respectively. Comparing the
estimates under perfect foresight to the estimates from the two-step procedure, the latter
produces entry cost estimates that are about 1/3 smaller in the chemicals sector. In the food
sector, the fixed cost estimates under perfect foresight equal $2.71 million, $3.13 million, and
$2.90 million when exporting to Argentina, Japan, and the United States, respectively. The
two-step procedure finds entry costs in the three countries that are about 20% smaller than
the estimates under perfect foresight.
   Under our moment inequality estimator, we find estimates of the fixed costs of exporting
in the chemicals sector between $270,000 and $298,000 for Argentina, $978,000 and $1.06
million for Japan, and $592,000 and $632,000 for the United States. Across Argentina, Japan,
and the US, the estimated bounds we find from the inequalities equal only a fraction of
the perfect foresight estimates, with a level between 60% and 70% smaller than the perfect
foresight values. The results are similar in the food sector: the fixed cost estimates from
the moment inequality models are 80-85% smaller than the fixed cost estimates from perfect
foresight. Comparing the bounds of the fixed costs from the inequalities to the estimates from
the two-step approach, reported in Table 3, again the bounds are much smaller; the estimates
of the fixed costs from the inequality approach are 50% smaller than those estimated under
the two-step approach in the chemicals sector and about 75% smaller in the food sector. The
results are in line with the discussion in Section 4.1 of the bias that arises if the researcher
incorrectly assumes firms have perfect foresight. Here, we observe that specifying a specific
and limited information set also appears to generate an upward bias in the estimates of the



                                                         23
fixed costs.

                                        Table 3: Export fixed costs
                                        Chemicals                                           Food
     Estimator         Argentina         Japan         United States     Argentina         Japan       United States
 Perfect Foresight        894.0           2796.2             1736.9        2705.4          3134.9          2895.7
      (MLE)              (242.3)          (708.6)            (438.7)       (543.5)         (612.1)         (566.6)
    Limited Info.         593.8           1903.1             1174.0        2109.5          2428.8          2251.0
       (MLE)             (109.2)          (315.9)            (190.9)       (328.6)         (363.7)         (336.9)
                  [270.0, 298.2] [977.6, 1062.0] [592.6, 632.0] [352.0, 397.5] [606.9, 645.1] [472.7, 507.2]
Moment Inequality (163.0, 385.8) (627.5, 1420.8) (408.8, 836.3) (304.2, 489.7) (552.2, 730.7) (430.0, 590.3)
Notes: All variables are reported in thousands of year 2000 USD. For the two ML estimators, standard errors are
reported in parentheses. For the moment inequality estimates, extreme points of the identified set are reported in
square brackets and extreme points of the confidence set are reported in parentheses. Confidence sets are computed
using the procedure described in Andrews and Soares (2010).



    Finally, in Table 4, we report the observed level of export participation in our three com-
parison countries in the final year of our data, 2005. Along with these observed values, we
report the predictions from the export model under perfect foresight, the two-step approach,
and from our inequalities. In part due to their high estimated levels of fixed costs and their
high coefficient on distance, both the perfect foresight model and the two-step approach under-
estimate the number of entrants per country in 2005 in both the food and chemicals sectors.
Interestingly, the predictions from these two approaches differ by country in the chemicals
sector. For the United States, the two-step approach predicts a larger number of exporters
than does the model that assumes perfect foresight. For Japan and Argentina, the perfect
foresight model predicts greater entry than does the two-step approach.
    For our inequality approach, the 95% confidence sets for the predicted number of exporters
in both the chemicals and food sectors for Argentina, Japan, and the United States generally
contain the observed number of exporters. The identified sets themselves also appear very close
to the observed number of exporters. In Table 4, the one exception is the predicted number
of exporters to the United States in the food sector. 48 firms chose to export, whereas the
model predicts that at least 78 would do so.


6     Counterfactuals
Beyond estimating the level of the fixed costs of exporting, we can use our estimates to conduct
counterfactual analyses. As introduced in Section 2.5, we simulate the effect of lowering the
fixed costs of exporting by 40%. We conduct the counterfactuals using only data from the
year 2005, and compare the predictions from both our moment inequality approach and from
the models that require the researcher to specify the exact set of covariates included in firms’
information sets. We report our counterfactual predictions in Table 5.


                                                        24
                                           Table 4: Goodness of fit
                                        Chemicals                                           Food
        Estimator       Argentina        Japan    United States         Argentina          Japan       United States
        Observed            46               5              24               22              52               48
  Perfect Foresight        41.00           2.41           15.69            21.96           25.99            39.13
       (MLE)               (0.44)         (0.60)          (1.52)           (0.20)          (2.29)           (2.73)
   Limited Info.           40.13           1.84           19.04            21.65           34.00            40.53
      (MLE)                (0.40)         (0.52)          (1.88)           (0.23)          (2.92)           (2.92)
                  [43.47, 45.53] [5.89, 5.99] [22.16, 22.64] [24.30, 29.41] [47.15, 49.35] [78.13, 81.30]
Moment Inequality (31.44, 52.27) (3.84, 11.99) (15.00, 30.86) (19.43, 32.70) (42.79, 52.94) (72.74, 84.69)
Notes: All variables are reported in thousands of year 2000 USD. For the two ML estimators, standard errors are
reported in parentheses. For the moment inequality estimates, all points in the identified set and confidence sets are
used to compute the counterfactual changes. The corresponding minimum and maximum predicted values obtained
using all parameter values contained in the identified set are reported in square brackets; the minimum and maximum
values obtained using all parameter values contained in the confidence set are reported in parentheses.



       We focus first on the predicted change in export participation and export volume under the
perfect foresight model and under the model that requires the researcher to specify the firm’s
complete information set. Relative to the predictions from perfect foresight, the predicted
export participation and volume under the two-step approach are lower for Argentina and
Japan, but higher for the United States. That is, even when comparing the two approaches
that assume researchers observe firms’ information sets, the predictions for how a policy
will affect exports differs depending on the assumptions imposed on the content of these
information sets. Specifically, in the chemicals sector, we find the predicted change in export
participation to be 3% and 19.6% higher under the two-step approach in Argentina and Japan,
but is 11.8% lower under the two-step approach in the United States.28
       The moment inequality approach, which imposes weaker assumptions on the content of
firms’ information sets, produces smaller predictions of the effect of the policy relative to
either maximum likelihood approach. Specifically, the moment inequality estimator predicts
growth in export participation in the United States that is between 23.9 and 25.2% lower than
the perfect foresight prediction in the chemicals sector and between 51.7 and 53.7% lower in
the food sector. Relative to the estimate from the two-step approach, the predicted number
of exporters to the United States is between 13.8 and 15.3% lower in the chemicals sector and
between 50.6 and 52.7% lower in the food sector. These differences are large and likely to be
important for the evaluation of any export promotion policy.
       The differences across the predictions generated by the three alternative models are much
larger for countries that are far away from Chile (e.g. Japan and the United States) than
for countries that are close to Chile (e.g. Argentina). This distinction across countries in the
  28
    Even though these differences are sizable, the counterfactual predictions in Table 5 appear more robust to
alternative specifications of the exporters’ information sets than do the parameter estimates in Table 3. The
parameter estimates generated under the two different ML estimation approaches differed by approximately
30%.


                                                         25
                            Table 5: Impact of 40% Reduction in Fixed Costs
                                        Chemicals                                          Food
       Estimator        Argentina       Japan     United States         Argentina        Japan       United States
                                        % Change in Number of Exporters
 Perfect Foresight         50.3          578.7           157.5            127.9          118.4             80.7
      (MLE)                (0.4)        (129.9)          (14.0)            (0.6)          (9.8)           (6.0)
   Limited Info.           51.9          692.3           139.0            130.8           94.3             79.0
      (MLE)                (0.4)        (184.9)          (13.4)            (0.8)          (8.5)           (6.2)
                  [47.1, 50.5] [239.2, 239.5] [117.8, 119.8] [104.4, 124.1] [57.5, 60.1]               [37.3, 39.0]
Moment Inequality (42.5, 76.3) (146.4, 298.4) (93.3, 139.3)   (94.6, 150.6) (54.5, 66.3)               (35.9, 41.9)

                                         % Change in Volume of Exports
 Perfect Foresight         40.5          163.4            53.1            114.3           35.2             18.8
      (MLE)                (2.8)         (90.8)          (26.3)            (4.0)          (9.6)           (5.0)
   Limited Info.           42.9          192.3            40.5            112.4           22.9             18.9
      (MLE)                (2.9)        (172.3)          (17.3)            (5.5)          (6.3)           (5.3)
                  [22.0, 23.4]        [50.9, 51.1]    [26.9, 27.3]     [36.6, 43.7]     [8.5, 9.2]      [3.8, 4.1]
Moment Inequality (16.3, 27.0)        (36.8, 56.2)     (18.4, 34.0)    (31.1, 57.0)    (7.6, 10.8)      (3.5, 4.6)
Notes: All variables are reported in percentages. For the two ML estimators, standard errors are reported in parenthe-
ses. For the moment inequality estimates, all points in the identified set and confidence sets are used to compute the
counterfactual changes. The corresponding minimum and maximum predicted values obtained using all parameter
values contained in the identified set are reported in square brackets; the minimum and maximum values obtained
using all parameter values contained in the confidence set are reported in parentheses.



sensitivity of the predictions reflects two factors: (a) biases in the estimated contribution of
distance to total fixed costs matter less for predictions in countries close to Chile, and (b) both
the level of uncertainty in export revenues and the heterogeneity in this uncertainty across
exporters are likely to be smaller in countries that are very similar to the exporter’s domestic
markets.
      The estimates reveal substantive economic effects from a hypothetical export promotion
measure that reduces fixed export costs.29 Decreasing export costs by 40% leads to a large
increase in export participation in all three countries, particular in markets far from Chile. As
a percentage of the baseline level, the policy that causes fixed costs to fall 40% leads to a 22 to
23% increase in export volume to Argentina in the chemicals sector. The 95% confidence set
for this prediction suggests the increase may lie between 16 and 27%. In the food sector, the
effect on trade flows between Chile and Argentina is somewhat larger: the reduction in fixed
costs produces an increase in volume of between 37 and 44%, with a confidence set ranging
from 31 to 57%. We report the effects of the counterfactual policy on trade flows from Chile
to Japan and the United States in both the food and chemicals sectors in Table 5.
      Of course, the counterfactual predictions from our model do not account for the effect
that a reduction in the fixed export costs could have on factor prices in Chile, in the demand
level abroad, or in the degree of competition in destination markets. In this respect, they
 29
      See the references in Section 2.5 for examples of this kind of policy.



                                                         26
represent partial equilibrium effects, and might not capture the total effect of such changes in
the economic environment on the number of exporters or aggregate exports. Our predicted
changes, however, do illustrate the importance of a firm’s fixed costs of exporting on the
extensive margin of trade, which in turn affects the volume of trade. Our results also illustrate
how researchers’ assumptions on exporters’ expectations translate into distinct measurement
in policy counterfactuals. The relative precision in the moment inequality estimates also
illustrates that researchers can rely on weaker assumptions on firms’ information sets and
nonetheless provide policymakers meaningful counterfactual predictions.


7         What do Exporters Know?
In addition to estimating the fixed costs of exporting and conducting counterfactuals, we use
the moment inequalities introduced in Sections 4.2.1 and 4.2.2 to test the content of potential
exporters’ information sets. Specifically, conditional on the structure imposed by equations
(6) and (13), we can use the specification test suggested in Andrews and Soares (2010) to test
the assumption that a set of observed covariates is contained in the firm’s information set.30
         The intuition behind these specification tests is the following: given the structure imposed
by equations (6) and (13), if the vector of observed covariates Zijt we use to define the
odds-based and revealed preference inequalities are in the exporter’s information set, Wijt ,
Theorems 1 and 2 imply that the set of parameter values consistent with these inequalities
must be non-empty. If, in our finite sample, we find an empty set during estimation, there
may be two reasons: (a) the population moment inequalities also yield an empty identified set
and, consequently, at least one of the set of assumptions under which they are derived does
not hold in the population, or, (b) the set defined by the population moment inequalities is
non-empty but, due to sampling noise, its sample analogue is empty. The test suggested in
Andrews and Soares (2010) allows us to compute a p-value for the null hypothesis that the
identified set is nonempty.
         We run three tests of the information set. In the first, we test our main specification
of the moment inequalities that includes three covariates in the vector of instruments: the
aggregate exports from Chile to each destination market in the previous year, the distance to
each market, and the firm’s own domestic sales in the previous year. We fail to reject the null
that the model is correctly specified at conventional significance levels. Thus, we fail to reject
the null hypothesis that potential exporters know at least the three covariates when forming
expectations over export profits.
         In a second test, we re-run the same inequality model as in our main specification, but
we add an additional variable to the vector of instruments. In this specification we assume
    30
    Alternative specification tests for partially identified models defined by moment inequalities have been
provided in Romano and Shaikh (2008), Andrews and Guggenberger (2009), and Bugni et al. (2015).



                                                    27
firms also know the average productivity of other exporters to a market in the prior year.
When we include the four variables in the specification, we reject the model and the choice
of information set in both the food and chemicals sector. We find a p-value of 0.04 and 0.01
in the food and chemicals sectors, respectively. Restating, the specification test rejects the
model that includes the average productivity of other exporters to a country as an element of
the firms’ information set.31
    Finally, we run our moment inequality procedure under the assumption of perfect foresight.
We presume the firm knows precisely the revenue it will earn upon exporting to a particular
destination. We can reject, at conventional significance levels, that firms know their exact
future revenue when deciding whether to export. We find a p-value of 0.05 and 0.01 in the
chemicals and food sectors, respectively.


8     Conclusion
We study the extensive margin decision of firms to enter foreign export markets. This decision
to participate in export markets drives much of the variation in trade volume. Thus, to predict
how trade volume will adjust to changes in the economic environment, policymakers first need
a measure of the determinants of firms’ decisions to engage in exporting.
    In developing an empirical model of firms’ export decisions, however, researchers face
a data obstacle. The decision to export depends on firms’ expectations about the profits
they will earn from exporting, which researchers rarely observe. In the standard approach,
researchers specify a set of observable covariates that enter the exporters’ information sets.
We show that the precise specification of the information set matters both for the estimates
of structural parameters as well as for the model’s predictions of how firms will respond to
changes in trade costs. Specifically, we prove formally that the assumption that firms have
perfect foresight will bias fixed export costs upwards, and the size of this bias increases with
the degree of uncertainty that firms face at the time they decide whether to export.
    To handle firm’s unobserved expectations, we develop a new moment inequality approach
to estimate structural models of binary choice when the decision maker’s information set
is unknown. We recover the parameters of the firm’s export decision requiring only that
researchers specify a subset of variables included in exporters’ information sets. Our inequality
   31
      Many recent papers have put forward different micro-foundations for exporters’ information sets. As an
example, Dasgupta and Mondria (2014) introduce rationally inattentive importers that endogenously process
different amounts of information across different countries; Allen (2014) models the search process that exporters
follow to acquire information about prices in different markets; Albornoz et al. (2010) show evidence consistent
with exporters learning from their previous export experience; and Fernandes and Tang (2014) develop a model
in which firms update their beliefs about demand in foreign markets based on the number of neighbors exporting
to these destinations. These papers have implications for the relationship between exporters’ information sets
and variables beyond those studied in this paper. In ongoing research, we conduct a broader examination of
the set of variables different types of firms use in their decision to enter foreign markets.



                                                       28
estimator is consistent with exporters knowing more than what the researcher specifies. The
estimated fixed costs from our inequalities are between one third and one half the size of the
costs found using the approaches common in the earlier international trade literature. The
predictions in a counterfactual economic environment in which export fixed costs fall 40%
also differ substantially across alternative methods. The bounds we estimate for the effect of
this counterfactual on export participation and export volume are sufficiently tight to inform
policy.
   Finally, we show how to use a specification test of our inequality model to test alternative
assumptions on the content of the information sets firms use in their export decision—that is,
to test what exporters know. We reject a model that presumes firms possess perfect foresight.
We can also reject a model that presumes firms know their competitors’ past productivity
when deciding whether to export today.




                                             29
References
Ahn, Hyungtaik and Charles F. Manski, “Distribution Theory for the Analysis of Binary
 Choice under Uncertainty with Nonparametric Estimation of Expectations,” Journal of
 Econometrics, 1993, 56, 291–321. [2, 14, 22]
Albornoz, Facundo, Héctor F. Calvo Pardo, Gregory Corcos, and Emanuel Or-
 nelas, “Sequential Exporting,” Journal of International Economics, 2010, 88 (1), 1–24.
 [28]
Allen, Treb, “Information Frictions in Trade,” Econometrica, 2014, 82 (6), 2041–2083. [28]
Ameriks, John, Joseph Briggs, Andrew Caplin, Matthew D. Shapiro, and Christo-
 pher Tonetti, “Long-Term Care Insurance, Annuities, and the Under-Insurance Puzzle,”
 mimeo, February 2015. [4]
Andrews, Donald W.K. and Gustavo Soares, “Inference for Parameters Defined by
 Moment Inequalities Using Generalized Moment Selection,” Econometrica, 2010, 78, 119–
 157. [3, 16, 23, 24, 27]
   and Patrik Guggenberger, “Validity of Subsampling and Plug-in Asymptotic Inference
  for Parameters Defined by Moment Inequalities,” Econometric Theory, 2009, 25, 669–709.
  [3, 27]
   and Xiaoxia Shi, “Inference Based on Conditional Moment Inequalities,” Econometrica,
  2013, 81 (2), 609–666. [20]
Antràs, Pol, Teresa Fort, and Felix Tintelnot, “The Margins of Global Sourcing: Theory
 and Evidence from U.S.,” mimeo, December 2014. [1, 12]
Arkolakis, Costas, “Market Penetration Costs and the New Consumers Margin in Interna-
 tional Trade,” Journal of Political Economy, 2010, 118 (6), 1151–1199. [1, 12]
  , Natalia Ramondo, Andrés Rodrı́guez-Clare, and Stephen Yeaple, “Innovation
  and Production in the Global Economy,” mimeo, December 2014. [1]
  , Sharat Ganapati, and Marc-Andreas Muendler, “The Extensive Margin of Export-
  ing Goods: A Firm-level Analysis,” mimeo, September 2014. [4, 12]
Armstrong, Tim B., “Asymptotically Exact Inference in Conditional Moment Inequality
 Models,” Journal of Econometrics, 2015, 186 (1), 51–65. [20]
Aw, Bee Yan, Mark J. Roberts, and Daniel Yi Xu, “R&D Investment, Exporting, and
 Productivity Dynamics,” American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (4), 1312–1344. [4]
Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen J. Redding, and Peter K.
 Schott, “The Margins of US Trade,” American Economic Review, 2010, 99, 487–493. [1,
 4]
Biesebroeck, Johannes Van, Emily Yu, and Shenjie Chen, “The Impact of Trade
  Promotion Services on Canadian Exporter Performance,” Canadian Journal of Economics,
  2015, forthcoming. [9]

                                            30
Bilbiie, Florian, Fabio Ghironi, and Marc Melitz, “Endogenous Entry, Product Variety
  and Business Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 2012, 120 (2), 304–345. [4]

Broda, Christian and David E. Weinstein, “Globalization and the Gains from Variety,”
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2006, 121 (2), 541–585. [36]

Bugni, Federico A., Ivan A. Canay, and Xiaoxia Shi, “Alternative Specification Tests
 for Partially Identified Models Defined by Moment Inequalities,” Journal of Econometrics,
 2015, 185 (1), 259–282. [3, 27]

Cherkashin, Ivan, Svetlana Demidova, Hiau Looi Kee, and Kala Krishna, “Firm
 Heterogeneity and Costly Trade: A New Estimation Strategy and Policy Experiments,”
 Journal of International Economics, 2015, 96 (1), 18–36. [1]

Crawford, Gregory S. and Ali Yurukoglu, “The Welfare Effects of Bundling in Multi-
 channel Television Markets,” American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (2), 643–685. [2]

Cunha, Flavio and James J Heckman, “Identifying and Estimating the Distributions of
 Ex Post and Ex Ante Returns to Schooling,” Labour Economics, 2007, 14, 870–893. [1]

Das, Sanghamitra, Mark J. Roberts, and James R. Tybout, “Market Entry Costs,
 Producer Heterogeneity, and Export Dynamics,” Econometrica, 2007, 75 (3), 837–873. [1,
 2]

Dasgupta, Kunal and Jordi Mondria, “Inattentive Importers,” mimeo, August 2014. [28]

Department of Commerce, “A Profile of U.S. Importing and Exporting Companies, 2012-
 2013,” Department of Commerce, 2015. [1]

Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, and Francis Kramraz, “An Anatomy of Interna-
 tional Trade: Evidence from French Firms,” Econometrica, 2011, 79 (5), 1453–1498. [1,
 12]

Eizenberg, Alon, “Upstream Innovation and Product Variety in the U.S. Home PC Market,”
  Review of Economic Studies, 2014, 81, 1003–1045. [2, 19]

Feenstra, Robert C., “New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International Prices,”
  American Economic Review, 1994, 84 (1), 157–177. [36]

Fernandes, Ana and Heiwei Tang, “Learning to Export from Neighbors,” Journal of
  International Economics, 2014, 94 (1), 87–94. [28]

Freeman, Richard, The Market for College-Trained Manpower, Cambridge MA: Harvard
  University Press, 1971. [4]

Greenstone, Michael, Stephen Ryan, and Michael Yankovich, “The Value of a Statis-
 tical Life: Evidence from Military Retention Incentives and Occupation-Specific Mortality
 Hazards,” mimeo, April 2014. [4]

Head, Keith and Thierry Mayer, “Gravity Equations: Workhorse,Toolkit, and Cook-
 book,” in Gita Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman, and Kenneth Rogoff, eds., Vol.4 of Handbook
 of International Economics, Elsevier, 2014, pp. 131–195. [9]

                                           31
Heckman, James J., “Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error,” Econometrica, 1979,
 47 (1), 153–161. [13, 46]

Helpman, Elhanan, Marc Melitz, and Yona Rubinstein, “Estimating Trade Flows:
 Trading Partners and Trading Volumes,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2008, 123 (2),
 441–487. [1]

Ho, Katherine, “Insurer-Provider Networks in the Medical Care Market,” American Eco-
 nomic Review, 2009, 99 (1), 393–430. [2]

   and Ariel Pakes, “Hospital Choices, Hospital Prices, and Financial Incentives to Physi-
  cians,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (12), 3841–3884. [2]

Lederman, Daniel, Marcelo Olarreaga, and Lucy Payton, “Export Promotion Agencies
  Revisited,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, 2009, 5125. [9]

Manski, Charles F, “Nonparametric Estimation of Expectations in the Analysis of Discrete
 Choice Under Uncertainty,” in William Barnett, James Powell, and George Tauchen, eds.,
 Nonparametric and Semiparametric Methods in Econometrics and Statistics, Cambridge:
 Cambridge University Press, 1991. [2, 14, 22]

Manski, Charles F., “Adolescent econometricians: How do youth infer the returns to school-
 ing?,” in Charles Clotfelter and Michael Rothschild, eds., Studies of Supply and Demand in
 Higher Education, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993, pp. 43–60. [1, 12]

  , “Measuring Expectations,” Econometrica, 2004, 5 (9), 1329–1376. [1, 4]

   and David A. Wise, College Choice in America, Cambridge MA: Harvard University
  Press, 1983. [4]

Martincus, Christian Volpe and Jerónimo Carballo, “Is Export Promotion Effective
 in Developing Countries? Firm-Level Evidence on the Intensive and the Extensive Margins
 of Exports,” Journal of International Economics, 2008, 76 (1), 89–106. [9]

  ,  , and Pablo Garcá, “Entering New Country and Product Markets: Does Export
  Promotion Help?,” Review of World Economics, 2010, 146 (3), 437–467. [9]

Mayer, Thierry and Soledad Zignago, “Notes on CEPII’s Distances Measures,” mimeo,
 May 2006. [11]

Melitz, Marc, “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
 Productivity,” Econometrica, 2003, 71, 1695–1725. [1]

Morales, Eduardo, Gloria Sheu, and Andrés Zahler, “Extended Gravity,” mimeo,
 January 2015. [2, 19]

Moxnes, Andreas, “Are Sunk Costs in Exporting Country-Specific?,” Canadian Journal of
 Economics, 2010, 43 (2), 467–493. [1]

Pakes, Ariel, “Alternative Models for Moment Inequalities,” Econometrica, 2010, 78 (6),
 1783–1822. [2, 19]


                                            32
  , Jack R. Porter, Katherine Ho, and Joy Ishii, “Moment Inequalities and their
  Application,” Econometrica, 2015, 83 (1), 315–334. [2, 19]

Romano, Joseph P. and Azeem M. Shaikh, “Inference for Identifiable Parameters in
 Partially Identified Econometric Models,” Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference,
 2008, 138 (9), 2786–2807. [3, 27]

Ruhl, Kim J. and Jonathan L. Willis, “New Exporter Dynamics,” mimeo, July 2014. [1]

Simonovska, Ina and Michael Waugh, “The Elasticity of Trade: Estimates and Evi-
  dence,” Journal of International Economics, 2014, 92 (1), 34–50. [9]

Willis, Robert J. and Sherwin Rosen, “Education and Self-Selection,” Journal of Political
 Economy, 1979, 87 (5), 7–36. [2, 4, 22]

Wollman, Thomas G., “Trucks Without Bailouts: Equilibrium Product Characteristics for
 Commercial Vehicles,” mimeo, November 2014. [2]

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M., Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, Cam-
 bridge MA: MIT Press, 2002. [15]

Yatchew, Adonis and Zvi Griliches, “Specification Error in Probit Models,” The Review
 of Economics and Statistics, 1985, 67 (1), 134–139. [14, 35]




                                           33
Appendix
A.1      Proxy for export revenue: Details
We describe here how we can combine the structure introduced in Sections 2.1 and 2.2 with data on (i) aggregate
exports from h to j in t, Rjt ; (ii) domestic sales for every active firm, {riht ; i = 1, . . . , Nt }; and, (iii) the set of
exporting firms, {dijt ; i = 1, . . . , Nt }, to define a perfect proxy for the export revenue that firm i would obtain
in country j if it were to export to it in year t.
    Given the expression for firm i’s potential export revenue in j in equation (5), aggregating rijt across all
firms located in country h that export to country j, we can write the aggregate exports from h to j in t as
                                               Nt                                           1−η
                                               X                              η τjt ct
                                      Rjt =           dijt rijt di =                                Yjt Vjt ,                 (29)
                                                i=1
                                                                            η − 1 Pjt

where Vjt is defined as
                                                                 Nt
                                                                 X            (1−η)
                                                       Vjt =           dijt ait        di.                                    (30)
                                                                 i=1

Note that Vjt is the sum of the inverse physical productivity terms ait (to the power of an exponent that
depends on the demand elasticity η) across all firms that export to the destination country j in year t. We can
therefore proxy for all the country-specific covariates in equation (5) by (Rjt /Vjt ) and rewrite rijt as
                                                                        (1−η)
                                                                      ait
                                                          rijt =            Rjt .                                             (31)
                                                                        Vjt
             (1−η)
The term ait     /Vjt is the unobserved firm-specific inverse physical productivity of firm i, ait , relative to the
sum of these physical productivities for all firms exporting to country j, Vjt . In order to proxy for this term,
we use information on the domestic revenue of every firm i = 1, . . . , Nt .
    From equation (5), in the case in which j = h and under the assumption that there are no domestic
transport costs, τiht = 1 for every firm i, it holds that:
                                                               1−η
                                                       η ait ct
                                            riht =                   Yht ,                                      (32)
                                                     η − 1 Pht

and, therefore, for any two firms i and i0 , we can write

                                                             a1−η
                                                              it    riht
                                                                  =         .                                                 (33)
                                                             a1−η
                                                               0
                                                              i t
                                                                    r i0 ht


Using this expression, we can rewrite the first term in equation (31) as
                        (1−η)
                       ait            1                           1                                       1
                                =    Vjt
                                              =                         (1−η)         = PNt                              .   (34)
                         Vjt
                                                                 
                                                  PNt             ast                              d sjt (r sht /riht )ds
                                                      s=1 dsjt                    ds
                                     (1−η)                                                     s=1
                                    ait                           ait


Plugging back this expression into equation (31), we obtain the expression for rijt in terms of observable
covariates in equation (6).

A.2      Bias in ML Estimates Under Perfect Foresight Assumption
In this section, we consider the bias generated by wrongly assuming perfect foresight in cases in which exporters
are uncertain about export profits upon entry. In order to do so, we consider a simplified version of the export
model described in Section 2. Specifically, assume that firm i decides whether to export to country j according
to the model

                                             dijt = 1{η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − νijt },




                                                                       34
where η −1 = β0 = 0.5, and νijt ∼ N(0, 2) and independent of any other covariate. This export participation
condition is identical to that in equation (8) except that we do not include distance as a covariate (i.e. we
assume β1 equals 0). Mimicking the estimation problem described in Section 4.1, we assume that the researcher
does not observe E[rij |Wij ] but only rij such that

                                                rij = E[rij |Wij ] + εij .

In Table A.1 below, for different distributions of the true unobserved expectations, E[rijt |Wijt ], and expecta-
tional error, εijt , we show the point estimates and standard errors that researchers would obtain if they were
to estimate η −1 and β0 under the assumption of perfect foresight. Under this assumption, we can estimate η −1
and β0 as the values of the unknown parameter vector (γ0 , γ1 ) that maximize a likelihood function that relies
on the individual likelihood
                                                          √
                                     P(dij = 1|rij ) = Φ(( 2)−1 (γ1 rij − γ2 )).

Note that this individual likelihood is normalized by scale using the correct variance of νijt . In the main text,
we normalize by scale by fixing η to a known value. The reason is that, when using actual data, the true value
of σ is unknown and external estimates of η are more reliable than those of σ. In this simulation, we decide to
normalize by σ purely for simplicity.


                                  Table A.1: Bias under Perfect Foresight

                    Model       Distribution of         Distribution of          η̂ −1          β̂0
                                  E[rij |Wij ]                εij
                      1             N(0, 1)                N(0, 0.25)          0.4706         0.4994
                                                                              (0.0014)       (0.0014)
                      2             N(0, 1)                 N(0, 0.5)          0.3960         0.4951
                                                                              (0.0013)       (0.0014)
                      3             N(0, 1)                  N(0, 1)           0.2426         0.4865
                                                                              (0.0010)       (0.0013)
                      4                t2                       t2             0.1573         0.4584
                                                                              (0.0006)       (0.0014)
                      5                t5                       t5             0.2274         0.4773
                                                                              (0.0008)       (0.0014)
                      6                t20                      t20            0.2394         0.4865
                                                                              (0.0009)       (0.0013)
                      7                t50                      t50            0.2436         0.4872
                                                                              (0.0010)       (0.0013)
                      8        log-normal(0, 1)        log-normal(0, 1)        0.1705         0.5436
                                                                              (0.0006)       (0.0014)
                      9       −log-normal(0, 1)       −log-normal(0, 1)        0.1435         0.4767
                                                                              (0.0006)       (0.0013)
                    Notes: All estimates in this table are normalized by scale by setting var(νijt ) =
                    2. In order to estimate each of the models, we generate 1,000,000 observations
                                                  N                                      E
                    from the distribution νijt ∼ (0, 2) and from the distributions of [rijt |Wijt ],
                    and εijt described in columns 2 and 3. Whenever draws are generated from
                    the log-normal distribution, we re-center them at zero. The true parameter
                    values are η −1 = β0 = 0.5.


     The first three rows in Table A.1 are specific examples of the general model studied in Yatchew and Griliches
(1985). The results in columns 4 and 5 of Table A.1 show that there is downward bias in the estimate of η −1
and that the bias is larger as the variance of the expectational error, εijt , increases. This is consistent with the
analytical formula for the bias term in Yatchew and Griliches (1985). In rows 4 to 10, we explore departures
from the setting studied in Yatchew and Griliches (1985). Specifically, we depart from the assumption that
both the unobserved firms’ expectations and the expectational errors are normally distributed. In rows 4 to 7,
we depart from the normal distribution by choosing a distribution both for the unobserved expectations and
expectational errors that has fatter tails than the normal distribution. The downward bias in the estimate
of η −1 persists and it is larger the higher the dispersion in the distribution of unobserved expectations and
expectational errors. In rows 8 and 9, we depart from the normal distribution by choosing distributions


                                                           35
both for unobserved expectations and expectational errors that are asymmetric. Specifically, model 8 assumes
distributions that are positively skewed, and model 9 distributions that are negatively skewed. In all cases, the
estimate of η −1 is biased downwards.
     The estimates shown in Table A.1 condition on the normalization var(νij ) = 2. In practice, we never know
what the variance of the structural error is. However, standard models of international trade as that described
in Section 2 imply that the coefficient on the expected export revenues is equal to the inverse of the price
elasticity of demand, 1/η. Furthermore, the literature in international trade provides multiple estimates of this
price elasticity of demand (Feenstra, 1994; Broda and Weinstein, 2006), Accordingly, in Section 5 we choose η
as the normalizing constant. Given the choice of a particular constant k as the value of η −1 , we obtain rescaled
estimates of the entry cost coefficient by multiplying our estimates of the fixed cost parameter, β0 , by k/η̂1−1 .
Given that the true value of k in our simulations is 0.5, the upward bias in the fixed costs parameters is given
by the ratio

                                                          (0.5/η̂1−1 )β̂0 − 0.5
                                                                                .
                                                                   0.5
Table B.1 reports this number for the nine models described in Table A.1. The results show that assuming
perfect foresight implies that we over estimate export fixed costs in a magnitude that varies between 6% (for
the model in which the variance of the expectational error is minimal) and 219% (for a model in which the
distribution of the expectational error is not symmetric).


                                      Table B.1: Bias in Fixed Costs Estimates
                   Model        1        2         3         4           5          6        7          8          9
                    Bias       6%      25%      100%       191%      110%       103%       100%      219%       167%



A.3       Partial Identification: Example
The data are informative about the joint distribution of (dijt , Zijt , rijt ) across i, j, and t. Consistent with the
alternative vectors of instruments discussed in Section 4, we define Zijt such that distj ∈ Zijt . We denote
the joint distribution of the vector (dijt , Zijt , rijt ) as P(dijt , Zijt , rijt ). In this section, we use P(·) to denote
distributions that may be directly estimated given the available data on (dijt , Zijt , rijt ). For the sake of
                                     e
simplicity in the notation, we use rijt  to denote E[rijt |Wijt ]. Without loss of generality, we can write
                                                          Z
                                P(dijt , Zijt , rijt ) = f (dijt , Zijt , rijt , rijt
                                                                                    e     e
                                                                                       )drijt ,

where, for any vector (x1 , . . . , xK ), we use f (x1 , . . . , xK ) to denote the joint distribution of (x1 , . . . , xK ). Here,
we use f (·) to denote distributions that involve some variable that is not directly observable in the data, such
    e
as rijt . Using rules of conditional distributions, we can further write
                                      Z
              P(dijt , Zijt , rijt ) = f y (dijt |rijt
                                                   e
                                                       , rijt , Zijt )f y (rijt |rijt
                                                                                  e
                                                                                      , Zijt )f y (rijt
                                                                                                    e
                                                                                                        |Zijt )P(Zijt )drijt
                                                                                                                         e
                                                                                                                             , (35)

where we use P(Zijt ) to denote that the marginal distribution of Zijt is directly observable in the data. Any
structure S y ≡ {f y (dijt |rijt
                             e
                                 , rijt , Zijt ), f y (rijt |rijt
                                                              e
                                                                  , Zijt ), f y (rijt
                                                                                  e
                                                                                      |Zijt )} is admissible as long as it verifies the
restrictions imposed in Section 2 and equation (35). The model in Section 2 imposes the following restriction
on the elements of equation (35):

                                     f y (dijt |rijt
                                                 e                               e
                                                     , rijt , Zijt ) = f (dijt |rijt , Zijt ; γ y ) =
                                                        dijt
                                                                                                                  1−dijt
              Φ (γ2y )−1 η −1 rijt
                               e
                                   − γ0y − γ1y distj                1 − Φ (γ2y )−1 η −1 rijt  e
                                                                                                  − γ0y − γ1y distj           .   (36)

    Here, we show that γ is partially identified in a model that imposes restrictions that are stronger than
those in Section 2. This means that there exists at least two structures S y that imply different values of γ and
that verify equation (35) even after we impose additional restrictions to those implied by the model in Section



                                                                    36
2. Specifically, we impose the following additional restrictions on the elements of equation (35)

                       γ1 is known and equal to 0,                                                                                    (37a)
                       rijt =    e
                                rijt   + εijt ,                 e
                                                        εijt |(rijt , ξijt )    ∼N  (0, σε2 )                                         (37b)
                       Zijt =    e
                                rijt   + ξijt                  e
                                                        ξijt |rijt   ∼N                     e
                                                                          ((σξ /σre )ρξre (rijt   − µre ), (1 −   ρ2ξre )σξ2 )        (37c)
                        e
                       rijt   ∼ N(µ    re   , σr2e ).                                                                                 (37d)

 Equation (37a) restricts the model in Section 2 by assuming that distance does not affect fixed export costs.
Equation (37b) assumes that firms’ expectational error is normally distributed and independent of both firms’
unobserved expectations and the difference between the instrument and the unobserved expectations, ξijt .
                                                                                            e
By contrast, the model in Section 2 only imposes mean independence between εijt and rijt      . Equation (37c)
                                                                                                    e
imposes a particular assumption on the joint distribution of firms’ unobserved true expectations rijt  and the
subset of the variables used by firms to form those expectations that are observed to the researcher, Zijt . The
model in Section 2 does not impose any assumption on this relationship. Finally, equation (37d) imposes that
firms’ unobserved expectations are normally distributed; a distributional assumption that is not imposed in
the model in the main text. Therefore, it is clear that equation (37) defines a model that is more restrictive
than that defined in Section 2. However, as we show below, even after imposing the assumptions in equation
(37), we can still find at least two structures
                                                                            e
                                       S y1 ≡ {(γ0y1 , γ2y1 ), f y1 (rijt |rijt                  e
                                                                                , Zijt ), f y1 (rijt |Zijt )},
                                       S y2 ≡ {(γ0y2 , γ2y2 ), f y2 (rijt |rijt
                                                                            e
                                                                                , Zijt ), f y2 (rijt
                                                                                                 e
                                                                                                     |Zijt )},

that: (1) verify the restrictions in equations (36) and (37); (2) verify equation (35); and (3) γ y1 6= γ y2 . If γ is
partially identified in this stricter model, it will also be partially identified in the more general model described
in Section 2.
     Equation (37a) simplifies the identification exercise discussed here because the only parameters that are left
to identify are (γ0 , γ2 ); i.e. we can set γ1 = 0 in equation (36). Equation (37b) assumes that the expectational
error not only has mean zero and finite variance but is also normally distributed. This implies that the
                                 e
conditional density f (rijt |rijt  , Zijt ) is normal:

                                                                          1         h 1  r − r e 2 i
                                                 e                                         ijt    ijt
                                       f (rijt |rijt , Zijt ) =           √      exp −                 .
                                                                     σε       2π       2       σε
                                                                                                      e
By applying Bayes’ rule, both equations (37c) and (37d) jointly determine the conditional density f (rijt |Zijt )
entering equation (35).

Result A.3.1 There exists empirical distributions of the vector of observable variables (d, Z, X),                               P(d, Z, X),
such that there are at least two structures S y1 and S y2 for which
   1. both S y1 and S y2 verify equations (35), (36), and (37);
   2. γ y1 6= γ y2 .

This result can be proved by combining the following two lemmas.

                                                                                                 e
Lemma A.3.1 The parameter vector (γ0 , γ2 ) is point-identified only if the parameter σre = var(rijt ) is point-
identified.

               e           e                     e
Proof: Define rijt = σre r̃ijt , such that var(r̃ijt ) = 1. We can then rewrite equation (36) as
                                       σr e e     γ0 dijt             σre e     γ0 1−dijt
                                 Φ η −1     rijt −             1 − Φ η −1    rijt −             .
                                        γ2         γ2                     γ2        γ2
The parameter γ2 only enters likelihood function in equation (35) either dividing σre or dividing γ0 . Therefore,
we can only separately identify γ0 and γ2 if we know σre . 

Lemma A.3.2 The parameter vector σre is point-identified if and only if the parameter ρξre is assumed to be
equal to zero.


                                                                               37
Proof: From equations (37b), (37c) and (37d), we can conclude that rijt and Zijt are jointly normal. Therefore,
all the information arising from observing their joint distribution is summarized in three moments:

                                              σr2 = σr2e + σε2 ,
                                              σz2 = σr2e + σξ2 + 2ρξre σre σξ ,
                                             σrz = σr2e + ρξre σre σξ                                            (38)

The left hand side of these three equations is directly observed in the data. If we impose the assumption that
ρξre = 0, then σrz = σr2e and, therefore, from Lemma A.3.1, the vector γ is point identified. If we allow ρξre
to be different from zero, the system of equations in equation (39) only allows us to define bounds on σr2e . We
can rewrite the system of equations in equation (39) as

                                                 σr2 = σr2e + σε2 ,
                                                 σz2 = σr2e + σξ2 + 2σξre
                                                σrz = σr2e + σξre .                                              (39)

This is a linear system with 3 equations and 4 unknowns, (σr2e , σε2 , σw
                                                                        2
                                                                          , σξre ). Therefore, the system is underi-
dentified and does not have a unique solution for σr2e .

A.4     Proof of Theorem 1
For the sake of simplicity in the notation and consistent with the definition of potential exporters’ information
sets used earlier, in this section we assume that distj ∈ Wijt .

Lemma 1 Let L(dijt |Wijt ; θ) denote the log-likelihood conditional on Wijt . Suppose equation (13) holds. Then:

                                 1 − Φ(σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))
                                                                                                        
     ∂L(dijt |Wijt ; θ)
                        = E dijt                                                    − (1 − d ijt ) W ijt   = 0. (40)
           ∂θ                       Φ(σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))


Proof: It follows from the model in Section 2 that the log-likelihood conditional on Wijt can be written as

             L(dijt |Wijt ; θ) = E dijt log(1 − Φ(−σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )))
                                  h

                                                                                                         i
                                  + (1 − dijt ) log(Φ(−σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))) Wijt .

The score function is given by
                                                   ∂L(dijt |Wijt ; θ)
                                                                      =                                           (41)
                                                            ∂θ
                                                                           −1 −1
      
                                     1                         ∂(1 − Φ(−σ (η E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )))
    E dijt
            1 − Φ(−σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )                      ∂θ
                                                                     −1 −1
                                                                                                               
                                    1                         ∂Φ(−σ (η E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))
 +(1 − dijt )                                                                                            W ijt   = 0.
              Φ(−σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))                  ∂θ
Reordering terms

                                              ∂Φ(−σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))/∂θ
                                            
                    ∂L(dijt |Wijt ; θ)
                                       =E                                                              ×
                          ∂θ                    Φ(−σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))
                                       Φ(−σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))
                             
                               dijt                                                       ×
                                    1 − Φ(−σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))
                  ∂(1 − Φ(−σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )))/∂θ
                                                                                                      
                ×                                                            +  (1  −  d ijt )  |W ijt   = 0.    (42)
                     ∂Φ(−σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))/∂θ




                                                             38
Given that
                                      ∂Φ(−σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))/∂θ
                                        Φ(−σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))

is a function of Wijt and different from 0 for any value of the index σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ), and

                               ∂(1 − Φ(−σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )))/∂θ
                                                                                         = −1
                                  ∂Φ(−σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))/∂θ
we can simplify:

                                        Φ(−σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))
                                                                                                             
          ∂L(dijt |Wijt ; θ)
                             = E dijt                                                     − (1 − d ijt ) W ijt = 0.
                ∂θ                    1 − Φ(−σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))

Equation (40) follows by symmetry of the function Φ(·).               

Lemma 2 Suppose the assumptions in equations (9), (10), and (13) hold. Then

                                1 − Φ(σ −1 (η −1 rijt − β0 − β1 distj ))
                                                                              
                         E dijt                                          W ijt
                                  Φ(σ −1 (η −1 rijt − β0 − β1 distj ))
                                                                ≥
                                                 −1   −1
                                                                                              
                                        1 − Φ(σ (η E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))
                               E dijt                                                    W ijt  .                             (43)
                                          Φ(σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))


Proof: It follows from the definition of εijt as εijt = rijt − E[rijt |Wijt ] and the assumptions in equations (9)
and (10). From equations (2), (8) and the assumption that distj ∈ Wijt it follows that dijt may be written as
a function of the vector (Wijt , νijt ); i.e. dijt = d(Wijt , νijt ). Therefore, E[εijt |Wijt , dijt ] = 0. Since

                                                            1 − Φ(y)
                                                              Φ(y)

is convex for any value of y and E[εijt |Wijt , dijt ] = 0, by Jensen’s Inequality

                             1 − Φ(σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj + η −1 εijt ))
                                                                                                 
                      E dijt                                                                W ijt
                               Φ(σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ) + η −1 εijt )
                                                                ≥
                                                 −1   −1
                                                                                             
                                        1 − Φ(σ (η E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))
                               E dijt                                                    W ijt .
                                          Φ(σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))

Equation (43) follows from the equality η −1 rijt = η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] + η −1 εijt . 

Corollary 1 Suppose Zijt ∈ Wijt . Then:

                      1 − Φ(σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))
                                                                                           
               E dijt                                                    − (1 − dijt ) Zijt   = 0.                            (44)
                         Φ(σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))
and
          1 − Φ(σ −1 (η −1 rijt − β0 − β1 distj ))                     1 − Φ(σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))
                                                                                                                             
 E dijt                                            Z ijt   ≥ E   d ijt                                                    Z ijt   .
            Φ(σ −1 (η −1 rijt − β0 − β1 distj ))                         Φ(σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))
                                                                                                                              (45)


Proof: The result follow from Lemmas 1 and 2 and the application of the Law of Iterated Expectations. 

Lemma 3 Let L(dijt |Wijt ; θ) denote the log-likelihood conditional on Wijt . Suppose equation (13) holds. Then:

                                          Φ(σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))
                                                                                                       
     ∂L(dijt |Wijt ; θ)
                        = E (1 − dijt )                                                    − d ijt W ijt = 0. (46)
           ∂θ                           1 − Φ(σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))


                                                                39
Proof: From equation (41), reordering terms

                                ∂(1 − Φ(−σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )))/∂θ
                                                                                         
        ∂L(dijt |Wijt ; θ)
                           =E                                                               dijt + (1 − dijt )×
              ∂θ                   1 − Φ(−σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))
1 − Φ(−σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))  ∂Φ(−σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))/∂θ
                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                            W ijt   = 0.
  Φ(−σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )) ∂(1 − Φ(−σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )))/∂θ
Given that
                                 ∂(1 − Φ(−σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )))/∂θ
                                    1 − Φ(−σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))

is a function of Wijt and different from 0 for any value of the index σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ), and

                                ∂Φ(−σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))/∂θ
                                                                                       = −1
                             ∂(1 − Φ(−σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )))/∂θ
we can simplify:

                                            1 − Φ(−σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))
                                                                                                          
         ∂L(dijt |Wijt ; θ)
                            = E (1 − dijt )                                                     − dijt Wijt = 0.
               ∂θ                             Φ(−σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))

Equation (46) follows by symmetry of the function Φ(·).              

Lemma 4 Suppose the assumptions in equations (9), (10), and (13) hold. Then

                                       Φ(σ −1 (η −1 rijt − β0 − β1 distj ))
                                                                                  
                       E (1 − dijt )                                          Wijt
                                     1 − Φ(σ −1 (η −1 rijt − β0 − β1 distj ))
                                                               ≥
                                            Φ(σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))
                                                                                                  
                          E (1 − dijt )                                                      W ijt   .              (47)
                                          1 − Φ(σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))


Proof: It follows from the definition of εijt as εijt = rijt − E[rijt |Wijt ] and the assumptions in equations (9)
and (10). From equations (2), (8) and the assumption that distj ∈ Wijt it follows that dijt may be written as
a function of the vector (Wijt , νijt ); i.e. dijt = d(Wijt , νijt ). Therefore, E[εijt |Wijt , dijt ] = 0. Since

                                                             Φ(y)
                                                           1 − Φ(y)

is convex for any value of y and E[εijt |Wijt , dijt ] = 0, by Jensen’s Inequality

                               Φ(σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj + η −1 εijt ))
                                                                                                  
                      E dijt                                                                 W ijt
                             1 − Φ(σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ) + η −1 εijt )
                                                               ≥
                                             −1    −1
                                                                                              
                                        Φ(σ (η E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))
                             E dijt                                                      W ijt  .
                                      1 − Φ(σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))

Equation (47) follows from the equality η −1 rijt = η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] + η −1 εijt . 

Corollary 2 Suppose Zijt ∈ Wijt . Then:

                               Φ(σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))
                                                                                            
               E (1 − dijt )                                                    − d ijt Zijt   = 0.                 (48)
                             1 − Φ(σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))




                                                              40
and
                                                     Φ(σ −1 (η −1 rijt − β0 − β1 distj ))
                                                                                                  
                                 E (1 − dijt )                                              Zijt
                                                   1 − Φ(σ −1 (η −1 rijt − β0 − β1 distj ))
                                                                  ≥
                                                    −1   −1
                                                                                                   
                                              Φ(σ (η E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))
                            E (1 − dijt )                                                      Zijt   .                  (49)
                                            1 − Φ(σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))


Proof: The results follow from Lemmas 3 and 4 and the application of the Law of Iterated Expectations. 

Proof of Theorem 1 Combining equations (44) and (45), we obtain the inequality defined by equations
(17) and (18a). Combining equations (48) and (49), we obtain the inequality defined by equations (17) and
(18b). 

A.5      Proof of Theorem 2
For the sake of simplicity in the notation and consistent with the definition of potential exporters’ information
sets used earlier, in this section we assume that distj ∈ Wijt .

Lemma 5 Suppose equations (2) and (8) hold. Then,

                                 E[dijt η−1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj − νijt )|Wijt ] ≥ 0.                          (50)



Proof: From equations (2) and (8),

                                  dijt = 1{η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj − νijt ≥ 0}.

This implies

                                       dijt η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj − νijt ) ≥ 0.

This inequality holds for every firm i, country j, and year t. Therefore, it will also hold in expectation
conditional on Wijt . 

Lemma 6 Suppose equations (2), (3), and (8) hold. Then

                                                                   φ σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )
                                                                                                                
 E dijt η−1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj + (1 − dijt )σ
   h                                                                                                                   i
                                                                                                                   Wijt ≥ 0.
                                                                 1 − Φ σ (η E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )
                                                                         −1    −1

                                                                                                                          (51)


Proof: From equation (50),

                      E dijt η−1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj Wijt − E dijt νijt |Wijt ] ≥ 0.
                                                                            i     
                                                                                                                         (52)

Since the assumption in equation (3) implies that             E[νijt |Wijt ] = 0, it follows that
                                             E[dijt νijt + (1 − dijt )νijt |Wijt ] = 0,
and we can rewrite equation (52) as

                 E dijt η−1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj |Wijt ] + E (1 − dijt )νijt |Wijt ] ≥ 0.
                                                                    
                                                                                                                         (53)




                                                                 41
Applying the Law of Iterated Expectations, it follows that

     E (1 − dijt )νijt |Wijt ] = E E[(1 − dijt )νijt |dijt , Wijt ]|Wijt ] = E (1 − dijt )E[νijt |dijt , Wijt ]|Wijt ] =
                                                                            

          P (dijt = 1|Wijt ) × 0 × E[νijt |dijt = 1, Wijt ] + P (dijt = 0|Wijt ) × 1 × E[νijt |dijt = 0, Wijt ] =
                 P (dijt = 0|Wijt )E[νijt |dijt = 0, Wijt ] = E[(1 − dijt )|Wijt ]E[νijt |dijt = 0, Wijt ] =
                                       E (1 − dijt )E[νijt |dijt = 0, Wijt ]|Wijt ],
                                          

and we can rewrite equation (53) as

             E dijt η−1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj + (1 − dijt )E[νijt |dijt = 0, Wijt ]|Wijt ] ≥ 0.
                                                     
                                                                                                                           (54)

Using the definition of dijt in equation (8), it follows

                    E[νijt |dijt = 0, Wijt ] = E[νijt |(νijt ≥ η−1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ), Wijt ]
and, following equation (3), we can rewrite

                                                        φ σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )
                                                                                                     
                       E[νijt |dijt   = 0, Wijt ] = σ                                                   .
                                                      1 − Φ σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )

Equation (51) follows by applying this equality to equation (54). 

Lemma 7 Suppose the assumptions in equations (3) and (9) hold. Then

        E dijt η−1 rijt − β0 − β1 distj Wijt = E dijt η−1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj Wijt
          h                                i    h                                           i
                                                                                                                           (55)



Proof: From the definition of εijt as εijt = rijt − E[rijt |Wijt ],

                                   E dijt η−1 rijt − β0 − β1 distj Wijt =
                                     h                                i


                  E dijt η−1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj Wijt + E η−1 dijt εijt Wijt .
                     h                                             i h                i
                                                                                                                           (56)

From equations (3) and (9), E[εijt |Wijt , νijt ] = 0. From equations (2), (8) and the assumption that distj ∈ Jijt
it follows that dijt is a function of the vector (Wijt , νijt ); i.e. dijt = d(Wijt , νijt ). Therefore, E[εijt |Wijt , dijt ] =
0 and, applying the Law of Iterated Expectations,

              E η−1 dijt εijt Wijt = E η−1 dijt E εijt Wijt , dijt Wijt = E η−1 dijt × 0 Wijt = 0.
                                                                                                  

Applying this result to equation (56) yields equation (55).

Lemma 8 Suppose the assumptions in equation (9) and (3) hold. Then

                                                   φ σ −1 (η −1 rijt − β0 − β1 distj )
                                                                                      
                                E (1 − dijt )σ
                                 h                                                             i
                                                                                         Wijt
                                                         −1    −1
                                                 1 − Φ σ (η rijt − β0 − β1 distj )
                                                                ≥
                                              φ σ (η E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )
                                                   −1   −1
                                                                                      
                          E (1 − dijt )σ
                            h                                                                  i
                                                                                         Wijt                             (57)
                                            1 − Φ σ (η E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )
                                                   −1 −1




Proof: It follows from the definition of εijt as εijt = rijt − E[rijt |Wijt ] and the assumptions in equations (9)
and (3) that E[εijt |Wijt , νijt ] = 0. From equations (2), (8) and the assumption that distj ∈ Wijt it follows
that dijt is a function of the vector (Wijt , νijt ); i.e. dijt = d(Wijt , νijt ). Therefore, E[εijt |Wijt , dijt ] = 0. Since

                                                               φ(y)
                                                             1 − Φ(y)



                                                                42
is convex for any value of y and            E[εijt |Wijt , dijt ] = 0, by Jensen’s Inequality
                                              φ σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj + η −1 εijt )
                                                                                                       
                        E (1 − dijt )σ
                         h                                                                                       i
                                                                                                           Wijt
                                            1 − Φ σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj + η −1 εijt )
                                                                      ≥
                                                    φ σ (η E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )
                                                         −1    −1
                                                                                                
                             E
                                 h                                                                         i
                                     (1 − dijt )σ                                                    Wijt
                                                  1 − Φ σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )

Equation (57) follows from the equality η −1 rijt = η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] + η −1 εijt . 

Corollary 3 Suppose Zijt ∈ Wijt then

                                                                         φ σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )
                                                                                                                       
 E dijt η E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj
   h                                                                                                                           i
          −1                                        
                                                        + (1 − dijt )σ                                                    Zijt ≥ 0,
                                                                       1 − Φ σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )
                                                                                                                                 (58)


               E dijt η−1 rijt − β0 − β1 distj Wijt = E dijt η−1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj Zijt ,
                h                                              i      h                                            i
                                                                                                                                (59)

and
                                                          φ σ −1 (η −1 rijt − β0 − β1 distj )
                                                                                              
                                      E (1 − dijt )σ
                                        h                                                              i
                                                                                                 Zijt
                                                                −1    −1
                                                        1 − Φ σ (η rijt − β0 − β1 distj )
                                                                    ≥
                                                   φ σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )
                                                                                                 
                             E (1 − dijt )σ
                              h                                                                          i
                                                                                                    Zijt .                     (60)
                                                 1 − Φ σ (η E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )
                                                         −1    −1


Proof: The results follow from Lemmas 6, 7 and 8 and the application of the Law of Iterated Expectations.


Lemma 9 Suppose equations (2) and (8) hold. Then,

                             E[−(1 − dijt ) η−1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj − νijt )|Wijt ] ≥ 0.                             (61)



Proof: From equations (2) and (8),

                                        dijt = 1{η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj − νijt ≥ 0}.

This implies

                                       −(1 − dijt ) η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj − νijt ) ≥ 0.

This inequality holds for every firm i, country j, and year t. Therefore, it will also hold in expectation
conditional on Wijt . 

Lemma 10 Suppose equations (2), (3), and (8). Then

                                                                           φ σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )
                                                                                                                         
 E − (1 − dijt ) η−1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj + dijt σ
   h                                                                                                                          i
                                                                                                                          Wijt ≥ 0.
                                                                           Φ σ (η E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )
                                                                               −1    −1

                                                                                                                                 (62)


Proof: From equation (61),

                E − (1 − dijt ) η−1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj Wijt + E (1 − dijt )νijt Wijt ≥ 0.
                                                                                  i                          
                                                                                                                                (63)


                                                                      43
Since the assumption in equation (3) implies that            E[νijt |Wijt ] = 0, it follows that
                                              E[dijt νijt + (1 − dijt )νijt |Wijt ] = 0,
and we can rewrite equation (63) as

                         E dijt η−1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj Wijt − E dijt νijt Wijt ≥ 0.
                                                                            i                   
                                                                                                                           (64)

Applying the Law of Iterated Expectations, it follows that

             E dijt νijt Wijt = E E[dijt νijt |dijt , Jijt ] Wijt = E dijt E[νijt |dijt , Wijt ] Wijt =
                            i                                                                    

           P (dijt = 1|Wijt ) × 1 × E[νijt |dijt = 1, Wijt ] + P (dijt = 0|Wijt ) × 0 × E[νijt |dijt = 0, Wijt ] =
          = 1|Wijt )E[νijt |dijt = 1, Wijt ] = E[dijt |Wijt ]E[νijt |dijt = 1, Wijt ] = E dijt E[νijt |dijt = 1, Wijt ] Wijt ,
                                                                                                                           
P (dijt

and we can rewrite equation (64) as

           E − (1 − dijt ) η−1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj − dijt E[νijt |dijt = 1, Wijt ] Wijt ≥ 0.
                                                                                                
                                                                                                                           (65)

Using the definition of dijt in equation (8), it follows

                      E[νijt |dijt = 1, Wijt ] = E[νijt |νijt ≤ η−1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj , Wijt ]
and, following equation (3), we can rewrite

                                                         φ σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )
                                                                                                       
                         E[νijt |dijt   = 1, Wijt ] = −σ                                               .
                                                         Φ σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )

Equation (62) follows by applying this equality to equation (65). 

Lemma 11 Suppose the assumptions in equation (9) and (3) hold. Then

 E − (1 − dijt ) η−1 rijt − β0 − β1 distj Wijt = E − (1 − dijt ) η−1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj Wijt (66)
  h                                          i   h                                                    i




Proof: From the definition of εijt as εijt = rijt − E[rijt |Wijt ],

                              E − (1 − dijt ) η−1 rijt − β0 − β1 distj Wijt =
                                h                                         i


             E − (1 − dijt ) η−1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj Wijt − E k(1 − dijt )εijt Wijt .
              h                                                    i   h                     i
                                                                                                                           (67)

From equations (9) and (3), E[εijt |Wijt , νijt ] = 0. From equations (2), (8) and the assumption that distj ∈ Wijt
it follows that dijt is a function of the vector (Wijt , νijt ); i.e. dijt = d(Wijt , νijt ). Therefore, E[εijt |Wijt , dijt ] =
0 and, applying the Law of Iterated Expectations,

      E η−1 (1 − dijt )εijt Wijt = E η−1 (1 − dijt )E εijt Jijt , dijt Wijt = E η−1 (1 − dijt ) × 0 Wijt = 0.
                                                                                                           

Applying this result to equation (67) yields equation (66).

Lemma 12 Suppose the assumptions in equation (9) and (3) hold. Then

           φ σ −1 (η −1 rijt − β0 − β1 distj )                   φ σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )
                                                                                                              
  E dijt σ                                      Wijt ≥ E dijt σ
   h                                                 i   h                                                            i
                                                                                                                Wijt
               −1    −1
           Φ σ (η rijt − β0 − β1 distj )                         Φ σ (η E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )
                                                                     −1    −1

                                                                                                                      (68)


Proof: It follows from the definition of εijt as εijt = rijt − E[rijt |Wijt ] and the assumptions in equations (9)
and (3) that E[εijt |Wijt , νijt ] = 0. From equations (2), (8) and the assumption that distj ∈ Wijt it follows



                                                                 44
that dijt is a function of the vector (Wijt , νijt ); i.e. dijt = d(Wijt , νijt ). Therefore,    E[εijt |Wijt , dijt ] = 0. Since
                                                             φ(y)
                                                             Φ(y)

is convex for any value of y and      E[εijt |Jijt , dijt ] = 0, by Jensen’s Inequality
                                   φ σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj + η −1 εijt )
                                                                                            
                          E dijt σ
                           h                                                                       i
                                                                                              Wijt ≥
                                   Φ σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj + η −1 εijt )
                                         φ σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )
                                                                                       
                                E dijt σ
                                   h                                                           i
                                                                                        Wijt
                                         Φ σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )

Equation (68) follows from the equality η −1 rijt = η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] + η −1 εijt . 

Corollary 4 Suppose Zijt ∈ Wijt then

                                                                      φ σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )
                                                                                                                    
  E − (1 − dijt ) η−1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj + dijt σ
     h                                                                                                                   i
                                                                                                                     Zijt ≥ 0.
                                                                      Φ σ (η E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )
                                                                          −1    −1

                                                                                                                            (69)


  E − (1 − dijt ) η−1 rijt − β0 − β1 distj Zijt = E − (1 − dijt ) η−1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj Zijt
     h                                              i       h                                                         i
                                                                                                                            (70)

and
              φ σ −1 (η −1 rijt − β0 − β1 distj )                   φ σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )
                                                                                                                 
 E                                                 Zijt ≥ E dijt σ
   h                                                    i   h                                                           i
       dijt σ                                                                                                      Zijt (71)
              Φ σ −1 (η −1 rijt − β0 − β1 distj )                   Φ σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )


Proof of Theorem 2 Combining equations (58), (59), and (60) we obtain the inequality defined by
equations (20) and (21a). Combining equations (69), (70), and (71) we obtain the inequality defined by
equations (20) and (21b). 

A.6        Deriving unconditional moments
The moment inequalities described in equations (17) and (20) condition on particular values of the instrument
vector, Z. From these conditional moments, we can derive unconditional moment inequalities. Each of these
unconditional moments is defined by an instrument function. Specifically, given an instrument function g(·),
we derive unconditional moments that are consistent with our conditional moments:
                                                                          
                                  
                                    ml (dijt , rijt , distj ; γ) 
                                                                  
                                 mu (dijt , rijt , distj ; γ) 
                              E
                                                                             
                                 mrl (dijt , rijt , distj ; γ)  × g(Zijt ) ≥ 0,
                                                                             
                                  
                                   r                             
                                     mu (dijt , rijt , distj ; γ)
                                                                  

where ml (·), mu (·), mrl (·), and mru (·) are defined in equations (18) and (21), and Zijt is the same vector of
observed covariates employed in defining the conditional moments in equations (17) and (20).
    In Section 5, we present results based on a set of instrument functions ga (·) such that, for each scalar
random variable Zkijt included in the instrument vector Zijt

                                        1{Zkijt > med(Zkijt )}
                                                               
                                                                                          a
                      ga (Zkijt ) =
                                        1{Zkijt ≤ med(Zkijt )} × (|Zkijt − med(Zkijt )|) .
In words, for each of scalar random variable Zkijt included in the instrument vector Zijt = (Z1ijt , . . . , Zkijt ,
. . . , ZKijt ), the function ga (·) builds two moments by splitting the observations into two groups depending on
whether the value of the instrument variable for that observation is above or below its median. Within each
moment, each observation is weighted differently depending on the value of a and on the distance between the
value of the instrument Zkijt and the median value of this instrument. Specifically, in Section 5, we assume



                                                                 45
             2
that Zijt = Zijt = (riht−1 , Rjt−1 , distj ) and, for a given value of a, we construct the following instruments

                                      1{riht−1 > med(riht−1 )} × (|riht−1 − med(riht−1 )|)a ,
                                  

                                      1{riht−1 ≤ med(riht−1 )} × (|riht−1 − med(riht−1 )|)a ,
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                      1{Rjt−1 > med(Rjt−1 )} × (|Rjt−1 − med(Rjt−1 )|)a ,
                                  
                                  
                     ga (Zijt ) =
                                     1 {Rjt−1 ≤ med(Rjt−1 )} × (|Rjt−1 − med(Rjt−1 )|)a ,
                                      1{distj > med(distj )} × (|distj − med(distj )|)a ,
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                      1{distj ≤ med(distj )} × (|distj − med(distj )|)a .
                                  
                                  

Given that each particular instrument function ga (Zijt ) contains six instruments and there are four basic odds-
based and revealed preference inequalities (in equations (18) and (21)), the total number of moments used in
the estimation is equal to twenty-four for a given value of a, in addition to a constant vector. In the benchmark
case we simultaneously use two different instrument functions, ga (Zijt ), for a = {0, 1.5}, to define both an
estimated set Θall and a confidence set Θα all at significance level α.
                                                                        32




A.7      Sample selection in the estimation of determinants of export revenues
Assume a setting characterized by the the following three equations

                     rijt = δXijt + uijt + eijt ,        E[eijt |Jijt ] = 0, uijt ∈ Wijt , Wijt ∈ Jijt ,                 (72)


                                       E[Xijt |Jijt ] = E[Xijt |Wijt
                                                                 x
                                                                     ],     x
                                                                           Wijt ∈ Jijt                                   (73)

                                                                   2            
                                       uijt                      0       σu     σνu
                                                   x
                                                  Wijt ∼N             ,                    ,                             (74)
                                       νijt                      0      σuν     σν2


                    dijt = 1{η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj − νijt ≥ 0},         (distj , νijt ) ∈ Jijt             (75)

where (dijt , dijt rijt , Xijt , distj ) are observed by the researcher, (uijt , eijt , E[rijt |Wijt ]) are unobserved, and we
normalize by scale by setting σν2 = 1. Therefore,
                                                      σuν     σuν   σuν
                                              ρuν = √ 2 √ 2 = √ 2 =     .
                                                     σu σν     σu   σu

In this model, we need to keep track of three different information sets: (a) Jijt is the true information set of
potential exporter i at period t about potential determinants of profits in country j; (b) Wijt is the subset of
                                           x
Jijt that is useful to predict rijt ; (c) Wijt is the subset of Wijt that is useful to predict the vector Xijt .
                                                                                          x
    As in Section 2, we do not fully specify the content of the information set Wijt        . Specifically, we do not
                                                                                                 x
assume anything on whether Xijt is included in the information set of the exporter, Wijt           . Therefore, this
model allows for a very flexible relationship between the information set that exporters have at the time they
decide whether to export and the set of determinants of export revenue observed by the researcher, Xijt .
    The model described by equations (72), (73), (74), and (75) corresponds to that in Section 2 if we assume
that uijt = eijt = 0 and δ is known. In this case, equation (6) is simply a specific case of equation (72), and
equation (74) collapses to equation (3).
    The model described by equations (72), (73), (74), and (75) also nests the censored regression model in
Heckman (1979). Specifically, the two-step estimator for (δ, β0 , β1 , σu2 , σuν ) in Heckman (1979) would apply to
the model in equations (72), (73), (74), and (75) if we were to assume that eijt = 0 and Xijt is measurable in
Wijt .
  32
    We have recomputed the tables presented in Section 5 using alternative definitions of the instrument
function ga (Zijt ). Even though the boundaries of both identified and confidence sets depend on the instrument
functions, the main conclusions are robust. The exact results are available upon request.




                                                              46
      Given that rijt is observed only in those cases in which dijt ,

   E[rijt |dijt = 1, Wijt ] = δ E[Xijt |dijt = 1, Wijt ] + E[uijt |dijt = 1, Wijt ] + E[eijt |dijt = 1, Wijt ]
                              = δ E[Xijt |dijt = 1, Wijt ] + E uijt η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj − νijt ≥ 0, Wijt
                                                               h                                                         i


                              = δ E[Xijt |dijt = 1, Wijt ] + E uijt νijt ≤ η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj , Wijt
                                                               h                                                      i


                              = δ E[Xijt |dijt = 1, Wijt ] + E uijt νijt ≥ − η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj , Wijt
                                                               h                                                        i

                                                                      h φ(η −1 E[r |W ] − β − β dist )
                              = δ E[Xijt |dijt = 1, Wijt ] + ρ12 σu E
                                                                                                                    i
                                                                                  ijt   ijt     0    1    j
                                                                                                              Wijt ,
                                                                        Φ(η E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj )
                                                                            −1


where the first equality comes from equation (72); the second equality comes from equation (75) and E[eijt |Jijt ] =
0; the third equality simply rearranges terms; the fourth equality uses symmetry in the distribution of νijt ; and
the fifth equality computes the inverse Mills ratio. We cannot directly use this moment for estimation purposes
because we do not observe Wijt and, therefore, we cannot construct a consistent estimator for E[rijt |Wijt ] and
E[Xijt |dijt = 1, Wijt ] for every i and t.
     In order to deal with the unobserved term E[rijt |Wijt ], we follow an approach identical to that in Section
4.2.2. Under the assumption of rational expectations, we can write

                                 rijt = E[rijt |Wijt ] + εijt ,        with       E[εijt |Wijt ] = 0.
Therefore, we can rewrite
                                                                          h φ(η −1 r        − β0 − β1 distj − η −1 εijt )
      E[rijt |dijt = 1, Wijt ] = δ E[Xijt |dijt = 1, Wijt ] + ρ12 σu E
                                                                                                                              i
                                                                                      ijt
                                                                                                                          Wijt .
                                                                              Φ(η −1 rijt                       −1
                                                                                            − β0 − β1 distj − η εijt )

Given that φ(·)/Φ(·) is globally convex and that           E[εijt |Wijt ] = 0, we can conclude that
                                                                                  h φ(η −1 r     − β0 − β1 distj )
           E[rijt |dijt = 1, Wijt ] ≤ δ E[Xijt |dijt = 1, Wijt ] + ρ12 σu E
                                                                                                                       i
                                                                                           ijt
                                                                                                                   Wijt ,
                                                                                   Φ(η −1 rijt   − β0 − β1 distj )
or, equivalently,

                                                                  φ(η −1 rijt − β0 − β1 distj )
                 E[rit |dit = 1, Wit ] ≤ E δXijt + ρ12 σu
                                             h                                                                i
                                                                      −1
                                                                                                dijt = 1, Wijt ,
                                                                  Φ(η rijt − β0 − β1 distj )
and
                                                    φ(η −1 rijt − β0 − β1 distj )
                        E rit − δXijt − ρ12 σu
                          h                                                                        i
                                                                                  d ijt = 1, W ijt   ≤ 0.
                                                    Φ(η −1 rijt − β0 − β1 distj )
Given a vector Zijt ∈ Wijt , we can further write

                                                    φ(η −1 rijt − β0 − β1 distj )
                        E rit − δXijt − ρ12 σu
                          h                                                                        i
                                                                                  d ijt = 1, Z ijt   ≤ 0.                          (76)
                                                    Φ(η −1 rijt − β0 − β1 distj )

     Besides the moment inequality in equation (76), we can also derive revealed preference and odds-based
inequalities analogous to those introduced in Sections 4.2.1 and 4.2.2. When deriving these inequalities, we
must take into account that, contrary to the case described in the main text, in the model considered here, rijt
is not observed for every firm i and period t. However, we can rely on the fact that Xijt is observed for every
firm i, country j and time period t, independently of the value of dijt .

Specifically, we know that

                          E[rijt |Wijt ] = E[δXijt + uijt + eijt |Wijt ] = δ E[Xijt |Wijt ] + uijt ,
and, using equation (73), we can write

                                                 E[Xijt |Wijt ] = E[Xijt |Wijt
                                                                           x
                                                                               ].



                                                                  47
Imposing this equality into equation (75), we can write

                              dijt = 1{η −1 δ E[Xijt |Wijt
                                                       x
                                                           ] − β0 − β1 distj + η −1 uijt − νijt ≥ 0},

and, analogously,

                                     dijt = 1{η −1 δ E[Xijt |Wijt
                                                              x
                                                                  ] − β0 − β1 distj + vijt ≥ 0},

where vit = η −1 uijt − νijt and

                                                           vit ∼ N(0, σv2 ),

where

                                σv2 = (η −1 )2 σu2 + 1 + 2η −1 σuν = (η −1 )2 σu2 + 1 + 2η −1 ρuν σu .                 (77)

Analogously, we can write

                        dijt = 1{(η −1 /σv )δ E[Xijt |Wijt
                                                       x
                                                           ] − (β0 /σv ) − (β1 /σv )distj + (vijt /σv ) ≥ 0},          (78)

with (vijt /σv ) ∼ N(0, 1). Using equation (78) and following the steps in Sections 4.2.1 we can derive the
odds-based inequalities
                   "                                                                          #
                        1 − Φ (η −1 /σv )δXijt − (β0 /σv ) − (β1 /σv )distj
                                                                            
                 E dijt                                                    − (1 − dijt ) Zijt ≥ 0,    (79)
                          Φ (η −1 /σv )δXijt − (β0 /σv ) − (β1 /σv )distj

and
                        "                                                                             #
                                       Φ (η −1 /σv )δXijt − (β0 /σv ) − (β1 /σv )distj
                                                                                       
                    E    (1 − dijt )                                                      − dijt Zijt ≥ 0.            (80)
                                     1 − Φ (η −1 /σv )δXijt − (β0 /σv ) − (β1 /σv )distj

Similarly, using equation (78) and following the steps in Sections 4.2.2 we can derive the revealed preference
inequalities
             "
            E − (1 − dijt )((η−1 /σv )δXijt − (β0 /σv ) − (β1 /σv )distj )
                                                                                                              #
                                                        φ((η −1 /σv )δXijt − (β0 /σv ) − (β1 /σv )distj )
                                                 + dijt                                                   Zijt ≥ 0,
                                                        Φ((η −1 /σv )δXijt − (β0 /σv ) − (β1 /σv )distj )
             "
            E dijt ((η−1 /σv )δXijt − (β0 /σv ) − (β1 /σv )distj )
                                                                                                               #
                                                       φ((η −1 /σv )δXijt − (β0 /σv ) − (β1 /σv )distj )
                                       + (1 − dijt )                                                       Zijt ≥ 0,
                                                     1 − Φ((η −1 /σv )δXijt − (β0 /σv ) − (β1 /σv )distj )

or, equivalently,
        "                                                                                                      #
                                                                     φ(σv−1 (η −1 δXijt − β0 − β1 distj ))
      E − (1 − dijt )(η       −1
                                   δXijt − β0 − β1 distj ) + dijt σv                                       Zijt ≥ 0,   (81)
                                                                     Φ(σv−1 (η −1 δXijt − β0 − β1 distj ))

        "                                                                                                    #
                                                                 φ(σv−1 (η −1 δXijt − β0 − β1 distj ))
      E dijt (η   −1
                       δXijt − β0 − β1 distj ) + (1 − dijt )σv                                           Zijt ≥ 0.     (82)
                                                               1 − Φ(σv−1 (η −1 δXijt − β0 − β1 distj ))


    The parameters to identify are (δ, η, β0 , β1 , ρ12 , σu ) and, for each observed covariate Zit such that Zit ∈ Jit ,
the set of moment inequalities identifying these parameters are those given in equations (76), (79), (80), (81),




                                                                 48
(82), plus the bounds

                                                           −1 ≤ ρuν ≤ 1,
                                                             0 ≤ σu ,

with σv defined in equation (77).

A.8       Proof of Theorem 3
Lemma 13 Suppose the assumptions in equations (9), (3), and (13) hold. Then

                    1 − Φ(σ −1 (η −1 rijt − β0 − β1 distj ))
                                                                                      
                                                                           1 − Pijt
                E                                            W ijt   ≥ E            W ijt .                                  (83)
                      Φ(σ −1 (η −1 rijt − β0 − β1 distj ))                   Pijt


Proof: It follows from the definition of εijt as εijt = rijt − E[rijt |Wijt ] and the assumptions in equations (9)
and (3) that E[εijt |Wijt , νijt ] = 0. Since

                                                              1 − Φ(y)
                                                                Φ(y)

is convex for any value of y and E[εijt |Wijt , dijt ] = 0, by Jensen’s Inequality

    1 − Φ(σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj + η −1 εijt ))            1 − Φ(σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))
                                                                                                                                  
E                                                                  Wijt ≥ E                                                      Wijt .
      Φ(σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ) + η −1 εijt )               Φ(σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))

Equation (83) follows from the equality η −1 rijt = η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ]+η −1 εijt and the definition of Pijt in equation
(13). 

Lemma 14 Suppose the assumptions in equations (9), (3), and (13) hold. Then

                      Φ(σ −1 (η −1 rijt − β0 − β1 distj ))
                                                                                  
                                                                          Pijt
                E                                            Wijt ≥ E            Wijt .                                      (84)
                    1 − Φ(σ −1 (η −1 rijt − β0 − β1 distj ))            1 − Pijt


Proof: It follows from the definition of εijt as εijt = rijt − E[rijt |Wijt ] and the assumptions in equations (9)
and (3) that E[εijt |Wijt , νijt ] = 0. Since

                                                                Φ(y)
                                                              1 − Φ(y)

is convex for any value of y and E[εijt |Jijt , dijt ] = 0, by Jensen’s Inequality

      Φ(σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj + η −1 εijt ))                    Φ(σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))
                                                                                                                                        
E                                                                   W ijt   ≥ E                                                      W ijt   .
    1 − Φ(σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ) + η −1 εijt )               1 − Φ(σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ))

Equation (83) follows from the equality η −1 rijt = η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ]+η −1 εijt and the definition of Pijt in equation
(13). 

Lemma 15 Suppose Zijt ∈ Wijt , then

             1 − Φ(σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj + η −1 εijt ))
                                                                                                     
                                                                                          1 − Pijt
         E                                                                  W ijt   ≥ E            Zijt   ,                  (85)
               Φ(σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ) + η −1 εijt )                  Pijt
and
                         Φ(σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj + η −1 εijt ))
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                       Pijt
               E                                                                       W ijt   ≥ E            Zijt .         (86)
                       1 − Φ(σ −1 (η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − β0 − β1 distj ) + η −1 εijt )               1 − Pijt




                                                                  49
Proof: It follows from lemmas 13 and 14 and the Law of Iterated Expectations. 

Lemma 16 Suppose Y is a variable with support in (0, 1), then
                                                    h1 − Y i        1 − E[Y ]
                                                E               ≥             ,                          (87)
                                                          Y           E[Y ]
and
                                                         Y i     E[Y ]
                                                E
                                                    h
                                                             ≥           .                               (88)
                                                        1−Y    1 − E[Y ]


Proof: We can rewrite the left hand side of equation (87) as
                                    h1 − Y i      h1         h1i
                                  E           =E      −1 =E
                                                          i
                                                                 − 1,                                    (89)
                                        Y          Y          Y
and the right hand side of equation (87) as

                                                 1 − E[Y ]           1
                                                           =                − 1.                         (90)
                                                   E[Y ]            E[Y ]
As Y takes values in the interval (0, 1), Jensen’s inequality implies
                                                   h1i       1
                                                 E      ≥        .                                       (91)
                                                     Y     E[Y ]
Equations (89), (90), and (91) imply that equation (87) holds.

Define a random variable X = 1 − Y and rewrite the left hand side of equation (88) as
                                                h1 − X i
                                              E           .
                                                    X
As the support of Y is (0, 1), the support of X is also (0, 1). Equations (89), (90), and (91) only depend on
the property that the support of Y is (0, 1). Therefore, from these equations, it must also be true that
                                                    h1 − X i        1 − E[X]
                                                E               ≥            ,
                                                          X           E[X]
and, applying the inequality X = 1 − Y , we can conclude that equation (88) holds. 

Corollary 5 Suppose Pijt is defined as in equation (13), then
                                         h1 − P                  1 − E[Pijt |Zijt ]
                                     E
                                                              i
                                                    ijt
                                                          Zijt ≥                    ,                    (92)
                                               Pijt                E[Pijt |Zijt ]
and
                                               Pijt            E[Pijt |Zijt ]
                                     E
                                         h                i
                                                      Zijt ≥                    .                        (93)
                                             1 − Pijt        1 − E[Pijt |Zijt ]


Proof: Equation (13) implies that the support of Pijt is the interval (0, 1). Therefore, Lemma 16 implies that
equations (92) and (93) hold. 

Lemma 17 Suppose Zijt ∈ Jijt and define P(Zijt ) = E[Pijt |Zijt ], with Pijt defined in equation (13). Then,

                                         1                         Bu (Zijt ; θ)
                                                    ≤ P(Zijt ) ≤                   ,                     (94)
                                  1 + Bl (Zijt ; θ)              1 + Bu (Zijt ; θ)




                                                               50
where
                                              1 − Φ σ −1 η −1 rijt − β0 − β1 distj
                                                                                       
                          Bl (Zijt ; θ) = E                                       Zijt .                (95)
                                                Φ σ −1 η −1 rijt − β0 − β1 distj
                                                Φ σ −1 η −1 rijt − β0 − β1 distj
                                                                                       
                          Bu (Zijt ; θ) = E                                         Zijt ,              (96)
                                              1 − Φ σ −1 η −1 rijt − β0 − β1 distj


Proof: Combining equations (85) and (92),

                                                                       1 − E[Pijt |Zijt ]
                                                                   
                                                       1 − Pijt
                               Bl (Zijt ; θ) ≥ E                Zijt ≥                    ,
                                                         Pijt            E[Pijt |Zijt ]
and, reordering terms, we obtain the inequality
                                                 1
                                                            ≤ E[Pijt |Zijt ].                             (97)
                                          1 + Bl (Zijt ; θ)

Combining equations (86) and (93),

                                                                         E[Pijt |Zijt ]
                                                                   
                                                         Pijt
                               Bu (Zijt ; θ) ≥ E                Zijt ≥
                                                       1 − Pijt        1 − E[Pijt |Zijt ]
and, reordering terms, we obtain the inequality
                                            Bu (Zijt ; θ)
                                                            ≥ E[Pijt |Zijt ].                             (98)
                                          1 + Bu (Zijt ; θ)

Combining the inequalities in equations (97) and (98) we obtain equation (94). 

A.9     Bounds on counterfactual choice probabilities
We may use equations (23), (24) and (25) to define bounds on expected export probabilities in the counterfac-
tual scenarios described in Section 2.5.

Sections 2.5 describes a counterfactual scenario in which export fixed costs become

                                         fijt = 0.6β0 + 0.6β1 distj + νijt .

In this counterfactual, the export probability is defined as
                                          Z
              c
            Pijt = P c (dijt = 1|Wijt ) =    1{η−1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − 0.6β0 − 0.6β1 distj − ν ≥ 0}φ(ν)dν
                                           ν

                                        = Φ σ −1 η −1 E[rijt |Wijt ] − 0.6β0 − 0.6β1 distj ,
                                                                                          

     Using expressions analogous to equations (23), (24) and (25), we may define bounds the expectation of
 c
Pijt conditional on any particular value or set of values of Zijt as follows
                                                                         c
                                         P c (Zijt ) ≤ P c (Zijt ) ≤ P (Zijt ),                           (99)

where
                                                                   1
                                        P c (Zijt ) = min                      ,                         (100)
                                                          1 + Blc (Zijt ; γ)
                                                          γ∈Θall

                                         c                  Buc (Zijt ; γ)
                                        P (Zijt ) = max          c (Z
                                                                               ,                         (101)
                                                   γ∈Θall 1 + Bu      ijt ; γ)




                                                              51
with
                                              Φ σ −1 η −1 rijt − 0.6β0 − 0.6β1 distj
                                                                                           
                       Buc (Zijt ; θ) = E                                               Zijt ,            (102)
                                            1 − Φ σ −1 η −1 rijt − 0.6β0 − 0.6β1 distj
                                            1 − Φ σ −1 η −1 rijt − 0.6β0 − 0.6β1 distj
                                                                                           
                       Blc (Zijt ; θ) = E                                             Zijt .              (103)
                                              Φ σ −1 η −1 rijt − 0.6β0 − 0.6β1 distj


In addition to computing the expected probability of exporting in actual and counterfactual scenarios, we may
also define bounds on the ratio of expected export probabilities in these different scenarios. Specifically, for
the counterfactual scenario described in Sections 2.5, we can compute bounds for the percentage growth of the
expected export probability for the subset of observations with a given value of Zijt due to a 40% reduction in
the fixed costs β0 and β1 :
                                                                                   c
                                             1                                    Bu (Zijt ;γ)
                                                           c
                                      1+Blc (Zijt ;γ)     Pijt (Zijt )           1+Buc (Z
                                                                                          ijt ;γ)
                              min                       ≤              ≤ max            1           ,       (104)
                             γ∈Θall    Bu (Zijt ;γ)       Pijt (Zijt )  γ∈Θall
                                                                                 1+Bl (Zijt ;γ)
                                      1+Bu (Zijt ;γ)

where Bu (Zijt ; γ) and Bl (Zijt ; γ) are defined in equations (96) and (95), respectively; and Buc (Zijt ; γ) and
Blc (Zijt ; γ) are defined in equations (102) and (103), respectively.




                                                              52
