                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 THE RISE OF DOMESTIC OUTSOURCING AND THE EVOLUTION OF THE GERMAN
                          WAGE STRUCTURE

                                        Deborah Goldschmidt
                                       Johannes F. Schmieder

                                        Working Paper 21366
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21366


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2015




We would like to thank Katharine Abraham, David Autor, Josh Angrist, Stefan Bender, Giuseppe
Berlingieri, Richard Blundell, David Card, Michael Clauss, Arindrajit Dube, Christian Dustmann,
Robert Gibbons, Pat Kline, Hillary Hoynes, Erik Hurst, Larry Kahn, Kevin Lang, Mark McCabe, W.
Bentley McLeod, Claudia Olivetti, Jim Rebitzer, Uta Schoenberg, Till von Wachter, David Weil, Birger
Wernerfelt, Heidi Williams, and Seminar Participants at Boston University, UC Berkeley, UCL, the
MIT Economics Department, MIT Sloan and Queens University. Johannes Schmieder gratefully
acknowledgesfunding from the W. E. Upjohn Institute Early Career Research Grant No. 14-147-08.
All errors areour own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the viewsof the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Deborah Goldschmidt and Johannes F. Schmieder. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Rise of Domestic Outsourcing and the Evolution of the German Wage Structure
Deborah Goldschmidt and Johannes F. Schmieder
NBER Working Paper No. 21366
July 2015
JEL No. J21,J23,J3,J31,J5,J81,L1,L11,L16,L22,L23,L24,M12,M13,M51,M52

                                              ABSTRACT

The nature of the relationship between employers and employees has been changing over the last decades,
with firms increasingly relying on contractors, temp agencies and franchises rather than hiring employees
directly. We investigate the impact of this transformation on the wage structure by following jobs
that are moved outside of the boundary of lead employers to contracting firms. For this end we develop
a new method for identifying outsourcing of food, cleaning, security and logistics services in administrative
data using the universe of social security records in Germany. We document a dramatic growth of
domestic outsourcing in Germany since the early 1990s. Event-study analyses show that wages in
outsourced jobs fall by approximately 10-15% relative to similar jobs that are not outsourced. We
find evidence that the wage losses associated with outsourcing stem from a loss of firm-specific rents,
suggesting that labor cost savings are an important reason why firms choose to contract out these services.
Finally, we tie the increase in outsourcing activity to broader changes in the German wage structure,
in particular showing that outsourcing of cleaning, security and logistics services alone accounts for
around 10 percent of the increase in German wage inequality since the 1980s.


Deborah Goldschmidt
Department of Economics,
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
02215, Boston, MA
debbiegold@gmail.com

Johannes F. Schmieder
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and IZA
and also NBER
johannes@bu.edu




An Online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w21366
1   Introduction

       Wage discrimination is rarely seen in large firms despite the benefits it could
       confer. As long as workers are under one roof, the problems presented by hor-
       izontal and vertical equity remain. But what if the large employer could wage
       discriminate by changing the boundary of the firm?
       - Weil (2014) -

The last decades have seen a thorough transformation of the nature of the labor market,
with large firms increasingly relying on non-traditional employment arrangements such as
outsourcing, temporary or contingent work, offshoring and subcontracting. Across a wide
range of industries, firms have been focusing on their “core competencies” and hiring outside
companies to provide services which were once performed by their own employees, such as
cleaning, security, logistics, human resources, or IT. Outsourcing to business service providers
potentially allows for reductions in wages for the contracted-out jobs. The outsourcing
firms are often traditional lead companies in sectors such as manufacturing or finance, and
typically offer the most attractive jobs, with higher wages, increased job security, strong
worker representation, and union coverage. Factors such as collective bargaining agreements
(Card et al., 2004; DiNardo and Lee, 2004) or efficiency wage considerations linked to fairness
perceptions (Akerlof and Yellen, 1990; Rees, 1993; Card et al., 2012) may lead to wage
compression within firms and rent sharing of firm profits, which in turn pushes up wages for
workers who would otherwise have lower paying outside job opportunities. Large employers
may thus find it beneficial to reduce the number of direct employees who benefit from such
wage premia by outsourcing jobs to subcontractors. These business service firms compete
fiercely with each other for service contracts from large companies on price, and since labor
costs are a large share of business service firms’ total costs, this creates intense pressure to
lower wages and reduce benefits. Furthermore, workers in these firms likely benefit less from
collective bargaining agreements and protection from unions since they would typically not
be covered by the same sectoral union of the outsourcing company. Even though anecdotal
and qualitative evidence for these changes in the labor market abound, research in the
economics literature on this topic is quite limited.1 One problem with analyzing outsourcing
is that it is very difficult to measure and can usually only be approximated using industry
and occupation codes. Furthermore, even with such an approximation, the existing research
    1
      Weil (2014) provides a detailed, largely qualitative analysis of the practice of domestic outsourcing in the
US and an overview of the quantitative research in economics. He only lists two papers that estimate wage
differentials between contracted-out and in-house workers based on CPS data (discussed below) and only a
handful of studies based on firm surveys that measure the increase in the incidence of sub-contracting of
labor services. The topic has received somewhat more attention in the sociology literature, e.g. see Kalleberg
(2000) for an overview.


                                                        1
has relied largely on cross-sectional datasets on the worker level with almost no information
on the outsourcing firms and limited information on the actual jobs people do. However,
outsourcing inherently occurs on the job level, where certain tasks or inputs are moved out of
the firm and provided externally. Since jobs are typically not directly observed, it is difficult
to identify the true causal impact of outsourcing on wages.
    In this paper we analyze the phenomenon of domestic labor service outsourcing in Ger-
many using detailed administrative data on the universe of workers and firms.2 We document
for the first time in detail the rise of outsourcing of labor services over the last three decades
in Germany, focusing in particular on logistics (i.e. truck drivers, warehouse workers), clean-
ing, security and food services.3 We develop a new method for identifying outsourcing events
at the time that they occur, which allows us to observe wages for a particular job before
and after the job is outsourced. Based on this we provide credible estimates of the causal
effect of outsourcing on wages, documenting that moving jobs outside the boundary of the
firm leads to large wage reductions. Next, we investigate whether the wage reductions we
find after outsourcing can be explained with the loss of firm wage premia and whether it is
plausible that at least part of the reason that firms outsource is that it allows them to avoid
paying these rents. Finally, we consider the relationship between the documented impacts
of outsourcing and the broad changes in the wage structure experienced by Germany over
the last decades.
    An important methodological innovation for this project is the development of a new
method of identifying a particular type of outsourcing which we refer to as on-site outsourc-
ing. This type of outsourcing refers to situations where a large employer spins out a group
of workers providing a particular service, such as cafeteria workers, to a legally separate
business unit, for example a subsidiary or an existing business service provider. In these
situations the outsourced workers still work together and do essentially the same job at the
same physical location, but under a different employer. We show that such outsourcing events
can be identified in administrative datasets using worker flows between establishments. The
basic intuition is that if a group of workers is contracted out at the same time, this can be
   2
     We use the term ‘domestic outsourcing’ in order to differentiate it from offshoring, which is a form of
outsourcing that has been studied much more widely in the economics literature even though it is not clear
that it is quantitatively more important.
   3
     The reason for focusing on these services is that we believe these are tasks that remained fairly consistent
over time, they correspond to clear occupation codes and the respective business service firms can be identified
over time. Furthermore the share of these occupations remained approximately constant over the past 3
decades. We believe outsourcing also occurred for many other tasks and we see, for example, the share of
accountants, advertising jobs, IT occupations, and phone operators who are working for business service
firms rise substantially over time; however all of these occupations also exhibit strong trends in the number
of workers in them over time (falling for accountants and phone operators, increasing for advertising and IT)
and the characteristics of these jobs may have changed substantially with the advent of new technologies.



                                                       2
observed by following the establishment identifiers as well as occupation and industry codes.
For example, if we observe a group of workers splitting off from a large bank in year t-1
and forming a new establishment identifier in year t with an industry code of ‘cafeteria’,
this likely reflects that the bank is outsourcing its cafeteria. This is further supported if the
workers who are leaving worked in food related jobs in year t-1 at the bank, and the bank
does not replace these occupations in the following year.
    On-site outsourcing events provide a particularly powerful testing ground to analyze the
wage effects of outsourcing, since they allow us to follow jobs over time where both the
worker and the work location remain the same, so that effects on wages can be attributed
directly to the change in the employment relationship without selection or omitted variable
bias. However, these instances of on-site outsourcing likely only constitute a small share
of all outsourcing, for example missing outsourcing events where all workers providing a
particular task are simply laid off and the task is sub-contracted to an external provider. We
therefore complement this analysis with a broader measure of outsourcing, where a worker
in a food, cleaning, security, or logistics occupation is defined as outsourced if he is employed
by a business services firm. Using both measures we find a dramatic increase in outsourcing
in Germany that accelerated in the late 1990s and continues into recent years.4
    Our main contribution is to provide cleanly identified effects of outsourcing on the wages
paid for outsourced jobs using two alternative approaches. We first show that workers who
are outsourced in on-site outsourcing events typically stay with the business service firm
they are outsourced to for the following years, and their employment is similarly stable as
for workers in the same occupations and industries who are not outsourced. This allows us
to interpret the wage effects of outsourcing as the effect on the job level, free of selection.
As a second method of estimating the wage losses from outsourcing, we compare wages of
workers in logistics, cleaning, food and security occupations who are employed in business
services firms with those employed directly by other employers, controlling for individual
fixed effects.5 The two approaches in principle have different advantages and disadvantages,
but yield very similar results: After on-site outsourcing, wages for outsourced workers fall
by around 10 percent within 5-10 years compared to the control group, essentially the same
   4
      This trend to vertical disintegration appears to be more widespread than just for the area of labor
services. E.g. Dustmann et al. (2014) document that final goods producers in the German manufacturing
sector have been relying increasingly on buying intermediate inputs from outside the firm and from abroad
(offshoring) and are responsible for an increasingly smaller share of the value added of final goods.
    5
      This is the same method used by Abraham (1990) and Dube and Kaplan (2010), who use CPS data
to estimate the effect of outsourcing on wages. It is also similar to the earlier literature that estimated
industry wage differentials using individual fixed effects, e.g. Krueger and Summers (1988). The criticism of
this approach in Gibbons and Katz (1992) applies in the outsourcing case as well, which is why identifying
on-site outsourcing as an exogenous (from the individual’s perspective) shock is crucial.



                                                     3
wage differential we estimate using our other method.
    Firms may choose to engage in these types of alternative employment arrangements for
various reasons. Subcontractors can provide increased flexibility for firms whose needs vary
throughout the year, or provide specialized skills or technology that would be costly for a
firm to invest in. Outsourcing can also provide cost savings through lower labor costs, if
outsourced workers are excluded from wage premia or rents at the outsourcing firm. In
order to test the hypothesis that the wage losses of outsourced workers stem from being
excluded from firm rents, we first obtain estimates of the establishment wage premium by
implementing a full decomposition of wages in Germany into establishment and worker fixed
effects as in Card et al. (2013) - henceforth CHK - and in the spirit of Abowd et al. (1999).
The establishment fixed effect of workers moving to business service firms falls by around
10 log points, fully explaining the wage losses at outsourcing. We also show that on-site
outsourcing is associated with sharp drops in other firm characteristics typically associated
with rents, such as firm size and average pay of coworkers. Furthermore, we show that wage
losses are highly correlated with measures of wage premia at the outsourcing establishment.
Finally, we document that establishments that pay above market wages or are covered by
collective bargaining agreements are more likely to outsource parts of their labor force. These
findings suggest that exclusion from establishment wage premia is a driving factor for the
wage losses and likely part of the motivation for why firms outsource.
    Germany provides a particularly interesting setting to study outsourcing. Over the last
few decades there has been a substantial increase in wage inequality, with significant wage
declines at the bottom of the wage distribution (Dustmann et al., 2009, CHK). These changes
in the wage structure are in part explained by de-unionization, the erosion of the sectoral
level collective bargaining system, and the increased decentralization of the wage setting
mechanism.6 However, as CHK show, a significant portion of the rise in wage inequality
comes from increased assortative matching of workers employed together with others in the
same or similar jobs, and low skilled workers being matched with low paying firms, something
which is not easily explained by de-unionization. On the other hand, increased reliance on
outsourcing, particularly of lower-skilled labor services and other inputs, provides a natural
explanation for this change, as lead firms move parts of their labor inputs out of the core
workforce and into highly specialized, lower-paying business service firms.7
   6
     See for example Dustmann et al. (2014) for a discussion of how the German reunification in combination
with the Eastern EU expansion lead to the reduction in collective bargaining coverage rates.
   7
     Outsourcing may also explain why unit labor costs in the German manufacturing sector declined even
though manufacturing wages remained relatively stable (see Dustmann et al., 2014): while large employers
continue to pay relatively high wages, they benefit from the drop in wages at their sub-contractors and
suppliers.



                                                    4
    We provide several pieces of evidence that outsourcing did indeed contribute to these
changes in the German employment and wage structure. In particular, based on the estab-
lishment - worker fixed effects decomposition, we show that outsourcing of cleaning, security
and logistics workers alone can account for about 10 percent of the increased wage dispersion
in Germany, with equal parts due to increased dispersion of the establishment component
and increased assortative matching of low paid workers to low paying employers. While we
view outsourcing as a complementary explanation to de-unionization for the change in the
German wage structure and the increases in competitiveness, we also believe that these two
channels are likely closely intertwined, since on the one hand weaker unions facilitated out-
sourcing decisions and, on the other hand, outsourcing weakened the bargaining positions of
unions and work councils. In fact, the increase in domestic outsourcing may have put direct
wage pressure on in-house employees in similar jobs, since these employees are increasingly
in competition with outside business service firms.8
    The next section presents the data and institutional background, as well as a description
of our measures of domestic outsourcing. Section 3 presents our empirical results on the
effects of outsourcing on workers’ employment trajectories and wages of outsourced jobs.
In section 4 we provide evidence that firms decide to outsource in order to avoid paying
establishment specific wage premia. Finally section 5 relates outsourcing to the broader
changes observed in the German wage structure and section 6 concludes.


2       The Rise of Domestic Outsourcing

2.1      Institutional Background

Germany features a somewhat unique collective bargaining system, the so-called “dual sys-
tem”, where wages are negotiated between employer associations and unions on the industry
or firm level, often in close coordination with elected firm or establishment level work councils
(see Fitzenberger et al., 2013; Dustmann et al., 2014). The close level of cooperation between
the different parties appeared to lead to relatively high wages and good working conditions,
while at the same time avoiding costly strikes and conflicts between unions and employers.
However, the system was always based on contractual relations and mutual agreements, and
firms were free to leave the collective agreements and instead set wages either in firm level
    8
    For example, this is illustrated by the final report of the Harvard Committee on Employment and
Contracting Policies (2001), also known as the Katz committee, that investigated the situation of low wage
workers at Harvard University. The report noted in particular that “in-house employees [...] have typically
been employed by Harvard service units that operate on a fee-for-service business model and compete with
outside contractors” and “outsourcing competition put pressure on Harvard’s unions to bring wages down to
the rates paid by outside contractors”.



                                                    5
negotiations or without any agreement. Firms that do not leave the union contracts can
achieve additional wage flexibility through “opening clauses”, which allow for wages below
the collectively agreed upon level.
    Starting in the early 1990s, Germany experienced a sharp decline in collective bargaining
coverage rates and union membership as more and more firms opted out of the industry level
agreements and either did not have any agreements or any firm level agreements.9 Many ex-
isting firms left the employer associations while new firms opted not to join them in the first
place (see CHK). Dustmann et al. (2009) and CHK argue that this decline was kick-started
by the decision of labor unions to demand West German wage levels in East German estab-
lishments almost immediately after the reunification. The large productivity gap essentially
forced East German employers to leave the collective agreements, which in turn led to firms
in West Germany imitating them and leaving the agreements as well. Increased pressure
from globalization, the real threat of moving production to Eastern Germany or the newly
accessible Eastern European countries, and high levels of unemployment in Germany all
provided West German firms with the necessary leverage to force work councils and unions
to agree to these changes.
    While work councils have to be consulted for a wide variety of firm level decisions that
affect workers, this does not apply to outsourcing decisions and German firms are legally
free to do so at their discretion. In practice work councils and unions may try to fight
outsourcing, but their success will depend on the willingness of the core workforce to stand
up for the workers affected by outsourcing. It seems likely that the same factors that led to
decreased union coverage likely also facilitated outsourcing of parts of the workforce. On the
other hand, as noted by Doellgast and Greer (2007), outsourcing itself offers a way for firms
to sidestep the unions, since even if a firm is following a collective bargaining agreement,
outsourced workers employed by a different sector typically would not be covered by the
same agreement. Furthermore, workers in business service firms are often not well organized
and in many cases do not form a work council.10
    Another factor that has facilitated outsourcing in Germany over the last two decades
has been a steady deregulation of the temp agency sector (Vitols, 2004). The number of
employees in this sector subsequently increased dramatically since the early 1990s and the
sector became more established, with many large temp agencies offering their services to
   9
      For example Dustmann et al. (2014) report that from 1995 to 2008, industry wide agreements fell from
75 to 56 percent, while firm level agreements stayed close to 10 percent.
   10
      Based on our calculations with the IAB establishment panel only around 6 percent of business service
firms have a work council and around 30 percent are covered by collective bargaining agreements. The
relatively large collective agreement coverage is largely due to temp agencies which are mostly covered by a
collective bargaining agreement specific to the temp sector, which however sets a pretty low wage floor (e.g.
7.50 Euro per hour in 2010).


                                                     6
other firms, thus making it easier to outsource.11

2.2    Data

We use the Integrated Employment Biographies data (IEB) which represents the universe
of social security records in Germany over the time period 1975 to 2009.12 The IEB has
been made available through the Research Data Center of the German Federal Employment
Agency at the Institute for Employment Research (IAB). Employers are required to file a
report for all employees who are employed during a year. Since this report is key for de-
termining health insurance coverage, pension accrual and unemployment benefits eligibility
it is generally of very high accuracy. This report contains information on the duration of
employment, the total pay over that period, the employment type (full-time, part-time, ap-
prentice), and a number of demographic variables (such as education, nationality, gender,
and age). The pay information is generally very accurate but top coded. The data covers
all employment subject to social security contributions, but excludes certain types of gov-
ernment employees and the self-employed. Furthermore, since employers and individuals are
uniquely identified through establishment and person IDs, it is possible to construct com-
plete employment histories for individual workers and to follow establishments over time.
One limitation is that the data only contains establishment, not firm, identifiers.13
    For our approach of measuring outsourcing it is important that the data contains industry
and occupation for every worker. Both pieces of information are an integral part of the
employment notification and cannot be easily left blank, and as a result occupation, for
example, is only missing in around 0.05% of employment records. The industry classification
system changed several times during our observation period with breaks in 1999, 2003 and
2009. We used crosswalks together with our best judgement to consistently classify business
service firms and outsourcing over time. Moreover, we do not have industry codes for the last
year (2009) and therefore all results relying on long time series for identifying outsourcing
only span 1975 to 2008.
  11
     It is interesting that other countries with very different institutional backgrounds also experienced a
dramatic rise in outsourcing. For example Autor (2003) argues that in the US the development of the “unjust
dismissal” doctrine that restricted the employment at will notion contributed to the growth in outsourcing
to temporary help service firms. Since Germany always had fairly strong employment protection laws, there
was no legal change in this regard driving the increase in temp services, although the existence of these laws
might have spurred outsourcing once this was easier for other reasons.
  12
     See Oberschachtsiek et al. (2009)
  13
     Multi-establishment firms typically have a separate identifier for each establishment they own, or they
may combine several establishments within the same county (such as branches) under a single establish-
ment identifier, but establishment identifiers do not span across multiple counties. See Hethey-Maier and
Schmieder (2013) for more details.




                                                      7
2.3    On-site Outsourcing

The IEB, like most data sets, does not contain any specific information on outsourcing.
Instead, we develop a method to identify a particular type of outsourcing using worker
flows between establishments. We call this on-site outsourcing, and it refers to cases where
companies contract out part of their workforce to a legally independent sub-contractor but
where the same employees continue their work at the same physical location. For example,
in 2005 the Daimler corporation implemented a large cost-saving program called “CORE” to
focus on its core business competencies. As part of this program it outsourced several of its
in-house cafeterias into a legally independent subsidiary company, which was at first fully
owned by Daimler and later sold in parts to various business service firms. The employees
largely remained the same and still worked at the same locations, but were now employed
by a different employer.14
    We identify these on-site outsourcing events using worker flows between establishment
identifiers, implementing a strategy similar to Hethey-Maier and Schmieder (2013), which
dealt with classifying establishment entries and exits, and Muendler et al. (2012), which used
worker flows to identify employee spin-offs. Starting with the universe of covered workers
as of June 30 in each year from 1975 to 2009, we track workers as they move between
establishments from year to year. We define a clustered flow of workers to be a group of
workers who were all employed in establishment A, the predecessor, in one year and then in
the following year were all employed in establishment B, the successor.
    A clustered flow at time t is considered an on-site outsourcing event if the following
conditions hold: First, the flow must consist of 10 employees or more, to eliminate small flows
that may be a part of regular year-to-year worker movements. The predecessor establishment
must have at least 50 employees in the year prior to the flow, continue to exist in the following
year and not shrink by more than 50%, to ensure that the flow we observe is not due to an
establishment closing, severely downsizing, or breaking apart. The flow must also represent
less than 30% of employment in the predecessor in the previous year, so that we are certain
that the outsourced employees represent only a small part of the predecessor’s business.15
  14
     This description of the events is based on personal conversations with Daimler employees. There are
many other case studies describing similar events, e.g. Doellgast and Greer (2007) describe outsourcing
in the automobile and telecommunications sector in Germany, Dietz et al. (2013) describe outsourcing of
airport workers in the U.S., and Smith Institute (2014) provides several examples from the UK.
  15
     If the successor is a new establishment (i.e. the establishment ID appears in the data for the first
time in year t), then we further require that the clustered flow makes up 65% or more of the successor’s
employment. While the exact cutoffs we use here are of course debatable, we found that in practice changing
these thresholds - even by a substantial amount - barely affects our main wage results reported below. As
will be seen below, the average outsourcing establishments that we identify is far away from these cutoffs:
much larger prior to the flow, barely shrinks and the flow is a very small part of total employment.



                                                    8
Finally, we restrict the successor establishment to have an industry code corresponding to a
business service firm in either logistics, food services, cleaning or security, and ensure that
the predecessor establishment is not a business service firm, giving us further confidence
that these flows are likely to be outsourcing occurrences and not spin-offs or other types of
establishment changes.16 For all outsourcing events, we call the predecessor establishment
the mother, and the successor establishment the daughter.17
    We also use this method to identify events where the daughter is a temp agency. Since
temp agencies can in principle provide many different labor services and are not associ-
ated with clear occupation codes we find these on-site outsourcing events to temp agencies
somewhat less clean from an identification perspective. On the other hand, temp agencies
clearly played an important role in the rise of outsourcing in Germany. For example there
are many news stories that business service firms themselves often outsource large shares
of their workforce to temp agencies. We therefore focus our analysis of the wage effects of
outsourcing on workers in FCSL (food, cleaning, security or logistics) tasks, but we do also
provide estimates for temp agencies separately and include workers in temp agencies in our
descriptive analysis on the rise of outsourcing.
    While this type of outsourcing was relatively uncommon in the late 1970s and 1980s, the
mid-90s saw a large increase in the number of outsourcing events to about 60-80 per year,
as can be seen in Figure 1 (a). This increase occurred across all five types of outsourcing
events, which follow similar time paths (Figure 1 (b)).18
  16
      Business service industries for logistics include transportation, warehouse and storage. For food occupa-
tions include canteens and catering. For cleaning, industries include industrial cleaning, cleaning of buildings,
rooms and equipment, street cleaning, chimney-sweeping, and scaffolding and facade cleaning. For security
occupations, the industries used were labeled security activities and security and storage activities. For a
complete listing of industry and occupation codes used, see Online Appendix tables A-3 and A-4.
   17
      While the outsourcing definition that we use does not explicitly exclude situations where a mother
establishment re-hires the types of workers who left the firm, we find that this is not typically the case. In
Appendix Figure A-1 (a) we graph the number of workers employed in the outsourced occupation at the
mother establishment (i.e. for establishments outsourcing cleaning tasks, this would be the number of workers
who are in occupations labeled “cleaner”) in the years surrounding outsourcing (which occurs between year -1
and 0). We find that this number drops sharply at the time of outsourcing and does not increase, indicating
that these workers are not replaced. If our method were instead just capturing layoffs or quits of groups of
workers while the corresponding tasks still stayed in-house, then the mother establishment would have to
replace these workers with others in the same occupation. Appendix Figure A-1 (b) shows establishment size
before and after outsourcing, and while establishment size decreases slightly in the years before outsourcing,
there is only a small drop at the time of outsourcing and afterwards employment continues to be relatively
flat, assuring us that we are not capturing mass layoffs or other types of restructuring or downsizing.
   18
      The spikes in 1983 and 1988 in outsourcing of food services are all due to department stores outsourcing
restaurants in those two years. We cannot link up our data to the company level across different counties,
but it seems likely that in each of these years a large department store chain decided to outsource all of
their restaurants simultaneously. We base this interpretation largely on the fact that the spikes are driven
by outsourcing events with exactly the same industry codes of mothers and daughters, as well as similar
establishment sizes in those years, while in other years there is a wide mix of industry codes among the



                                                       9
2.4    Measuring Outsourcing using Industry and Occupation Codes

While our method for identifying on-site outsourcing has the advantage that we can observe
the event of outsourcing right when it happens, the disadvantage is that we are likely missing
many instances where outsourced workers are not moved together to a separate business unit.
For example, we would not be capturing slower movements of tasks to outside contractors
that are not at the extensive margin (getting rid of workers of a specific task or spinning off
entire units of workers) and changes due to reallocation of employment shares among existing
firms or between exiting and new firms (who may, for example, rely more on outsourcing).
    In order to obtain a broad picture of the evolution of domestic outsourcing, Figure 2 (a)
shows the share of workers among all West German workers who are employed in establish-
ments that - based on their industry codes - provide cleaning, security or logistics (CSL)
services to other firms or who are temp agencies. We do not include food workers here,
since only the industry codes from 1999 onwards allow us to distinguish between business
service firms and regular restaurants. The figure documents a dramatic rise in outsourcing
of labor services over the past 3 decades: the share of outsourced workers in CSL business
service firms and temp agencies has increased from 2 percent to almost 8 percent of the West
German workforce in 2008. The figure also breaks out temp agency workers as a separate
group, showing a stark increase to around 2.5 percent of all workers in Germany in 2008. Im-
portantly these changes occurred even though the share (and absolute numbers) of workers
in CSL occupations remained approximately constant over this time period (see Appendix
Figure A-4).
    In Figure 2 (b) we show the share of outsourced workers in FCSL occupations, where
outsourced is defined as working for a FCSL business service firm or a temp agency. For
example, a food services worker such as a waiter or cook is considered to be an outsourced
worker if she is employed in the “catering” or “canteen” industry, or in a temp agency.
The share of outsourced workers in these occupations has increased substantially in all four
groups over time. The most dramatic increase is the rise of cleaners working for firms
providing cleaning services: while in 1975 only about 10 percent of cleaners were working
for cleaning firms, this share has risen to almost 40 percent by 2008. Cleaning tasks may
lend themselves particularly well to being broken out of the normal firm hierarchy and, as
they are often very low-paying, may provide particularly good opportunities for cost savings
through outsourcing. There was also a substantial rise in the share of workers in security
and logistics occupations who are working for business service firms, by about 20 percentage
points towards the end of the sample period. Over the shorter time period there has been
different mother establishments.



                                              10
an increase in the share of food workers employed in business service firms, from about 16
percent to 26 percent.19
     Another way to evaluate the extent of outsourcing of FCSL services is by analyzing in-
dustries which, although not in FCSL fields, typically employ some of these types of workers
to provide services for their establishment or workforce. Here we focus on retail, manufac-
turing, finance and hospital industries. Figure 3 graphs the share of large establishments
(over 100 workers) in each of these industries employing at least one FCSL worker in each
year. Starting with the top left graph, for the retail industry, we see that over time fewer
retail establishments employed workers in these occupations. For example, in 1975, about
82% of retail establishments had at least one cleaning worker on staff, while in 2009, only
about 20% did. Presumably these retail establishments are being cleaned somehow, and so
it is likely that these tasks have been contracted out to another provider, rather than being
done by workers employed directly by the retail firms. We see the same patterns among
manufacturing and finance firms. For hospitals, the share employing FCSL workers has also
decreased over time, although not quite as dramatically as in the other industries and mainly
during the 1990s and 2000s.
     Both our measure of on-site outsourcing events as well as our analysis based on indus-
try and occupation codes showed a substantial increase in outsourcing over the past three
decades. Especially since the late 1980s / early 1990s the growth has accelerated and reached
quite dramatic levels, with almost 8 percent of the entire German labor force now working
for FCSL business service firms and temp agencies. These findings are largely in line with
the limited evidence from the US and other countries, which covers much shorter time pe-
riods and more restrictive occupation groups.20 This increase in outsourcing on the worker
level also corresponds to the rise of large business service firms. While we are not aware
of systematic quantitative evidence, it is clear that for example, food services firms that
  19
     Food workers employed by restaurants and hotels are omitted from these calculations, as they would be
considered neither “outsourced” nor “in-house”, but rather providing the main service of the establishment.
We also exclude workers in the “waiter, steward” occupation who are employed in the air travel industry, as
they are likely to be flight attendants and not relevant to this study.
  20
     For example, Abraham and Taylor (1996) used a survey question in the 1979-1987 Industry Wage Surveys
and found an increase in the fraction of work contracted out for janitorial, machine maintenance, engineering
and drafting, accounting and computer tasks, while Wooden (1999) examined the AWIRS establishment
survey and found evidence of a small increase in the use of contract workers in Australia from 1990 to 1995.
Using the industry and occupation codes in the CPS from 1983 to 2000, Dube and Kaplan (2010) found an
increase in the share of janitors and guards working for firms that provide labor services to other firms. Dey
et al. (2010) investigated industry and occupation codes in the Occupational Employment Statistics program
and found that the share of workers in security, janitor, computer, and truck driver occupations employed
in industries that provide services to other firms increased from 1989-2000. Segal and Sullivan (1997) and
Autor (2003) document a sharp increase in employment in temporary help services between 1980 and 2000.
Finally Berlingieri (2013) argues that the rise in professional and business services outsourcing is responsible
for around 14 percent of the increase in service employment in the US.


                                                      11
provide catering and cafeterias to other companies are now a major multi-national industry,
consisting of large providers such as Compass Group (500,000 employees worldwide), Sodexo
(about 415,000 employees), Eurest, and Aramark as well as smaller independent providers.


3     The Effects of Outsourcing on Wages

3.1    Framework

It is not immediately obvious why business service firms would pay different wages than
outsourcing firms. In particular, if the labor market were perfectly competitive, then wages
should simply be determined by the productivity of the worker and possibly a compensating
wage differential component. However, if labor markets are not perfectly competitive, then
outsourcing may allow for lower wages and thus labor costs savings by reducing the non-
competitive wage component.
    In order to clarify this, consider the following simple wage setting equation :

                                                    ′
                       ln(wjt ) = δ Outsourcedjt + zjt γ + x′i(j,t);t β + ǫjt                 (1)

    where ln(wjt ) is the (log) wage of job j at time t. Outsourcedjt is an indicator function
taking a value of one if the employer is a business service firm and zero otherwise. Fur-
thermore wages are determined by characteristics of the job or workplace zjt , and individual
characteristics xi(j,t);t . Note that i is a function of j and t, since the same job might be held
by different people over time. A job is a set of tasks at a particular physical location, e.g. a
cook in a cafeteria within a bank. The employer may either be the parent company operating
the workplace, such as the bank, or a subcontractor that is hired by the parent company.
Workplace or job characteristics that affect wages could include working conditions or char-
acteristics such as the amount of variety or stress involved in the required tasks. The identity
of the employer may affect the wage paid for a job, separately from the characteristics of
the workplace, for various reasons, such as if wages are set in a collective or individual wage
bargaining setting or because of efficiency wage considerations. For example, if wages are set
in a collective bargaining process, then the profits of the employer might affect individual
wages through rent sharing. If the job is outsourced, then some or all of the rent component
of the wage may be lost, either because the profits of the subcontractor may be lower (due
to the more competitive environment) or because the workers may be in a weaker bargaining
position because they are not covered by the same labor union or they might find it harder
to go on strike (since the subcontractor can simply be replaced).
    The effect of outsourcing could be measured by estimating equation (1) using OLS. How-


                                                12
ever, in practice outsourced status is likely correlated with workplace and individual worker
characteristics. While panel data may help to control for individual characteristics through
individual fixed effects, it is rare to have information on job characteristics to satisfactorily
deal with the omitted variable bias problem. We provide two alternative estimates, of the
effects of outsourcing: First, we estimate equation (1) using an event-study design around
on-site outsourcing events. Second, we implement the method used by Dube and Kaplan
(2010) to estimate wage differences between outsourced and non-outsourced FCSL work-
ers using individual fixed effects regressions. The approaches have various advantages and
disadvantages, explained in detail below, and we view them as complementary evidence.21

3.2    The Effects of On-site Outsourcing on Wages

Method

In order to measure the effect of on-site outsourcing, we require a comparison group of
workers at jobs which are not outsourced. In general workers employed at outsourced and
non-outsourced jobs may differ in many dimensions. In order to obtain a comparable control
group, we implement a matching algorithm. For each outsourced worker, we take the set of
non-outsourced workers who worked in the same industry and occupation in the year prior
to outsourcing to be our potential control group.22 We then estimate a probit regression
of whether a worker is outsourced or not, controlling for tenure and establishment size in
the year prior to outsourcing as well as wages two and three years prior to outsourcing.
In addition, we restrict our sample to workers with at least 2 years of tenure at their es-
tablishment in the year prior to outsourcing. For each outsourced worker we then choose
the non-outsourced worker with the closest propensity score to the comparison worker.23
Columns 1 and 2 of Table 1 show worker characteristics for our analysis sample. The char-
acteristics of the matched outsourced and non-outsourced workers are quite similar, even
for characteristics that were not part of the matching algorithm, such as fulltime status and
   21
      Both the on-site outsourcing and industry-occupation estimates may fail to capture the cost of outsourc-
ing to workers who are simply laid off and replaced by a business services firm. This type of focus on the
effect of outsourcing on the worker level would be closer to the displaced worker literature, while here we are
interested in the effects of outsourcing on the job level. Nevertheless in the appendix we discuss this type of
worker level analysis, which we call Occupational Layoff outsourcing, and provide some estimates.
   22
      For this we use 3 digit occupation and 3 digit industry codes (5 digit after 1999).
   23
      We tested other matching specifications and found essentially the same results. For example, we matched
on other variables such as current wage, full-time status, and education. We also implemented a two-
step matching procedure, where we first found a control establishment for each outsourcing establishment,
matching on establishment size and mean wage; in the second step, we matched each outsourced worker
to a worker in the non-outsourcing matched establishment, matching on wage and education. This latter
procedure makes it harder to find very similar individual matches in the second step, but the estimation
results are very similar.


                                                      13
education.
   We use an event-study framework, using the full employment histories of our treatment
and control groups by estimating regression models of the form:

                        10
                               δk I(t = t∗ + k) Outsourcedjt + θi + ξj + αt + x′it β + εjt
                        X
                yjt =                                                                                         (2)
                        k=−5


    where yjt is an outcome variable and Outsourcedjt is an indicator for whether job j was
outsourced in year t∗ . αt are year fixed effects to control for year-level shocks that could affect
all workers and jobs, xit are individual-level time varying worker controls, and εjt is an error
term. We cluster standard errors on the level of the outsourcing establishment.24 While
we do not directly observe the job or workplace, by restricting the sample to individuals
who remain at the same employer as in the year right before and after outsourcing we can
indirectly control for job fixed effects ξj . Each coefficient δk measures the change in the
outcome variable yjt for outsourced jobs relative to the non-outsourced control group in the
k-th year before or after outsourcing occurred.25

Results

We start by comparing the trajectories of individual-level variables for outsourced and non-
outsourced workers in the years before and after outsourcing. Figure 4 (a) shows yearly
earnings before and after outsourcing for the two groups. It is reassuring for our design
that the two groups show very similar trends in earnings prior to the outsourcing year. The
change in the slope between t=-3 and t=-2 is due to the tenure restriction of 2 years prior
to the outsourcing year. This also leads to mean reversion in earnings in the control group
from year t=1 onwards.26 However, at the time of outsourcing the two groups diverge, and
   24
      This seems to be the most conservative in this case. If we cluster on the individual level, SEs are about
one third as large.
   25
      An alternative to matching is to use all workers in the potential control group for comparison, and
adjust the estimates using standard regression methods controlling for observables. One issue when doing
so is that it seems appropriate to allow for each cohort of outsourced workers (a cohort being workers who
are outsourced in a single year) and their comparison workers to have different year effects from each other.
When we implemented regression estimates using workers from a small number of outsourcing cohorts and
allowing for such flexible year fixed effects, we got virtually identical results to the propensity score matching
estimates (where the control observation is implicitly controlling for different year effects by cohort). However
in our main specifications we have around 30 cohorts with 15 year effects each, which brings the total number
of year dummies up to 450 and makes this computationally difficult when we also try to control flexibly for
other observables (state effects, industry fixed effects, individual fixed effects, ...). Our matching estimates
are more robust and can be implemented without computational problems. The second advantage of creating
a comparison group via propensity score matching is that comparing the raw means between the two groups
over time is already quite informative, even absent any regression adjustments.
   26
      We conducted extensive robustness checks with different tenure restrictions. For example with a tenure
restriction of 5 years, the ’kink’ occurs between year t=-6 and t=-5, which cuts our sample size but leaves


                                                       14
within 3 years after the outsourcing event the outsourced workers are earning approximately
1700 euros less than the non-outsourced group, a difference of about 10% of earnings. These
differences are persistent, lasting for at least 10 years after outsourcing occurs.
    Yearly earnings can be decomposed into the average daily wage over the year times the
number of days worked per year. In order to see what drives our earnings losses, Figure 4 (b)
shows the average daily wage over time for the two groups. Again the two groups are quite
similar in the years prior to outsourcing. After outsourcing, wages of the non-outsourced
group continue to increase steadily. Meanwhile, wages of the outsourced group drop slightly;
they start to climb again after 3 years, but never catch up to the non-outsourced group.
In the years following outsourcing, the wages of the outsourced group remain about 6-8 log
points lower than that of the non-outsourced workers.
    In Figure 4 (c), we turn to the other component of earnings, days worked per year, but
find essentially no difference between the two groups. We also explored differences in fulltime
status before and after outsourcing and found no difference between the two groups. It thus
seems that while outsourcing has a strong negative effect on the wages and earnings of the
outsourced workers, there are basically no employment effects.
    We further investigate employment stability in Figure 4 (d) by graphing the probability
of being employed at the outsourced job. In each year prior to outsourcing, the dependent
variable in this figure takes a value of one if the worker is employed at the outsourcing estab-
lishment - the establishment at which he was employed in time t=-1 - and zero otherwise.
For each year after outsourcing, it takes a value of one if the worker is employed at the same
establishment as in time t=0 (for outsourced workers this is the daughter establishment, for
non-outsourced worker it is the same establishment as in time t=-1). Figure 4 (d) shows
that outsourced workers are leaving their jobs at a slightly higher rate after outsourcing than
non-outsourced workers - 3 years after outsourcing, 77% of outsourced workers and 85% of
non-outsourced workers remain at the same job.27 When we investigated the job stability
patterns by outsourcing type, we found that the gap in mobility between outsourced and
non-outsourced workers is largest for cleaning outsourcing events, which - as we document
below - is also the group for whom wage losses are highest. As this suggests that the workers
the point estimates for the wage and earnings losses very similar. We also experimented with different
restrictions for when to include workers after t=0, such as whether to include workers with zero earnings in
a given year as zeros or to drop them (as is often done in the displacement literature). While these different
specifications affect the levels of earnings and the shape over time, it has virtually no effect on the differences
between the treatment and control groups.
  27
     The increased mobility among outsourced workers could also in part be due to ownership changes of
the outsourced establishments. Anecdotally it appears somewhat common that workers are outsourced
into subsidiaries that are later sold to other companies, which may be accompanied by a change in the
establishment ID.



                                                        15
who experience the largest wage losses are most likely to leave their jobs after outsourcing,
our method may slightly underestimate the wage losses associated with outsourcing.
    While the raw means are quite informative in our matched sample, there is the possibility
that selection and time varying variables on the individual level (in particular age) affect
the changes over time. For example, it is possible that in the non-outsourced group, low
wage workers are more likely to leave the labor force, thus creating a mechanical increase in
wages in the non-outsourced group relative to the outsourced group. The event study design
allows us to easily control for this type of selection by estimating equation (2) controlling
for individual fixed effects as well as year-level shocks. Figure 5 (a) graphs the δk coefficients
from estimating equation (2) using log daily wage as the dependent variable. The regression
framework confirms the results: outsourced workers suffer an immediate drop in wages at
the time of outsourcing and wages continue to decline relative to non-outsourced workers,
ending up about 10% lower after 10 years.28
    While we can follow workers over extended time periods, the further away from the
outsourcing event we compare outsourced to non-outsourced workers, the less likely it is
that the workers are still at the same jobs, as we documented in Figure 4 (d) above. The
main goal of this paper however is to estimate how wages change for jobs that are outsourced.
We can follow jobs - rather than workers - over time by excluding those workers who change
establishments, and hence leave their job, from our sample. Figure 5 (b) shows estimates
of the δk coefficients in equation (2) restricting our sample to workers who remained at
the same job after outsourcing, thus effectively controlling for job fixed effects.The results
for this restricted sample show a similar pattern but indicate somewhat larger wage losses
of about 15% 10 years after outsourcing. This is consistent with workers moving to other
establishments after outsourcing in order to avoid the wage losses, so that the estimates
without mobility restrictions are attenuated towards zero.
    Table 2 presents wage regression results for workers and jobs, for the full sample as well
as by daughter establishment type. This table uses a specification similar to equation 2,
but, instead of using individual dummy variables for each year relative to outsourcing, it
simply uses three indicator variables for the time periods: pre-outsourcing (includes the 6
years prior to outsourcing), short-run post-outsourcing (includes the year outsourcing occurs
and the following 3 years), and long-run post-outsourcing (years 4-10 after outsourcing). In
panel A we include all matched outsourced and non-outsourced workers and verify that, for
each type of daughter establishment, outsourced workers suffer a decrease in log wages both
  28
    Appendix figures A-5 and A-6 show these results for other outcome variables, indicating that there is
a very small short term effect on employment variables such as days worked and days working fulltime per
year.



                                                   16
in the short- and long-term of about 5.6% and 8.5%, respectively, implying a large cost of
outsourcing to the outsourced workers’ lifetime expected income. Workers outsourced to
cleaning establishments face the largest decrease in both the short and long term, while
logistics and food workers are impacted slightly less. We also report the effects of on-site
outsourcing events where the daughter is a temp agency, though these cases are not included
in the pooled specifications. It is striking that for outsourcing to temp agencies wage losses
are the largest with around 16 percent drops in the long run. In panel B we follow jobs rather
than workers by restricting the sample to only those workers who remain at their outsourced
(or non-outsourced) job. The results show that outsourced jobs suffer an even larger wage
loss in the long term, of about 10%, relative to non-outsourced jobs. The impact on jobs is
likely larger than the long-term wage impact on workers since in the long term outsourced
workers can move out of the outsourced job and to a higher-paying position.
    The last columns in Table 2 show the wage losses depending on whether the business
service firm that workers are outsourced to is a new establishment or an existing establish-
ment. The wage losses are similar, with just slightly larger losses for existing establishments,
which could be due to outsourcing events into existing establishments being different along
other dimensions.
    Overall, we find very consistent medium run wage losses of about 10 percent for jobs
that are outsourced during on-site outsourcing events. These results are very robust to
different choices with respect to sample, outsourcing definition, or estimation method (such
as matching algorithms vs. purely regression adjusted estimates). We also explored whether
on-site outsourcing had an effect on the wages of workers who stayed behind. Appendix
Figure A-3 shows that workers who stayed at an outsourcing firm had very smooth wage
trajectories around the outsourcing event with no evidence of a jump or trend break in the
outsourcing year. Furthermore the wage (and employment) evolution for them is parallel to
the wage evolution of workers in non-outsourcing firms.

3.3   The Effect of Working for a Business Services Firm

While the wage estimates using our measure of on-site outsourcing have a high degree of
internal validity, they may be limited in their generalizability since these events are relatively
rare and may not be representative of the bulk of outsourcing. On-site outsourcing may be
more common among larger, more successful companies who might be paying higher wages,
which can lead to larger wage losses after outsourcing and thus to an overestimate of the
wage loss for the general population. On the other hand, jobs that are outsourced in the
circumstances identified by on-site outsourcing may be subject to agreements between work
councils/unions and the outsourcing employer regarding the wages of the outsourced workers,

                                               17
making it possible that we are underestimating the true effect of outsourcing on wages.
    In order to obtain a broader estimate of the effect of outsourcing on wages, we estimate the
wage differentials for outsourced workers in FCSL occupations, where outsourcing is defined
based on workers’ occupation and industry codes.29 Food, cleaning, security and logistics
services workers are identified by their 3-digit occupation codes. “Outsourced” workers are
those who are employed at service contractors, i.e. establishments whose main business is
providing services to other firms, identified by their industry codes, while non-outsourced
workers are those who are employed in-house to provide services to a firm. We take the
universe of workers in FCSL occupations and estimate an equation of the form:

                           ln(wit ) = γOutsourcedit + αi + θt + x′it β + ǫit                               (3)

    where wit is the daily wage of worker i in year t, Outsourcedit is an indicator variable that
takes a value of one if the worker is employed at a business services firm in time t and zero
otherwise, θt account for year-level shocks that affect all workers, and individual fixed effects
αi control for fixed and xit for time varying individual characteristics.30 Using this method,
we identify the impact of outsourcing on wages using the movement of food, cleaning, security
and logistics workers between outsourced and non-outsourced status, rather than through
the timing of outsourcing as in the on-site outsourcing analyses. For the main specifications
we do not include FCSL workers working for temp agencies, but instead provide separate
results of the effect of working for a temp agency.
    Results are shown in the bottom panel of Table 2. We find that workers in FCSL
occupations employed in business services firms have wages that are about 9% lower than
non-outsourced workers in the same occupations. Cleaning workers face the largest losses
from being outsourced, a deficit of 17%, while security workers face a 12% loss. Food
and logistics workers at business services firms have wages that are about 3% lower than
those employed in-house. In the last column, we estimate the wage effect of working for a
temp agency. For this regression, we include only individuals who have worked in the same
  29
      Dube and Kaplan (2010) restricted their analysis to janitors and security guards; we additionally analyze
the effect of outsourcing on workers in food and logistics occupations. The approach in Dube and Kaplan is
in turn based on Abraham (1990). While both use CPS data, Abraham did not control for selection, while
Dube and Kaplan use the short panel structure of the CPS to estimate specifications with individual fixed
effects and thus control, in part, for selection into outsourcing.
   30
      We control for age, age squared and age cubed, all interacted with education dummy variables. Con-
troling for full-time status or dropping part-time workers makes little difference in the results. In the food
regressions, we omit workers employed by restaurants and cafes because they would not be considered out-
sourced nor to be providing services to a firm, since food services is the firm’s main business. In addition,
while the logistics, cleaning and security regressions were run using all years of data from 1975 to 2008,
food regressions started in 1999 because before then, industry codes did not differentiate between canteens,
catering and restaurants.


                                                      18
occupation in a temp agency as well as in other industries.31 We find that working for a temp
agency is associated with a 26% wage penalty, the largest of any type of business service
firm.
    While on-site outsourcing provides a high degree of internal validity, the estimates may
over- or under-state the effect for the general population. On the other hand, the higher
degree of external validity in the Dube-Kaplan approach comes at a cost: there is more
potential for selection into who becomes an outsourced worker. While individual fixed effects
control for permanent differences between workers, it may be that workers work for business
service firms after some kind of shock, such as a protracted unemployment spell associated
with human capital depreciation and loss in earnings potential. This could lead to downward
biases in the wage estimates. In addition, in this type of estimation we have no information
about job or workplace characteristics.32 To the extent that job characteristics are worse at
business service firms, this could lead to an underestimate of the true loss in compensation
or utility. It is reassuring that our estimates based on on-site outsourcing are quite similar
as the results from this section despite the difference in methodology and sample.

4        Do Firms Outsource to Exclude Workers from Rents?

There are four primary reasons why a firm may choose to outsource.33 The first is increased
flexibility - if a firm’s labor input needs vary throughout the year, they may prefer to sub-
contract for these workers rather than either hiring and firing workers throughout the year
or hiring the number of workers needed for the busy season, who then remain idle when the
workload decreases. The second is comparative advantage - the firm may require a service
that involves specialized skills or technology, which could be expensive for an individual firm
to investment in. In this case they may prefer to work with a contractor, who can take ad-
vantage of economies of scale and invest in the needed technologies which could be used for a
large number of clients. The third reason is that managers have finite resources to coordinate
complex production chains and outsourcing may allow them to focus on the more important
areas of the firm.34 Finally, outsourcing could provide cost savings, in particular on labor
inputs. Firms may be constrained in their wage-setting for various reasons. For example,
they may be required to pay higher wages to all employees because of collective bargaining
    31
     Instead of individual fixed effects, here we control for individual-occupation fixed effects.
    32
     Berlinski (2008)uses the Contingent Workers and Alternative Employment Arrangements supplement
to the CPS, which contains information on industry of assignment for workers employed by contract firms,
and thus can estimate the effect of outsourcing on wages controlling in part for job conditions. However,
because his data is a repeated cross-section and not a panel, he cannot control for selection into outsourcing;
in addition, the sample contains less than 100 outsourced workers.
  33
     For a discussion of these also see Abraham and Taylor (1996), Houseman (2001) and Berlingieri (2015).
  34
     See Berlingieri (2015).

                                                      19
agreements, which are typically set at the industry level in Germany. Alternatively, firms
may pay efficiency wages to some workers for various reasons. At larger firms workers may
be hard to monitor, and so higher wages may discourage shirking. At firms that employ a
large number of high-skilled, high-wage workers, lower-skilled workers may receive a wage
premium in the interest of fairness or equity. Outsourcing provides a way for firms to get
around these constraints: by moving these jobs outside the boundary of the firm, they can
be excluded from receiving these wage premia or rents.
    In this section we show that outsourcing is associated with a loss of firm rents, and
provide pieces of evidence suggesting that firms do in fact outsource in order to avoid paying
establishment level wage premia.

4.1    Estimating the Loss in Firm Rents Using AKM Decomposition

We follow Abowd et al. (1999) and CHK and estimate a full worker - establishment fixed
effect decomposition using the universe of social security data in Germany:

                                ln(wit ) = ψJ(i,t) + αi + θt + x′it β + ǫit ,                               (4)

where ψJ(i,t) represents a vector of establishment fixed effects, αi a vector of individual fixed
effects and θt and Xit β are year effects and time varying observables. We closely follow CHK
in the estimation of this model.35 First, we impute wages above the social security maximum
in Germany using their algorithm. Like CHK, we estimate the model on all fulltime male
workers, but rather than breaking the data up into different periods, we pool the entire time
period 1979 to 2009, which covers around 480 million observations.36 The establishment and
worker fixed effects are only separately identified within a connected set of establishments
  35
      Estimating the model is computationally challenging even on modern computers. To make this more
manageable we only run the estimation on the subset of individuals who switch employers, which provides
unbiased estimates with a negligible loss in efficiency (see CHK). This allows us to calculate the establishment
fixed effects which can then be used to calculate person and establishment effects for the whole sample. Even
then, we estimate that around 200GB or RAM would be necessary to estimate this using a conjugent gradient
algorithm like a2reg, which is not available to us at the research data center of the IAB. Instead we used the
Stata tool gpreg (written by us), based on Guimaraes and Portugal (2010), which is a slow but much more
memory efficient algorithm.
   36
      Breaking the sample up into separate pieces has obvious computational advantages, but also allows
establishments to have different fixed effects in different years. Since for some of our analysis in the next
sections we are interested in following workers over time after outsourcing, we want to have AKM effects
that are comparable across all periods, otherwise there would be large jumps at the transitions from one
period to the next. In practice this does not make a significant difference to our results. For the same reason
we estimate the AKM model including the earlier years from 1979 onwards. As Dustmann et al. (2009) and
others note, there was a change in the way bonuses were recorded in the IEB in 1984. We found that this
did not affect our estimates of the AKM decomposition (where we control for year dummies in any case).
When we did the same analysis excluding the years prior to 1985 the results were virtually identical.



                                                      20
which are linked through workers moving between them.37 We therefore restrict our analysis
to this largest connected group, which in our data covers around 90 percent of observations.
Identification of the AKM model requires that workers do not move across establishments
in a way that is systematically related to individual productivity shocks or trends. The
underlying assumptions are discussed in detail in CHK, who provide various tests suggesting
that these assumptions do indeed seem to be justified.
    The estimated establishment fixed effect - which we refer to as the “AKM effect” - provides
a measure of the wage premium paid by each establishment. As a first test whether the AKM
decomposition provides a useful measure of wage premia for the group of workers we are in-
terested in, we estimated the AKM model separately, once excluding FCSL workers and once
only using FCSL workers. Figure 6 shows a binned scatter plot of the two estimated AKM
effects for all establishments with at least 100 employees and who have at least one FCSL
and one non-FCSL worker. Both sets of AKM effects are normalized to have a mean of zero
in the overall establishment distribution. Quite remarkably, even though the two measures
of wage premia are estimated using mutually exclusive samples of workers, the relationship
between the two is essentially linear with an estimated slope of 0.95. Measurement error
in the right hand side variable will lead to a downward bias in the slope coefficient. When
we correct for this using split sample IV we obtain a slope coefficient of 1.05 (SE around
0.0004).38 Thus, establishments that pay their non-FCSL workers a premium pay almost
the same premium, in log terms, to FCSL workers.39 This suggests that firms do indeed
pay wage premia across the board and may find it difficult to exclude low skill workers from
these premia if they are employed directly by the firm. In the following analysis we will use
AKM effects estimated by pooling FCSL and non-FCSL, which will increase the precision of
   37
      In the on-site outsourcing sample all observations are in the connected group, which is not surprising
since at baseline all workers are employed at relatively large establishments.
   38
      In order to correct for the downward bias from measurement error, we took all workers who are not
in FCSL occupation and divided them in two equal sized random samples (on the worker level not the
employment spell level, so that worker histories stay together). We then estimate the AKM model separately
for each sample and keep the predicted establishment FE, call these EFE1 and EFE2. If measurement error
of the establishment FE in the AKM model is only due to small sample imprecision or due to measurement
error of individual wages where the error is IID across individuals, then the measurement error of EFE1
and EFE2 is uncorrelated. We then regress the predicted AKM effect estimated using FCSL worker only on
EFE1, but instrument EFE1 with EFE2. Since the measurement error of EFE1 and EFE2 is uncorrelated
given the above assumptions this gives an unbiased estimate for the slope coefficient. We calculate standard
errors clustering on the establishment level. We also repeated this for establishments with at least 500
employees (and where measurement error should thus also be smaller). For this sample the coefficient is 0.99
using OLS and 1.01 using split sample IV.
   39
      Technically the level of the premium is not identified (we cannot separately identify the average of the
individual fixed effects and the average of the establishment effects), so this statement is about the premium
relative to other establishments, that is if an establishment pays around 1 percent higher wages to Non-FCSL
workers than other establishments it also pays around 1 percent higher wages to FCSL workers than other
establishments.


                                                     21
the estimates (relative to using only FCSL workers).
     The effect of outsourcing on wages is reflected in this decomposition as the average dif-
ference in establishment fixed effects between an outsourced and a non-outsourced worker:
   h                                  i   h                                       i
E ψJ(i,t) |outsourcedi , αi , θt , Xit − E ψJ(i,t) |nonoutsourcedi , αi , θt , Xit . To compute the dif-
ference we take all workers in FCSL occupations and regress the estimated establishment
fixed effects ψ̂J(i,t) on a dummy for working at a business service firm or temp agency, as well
as year dummies and time varying observables.40 Results are shown in panel A of Table 3.
We find that overall, FCSL workers who are outsourced tend to be employed at firms with
with lower wage premia - their AKM effect is about 12 log points lower than FCSL workers
who are not at business service firms. This is fairly consistent across occupation types - we
see the largest difference for security workers (26 log points) and the smallest for logistics
(6.6 log points), but all are negative and significant. As in the last column of panel C in
Table 2, we separately estimate the effect of working for a temp agency on the AKM effect,
for workers who have been in the same occupation in a temp agency and in other industries.
Again we find a large, negative effect, of 33 log points.
     In panel B we include individual fixed effects. These estimates can be interpreted as
the difference in AKM effects between establishments where workers are actually moving
between outsourced and non-outsourced jobs. Here the loss in AKM effect for workers at
BSFs is slightly smaller, but still negative and significant. Overall for FCSL workers, after
controlling for individual fixed effects, being employed by a business service or temp firm
is associated with a 7 log point loss in AKM effect, implying a 7 percentage points lower
wage premium, with losses ranging from 20 log points for security workers to 4 log points
for logistics workers.

4.2    Establishment Characteristics after On-site Outsourcing

If exclusion from firm rents is the primary driver of wage losses for outsourced jobs, then
we would expect outsourced workers to move from higher-rent firms to lower-rent firms.
To test this, we analyze the characteristics of the establishments employing outsourced and
matched non-outsourced workers in the years before and after an on-site outsourcing event.
In particular, we look at the characteristics typically associated with rents - firm size, average
wage, and our measure of the establishment wage premium, the AKM effect
    Figure 7 shows employer characteristics before and after on-site outsourcing. Panel (a)
shows that outsourced and non-outsourced workers work in relatively similarly sized estab-
lishments, although the outsourced workers experienced a slightly declining trend in employer
  40
     We include age, age squared, and age cubed, and interact these variables with dummy variables for
different levels of education.


                                                  22
size in the years up to the outsourcing event. The outsourced jobs experience a dramatic
drop in employment size of their employer in year 0 to about 100 workers. In the years
following outsourcing we see that establishment size rises slowly for both groups. This is
because workers who leave their establishment - and therefore their job - are removed from
our sample. Workers may be more likely to stay at larger firms and therefore as the workers
at smaller establishments leave over time, the average establishment size in our sample goes
up.
    Figure 7 (b) graphs results for the average (log daily) wage at the establishments where
the workers in the two groups are employed. While the pre-outsourcing levels match well,
after the outsourced workers leave, the average wage at the establishment in which they are
employed drops substantially, by about 20%.
    Mean establishment wages are determined by a number of factors, such as the average
skill, education level, and experience in the establishment. An establishment could pay high
average wages but these might be entirely explained by the high skill level of its workers and
relative to this skill level the wages may actually be below average. To get a better measure
of the pay policy of an establishment, in graph (c), we show the average of the AKM effect for
the establishment at which each outsourced and matched non-outsourced worker is employed
in each year. Before outsourcing, both groups of workers were employed at firms with similar
AKM effects, but the outsourced workers move to firms with much lower AKM effects at the
time of outsourcing, and remain at lower-AKM effect firms in the years that follow. In fact,
the AKM effect drops by about 10 log points at the time of outsourcing, similar in size to
the long-term wage decrease that we see for outsourced workers.

4.3   Wage Losses by Establishment Characteristics

If the loss of firm rents is indeed the primary driver of wage losses for outsourced jobs, then
it is likely that workers with the most to lose - those coming from establishments with the
highest wage premia - would suffer the biggest drop in wages. To test whether this is indeed
the case, we divide our sample into groups based on the characteristics of the outsourcing
establishment (the establishment at time -1) most associated with firm rents.
    Figure 8 (a) shows the effects of outsourcing separately for establishments in the top
and bottom quartile of the establishment size distribution (within the matched establish-
ments). Jobs outsourced by the smaller establishments (in the bottom quartile) experience
significantly smaller wage losses in every year. For example, 5 years after outsourcing, jobs
outsourced from the smallest establishments experienced wages about 8% lower relative to
year -1 and compared to the comparison group, while those that came from the largest
establishments had losses of about 14%.

                                              23
    Similarly, Figure 8 (b) shows the effects by the mean wage of the outsourcing establish-
ment, again comparing the first with the fourth quartile. Jobs outsourced by establishments
located at the bottom of the (establishment level) wage distribution show less dramatic wage
losses relative to those that came from establishments in the top quartile. Figure 8 (c) shows
the wage losses separately for jobs outsourced from establishments with the top and bottom
establishment AKM effect. Jobs outsourced from high-AKM effect establishments saw a
much more dramatic loss in the short term, although the long-term effects are similar.41

4.4    Propensity to Outsource

Finally, we turn to the question of which type of firms are most likely to outsource their
service workers. We start by creating a definition of outsourcing that is more general than our
on-site outsourcing definition. In particular, it will capture situations where an establishment
lays off all of its workers providing a particular service - either logistics, cleaning, security or
food services - either in one large layoff event or over a few years. We say that, for example,
generalized outsourcing of cleaning services has occurred when an establishment loses the
last of its cleaning workers, conditional on having at least 5 workers in cleaning occupations
in the last 5 years and on not downsizing by more than 50 percent.42 We also only keep the
earliest instance of cleaning outsourcing for any establishment. Generalized outsourcing of
food, logistics and security services is defined analogously.43
    Using this definition, we can analyze whether establishment characteristics typically as-
sociated with higher firm rents are associated with outsourcing. Results of our analysis are
presented in Table 4. In these regressions, observations are at the establishment-year level,
and the dependent variable takes a value of 1 if the establishment experienced either an
on-site outsourcing event or a generalized outsourcing in the following year, and zero other-
wise. The sample is restricted to those establishments who are “eligible” to outsource (i.e.
  41
     We also found that workers who get outsourced from high AKM firms experience significantly larger
drops in the AKM effect of their employer after outsourcing. For example logistics workers outsourced from
establishments in the highest quartile of AKM distribution lose around 14 log points, while those from the
lowest only around 2. Similarly for cleaning workers, the highest quartile losses are around 3.5 times the size
of the lowest quartile losses. See Online Appendix Figure A-7 for more details.
  42
     More specifically, an establishment is said to have outsourced in time t if: it does not employ and workers
in cleaning occupations in time t; it employed at least 1 cleaning worker in time t − 1, and at some point
in the last 5 years it employed at least 5 such workers; the establishment had at least 50 employees in time
t − 1, and its size did not shrink by 50% or more between time t − 1 and t; and the establishment is not in
an industry associated with cleaning.
  43
     This definition may be best suited for cleaning, logistics and security outsourcing, which are services
that an establishment is likely to need whether they hire the workers directly or contract these services from
another provider. Food services are less clear - when a firm lays off its cooks and waiters, it may be that these
services are being provided by an outside vendor, or that the firm has decided to close down the cafeteria
altogether. Here we include food outsourcing events, but excluding them does not affect the results.


                                                       24
they have at least 50 employees) and excludes East Germany prior to 1997. All regressions
include state fixed effects to account for regional variations in outsourcing, year fixed effects
to control for shocks that may affect all firms in a year, and controls for broad industry cate-
gories to account for differences across types of industries in the propensity to outsource. We
augment our data with information from the IAB Establishment Panel Survey, an annual
survey of approximately 16,000 employers which has taken place since 1993.
    Columns (1) through (4) include all establishments in the sample, while columns (5)
through (6) include only those establishments that are included in the Establishment Panel
Survey. The independent variables all provide different correlates or measures of establish-
ment wages or rents. Larger establishments and those with a higher estimated AKM effect
are more likely to outsource, while the coefficient on log average establishment wage is posi-
tive, but insignificant. The wage premium paid to FCSL workers - calculated as the average
wage paid to workers in FCSL occupations at the establishment divided by the average wage
paid to FCSL workers employed at business service or temp firms in the same county and
year - is also positive and significant, indicating that those establishments that may save
more money in wages by outsourcing their FCSL to a business service firm are likely to
do so. The Establishment Panel Survey asked respondents whether they were bound by a
collective agreement; those who replied yes are also more likely to outsource FCSL work-
ers, conditional on year, industry and state. In addition, establishments that responded that
they paid wages above the collectively agreed scale were also more likely to outsource. While
one should be cautious to interpret this evidence as causal, we view Table 4 as providing
supporting evidence for our hypothesis regarding firm rents and outsourcing by documenting
the correlation between characteristics associated with higher firm rents - in particular the
firm AKM effect and participation in a collective agreement - and increased likelihood of
outsourcing.
    While the previous evidence suggests that firms are more likely to outsource when they
pay high wage premia and there is potential for wage savings, this does not explain why
outsourcing has increased over time. A possible reason is that over time new business
service firms have been entering the market competing for contracts. As the environment
became more competitive between business service firms, this increased the pressure to lower
prices and may in turn have lead to more firms considering outsourcing as an option. Indeed
Figure 9 (a) shows that the AKM effects of new business service firms have been falling
substantially over time, with the newest entrants paying much lower wage premia compared
to both the earlier cohorts of BSF and non-BSF establishments. Figure 9 (b) on the other
hand illustrates how the market for BSF has become increasingly competitive over time, by
plotting the average county-level market concentration herfindahl index for business service


                                               25
firms by year. For cleaning and security BSF competition on the local level has increased
markedly, which in turn may have driven down prices and wages. For food services we have
a much shorter time series, but over this short time series competition has increased as well.
For logistics BSFs, market concentration has always been relatively low, likely because this
is a more heterogeneous sector that always had a larger number of firms.

5        The Effects of Outsourcing on the Employment and Wage Structure

Germany experienced a substantial increase in wage inequality over the past decades, compa-
rable in magnitude to the changes in the US labor market (see Autor et al., 2008; Dustmann
et al., 2009). This has been partly due to a considerable decline in real wages at the lower end
of the wage distribution (Dustmann et al., 2014). Furthermore, CHK showed that a large
share of the increase was driven by increased dispersion of establishment wage premia - as
measured by the AKM effect - as well as stronger assortative matching between workers and
firms.44 While CHK and Dustmann et al. (2014) mention outsourcing as a possible channel,
their empirical evidence focuses on de-unionization as the driving force behind these changes.
Our results support the importance of the former channel, and in this section we explore
the extent to which outsourcing may have been a contributor to these broad changes in the
wage structure.

5.1       Decoupling of Wages in Labor Services

Dustmann et al. (2014) document a dramatic decline of real wages at the lower end of
the wage distribution since the early 2000s. After a decade of stagnation between 1990 to
2000, real wages at the 15th percentile fell by around 10 percent between 2000 and 2008.45
This pattern is also apparent among the labor service occupations we study in this paper:
Figure 10 (a) shows the evolution of real wages in cleaning, security and logistics (CSL)
occupations from 1975 to 2009.46 The figure shows that real wages in CSL occupations moved
in tandem with wages in other occupations until around 1990. Even for cleaners, where mean
wages were 50 log points lower during the early period, wages grew at approximately the same
rate as for the other occupations. This pattern changed markedly from around 1990 onwards,
when wage growth for CSL occupations decoupled from the general wage evolution: While
wage growth began to slow considerably across all occupations since 1990 and essentially
    44
     Barth et al. (2014) show that rising wage dispersion between establishments also plays an important role
in explaining the rise in wage dispersion in the U.S..
  45
     This decline has been even more pronounced in non-tradable sectors and tradable services, where real
wages at the 15th percentile already started to fall in the mid 1990s and then decreased by 10 to 15 percent.
  46
     Since we can only identify food business service firms in the industry codes since 1999, we do not separate
out food workers for this part of the analysis.

                                                      26
stagnated over the past 10 years, real wages in CSL occupations declined by a remarkable
20 log points over the past 20 years. It is noteworthy that this decoupling occurred at the
same time as the general rise in outsourcing shown in Figure 2.
    Figure 10 (b) provides further suggestive evidence that outsourcing is part of the ex-
planation for this decoupling. The figure shows wages for outsourced (working for business
service firms / temp agencies) and non-outsourced workers in CSL occupations as well as
for other occupations. Both outsourced and non-outsourced wages move in parallel with the
general wage evolution until 1990. From 1990 onwards CSL wages diverge, but more so for
outsourced jobs. This is consistent with the explanation that outsourcing allowed firms to
indirectly cut wages for labor services by a substantial amount. The fact that wages for non-
outsourced CSL workers also fell may be in part a selection effect, where the establishments
with the highest wage premia were most likely to outsource, and may also be because the
threat of outsourcing allowed employers to cut wages to non-outsourced workers.
    The role of establishment wage premia for CSL wages is illustrated in Figure 10 (c),
which shows the estimated AKM effects for CSL and other occupations. Decoupling is very
apparent in these graphs as well: AKM effects for cleaning and security workers are around 7
log points lower in 1975 compared to the other occupations, but move in parallel until 1990,
when they begin to rapidly fall until the gap is more than 20 log points in 2008. For logistics
workers the pattern is even more striking, since until 1990 the AKM effects for logistics
workers were essentially identical to average AKM effects in the general population but then
began to diverge sharply during the 1990s and 2000s to a gap of around 15 log points. In
other words, while in the 1970s and 1980s logistics workers were employed in firms that paid
the average wage premium in the economy, by the late 2000s they were employed in firms
paying around 15 percent lower wages.
    Figure 10 (d) shows the evolution of AKM effects broken up by outsourcing status.
While outsourced workers in CSL occupations always worked at establishments that paid
significantly lower wage premia, the differential remained roughly constant until 1990. From
1990 onwards outsourced workers are working at increasingly worse firms, with wage premia
declining by almost 15 log points. Non-outsourced workers are also losing wage premia
relative to the general population, with a gap of close to 10 log points by 2008. This
suggests that, consistent with the results in section 4, the firms that are not outsourcing are
those that are already paying very low wage premia and therefore face weaker incentives to
outsource.




                                              27
5.2    Occupational Sorting of Workers

CHK documented that workers are increasingly concentrated in establishments with ho-
mogenous workforces.47 Outsourcing provides a natural explanation for this: since business
service firms are much more homogenous (for example, in the typical cleaning BSF about
60% of the employees are cleaners), moving workers from heterogeneous lead employers to
BSFs that employ largely the same occupations as the outsourced worker will increase the
overall occupational assortativeness. Figure 11 illustrates this mechanism for cleaning, se-
curity, and logistics occupations by graphing the average Herfindahl index of occupational
sorting over time for establishments that employ cleaning, security or logistics workers.48
While panel a) shows that CSL workers are employed by increasingly homogenous establish-
ments, with an increase of the Herfindahl index of occupational sorting from 0.22 to 0.43,
panel b) shows that there there has been much less increase conditional on being outsourced
and only a mild increase conditional on not being outsourced. There is, however, a huge level
difference in occupational sorting between outsourced and non-outsourced workers, with the
former having a Herfindahl index of around 0.61 and the latter of around 0.3 towards the
end of the sample period. Thus much of the increase in occupational sorting among CSL
workers stems directly from movement from the non-outsourced group to the outsourced
group. Note that this may even understate the influence of outsourcing, since the increase
in the Herfindahl index for CSL workers at non-BSF firms might in part be due to increases
in occupational homogeneity because other occupations may have been outsourced.

5.3    The Contribution of Outsourcing to the Rise in Wage Dispersion

The main findings in CHK were that dispersion in AKM effects and assortative matching
between person and AKM effect increased substantially over the past two decades, accounting
for the lion’s share of the increase in wage dispersion. Our results from the previous sections
suggest that outsourcing may explain these developments in several ways.
    On the one hand, outsourcing changes the allocation of workers across establishments,
with outsourced workers moving to establishments at the lower end of the AKM effects
distribution. Since workers are moving from throughout the distribution to the bottom, this
will lead to a mechanical increase in the dispersion of the employment weighted AKM effects
  47
     This is only briefly discussed in the published paper. More details are provided in the NBER working
paper version.
  48
     The Herfindahl index was originally used as a measure of market concentration; we use it here as a
measure of occupational concentration within firms. For each establishment, we calculate the Herfindahl
index as the sum of squared occupation shares within the establishment. Establishments with workers in
a large number of different occupations will have a low Herfindahl index, while establishments made up of
workers in only a few occupations will have a large index.


                                                   28
distribution. Furthermore since workers in the affected occupations tend to be low wage
workers, this will also lead to concentration of low person fixed effects workers in firms at
the bottom of the AKM distribution, thus increasing assortative matching.
    On the other hand, while this can occur even if the unweighted distribution of AKM
affects remains constant, there are good reasons to assume that outsourcing affected the wage
premia of establishments directly. First, if rents arise from profit sharing, then outsourcing
would lead to profits being shared among a smaller number of workers and AKM effects
may well rise for the non-outsourced workers. Second, if within-firm wage inequality is
constrained due to collective bargaining or efficiency wage / fairness considerations, then
after a firm outsources these constraints may be loosened and wages may also rise for the
remaining high skill workers. Third, the creation of new business service firms who likely
pay low or no wage premia corresponds to the entry of new very low AKM effect firms, thus
spreading out the AKM distribution. And finally, outsourcing may shift bargaining power
away from workers towards firms, thus potentially reducing the role of wage premia in firms
where this is a threat.
    In order to illustrate the extent to which outsourcing contributes to the changes in the
AKM dispersion and assortative matching, we follow the decomposition of the variance of
log wages proposed in CHK:49

                 V ar(wit ) = V ar(θi ) + V ar(ψJ(i,t) ) + 2 Cov(θi , ψJ(i,t) ) + V ar(εit )

    Table 5 Panel A shows that the variance of log wages increased by around 0.073 from 1985
to 2008, around one third of which was due to the increase in the variance in establishment
effects and slightly less than half of it due to the increase in the covariance term.50
    We construct a counterfactual distribution of log wages and AKM effects, where we
reweight workers in CSL occupations so that CSL workers are kept at constant locations
of the AKM distribution. E.g. if in 1985, x percent of CSL workers were in the 90th
percentile of the AKM distribution, we reweight CSL worker in 2008 so that x percent are
in the 90th percentile at that time as well. To construct these counterfactual weights, we
use the reweighting method of DiNardo et al. (1996), where the conditioning variables are
indicators for the deciles of the AKM distribution interacted with a dummy for being in a
  49
     For the sake of brevity we ignore the components associated with time varying observables Xit β. As
CHK showed these components play almost no role in explaining changes in wage dispersion over time.
  50
     Since the IEB started to include bonues in the wage variable from 1985 onwards (see Dustmann et al.,
2009), the time series on wage dispersion are hard to compare before and after and exhibit jumps in 1985.
This is less of an issue for our specific occupations, but affects the variance and percentiles of the overall
wage distribution. For this reason we follow the literature and use 1985 as the starting year for this analysis.




                                                      29
CSL occupation.51 The results of this reweighting exercise are shown in Figure 12. The solid
line in panel (a) shows the variance of log wages by year for male fulltime workers excluding
workers in food industries or occupations. This figure documents the dramatic increase in
inequality since the 1990s. Panels (b) and (c) show the two components of this increase
highlighted by CHK: the variance of the establishment effects and the covariance between
person and establishment effect. The dashed line shows the reweighted distribution that
holds the location of CSL workers in the AKM distribution constant at 1985 levels. Overall
reweighting reduces the increase in the variance of wages by about 10 percent. As (b) and
(c) show, reweighting reduces the variance and the covariance terms, consistent with our
hypothesis that outsourcing contributed significantly to the increases in wage premia and
assortative matching. Table 5 Panel B confirms this visual impression, showing that the
DFL reweighting exercise can account for 9 percent of the rise in the variance of log wages,
and similarly for the AKM effect and covariance term.
    An alternative way to construct a counterfactual is to simply use the point estimate for
the loss in AKM effects at outsourcing, around 10 log points, and add it back to the AKM
effects of workers who are outsourced on top of the outsourcing level in 1975. As Table 5
Panel C shows, this leads to qualitatively similar results. The downside of this procedure
is that it does not account for the fact that the composition of non-outsourced workers has
changed dramatically: even the non-outsourced CSL workers are now working at much worse
establishments, likely because the high-paying establishments were the first to outsource.
    While we prefer the reweighting procedure, even this method is likely just a lower bound
of the impact of outsourcing on the wage structure. First, this exercise is holding the (un-
weighted) distribution of AKM effects constant. As described above, there are good reasons
to assume that outsourcing may have affected the AKM effects of establishments directly.
While we believe these equilibrium adjustments of wage premia to be important, modeling
them would require a more structural approach beyond the scope of this paper. Second, our
analysis here only uses CSL occupations, a relatively small fraction of the German workforce.
Outsourcing occurred for other low skill labor services as well that we do not capture here.
And third, while we focus on outsourcing of relatively low skilled jobs, it is conceivable that
outsourcing of high skill tasks lead to the creation of new high AKM establishments, leading
to increases in the dispersion of AKM effects and assortative matching at the upper end of
  51
    There are several other ways one could construct such a counterfactual. One choice would be to simply
keep the share of outsourced workers constant. However, since outsourced workers are typically displaced
from high AKM firms, such a simple reweighting scheme would reweight the outsourced workers to the
non-outsourced workers later in the sample who are at very low AKM firms. Thus this completely ignores
the selection effect of who is outsourced. Our method, on the other hand, simply assumes that without
outsourcing, the allocation of CSL workers across the AKM distribution would have remained unchanged.



                                                   30
the distribution as well.
    Finally, we also investigate whether the effects of outsourcing on wage dispersion were
concentrated, as one might expect, in the lower half of the wage distribution. Figure 12
(d) shows the 85th, 50th, and 15th percentiles of the log wage distribution (normalized to
0 in 1985). The figure shows that while outsourcing had no effect at the top of the wage
distribution, it lowered both the median and the 15th percentile substantially, contributing
to the erosion of wages at the bottom. Table 5 shows similarly that outsourcing - based
on the reweighting exercise - can account for about 6.7 percent of the increase in the 85-15
gap, with a larger effect on the 50-15 gap. We also did the same analysis for women (shown
in the online appendix). For women outsourcing explains around 7 percent of the increase
in inequality which is consistent with CSL workers only making up around 6 percent of
employment among women.


6   Conclusion

The labor market has seen a fundamental restructuring in recent decades, with lead employers
increasingly contracting out parts of their non-core labor force. Using high quality adminis-
trative data, we document the trend towards increasing reliance on outsourcing for Germany,
with a marked acceleration in the late 1990s. While we focus on a subgroup of labor services
where domestic outsourcing can be measured comparatively well (logistics, cleaning, food
and security services), anecdotal evidence suggests that this is a widespread phenomenon
affecting many types of labor services and occupations, such as human resources, IT, call
centers, and legal services.
    This reorganization of the production structure changes the employment relationship for
a large share of the workforce. As more workers end up employed by specialized business
service firms, they find themselves working for firms that provide narrow products and which
compete fiercely with similar firms for contracts with lead companies. This creates pressure
to reduce costs and lower wages, which likely make up a large share of input costs among these
types of business service providers. It also drastically changes the bargaining environment, as
the price competition among business service firms makes it difficult for outsourced workers
to bargain for a share of the firm rents at the lead company. In this paper, we provide
careful estimates of how this translates into lower wages for outsourced workers and we find
that across a wide range of measures, outsourcing reduces wages by around 10 percent. Our
method implies that this is not due to selection of different types of workers in outsourced
employment relationships, or due to differences in the types of jobs that outsourced workers
do. Instead it appears that outsourced workers receive lower pay since they are excluded


                                              31
from firm rents that are being paid to workers at the lead companies. This suggests that the
boundary of the firm is a crucial component for the wage setting and bargaining process.
    It is difficult to know why firms decide to outsource part of their workforce. Our evidence
that firms that seem to pay wage premia to their workers are more likely to outsource
is suggestive that saving labor costs is part of the motivation, but there are many other
reasons that are likely of similar or possibly higher importance, such as the comparative
advantage of business service firms in their specialty, cost savings through economies of scale,
or gains in efficiency through market pressures in the competitive environment of bidding
for service contracts. It is even more difficult to know what is driving the long-term increase
in outsourcing. Changes in management philosophy (e.g. a move towards emphasis on
shareholder value in the 1980s and 1990s) may be of similar importance as the development
of new technologies that facilitate breaking out service provision.52 Understanding this is
beyond the scope of this project but a fruitful area for future research.
    Finally it should be noted that the welfare implications of increased outsourcing are
not straightforward. Our findings suggest that the increasing reliance on contracting-out
reduced the participation of these workers in firm rents and contributed to the sharp rise in
wage inequality in Germany. However, outsourcing also made the provision of these kinds
of labor services more efficient, and while rents to workers may have diminished, it might
have contributed to overall economic growth and possibly the improved performance of the
German economy over the past decade. The general equilibrium effects might have decreased
unemployment and even increased average welfare, while at the same time having hurt the
workers who were directly affected.



References

Abowd, John M., Francis Kramarz, and David N. Margolis, “High Wage Workers and High
 Wage Firms,” Econometrica, 67 (2), March (1999), 251-334.

Abraham, Katharine G, “Restructuring the employment relationship: The growth of market-
 mediated work arrangements,” New developments in the labor market: Toward a new
 institutional paradigm, 85 (1990).

   and Susan K Taylor, “Firms’ Use of Outside Contractors: Theory and Evidence,” Journal
  of Labor Economics, (1996), 394–424.
  52
    As an indication that outsourcing was simply not on the radar of managers and consulting firms, Ap-
pendix Figure A-12 shows the frequency of the term “outsourcing” in the Google books database. The term
outsourcing only appears in the 1990s, coinciding with the rise of outsourcing in Germany.




                                                  32
Akerlof, George A and Janet L Yellen, “The fair wage-effort hypothesis and unemployment,”
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105 (2), (1990), 255–283.

Autor, David H, “Outsourcing at will: The contribution of unjust dismissal doctrine to the
 growth of employment outsourcing,” Journal of Labor Economics, 21 (1), (2003), 1–42.

  , Lawrence F Katz, and Melissa S Kearney, “Trends in US wage inequality: Revising the
  revisionists,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 90 (2), (2008), 300–323.

Barth, Erling, Alex Bryson, James C. Davis, and Richard Freeman, “It’s Where You Work:
  Increases in Earnings Dispersion across Establishments and Individuals in the U.S.,” Work-
  ing Paper 20447, National Bureau of Economic Research September (2014).

Berlingieri, Giuseppe, “Outsourcing and the rise in services,” (2013).

  , “Managing Export Complexity: the Role of Service Outsourcing,” (2015).

Berlinski, Samuel, “Wages and contracting out: does the Law of one price hold?,” British
  Journal of Industrial Relations, 46 (1), (2008), 59–75.

Card, David, Alexandre Mas, Enrico Moretti, and Emmanuel Saez, “Inequality at Work: The
  Effect of Peer Salaries on Job Satisfaction,” American Economic Review, 102 (6), (2012),
  2981–3003.

  , Jörg Heining, and Patrick Kline, “Workplace Heterogeneity and the Rise of West German
  Wage Inequality*,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, (2013).

  , Thomas Lemieux, and W Craig Riddell, “Unions and wage inequality,” Journal of Labor
  Research, 25 (4), (2004), 519–559.

Dey, Matthew, Susan Houseman, and Anne Polivka, “What Do We Know About Contracting
  Out in the United States? Evidence from Household and Establishment Surveys,” in
  “Labor in the New Economy” NBER Chapters, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  Inc, October (2010), pp. 267–304.

Dietz, Miranda, Peter Hall, and Ken Jacobs, “Course Correction: Reversing Wage Erosion
  to Restore Good Jobs at American Airports,” UC Berkeley Center for Labor Research and
  Education, (2013).

DiNardo, John and David S Lee, “Economic impacts of new unionization on private sector
  employers: 1984–2001,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (4), (2004), 1383–1441.

  , Nicole M Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux, “Labor Market Institutions and the Distribution
  of Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric Approach,” Econometrica, 64 (5), (1996), 1001–
  1044.

Doellgast, Virginia and Ian Greer, “Vertical Disintegration and the Disorganization of Ger-
 man Industrial Relations,” British Journal of Industrial Relations, 45 (1), (2007), 55–76.



                                             33
Dube, Arindrajit and Ethan Kaplan, “Does outsourcing reduce wages in the low-wage service
 occupations? Evidence from janitors and guards,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
 (2010), 287–306.
Dustmann, Christian, Bernd Fitzenberger, Uta Schönberg, and Alexandra Spitz-Oener,
 “From Sick Man of Europe to Economic Superstar: Germany’s Resurgent Economy,” Jour-
 nal of Economic Perspectives, 28 (1), (2014), 167-88.
  , Johannes Ludsteck, and Uta Schönberg, “Revisiting the German wage structure,” The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124 (2), (2009), 843–881.
Fitzenberger, Bernd, Karsten Kohn, and Alexander C Lembcke, “Union Diversity and Va-
  rieties of Coverage: The Anatomy of Union Wage Effects in Germany,” ILRReview, 66
  (2013), 169.
Gibbons, Robert and Lawrence Katz, “Does unmeasured ability explain inter-industry wage
  differentials?,” The Review of Economic Studies, 59 (3), (1992), 515–535.
Grossman, Gene M and Elhanan Helpman, “Fair wages and foreign sourcing,” Harvard Uni-
  versity Department of Economics Working Paper, (2007).
Grossman, Sanford J and Oliver D Hart, “The costs and benefits of ownership: A theory of
  vertical and lateral integration,” The Journal of Political Economy, (1986), 691–719.
Guimaraes, Paulo and Pedro Portugal, “A simple feasible procedure to fit models with high-
 dimensional fixed effects,” Stata Journal, 10 (4), (2010), 628.
Harvard Committee on Employment and Contracting Policies, “Lower-Paid Workers at Har-
  vard University,” Committee Report, Harvard University (2001).
Hethey-Maier, Tanja and Johannes Schmieder, “Does the Use of Worker Flows Improve
  the Analysis of Establishment Turnover? Evidence from German Administrative Data,”
  Journal of Applied Social Science Studies, 133 (4), (2013), 477-510.
Houseman, Susan N, “Why employers use flexible staffing arrangements: Evidence from an
  establishment survey,” Industrial & Labor Relations Review, 55 (1), (2001), 149–170.
Kalleberg, Arne L, “Nonstandard employment relations: Part-time, temporary and contract
 work,” Annual review of sociology, (2000), 341–365.
Krueger, Alan B and Lawrence H Summers, “Efficiency wages and the inter-industry wage
  structure,” Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, (1988), 259–293.
Muendler, Marc-Andreas, James E Rauch, and Oana Tocoian, “Employee spinoffs and other
 entrants: Stylized facts from Brazil,” International Journal of Industrial Organization, 30
 (5), (2012), 447–458.
Oberschachtsiek, Dirk, Patrycja Scioch, Christian Seysen, and Jörg Heining, “Integrated em-
 ployment biographies sample IEBS: handbook for the IEBS in the 2008 version,” Hand-
 book, Institut für Arbeitsmarkt-und Berufsforschung (IAB), Nürnberg (2009).

                                            34
Rees, Albert, “The Role of Fairness in Wage Determination,” Journal of Labor Economics,
  11 (1), (1993), pp. 243-252.

Schmieder, Johannes F., T. von Wachter, and S. Bender, “The long-term impact of job
  displacement in Germany during the 1982 recession on earnings, income, and employment,”
  IAB Discussion Paper, (2010).

Segal, Lewis M and Daniel G Sullivan, “The growth of temporary services work,” The Journal
  of Economic Perspectives, (1997), 117–136.

Smith Institute, “Outsourcing the cuts: Pay and employment effects of contracting out,”
  Report (2014).

Vitols, Katrin, “Reforming the German labour market: the case of temporary agency work,”
  Competition and Change, 8 (4), (2004), 375–389.

Weil, David, The Fissured Workplace: Why Work Became So Bad for So Many and What
 Can Be Done to Improve It, Harvard University Press, (2014).

Wooden, Mark, “Outsourcing and the Use of Contractors: Evidence from the AWIRS,” The
 Economic and Labour Relations Review, 10 (1), (1999), 22-35.




                                           35
     Table 1: Characteristics of Outsourced and Non-outsourced Workers
                             Outsourced    Matched Non-OS       FCSL at      FCSL not at
                              at t=-1          at t=-1         BSF/Temp       BSF/Temp
 Avg Establishment Wage         78.83              77.70           53.65         74.49
                               (20.16)            (20.35)         (19.59)       (17.94)
 AKM Effect*                     0.03               0.03           -0.14          0.02
                                (0.14)             (0.15)         (0.18)         (0.15)
 Establishment Size            1,120.63           1,110.63        265.41        1,683.45
                              (2,416.86)         (3,246.35)      (385.18)      (5,204.99)
 Real Daily Wage in Euro        69.93              70.18           51.07         63.71
                               (29.47)            (30.83)         (24.80)       (25.36)
 Age in Years                   42.29              43.67          40.25          41.87
                                (7.98)             (9.72)         (8.49)         (8.43)
 Female                          0.45              0.47            0.40           0.40
 Years of Education             10.16              10.22           9.93          10.06
                                (1.17)             (1.33)         (1.06)         (0.89)
 College Degree                  0.02              0.03            0.01           0.01
 Living in West Germany          0.86              0.91            0.85           0.94
 Working Fulltime                0.78              0.76            0.70           0.78
 Tenure in Years                 8.58               8.58           3.91           6.16
                                (5.80)             (6.35)         (3.83)         (5.29)
 Food Occupation                 0.21              0.21            0.05           0.14
 Cleaning Occupation             0.11              0.12            0.41           0.24
 Security Occupation             0.03              0.03            0.11           0.08
 Logistics Occupation            0.34              0.34            0.42           0.53
 Observations                   21195              20621         6412854       35201181
Notes: Mean of each variable with standard deviation in parentheses. Columns 1-2 include
On-Site Outsourced and matched Non-Outsourced workers age 25-55 with at least 2 years of
tenure in year before outsourcing. Statistics calculated in year before outsourcing. Columns
3-4 include workers in food, cleaning, security and logistics occupations who are age 25-55
and employed at an establishment with 50 or more workers. Column 3 includes these workers
who are employed at business services or temp firms, while column 4 includes these workers
who are not employed at business service or temp firms. All columns exclude East Germany
prior to 1997.
* The AKM effect is the predicted establishment fixed effect from the AKM model described
in section 4.1. The AKM effects are normalized to be equal to 0 in the sample of all workers
from 1979-2009 (the period we use for the AKM model).




                                            36
                                         Table 2: The Effects of Outsourcing on Log Wages
                                        All FCSL       Food      Cleaning    Security    Logistics     Temp      OS to new      OS to
                                        OS events                                                                 Estab.       Existing
                                        & workers                                                                               Estab.

      Panel A: Effect of On-site Outsourcing on Workers
      Post-OS short-run                 -0.056***    -0.048***   -0.11***    -0.069***   -0.039***    -0.15***    -0.043***    -0.074***
                                         (0.0048)     (0.0056)    (0.013)     (0.016)     (0.0058)     (0.019)     (0.0053)     (0.0083)
      Post-OS long-run                  -0.085***    -0.087***   -0.12***    -0.10***    -0.066***    -0.16***    -0.080***    -0.092***
                                         (0.0077)     (0.010)     (0.019)     (0.021)     (0.010)      (0.019)     (0.0095)     (0.013)
      Observations                       517662       158971       73064       83574      202053       97538       305315       212347
      Avg Outcome Var at t=-1             4.14         4.02         3.95         4         4.37         4.37        4.11         4.19

      Panel B: Effect of On-site Outsourcing on Jobs
      Post-OS short-run                 -0.054***    -0.045***   -0.10***    -0.072***   -0.035***    -0.15***    -0.041***    -0.073***
                                         (0.0050)     (0.0049)    (0.013)     (0.019)     (0.0057)     (0.016)     (0.0056)     (0.0087)
      Post-OS long-run                  -0.097***    -0.11***    -0.12***    -0.14***    -0.059***    -0.16***    -0.090***    -0.11***




37
                                         (0.0079)    (0.0093)     (0.018)     (0.024)     (0.011)      (0.023)     (0.0099)     (0.013)
      Observations                       429949       134005       61276       69976      164692       72854       259434       170515
      Avg Outcome Var at t=-1             4.14         4.02         3.95         4         4.37         4.37        4.11         4.19

      Panel C: Effects of working for Business Service Firm (Dube & Kaplan 2010 Measure)
      Working for Business              -0.090***    -0.036***   -0.17***    -0.12***    -0.028***    -0.26***
      Service Firm                      (0.00064)     (0.0030)   (0.0015)    (0.0027)    (0.00064)   (0.00075)
      Observations                      36234249     1455432     10703132     3373983    20701702    13084766
      OS Workers                         1529268      45950       723294       204031     576039      629278
      Mean Outcome for OS workers          3.83        3.79        3.43         3.95       4.21        3.93
     Notes: (*p<.1, **p<.05, ***p<.01) Standard errors in Panel A and B are clustered at the level of the outsourcing establishment,
     in Panel C at the worker level. Panels A and B use matched sample of OS and non-OS workers. Panel B includes only workers who
     are at the same establishment as in time t=-1 in all years prior to outsourcing, and in the same establishment as in time t=0 in
     all years after outsourcing. Time periods are 5 yrs pre-OS; 4 yrs short-run; 6 yrs long-run. First column, for all outsourcing types,
     does not include workers outsourced to temp firms. All regressions include individual fixed effects and year dummies, and exclude
     East Germany before 1997. Panel C, column 1 includes only workers in food, cleaning, security or logistics occupations; columns
     2-5 include only workers in the occupation indicated by the column heading. For food workers, the independent variable has a value
     of 1 if the worker is employed by a firm that provides food services to other companies (defined analogously for other occupations).
     Column 6 is restricted to individuals in any occupation who have worked in the same occupation at both a temp agency and in
     another industry; the independent variable has a value of 1 if the workers is employed by a temp agency. All regressions in Panel
     C control for individual fixed effects, year indicator variables, age, age squared and age cubed interacted with education dummies;
     samples are restricted to workers age 25-55, working at establishments with at least 50 workers, and excluding East Germany before
     1997. Food workers employed at restaurants and hotels are omitted.
             Table 3: The Effects of Outsourcing on Establishment Wage Premia
                                    All OS        Food      Cleaning     Security    Logistics     Temp

 Panel A: OLS
 Working for Business               -0.12***     -0.13***    -0.10***    -0.26***   -0.066***     -0.33***
 Service Firm                      (0.00021)    (0.00090)   (0.00028)   (0.00058)   (0.00026)    (0.00039)
 Observations                      33744965     1205601     10057326     3014162    19467876     11628470
 OS Workers                         1316240      33321       616064      171077      513344       529642
 Mean Outcome for OS workers          -.12        -.15        -.16         -.26       -.03         -.34

 Panel B: Individual Fixed Effects
 Working for Business              -0.069***   -0.051***    -0.067***    -0.20***   -0.041***     -0.33***
 Service Firm                      (0.00038)    (0.0023)    (0.00075)    (0.0022)   (0.00044)    (0.00063)
 Observations                      33744965     1205601     10057326     3014162    19467876     11628470
 OS Workers                         1316240      33321       616064      171077      513344       529642
 Mean Outcome for OS workers          -.12        -.15        -.16         -.26       -.03         -.34
Notes: (*p<.1, **p<.05, ***p<.01) Standard errors, in parentheses, are clustered at the worker level.
Dependent variable is the AKM effect of the establishment at which each worker is employed. Column 1
includes only workers in food, cleaning, security or logistics occupations; columns 2-5 include only workers
in the occupation indicated by the column heading. For food workers, the independent variable has a value
of 1 if the worker is employed by a firm that provides food services to other companies (defined analogously
for other occupations). Column 6 is restricted to individuals in any occupation who have worked in the
same occupation at both a temp agency and in another industry; the independent variable has a value of
1 if the workers is employed by a temp agency. All regressions control for year indicator variables, age,
age squared and age cubed interacted with education dummies; Panel B also controls for individual fixed
effects. Samples are restricted to workers age 25-55, working at establishments with at least 50 workers,
and excluding East Germany before 1997. Food workers employed at restaurants and hotels are omitted.




                                                    38
                           Table 4: Determinants of Outsourcing
                                           All Establishments                   Establishment Panel
                                                                                      Sample
                                (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
 Log Estab Size              0.0084***
                             (0.00016)
 Log Avg Estab Wage                        0.00044
                                          (0.00032)
 AKM Effect                                             0.0046***
                                                        (0.00057)
 Wage Premium to FSCL                                               0.0015***
 workers over BSF firms                                             (0.00026)
 Collective Agreement                                                           0.0091***
                                                                                 (0.0013)
 Pay Wages                                                                                  0.0029**
 Above Standard                                                                             (0.0014)
 Observations                 2086507     2086505       1892408     1769077       68577       68595
 Mean of Dep Var                .012        .012          .011        .014         .02         .02
 Mean of Indep Var             4.788       4.285          .003       1.162         .81         .34
Notes: (*p<.1, **p<.05, ***p<.01) Standard errors, in parentheses, are clustered at the establishment
level. All regressions exclude East Germany before 1997 and establishments with less than 50 workers.
Columns 5-6 includes only establishments included in the IAB Establishment Panel Survey. All regres-
sions control for state dummies, year dummies, and industry dummies. Dependent variable = 1 if the
establishment was involved in either a general outsourcing event or an on-site outsourcing event in the
following year, and 0 otherwise. “Collective Agreement”=1 if the establishment responded that they
were bound by a collective agreement. “Pay Wages Above Standard”=1 if the establishment responded
that they pay salaries and wages above the collectively agreed scale. “Wage Premium to FSCL workers
over BSF firms” is the ratio of the average wage paid to Food, Security, Cleaning and Logistics work-
ers at the establishment to the average wage paid to Food, Security, Cleaning and Logistics workers
employed by business services firms or temp agencies in the same county and year.




                                                   39
Table 5: The Evolution of the West German Wage Structure from 1985 to 2008 and the
Role of Outsourcing
                                         Wage Structure      Wage Structure    Change from     Percent of Change
                                             1985                2008          1985 - 2008       explained by
                                                                                                Counterfactual
 Panel A: Observed
 Total Variance of Log Wages                   0.132              0.205            0.073
 Variance of Estab Effects                    0.0289             0.0547           0.0258
 2 × Cov(person, estab effect)                -0.0050            0.0426           0.0475
 85-15 log wage percentile gap                 0.655              0.934            0.279
 85-50 log wage percentile gap                 0.385              0.512            0.127
 50-15 log wage percentile gap                 0.270              0.422            0.152
 Panel B: Counterfactual I: DFL Reweighting of CSL Workers
 Total Variance of Log Wages                   0.132              0.198            0.067              8.9%
 Variance of Estab Effects                    0.0289             0.0525           0.0236              8.4%
 2 × Cov(person, estab effect)                -0.0050            0.0381           0.0431              9.4%
 85-15 log wage percentile gap                 0.655              0.916            0.260              6.7%
 85-50 log wage percentile gap                 0.385              0.503            0.118              7.1%
 50-15 log wage percentile gap                 0.270              0.412            0.142              6.4%
 Panel C: Counterfactual II: Adjusting Wage and AKM Effect of Additional Outsourced Workers
 Total Variance of Log Wages                   0.132              0.200            0.068              7.1%
 Variance of Estab Effects                    0.0289             0.0518           0.0229              11.2%
 2 × Cov(person, estab effect)                -0.0050            0.0408           0.0457               3.8%
 85-15 log wage percentile gap                 0.655              0.925            0.270               3.3%
 85-50 log wage percentile gap                 0.385              0.510            0.125               1.6%
 50-15 log wage percentile gap                 0.270              0.415            0.144               4.7%
 Percent working in CLS occupations            0.127             0.138             0.011
 Percent outsourced                            0.039             0.099             0.060
Notes: Sample are all fulltime male workers in West Germany, excluding workers in food occupations or food
industries. Panel A shows the observed wage structure in 1985 and 2008 as well as the estimated components due
to the variance of establishment effects and the covariance of establishment with person effects. Panel B shows the
counterfactual where workers in cleaning, security and logistics (CSL) occupations in 2008 are reweighted in order
to keep them at the same percentiles of the AKM distribution as in 1985 using DFL reweigthing (see text). Panel
C shows the counterfactual where a random fraction of workers in CSL business service firms and temp agencies are
’insourced’ in 2008 by adding 10 log points to their log wage and establishment effect. The fraction to be insourced
is picked so that the fraction of outsourced workers remains at the 1985 level.




                                                        40
             Figure 1: Frequency of On-site Outsourcing Events by Year



                            150
              Number of Outsourcing Events
                  50        0    100




                                              1970   1980           1990        2000      2010
                                                                    Year

                                                        West Germany       East Germany


              (a) Number of Outsourcing Establishments in East and West Germany
                              80
               Number of Outsourcing Events
                  20       40 0     60




                                              1970   1980           1990        2000      2010
                                                                    Year

                                                             Food          Cleaning
                                                             Security      Logistics
                                                             Temp

                       (b) Number of Outsourcing Establishments by Type of Outsourcing

Notes: The figure shows the number of on-site outsourcing events in Germany by year, where on-
site outsourcing events are defined as groups of workers leaving large establishments and moving to
business service firms. The top figure breaks this up by East and West Germany, while the bottom
breaks it up by outsourcing type. Only the bottom figure includes outsourcing to temp agencies.



                                                                  41
Figure 2: Share of Workers employed by Business Service Firms and Temp Agencies
over time
                   .08
                   .06
                   .04
                   .02
                   0            Fraction of workers in Cleaning, Security or Logistics BSF or Temp Agencies




                         1970              1980                      1990                          2000       2010
                                                       Cleaning, Security or Logistics BSF or Temp Agencies
                                                       Temp Agencies




                                           (a) Worker in all Occupations
                   .4
                   .3
                   .2
                   .1
                   0




                         1970              1980                        1990                          2000      2010
                                                                       year


                                                        Food                              Cleaning
                                                        Security                          Logistics

                 (b) Workers in Food / Cleaning / Security / Logistics Occupations

Notes: The top figure shows the share of all fulltime workers in West Germany from 1975 to 2008
who are working in either a cleaning, security or logistics business service firm or for a temp agency.
The top figure shows the share of workers in food, cleaning, security or logistics occupations who
are employed in business service firms or temp agencies. For food occupations the time series in the
bottom figure starts in 1999, since earlier industry codes did not differentiate between restaurants
and food business services industries, such as canteens and catering. We also exclude food workers
employed in the restaurant, hotel and air travel industries.




                                                                   42
Figure 3: Share of Firms with any Food/Cleaning/Security/Logistics workers, by
Industry
                         Retail industry                                                     Manufacturing industry




                                                                      1
    1




                                                                      .8
    .8




                                                                      .6
    .6




                                                                      .4
    .4




                                                                      .2
    .2




         1970   1980          1990            2000        2010             1970      1980            1990             2000   2010
                              Year                                                                   Year


                       (a) Retail                                                      (b) Manufacturing
                        Finance industry                                                           Hospitals
                                                                      1
    .8




                                                                      .8
    .6




                                                                      .6
    .4




                                                                      .4
    .2




                                                                      .2
    0




         1970   1980          1990            2000        2010             1970      1980            1990             2000   2010
                ï




                              Year                                                                   Year


                       (c) Finance                                                          (d) Hospitals

                                           +,,-                                   ./()0102
                                           3(45*16'                               7,21861489ï9:*1;(*8
                                           7,21861489ï9<)*(=,58(



Notes: The Figure shows the fraction of West German establishments with at least 100 workers in 4
major industries (retail, manufacturing, finance and hospitals), who are employing at least 1 worker
in the respective occupations (food, cleaning, security, driver or warehouse worker). The data covers
1975 to 2008 and in each year is based on the employee composition on June 30th.




                                                                 43
Figure 4: Employment Outcomes of Outsourced and Non-Outsourced Workers Before
and After On-site Outsourcing




                                                                     4.3
25000




                                                                     4.25
24000
23000




                                                                     4.2
22000




                                                                     4.15
21000




                                                                     4.1

        −5         0                                   5   10               −5             0                                   5   10
                       Years relative to Outsourcing                                           Years relative to Outsourcing

                                         OS                                                                      OS
                                         Non−OS                                                                  Non−OS




                (a) Yearly Earnings                                                     (b) Log Daily Wage
                                                                     1
360




                                                                     .8
340
320




                                                                     .6
300




                                                                     .4




        −5         0                                   5   10               −5             0                                   5   10
                       Years relative to Outsourcing                                           Years relative to Outsourcing

                                         OS                                                                      OS
                                         Non−OS                                                                  Non−OS




             (c) Days Worked Per Year                                       (d) Probability of working at outsourced job

Notes: The figures follow two group of workers: the first is a group of workers who are outsourced
between year t=-1 and t=0, while the second group is a control group of non-outsourced workers.
The control group was chosen by finding workers employed in the same industry and occupation with
similar tenure and establishment size in the year prior to outsourcing, and have similar wages 2 and
3 years prior to outsourcing as the outsourced workers. The figures show average characteristics of
the workers in the two groups before and after the outsourcing event. The wage graph uses the full
universe of workers, while the earnings and days worked graphs use a 25pct sample (to be updated
using the full universe of workers soon).




                                                                44
Figure 5: Regression Estimates of the Effect of On-site Outsourcing on Log Daily
Wages



                  0
                  −.05
                  −.1
                  −.15




                         −5                  0                                   5   10
                                                 Years relative to Outsourcing

                          (a) All worker observations before and after outsourcing
                  0
                  −.05
                  −.1
                  −.15




                         −5                  0                                   5   10
                                                 Years relative to Outsourcing

                 (b) Sample restricted to observations remaining at the same job

Notes: The figures show regression estimates of the effects of being outsourced on log wages before
and after the outsourcing event (see equation 2). The omitted category is year -1. The bands are
95 percent confidence intervals (SE clustered on the level of the outsourcing establishment). The
regressions control for individual fixed effects and year dummies. The figures follow two group of
workers: the first is a group of workers who are outsourced between year t=-1 and t=0, while the
second group is a control group of non-outsourced workers. The control group was chosen by finding
workers employed in the same industry and occupation with similar tenure and establishment size
in the year prior to outsourcing, and have similar wages 2 and 3 years prior to outsourcing as the
outsourced workers.
The sample consists of all workers outsourced during on-site outsourcing events from 1975 to 2008
as well as the matched control group. The top panel shows results irrespective of whether they move
to other establishments in later years. The bottom panel restricts the sample to workers who are at
the outsourced job, i.e. at the same establishment as in time t=-1 in all years before outsourcing,
and in the same establishment as in time t=1 in all years after outsourcing.




                                                          45
Figure 6: Comparing Estimated Wage Premia (AKM Effects) based on FCSL and
Non-FCSL workers
                                                            .4
                 AKM effect estimated using only FCSL workers
                              0          −.2 .2




                                                                 −.2                 0                    .2              .4
                                                                       AKM effect estimated using only Non−FCSL workers

Notes: The figure shows a binned scatter plot of AKM effects estimated using food, cleaning,
security and logistics (FCSL) workers and non-FCSL workers. Each dot corresponds to 1/20th of
the observations. Sample is restricted to all German establishments with at least 100 employees.
The regression coefficient of the simple regression is 0.946 (SE: 0.0003). The measurement bias
corrected regression coefficient (using split sample IV to correct for measurement error in the RHS
variable) is 1.05 (SE: 0.0004). For establishments with more than 500 employees the reg coefficient
is 0.99 using OLS and 1.01 using split sample IV (SE around 0.0004 in both cases). All standard
errors clustered on the establishment level.




                                                                                          46
Figure 7: Establishment Characteristics of Outsourced and Non-outsourced Jobs be-
fore and after Outsourcing
1500




                                                                                          4.4
                                                                                          4.3
1000




                                                                                          4.2
500




                                                                                          4.1
0




                                                                                          4

       −5              0                                   5                    10               −5                0                                   5   10
                           Years relative to Outsourcing                                                               Years relative to Outsourcing

                                                 OS                                                                                      OS
                                                 Non−OS                                                                                  Non−OS




            (a) Size of Employer (Establishment)                                                         (b) Average Log Wage of Coworkers
                                          .05
                                          0
                                          −.05
                                          −.1




                                                  −5                  0                                   5                  10
                                                                          Years relative to Outsourcing

                                                                                                OS
                                                                                                Non−OS




                                                               (c) AKM Effect of Employer

Notes: Sample restricted to workers who are at the same establishment as in time t=-1 in all years
before outsourcing, and in the same establishment as in time t=1 in all years after outsourcing. The
figures follow two group of workers: the first is a group of workers who are outsourced between year
t=-1 and t=0, while the second group is a control group of non-outsourced workers. The figures show
average characteristics of the establishments where the workers in the two groups are working before
and after the outsourcing event. The AKM effect is the estimated establishment fixed effect from a
wage regression including a full set of worker and establishment fixed effects using the universe of
wage records in Germany.




                                                                                     47
            Figure 8: The Effects of Outsourcing by Characteristics of Outsourcing Firm
 .1




                                                                                             0
                                                                                             −.05
 0




                                                                                             −.1
 −.1




                                                                                             −.15
 −.2




                                                                                             −.2
                                                                                             −.25
 −.3




       −5               0                                       5                  10               −5               0                                       5           10
                            Years relative to Outsourcing                                                                Years relative to Outsourcing

                                    1st quartile of Establishment size                                                         1st quartile of Establishment mean wage
                                    4th quartile                                                                               4th quartile



(a) Log Wage by Size of Outsourcing Establishment (b) Log Wage by Mean Wage of Outsourcing Estab-
(1st vs. 4th Quartile)                            lishment (1st vs. 4th Quartile)
                                             0
                                             −.1
                                             −.2




                                                   −5                    0                                      5              10
                                                                             Years relative to Outsourcing

                                                                                        1st quartile of AKM Effect
                                                                                        4th quartile



                                         (c) Log Wage by Establishment AKM Effect of Out-
                                         sourcing Establishment (1st vs. 4th Quartile)

       Notes: The figures show regression estimates of the effects of being outsourced on log wages and
       establishment AKM effect before and after the outsourcing event. The regression is based on equation
       (2) in the paper where outsourcing is interacted with characteristics of the outsourcing establishment.
       The omitted category is year -1. The bands are 95 percent confidence intervals (SE clustered on the
       level of the outsourcing establishment). The sample is restricted to workers who are at the same
       establishment as in time t=-1 in all years before outsourcing, and in the same establishment as in
       time t=1 in all years after outsourcing. The establishment AKM effects are calculated using the
       method described in Card, Heining and Kline (2013) using the universe of social security data for
       Germany (own calculations).




                                                                                        48
           Figure 9: Market Entry of New Business Service Firms over Time


                      2
                      1.9
                      1.8
                      1.7
                      1.6
                      1.5




                            1970             1980                          1990            2000                          2010
                                                                           Year
                                           New CSL business service firm            Existing CSL business service firm
                                           New Non−CSL firm                         Existing Non−CSL firm




                      (a) AKM Effects of New and Existing Establishments by Year
                                            Average BSF Herfindahl Index By Year
                 .8
                 .6
                 .4
                 .2
                 0




                      1970                   1980                            1990                  2000                         2010
                                                                             year


                                                               Food                   Cleaning
                                                               Security               Logistics
                       West germany only. Uses w73 industry codes
                      (b) Market Concentration of Business Service Firms by Year

Notes: The top figure shows the AKM effect (estimated over the entire duration of an establishments
existence) of establishments by the year the establishment was founded (first appears in the data).
The figure is restricted to establishments with at least 10 employees in West Germany 1976-2008. The
bottom figure shows the average county level index of employment weighted market concentration
among business service firms. The index can be interpreted as the probability that two randomly
picked workers at business service firms in a particular year and county are working for the same
firm. The data is restricted to West Germany 1975-2008.




                                                                           49
  Figure 10: Decoupling of Wages in Logistics, Cleaning and Security Occupations from
  General Wage Growth
                          3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 4 4.1 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7 4.8




                                                                                                                                                                       3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 4 4.1 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7 4.8
Log Real Wage (imputed)




                                                                                                                                             Log Real Wage (imputed)

                                                                                      1970      1980      1990                 2000   2010
                                                                                                          Year                                                                                                                     1970   1980   1990                 2000   2010
                                                                                                           Other Occupations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Year
                                                                                                           Cleaning                                                                                                                               Other Occupations
                                                                                                           Security                                                                                                                               All Occ − Not OS
                                                                                                           Logist                                                                                                                                 All Occ − OS



                                                                                        (a) Evolution of Wages by Occupations                                          (b) Evolution of Wages by Outsourced Status
                          1.8




                                                                                                                                                                       1.8
                          1.7




                                                                                                                                                                       1.7
Establishment effect




                                                                                                                                             Establishment effect
                          1.6




                                                                                                                                                                       1.6
                          1.5




                                                                                                                                                                       1.5
                          1.4




                                                                                                                                                                       1.4
                          1.3




                                                                                                                                                                       1.3
                          1.2




                                                                                                                                                                       1.2




                                                                                      1970      1980      1990                 2000   2010
                                                                                                          Year                                                                                                                     1970   1980   1990                 2000   2010
                                                                                                           Other Occupations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Year
                                                                                                           Cleaning                                                                                                                               Other Occupations
                                                                                                           Security                                                                                                                               All Occ − Not OS
                                                                                                           Logist                                                                                                                                 All Occ − OS



                            (c) Evolution of AKM effects by Occupations                                                                      (d) Evolution of AKM Effects by Outsourced Sta-
                                                                                                                                             tus

Notes: The figures show how wages in logistics, cleaning, and security (LCS) occupations have
evolved relative to wages in other occupations. Panel (a) shows the log wage for the different
occupations. Panel (b) Shows how wages for LCS workers have evolved depending on whether
they are outsourced or not, relative to workers in other (non-LCS) occupations. Panel (c) the
establishment (AKM) effect by occupation, and panel (d) shows the AKM effects for LCS workers
by outsourcing status and the AKM effects for all other occupations.




                                                                                                                                         50
Figure 11: Occupational Concentration (Herfindahl index) over Time for Cleaning,
Security and Logistics Workers
                                 .4
                                 .35
               herfindahl_mean
                                 .3
                                 .25




                                       1970          1980          1990                 2000   2010
                                                                   Year


                                                  (a) Occ. Concentration CSL Workers
                                 .6
                                 .5
               herfindahl_mean
                                 .4
                                 .3
                                 .2




                                       1970          1980          1990                 2000   2010
                                                                   Year
                                                                       Not Outsourced
                                                                       Outsourced


                                              (b) Occ. Concentration by Outsourced Status

Notes: The figures show the herfindahl index of occupational concentration in the establishments
where cleaning, security and logistics workers are employed. While show the average concentration
index for all CSL workers, Figure b) breaks it up by whether or not the worker is working for a
business service firm (outsourced).




                                                                  51
        Figure 12: The Evolution of the West German Wage Structure, Actual and DFL
        Reweighted




                                                                                                     .055
.2




                                                                                                     .05
.18




                                                                                                     .045
.16




                                                                                                     .04
                                                                                                     .035
.14




                                                                                                     .03
.12




       1985        1990                1995            2000               2005               2010           1985      1990               1995               2000                2005                2010
                                                Year                                                                                                 Year
                     Var of Log Wage − Actual                 Var of Log Wage − Reweighted                             Var of AKM effect − Actual                  Var of AKM effect − Reweighted



                               (a) Var(log wage)                                                                      (b) Var(establishment effect)
                                                                                                     .3
.04




                                                                                                     .2
.03
.02




                                                                                                     .1
.01




                                                                                                     0
0




                                                                                                     −.1




                                                                                                            1985      1990               1995               2000                2005                2010
−.01




                                                                                                                                                     Year
       1985        1990               1995             2000               2005               2010                             15th Pctile − Actual                 15th Pctile − Reweighted
                                                Year                                                                          50th Pctile − Actual                 50th Pctile − Reweighted
              Covariance worker / estab FE − Actual      Covariance worker / estab FE − Reweighted                            85th Pctile − Actual                 85th Pctile − Reweighted



              (c) Cov(estab effect, person effect)                                                             (d) Percentiles (15-50-85) of log wage dist.

       Notes: The figures shows how the variance of log wages and its components has evolved over
       time. Panel (a) shows the variance of log wages, panel (b) shows the variance of the estimated
       establishment effect (AKM effect) over time, and panel (c) the covariance between establishment
       effects and the individual fixed effect. Panel (d) shows percentiles of the log wage distribution. The
       solid line is the actual evolution over time, while the dashed line shows the counterfactual evolution
       if outsourcing had remained constant at the 1985 level, where the counterfactual is constructed using
       DFL reweighting (see text).




                                                                                                52
