                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               WHEN IS SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY SOCIALLY DESIRABLE?

                                     Jean-Etienne de Bettignies
                                        David T. Robinson

                                        Working Paper 21364
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21364


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2015




The authors would like to thank Shawn Cole, Navin Kartik, Ramana Nanda, Tom Nycholas, Mike
Waldman, Jeff Zwiebel, and seminar participants at Brigham Young University, Cornell, Duke, Fordham,
Harvard Business School, HEC Montreal, INSEAD, National University of Singapore, Universite
du Quebec a Montreal, Universite Paris 1 Pantheon-Sorbonne, University of Miami, University of
New South Wales, Stanford, University of Toronto, and University of Victoria for helpful feedback.
The expert research assistance of Huafang Liu is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Jean-Etienne de Bettignies and David T. Robinson. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
When Is Social Responsibility Socially Desirable?
Jean-Etienne de Bettignies and David T. Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 21364
July 2015
JEL No. D21,G30,H20

                                             ABSTRACT

We study a model in which corporate social responsibility (CSR) arises as a response to inefficient
regulation. In our model, firms, governments, and workers interact. Firms generate profits but create
negative spillovers that can be attenuated through government regulation, which is set endogenously
and may or may not be socially optimal. Governments may choose suboptimal levels of regulation
if they face lobbying pressure from companies. Companies can, in turn, hire socially responsible employees
who enjoy taking actions to ameliorate the negative spillovers. Because firms can capture part of the
rent created by allowing socially responsible employees to correct social ills, in some settings they
find it optimal to lobby for inefficient rules and then capture the surplus associated with being "good
citizens" in the face of bad regulation. In equilibrium, this means CSR can either increase or decrease
social welfare, depending on the costs of political capture.


Jean-Etienne de Bettignies
Queen's School of Business
143 Union Street
Kingston, ON, K7L4V1, Canada
jdebettignies@business.queensu.ca

David T. Robinson
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
100 Fuqua Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
davidr@duke.edu
1         Introduction
Milton Friedman, in his classic book Capitalism and Society, calls corporate social responsibility
(CSR) a “fundamentally subversive doctrine,” arguing instead that the goal of business should
be solely to maximize profits. In his analysis, a democratic political process should implement
laws and other strictures to constrain corporate behavior, and corporations in turn should be
left free to maximize shareholder returns within these confines. In essence, he argues that it is
better to ask a zookeeper to cage a lion rather than to ask the lion to refrain from eating the
other animals in the zoo.
        Despite the suspicion expressed by Friedman (1963, 1970), Levitt (1958), and many other
economists, CSR has become a pervasive feature of the modern corporate landscape. A recent
study by KPMG indicates that 95% of the 250 largest global companies now report on their
CSR activities (KPMG, 2011). Indeed, many large multinational corporations view CSR as an
essential component of good business practice.1
        One reason why modern corporations embrace CSR might simply be that with global sup-
ply chains and a high degree of digital interconnectedness, consumers in the developed world
are connected to workers in the developing world to an extent not formerly possible, narrow-
ing the social distance between consumer and producer (Baron, 2010). In such a world, the
zookeeper/lion metaphor breaks down: large multinational corporations operate at a scale that
is comparable to that of many small national governments (the zookeeper cannot cage the lion),
and in many cases it may be infeasible for any single government to have regulatory oversight
over a firm’s global operations (the lion belongs to many zoos).2
        Regardless of whether CSR is good for the companies that embrace it, a deeper question is
whether it is good for society as a whole. Even if CSR is smart business for the firms that adopt
it, is it good for society? When, and under what circumstances, is it preferred to government
actions? Put differently, when is CSR socially desirable? These questions are the focus of our
analysis.
        Complicating the analysis of these questions is the fact that modern corporations not only
    1
     The following quote from Nike’s 2012 Annual Report expresses this view nicely: “Over time, we’ve moved
from viewing corporate responsibility as a necessity for managing risk to seeing it as an opportunity to create
value for our business. . . We think this is smart business. . . (Nike Annual Report, 2012)”
   2
     Consider, for example, the Danish shipping line, Maersk: it employs around 100,000 people globally, while
the Danish workforce comprises around 2.8 million people. Maersk global revenues were about 1/2 as large as
the Danish national government’s budget in 2011.


                                                      1
commonly pursue objectives that were once largely within the purview of government, they
also engage in other forms of political action, like lobbying. Indeed, many policy makers and
industry observers express concern that firms engage in lobbying at cross-purposes to their CSR
activities. For example, the Global Compact (2005) points to numerous examples of companies
that, either indirectly or directly, lobby for legislation that is directly at odds with their CSR
agenda. Take for instance British Petroleum: according to SustainAbility (2005) “BP was a
signatory to the Corporate Leaders Group on Climate Change letter to the UK prime minister
but was subsequently alleged to have been lobbying in the US against Senator Bingaman’s
proposal for compulsory limits on carbon dioxide emissions.” Moreover, scholars in corporate
strategy and political science have shown that firms and other organizations earn high returns
to political contributions (see Ansolabehere et al (2003), de Figueiredo (2002), or de Figueiredo
and Silverman (2006)). Thus, any analysis of the tradeoffs of CSR versus government action
must be cast against a broader backdrop in which CSR and corporate political action are
allowed to interact.
   To address these questions, we develop a simple model in which governments, citizens and
firms interact. By placing firms in a context in which they can simultaneously engage in CSR
as well as engage in political action, the analysis delivers answers both to the positive question
of when CSR arises endogenously as a response to certain economic forces, as well as to the
normative question of whether society is better or worse as a result.
   In our model, businesses unavoidably generate negative externalities when they operate.
The role of government is to set regulatory thresholds that balance a firm’s profits against
the social costs of these negative externalities. Governments may act in the best interests of
society as a whole, or they may be subject to regulatory capture. Firms are standard profit
maximizers, but they can choose to engage in CSR by hiring a socially responsible worker
who will operate the firm in a manner that generates fewer negative externalities than the law
requires. Although this generates lower financial profits, firms may be able to capture other
economic rents by behaving this way. Important special cases of our model hinge on how these
additional rents are shared between managers and the firm’s shareholders.
   In our baseline analysis, the objective of government is simply to maximize social welfare.
In this version of the model, the fact that firms have the option to hire a socially responsible
worker and engage in CSR is neither beneficial nor detrimental to anyone. No one is made better


                                                2
off by their actions, because the government naturally sets the optimal regulatory threshold.
In that case, a socially responsible firm cannot improve on the production choice that a purely
profit-seeking firm would choose facing the constraints imposed upon it. In this world, CSR
would be empirically undetectable: firms that engaged in it would behave identically to those
that did not.
       The analysis changes substantially when we allow the government to maximize a combina-
tion of social welfare and influence payments along the lines of Stigler (1971, 1974), Peltzman
(1976), and Becker (1983). This opens the possibility for firms to lobby governments to choose
a regulatory threshold that no longer coincides with the social optimum. In fact, in this version
of the model firms will always lobby, at least a little, for inefficient regulation, even if they do
not find it optimal to engage in CSR.
       An important parameter in the model is the government’s weighting between social welfare
and influence payments. This determines the ease with which inefficient regulation can be
purchased through lobbying. At a certain point, firms endogenously create rents for the socially
responsible worker by lobbying the government for loose regulatory thresholds; they then let
the worker enjoy utility by producing fewer externalities than the law permits and capture these
rents through contractual means.3 This produces two offsetting effects on social welfare. On
the one hand, having the option to engage in CSR leads to socially superior operational choices,
but on the other hand it leads to more lobbying, imposing deadweight costs on society.
       Thus, because CSR fills a void created by inefficient government, social responsibility may
or may not be socially desirable depending on whether the deadweight costs associated with
inefficient government are small relative to the marginal welfare increase of CSR activity. If
government is not too inefficient, then lobbying is relatively expensive, and the deadweight
costs to society of lobbying exceed the social value created through the firm’s CSR activities.
In this case, CSR is not socially desirable. On the other hand, when government is more easily
purchased, the social spillovers associated with the allowing the socially responsible worker
to make the right decision exceed the deadweight costs of lobbying, and CSR becomes socially
desirable on net, even though the problems it addresses were manufactured through the purchase
   3
    Compensating wage differentials are one example of how a firm could extract rents from socially responsible
workers. There is indeed empirical evidence that workers accept lower wages to work in socially responsible
organizations. Nyborg and Zhang (2013) show that firms with a strong reputation for social responsibility pay
38% less than low-quality CSR reputation firms. Similarly, Frank (2004) using survey evidence from Cornell
graduates finds a compensating salary differential for corporate social responsibility.


                                                      3
of socially inefficient government action.
       We also explore several extensions of our model that allow us to ask whether CSR is de-
sirable from a shareholder perspective. The empirical literature is divided on this point: for
example, Cheng, Hong and Shue (2011) argue that agency motives drive CSR activity, offering
as evidence a number of distinct results linking exogenous increases in incentives and governance
to reductions in CSR activity. In contrast, Edmans (2010) finds that companies recognized for
the quality of employee treatment earn risk-adjusted rates of return that are higher than other,
non-friendly companies. In our model, whether CSR is good for shareholders hinges on how
the rents extracted from socially responsible managers are distributed within the firm. The set-
ting in which rents can be distributed to shareholders (through, for example, lower wages that
manifest in higher profits) is one in which CSR unambiguously improves shareholder welfare.
In contrast, if rents are captured inside the firm as private benefits, then our model predicts
exactly the results offered in Cheng, Hong and Shue (2011). By nesting competing sets of em-
pirical findings, our analysis helps to shed on the mechanisms by which CSR affects shareholder
value.
       Our work connects to a broader literature in economics examining CSR from positive and
normative perspectives.4 A positive strand examines plausible explanations for CSR and condi-
tions under which it might emerge. These conditions may arise in labor market environments,
where CSR may serve as a screening (Brekke and Nyborg, 2004) or signalling (Greening and
Turban, 2000) mechanism to attact desirable employees; or as entrenchment by inefficient
managers protecting their jobs (Cespa and Cestone, 2007). Alternatively, these propicious con-
ditions for CSR may be present in product markets where consumers have social preferences.
In this type of environment, CSR may emerge as a result of optimal managerial incentive design
(Baron, 2008), or competition in these markets (Arora and Gangopadhay, 1995; Bagnoli and
Watts, 2003; Besley and Ghatak, 2007; Galasso and Tombak, 2014). Finally, CSR may arise in
political environments, as a hedging response to a threat posed by the “politician” who could
be an activist (Baron, 2001; Baron, 2009; Baron and Diermeier, 2007; Lyon and Maxwell, 2011)
or a lobbyist influencing government policy (Lyon and Maxwell, 2004; Maxwell et al., 2000).
In contrast our analysis shows that firms engaging in CSR may also strategically lobby govern-
   4
    For excellent recent overviews of this literature, see Benabou and Tirole (2010) or Kitzmueller and Shimshack
(2012).



                                                       4
ments to increase their payoffs from CSR, rather than engage in CSR in response to lobbying
by others. A normative strand focuses on whether the overall level of a public good in society
increases or decreases based on whether or not the private provision of the public good crowds
out its public provision.5
        The balance of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we lay out the basic setup
of the model. In Section 3 we study a version of the model in which government maximizes
social welfare. This section illustrates that under efficient government, CSR is completely un-
necessary. Then in Section 4 we explore a version of the model in which governments maximize
a combination of social welfare and lobbying contributions they receive. Section 5 explores a
variety of extensions to the model, while section 6 concludes. An appendix contains all relevant
proofs as well as a detailed discussion of robustness considerations.


2         Basic Setup
At the core of our model is a firm whose operations unavoidably impose negative externalities
on the government’s citizens. The firm is engaged in two strategic interactions. First, the firm
hires workers to run the company’s operations. The strategic interaction between the firm and
its labor force determines employee compensation as well as the action workers should take
conditional on government-mandated regulations determining the maximum level of externali-
ties. The second is the potential strategic interaction between the firm and the government to
influence the equilibrium level of regulation. This section describes the each of these actors in
greater detail.

        Firms. A firm seeks workers to run the company’s operations. Once hired, the worker’s
main task is to take action a ∈ R+ which is expected to affect the firm’s profits.
        The firm’s expected profits π (a) are positive, continuously differentiable over R+ and strictly
concave in a, with lim+ dπ/da > 0. Hence there exists a unique aπ = arg max π (a) > 0, such
                        a→0
that the firm’s expected profits are maximized.
        To keep the analysis as simple as possible, we assume that the production technology and
the nature of the CSR opportunity are tightly coupled. In particular, as we make clear below,
    5
    Related to Kotchen (2006) and Besley and Ghatak (2007), Graff Zivin and Small (2005) and Nilsson and
Robinson (2012) explore models in which consumers can donate to private charities or can invest in companies
that engage in social mission; and explore the conditions under which corporate social responsibility and/or
social entrepreneurship will dominate private donations to “pure charities.”

                                                     5
we assume that larger values of a generate more negative externalities for citizens. In other
words, the CSR is specifically modeled as the act of doing less harm while producing: developers
are choosing to cut down fewer trees, textiles are dumping fewer chemicals into lakes, and so
forth.
   The tight connection between the nature of the CSR and the nature of the productive
activity is assumed purely for concreteness and expositional simplicity. Nothing hinges on the
specific nature of the connection between the spillover and the main productive activity of the
firm. Indeed, in more general settings, there is no reason to think that a firm’s productive
activity and its CSR initiatives would be so tightly coupled. All that matters for our analysis is
that some corporate actions are associated with potentially lower profits but potentially greater
social benefit.
   For our main analysis, we will assume that firms maximize the sum of the standard profits
they obtain from operations as well as any rents they can extract through CSR activity. In
Sections 3 and 4 we will put aside the question of who owns the firm, which will allow us to
sidestep any differences in how these two sources of rents can be distributed or shared. Then
in Section 5 we will consider a number of model extensions that will allow us to examine the
welfare implications of CSR for different corporate stakeholders.

   Citizens. Citizens are another key player in our model. They take no action on their own
behalf, but are negatively affected by the actions taken by the firms. Thus their preferences
are important for understanding social welfare.
   The citizenry’s utility V (a, q) depends on action a and on a vector q of other exogenous
factors. For simplicity we assume that ∂ 2 V /∂a∂q = 0 (i.e. the marginal utility of a is inde-
pendent of other factors) and henceforth omit q in our notation. More importantly we posit
that action a creates a negative externality on the citizenry, in that it negatively affects the
citizenry’s utility: dV /da < 0 for all a ∈ R++ . One can think of a as representing a price or a
pollution level for example. Clearly, then, the level of a that maximizes V (a) is ac = 0.
   In the main analysis, we simply assume that the citizenry is disconnected from the firm
and its workers. Although somewhat stark, this framing would be well suited to the case of a
citizenry of a country that was home to one piece of a larger global supply chain operated by a
multinational corporation. Later we discuss extensions to the model that allow for citizens to


                                                6
be connected to the firm’s workers explicitly, or to hold an ownership stake in the firm. Because
these extensions do not affect the main results of the model, we postpone them to Section 5.

       Workers. There are two types of risk-neutral workers available in the labor market: self-
interested (si) workers and socially responsible (sr) ones. Firms can costlessly detect which type
of worker they face in the labor market. We abstract away from whether the firm is hiring one or
many workers, and use the term worker to refer to the firm’s labor force generally. Furthermore,
we assume that workers are not wealth-constrained, and that action a is verifiable; with the firm
making a take-it-or-leave-it, action-contingent contractual offer W (a) to the worker it wishes
to hire.6 Both types of workers have reservation wage W 0 normalized to zero.
       Self-interested and socially responsible workers differ in terms of their preferences. The si
worker cares only about his own payoff: If he is hired with compensation Wsi (a), his utility is
Usi = Wsi (a). If he is not hired, his reservation utility is Usi0 = W 0 = 0.
       In contrast the socially responsible (sr) worker cares not only about his compensation, but
also about what we call the “core” social surplus associated with action a, S (a), which we
define as the sum of 1) the citizenry’s utility, 2) the firm’s profits net of compensation cost, 3)
the hired worker’s compensation:

                                  S (a) = V (a) + (π (a) − Wj ) + Wj ,                                    (1)

with j = si, sr, or simply
                                          S (a) = V (a) + π (a) .                                         (2)

We use this notion of core surplus for expositional convenience. As shall become clear below,
total social surplus (social welfare) will turn out to be a simple function of the core surplus.
We assume that V (a) and π (a) are such that S (a) is “well-behaved,” with d2 S (.) /da2 < 0
and dS (0) /da > 0.
   6
     We assume symmetric worker-type information, wealth-unconstrained workers and verifiable action for
simplicity, in order to abstract away from issues related to hidden information or hidden action between firm
and worker. This is in contrast to Carlin and Gervais (2009) for example, who explore an agency model
in which some agents suffer from agency costs and some do not. The fact that some agents do not require
high-powered incentives to exert effort, in equilibrium, induces sorting between firms and employees. A recent
literature has also examined agency problems when agents have special preferences such as intrinsic motivation
or prosocial preferences, for example. See, e.g. Benabou and Tirole (2003, 2006), Besley and Ghatak (2005,
2007), Prendergast (2007, 2008), Ellingsen and Johanesson (2008), Delfgaauw and Dur (2008). We make the
aforementioned simplifying assumptions in order to bring into sharper focus the connection between social
preferences, lobbying, and regulation. We relax these assumptions, and discuss wealth-constrained workers,
non-contractible action, and worker-type information asymmetry in some detail in the appendix.

                                                      7
       Thus, we specify the utility of a sr worker hired with compensation Wsr (a) and choosing
action a as Usr (a) = Wsr (a) + ρS (a), with ρ ∈ (0, 1), where ρS (a) is the “responsible”
component of his preferences. If he is not hired, the sr worker’s reservation utility is (the sum
of his zero reservation wage and) the core social surplus associated with action a0 selected in
                                                   0
that case (e.g. by the si worker if he is hired): Usr = W 0 + ρS (a0 ) = ρS (a0 ). Thus, socially
responsible employees experience utility that is increasing in the core social surplus regardless
of whether or not they are engaged in the alleviation of negative externalities.

       Social Responsibility. The parameter ρ ∈ (0, 1) captures the sr employee’s degree of
social responsibility. If ρ = 0, Usr = Wsr , and the sr worker is purely self-interested. As ρ
increases, however, he applies more weight on overall social surplus relative to his personal
compensation.

       Government. We assume that transactions costs prevent direct Coasian bargaining be-
tween the firm and the citizenry,7 and that as a result a government emerges that plays an
important role as an intermediary between the citizenry and the firm. The government exam-
ines both points of view and then affects equilibrium action through regulation.
       For simplicity - and in our opinion not unrealistically - we assume that the government can-
not verify the exact value of a, and therefore cannot specify its value through regulation. What
the government can verify, however, is whether a is superior or inferior to some predetermined
threshold. Thus the government can regulate by imposing a verifiable ceiling a for action a.
(Because negative externalities are monotonically increasing in a, it is never optimal for the
government to set a regulatory floor.) Note that the main results of our model would continue
to hold even if the government could verify and select an exact regulatory value value for a.
       We follow Stigler (1971, 1974), Peltzman (1976), Becker (1983) and others and assume
that government seeks to maximize a political support function M , which depends primarily
on two factors: the number of votes N that it may receive, and political contributions C.
For simplicity, we assume that the number of votes depends directly on contribution of the
government’s regulatory choice a to the core surplus, and normalize N such that N = S(a).
This assumes that, even though in equilibrium the worker and firm may choose an action a < a,
with S(a) > S(a), voters can separate regulatory thresholds from observed market actions. As
   7
    For instance, the citizenry’s “fragmentation” may imply high coordination costs for the group’s members,
which may hinder efficient bargaining, and indeed prevent bargaining altogether.

                                                     8
such, voters value the government’s contribution to core surplus as S(a), with the added core
surplus S(a) − S(a) being the result of the firm’s action rather than the government’s. This
leads to the following reduced-form government political support function:

                                   M (a) = (1 − γ) S(a) + γC(a),                              (3)

where γ ∈ (0, 1) represents the degree of government inefficiency: as γ increases, the government
places less weight on satisfying voters, and more weight on political contributions. When γ
is close to zero, the government behave almost like a social welfare maximizer, while as γ
approaches 1, the government becomes completely beholden to lobbyists.

   Timing of the Game. At date 0, the government examines the citizenry and the firm’s
points of view, and imposes ceiling a on action a. At date 1, the firm makes a take-it-or-leave-it
contractual offer to the worker. At date 2, the worker selects action a. At date 3, profits and
utilities are realized and contracts are honored.

   Social Welfare and the First-Best. Social welfare is the grand total surplus generated,
which includes not only the core surplus, S(a) = V (a) + π(a) but also the preferences of socially
responsible workers’, ρS(a) and the government’s preferences. More specifically social welfare
here includes 1) the citizenry’s utility, 2) the firm’s profits net of compensation cost, 3) the
hired worker’s utility, 4) the other worker’s utility, and 5) the government’s utility:



             T S (a (γ) , a (γ) , C (γ)) = V (a (γ))                                          (4)

                                           + (π (a (γ)) − Wj − C) + Wj + ρS (a (γ))

                                           + (1 − γ) S(a (γ)) + γC (γ)

with j = si, sr, or more simply:


            T S (a (γ) , a (γ) , C (γ)) = (1 + ρ) S (a (γ)) + (1 − γ) [S(a (γ)) − C (γ)] .    (5)

   Let us define the first-best benchmark as the situation in which the government is perfectly
efficient (γ = 0), and total surplus is maximized. Because influence payments C involve dead-
weight costs (1 − γ)C, the first-best outcome requires C = 0. This means that in the first-best,
the total surplus simplifies to:

                                                  9
                                 T S ∗ (a, a) = (1 + ρ) S (a) + S(a).                        (6)

    Clearly, the unique first-best ceiling and action are one and the same, and equal to a∗ =
arg max T S ∗ (a) = arg max S (a): they maximize both the core surplus and social welfare. The
strict concavity of S (a) ensures existence and uniqueness of a solution. The first-best social
welfare can thus be written as T S ∗ (a∗ ) = (2 + ρ) S (a∗ ).
    Note also that a∗ depends neither on who is hired, nor on parameter ρ. Note also that a∗ ∈
(0, aπ ). To see this, consider a) that dS (0) /da > 0 by assumption; and b) that dS (aπ ) /da =
dV (aπ ) /da < 0, since dπ (aπ ) /da = 0 by definition of aπ and dV (a) /da < 0 for all a ∈
R++ . The strict concavity of S (a) then implies that there must exist a a∗ ∈ (0, aπ ) such that
dS (a∗ ) /da = 0.
    Because Equation 5 captures the overall welfare of citizens, firms, managers and the govern-
ment, it forms the reference for welfare comparisons throughout the remainder of our analysis.


3     Social Responsibility In a World Without Lobbying
To set the baseline for our analysis, we begin by considering first a government whose objective
is to maximize the core surplus S (a). That is, we study a model in which γ = 0, a model in
which government is immune to lobbying pressure. The main result in this section is essentially
an irrelevance result: under a government that maximizes social welfare, the presence of socially
responsible firms is of no consequence.
    Because socially responsible workers internalize the negative consequences of action a no
matter whether they work for the firm, the equilibrium when only self-interested workers are
available determines the reservation utility of socially responsible workers. Thus, we begin by
analyzing the case in which only self-interested workers is available, then we examine the case
when the firm can choose between hiring a self-interested or a socially responsible employees.

3.1    Equilibrium with Self-Interested Workers Only

We begin with the case where only the self-interested (si) employee is available for hire; and
determine the subgame-perfect Nash equilibrium by backward induction. As is well known,
since the worker faces no direct cost associated with a, he selects the firm’s preferred action


                                                 10
as long as he receives compensation Wsi ≥ 0. Thus in equilibrium the firm pays the worker
Wsi = 0, and can choose the action asi to be selected by the employee. Clearly, the action that
maximizes the firm’s payoff Psi = π (a) − Wsi = π (a) is the profit maximizing action aπ > a∗ .
The difference between aπ and the first-best action a∗ captures the externality at play here:
The firm does not internalize the negative impact of a higher action choice on the citizenry,
and hence selects an action level that is too high from a social point of view.
   Here, however, the firm’s choice of action may be constrained by government regulation.
Suppose that at date 0 the government has imposed ceiling a for action. Then, taking a as
given, at date 1 the firm requests the following action from the worker:
                                                          
                                            a if a ≤ aπ
                                   asi =                     .                                   (7)
                                            aπ if a > aπ
If the action ceiling is not binding, the firm chooses her preferred action aπ ; if the ceiling is
binding, then the best the firm can do while remaining within the law is to request action asi
from the worker exactly equal to the ceiling . Accordingly, the firm’s equilibrium payoff Psi ,
can be expressed simply as:
                                                                     
                                                  π (a) if a ≤ aπ
                                  Psi (a) =                               .                      (8)
                                                  π (aπ ) if a > aπ
   Moving back one period, the government chooses ceiling a∗si to solve the following program:

                            max S (asi ) =          max V (asi ) + π (asi ) ,                    (9)
                              a                     a

subject to condition (7). Clearly, the optimal regulatory ceiling is a∗si = a∗ : since a∗ ∈ (0, aπ ),
this forces the firm to request action asi = a∗ from the worker at date 1, and ensures that
first-best core surplus S (a∗ ) and social welfare T S (a∗ ) = (2 + ρ) S (a∗ ) are achieved. Indeed,
the equilibrium can be described as follows:

Lemma 1 Under efficient government, and with a profit maximizing firm and a self-interested
employee: At date 0, the government sets regulatory ceiling a∗si = a∗ . At date 1, the firm hires
the si worker, and requests action asi = a∗ . At date 2, the si worker takes action a∗ and receives
compensation Wsi = 0; the firm obtains payoff π (a∗ ), and social surplus T S (a∗ ) is generated.

   The main result of this section thus follows:

Proposition 1 Even with a profit-maximizing firm and a self-interested worker, an efficient
government can circumvent problems associated with externalities through regulation, and can
achieve first-best social welfare.

                                                     11
3.2       Equilibrium with Both Self-Interested and Socially Responsible
          Workers

Suppose now that at date 1, the firm has a choice between hiring a self-interested employee, or
instead a socially responsible worker who cares about social welfare. If the firm makes an offer
to the si type, the remainder of the game is as described in section 3.1: For a given ceiling a,
the requested action asi is defined as in (7), and the firm’s payoff Psi is defined as in (8).
       Now suppose the firm makes a contractual offer Wsr (a) to the sr worker. As discussed
above, if he accepts the offer and chooses action a, his utility is Usr (a) = Wsr (a) + ρS (a). If
he is not hired, the sr worker’s reservation utility depends on the action a0 chosen in that case:
 0
Usr = ρS (a0 ). For simplicity we assume that if the sr employee turns down the offer, the firm
hires the si worker (since this gives the firm a positive payoff Psi ) who selects a0 = asi , and this
                      0
in turn implies that Usr = ρS (asi ).
       Consider first the “government-unconstrained” scenario in which no regulatory ceiling is
constraining the action requested by the firm from the sr worker. Suppose the firm wishes to
elicit an action b
                 a. In that case, the optimal contract offered to the sr type includes a base
salary wsr and an action-contingent bonus bsr such that:
                                                            
                                        wsr + bsr if a = b a
                            Wsr (a) =                          .                                        (10)
                                            wsr if a 6= ba

The action b
           a, the base salary wsr , and the bonus bsr are chosen to maximize the firm’s program
   a) − (wsr + bsr ), subject to the incentive compatibility (IC) constraint,8
π (b

                                                   a) ≥ ρS (a∗ ) ,
                                         bsr + ρS (b                                                    (11)

and to the individual rationality (IR) constraint,

                                                     a) ≥ ρS (asi ) .
                                     wsr + bsr + ρS (b                                                  (12)

       One can easily verify that in equilibrium bsr and wsr are chosen as solutions to binding IC
and IR constraints, respectively; and that the equilibrium “unconstrained” action ausr is the
solution that maximizes the following simplified program:

                                   max π (b          a) − S (asi )] .
                                          a) + ρ [S (b                                                  (13)
                                     a
                                     b

   8
    Conditional on not choosing b a, the worker anticipates he will receive a payoff of wsr + ρS (a). And the
action that maximizes this payoff is a∗ .

                                                     12
       The intuition is simple: the firm chooses the action ausr that maximizes the joint firm-worker
surplus; ensures that the employee has an incentive to select this action through the appropriate
choice of bsr satisfying (11); and extracts all rents from the worker by choosing the base salary
wsr such that (12) is binding.9
       The firm’s payoff, for a given requested action ausr , thus includes two components: gross profit
π (ausr ), and the social responsibility wedge ρ [S (ausr ) − S (asi )] extracted from the sr employee.
This wedge is the difference between the responsible components of the sr worker’s utility a) if
he is hired to take action ausr and b) if instead the si worker is hired to take action asi .
       Given the strict concavity of π (.) and S (.) and hence of π (.) + ρS (.), the unique uncon-
strained action ausr maximizing program (13) can be expressed as the solution to:
                                         dπ (ausr )    dS (ausr )
                                                    +ρ            = 0.                                      (14)
                                           dba           dba
       Note that ausr ∈ (a∗ , aπ ). This follows directly from the strict concavity of π (.) + ρS (.);
and from the fact that dS (a∗ ) /da = 0 and dπ (aπ ) /da = 0, with a∗ < aπ as shown previously.
Intuitively, equilibrium unconstrained action ausr maximizes a linear combination of two strictly
concave functions, S (.) and π (.), and hence the solution to this linear combination should be
between the solutions a∗ and aπ to the two strictly concave functions.
       Clearly, as in the case of the si employee, here again the equilibrium action chosen depends
on whether or not the firm is constrained by the previously determined regulatory ceiling a.
This equilibrium action with the sr worker can be expressed as follows:
                                                         
                                          a if a ≤ ausr
                                asr =                       .                                               (15)
                                         ausr if a > ausr
       Using (7) and (15), we can express the firm’s equilibrium payoff if it hires the sr worker,
Psr , as follows:
                                                                                          
                              
                               π (a)                               if a ∈ [0, ausr ]      
                                                                                           
                              
                                                                                          
                                                                                           
                                                                                          
                    Psr (a) =   π (ausr ) + ρ [S (ausr ) − S (a)] if a ∈ (ausr , aπ ]          .            (16)
                              
                                                                                          
                                                                                           
                              
                                                                                          
                                                                                           
                                π (ausr ) + ρ [S (ausr ) − S (aπ )] if a ∈ (aπ , +∞)
                                                                                          

   9
     A concrete example of how a firm could extract rents from socially responsible workers would be through
compensating wage differentials. There is indeed empirical evidence that workers accept lower wages to work
in socially responsible organizations. Nyborg and Zhang (2013) show that firms with a strong reputation
for social responsibility pay 38% less than low-quality CSR reputation firms. This difference drops to about
24% when one accounts for industry and gender/demographic composition of the work force. Similarly, Frank
(2004) using survey evidence from Cornell graduates finds a compensating salary differential for corporate social
responsibility.

                                                       13
       Comparing the firm’s payoffs defined in (8) and (16), we can now determine the firm’s
optimal choice of employee type and the associated equilibrium action for a given regulatory
ceiling a.
       For all a ∈ [0, ausr ], it follows directly from (7) and (15) that the equilibrium action selected
is the same regardless of the type of worker hired: asr = asi = a. This in turn implies
Psr (a) = Psi (a) = π (a): the firm is indifferent between the two types of workers. Since both
types choose the same action a, the sr worker derives no additional utility from selecting a
more socially responsible action - the social responsibility wedge ρ [S (a) − S (asi )] collapses to
zero - and hence there is no additional utility to be extracted by the firm.
       For all a ∈ (ausr , +∞), in equilibrium we have asr = ausr and asi = min (a, aπ ) , with ausr < asi .
Note that in this case the firm could choose to elicit action asi from the sr type, in which case
the payoff would be the same from either worker. Yet the firm chooses to elicit ausr 6= asi
from the sr worker, which implies that the payoff from doing so is strictly superior to the
payoff from eliciting asi (by the strict concavity of π (.) + ρS (.)). And this in turn implies
that Psr (a) > Psi (a): the firm is strictly better off by hiring a sr worker over a si worker.
Intuitively, when the sr employee is hired and the ceiling a is not too restrictive, a positive
social responsibility wedge ρ [S (ausr ) − S (asi )] is created, that can be extracted by the firm via
lower compensation for the sr worker.
       In sum, for a given ceiling a, we can express the firm’s hiring choice and the equilibrium
action ach as follows:10

                                                                                             
   If a ∈ [0, ausr ]:           The firm is indifferent betw. types, requests action ach = a 
                                                                                                          . (17)
         If a ∈   (ausr , +∞):   The firm hires sr worker, requests action ach =       ausr
                                                                                                     

       This logic is depicted graphically in Figures 1 and 2, which capture equilibrium actions and
profits, respectively, as functions of the regulatory ceiling a, depending on whether the si or
the sr type is hired.

       [INSERT FIGURES 1 AND 2 ABOUT HERE]

       The critical value for ceiling a in both figures is ausr , the ceiling value at which the equilibrium
actions of the si and the sr type begin to differ. To the left of ausr , the ceiling is binding, and the
  10
       Subscript ch refers to situations when the firm has a choice between hiring either type of manager.

                                                        14
equilibrium action is the same regardless of whom is hired, as shown in Figure 1. Accordingly,
the firm’s payoff is also indenpendent of the type being hired, as depicted in Figure 2.
   To the right of ausr , the firm deliberately requires a lower action asr from the sr employee
than it would from the self-interested type. It does so to generate the social responsibility
wedge ρ [S (asr ) − S (asi )] for the sr worker, which it extracts through contractual means, thus
increasing its overall payoff. The lower equilibrium action asr (a) < asi (a) and greater profits
Psr (a) > Psi (a) under sr management are depicted in Figures 1 and 2, respectively.
   Anticipating all this, at date 0 the government chooses ceiling a∗ch to solve the following
program:
                            max S (ach ) =       max V (ach ) + π (ach ) ,                     (18)
                              a                  a

subject to condition (17). As in the previous scenario where only the si worker was available,
here the optimal regulatory ceiling for the government is a∗ch = a∗ : since a∗ ∈ (0, ausr ), this
forces the firm to request action ach = a∗ from either type at date 1, and ensures that first-best
core surplus S (a∗ ) and social welfare T S (a∗ ) = (2 + ρ) S (a∗ ) are achieved.
   We summarize these results in the following lemma:

Lemma 2 Under efficient government, when the firm can choose between a self-interested or
a socially responsible worker: At date 0, the government sets regulatory ceiling a∗ch = a∗ . At
date 1, the firm hires either type, requesting the same action a∗ either way. At date 2, the
hired worker takes action a∗ and receives compensation Wsi = Wsr = 0; the firm obtains payoff
π (a∗ ); and social welfare T S (a∗ ) is generated.

   Thus two primary results emerge from this section:

Proposition 2 Under efficient government, social responsibility neither makes the firm better
off nor has any impact on social welfare.

   Qualitatively, this irrelevance result is altogether different than those explored in Graff Zivin
and Small (2005) or Baron (2007). In their analysis, no government exists, but consumers have
preferences over direct or delegated philanthropy. In these models, the irrelevance result stems
from the fact that CSR can crowd out individual philanthropy. In our model, the direct philan-
thropy channel is suppressed, and the irrelevance stems from the fact that a well-functioning
government is a perfect substitute for CSR. Of course, this results hinges critically on the fact

                                                     15
that the government maximizes social welfare. As the next section illustrates, the analysis
changes considerably when we allow for governments to be susceptible to lobbying pressure.


4        CSR When Firms Can Lobby the Government
Now we relax the assumption that γ = 0 and consider a model in which governments can be
influenced by lobbying contributions. We refer to a government that is prone to lobbying pres-
sure as an inefficient government. As discussed in Section 2, we assume that the government’s
regulatory ceiling a is verifiable. Hence the firm can offer, at date 0, a (take-it-or-leave-it)
ceiling-contingent contract to the government, consisting of a political contribution C ∗∗ if a
specific regulatory ceiling a∗∗ is chosen, and zero otherwise.
       As before, we proceed by first considering a world in which only self-interested workers exist.
The sets the reservation utility for socially responsible types. For a given regulatory ceiling a,
the equilibrium between the firm and either type plays out exactly as before. The difference
now, however, is that lobbying may cause the equilibrium level of regulation to deviate from
the first best, creating scope for the firm to pursue CSR in equilibrium.

4.1       Lobbying Equilibrium with Self-Interested Workers Only

For a given regulatory ceiling a, from date 1 onward the analysis proceeds exactly as in Section
3.1. The key difference is that now the firm can contract with the government at date 0. The
firm chooses a regulatory ceiling level a∗∗                             ∗∗
                                         si and political contribution Csi that maximize the

following program:11
                                     max Psi (a) − C =          max π (a) − C,                                     (19)
                                     a,C                         a,C

subject to the government’s IR constraint:12 (1 − γ) S (a) + γC ≥ (1 − γ) S (a∗ ) . The IR con-
straint is binding, yielding:
                                                 1−γ
                                           C=        [S (a∗ ) − S (a)] ,                                           (20)
                                                  γ
and the firm’s date 0 program simplifies to:

                                                             1−γ
                               max Usi (a) = π (a) −             [S (a∗ ) − S (a)] .                               (21)
                                 a                            γ
  11
      It is easy to see that the firm’s objective function, Psi (a) − C, simplifies to π (a) − C. Clearly Psi (a) = π (a)
since it would never be optimal to have a > aπ : it would require a higher cost C without additional benefit.
   12
      If it does not accept the firm’s offer, the government ends up maximizing (1 − γ) S (a) and we know from
section 3.1 that this yields a = a∗ .

                                                           16
    Given the strict concavity of π (.) and S (.) and hence of Usi (.), the unique equilibrium
regulatory ceiling a∗∗
                    si (γ) maximizing the firm’s program can be expressed as the solution to:

                                       dπ (a∗∗
                                            si )   1 − γ dS (a∗∗
                                                              si )
                                                 +                 = 0.                             (22)
                                         da          γ     da

    Note that equilibrium regularity ceiling a∗∗
                                              si is strictly increasing in government inefficiency:
da∗∗
  si
 dγ
       > 0. Intuitively, as γ increases, the government cares relatively more about financial
                                                                                              dS(a)
contributions, and the firm’s marginal cost of raising the regulatory ceiling above a∗ (− 1−γ
                                                                                           γ   da
       dS(a)
with    da
               < 0 for all a > a∗ ) declines. Accordingly, this leads to an increase in the contracted
regulatory ceiling a∗∗        ∗
                    si above a .

    At one end of the spectrum, when the government is almost perfectly efficient and γ → 0,
the firm’s marginal cost of lobbying to raise the ceiling above a∗ is extremely high, and hence the
contracted ceiling a∗∗             ∗
                    si approaches a . At the other end of the spectrum, when the government

is almost perfectly inefficient and γ → 1, the firm’s marginal cost of lobbying tends to zero and
the contracted ceiling a∗∗
                        si approaches the firm’s profit-maximizing action aπ .

    Thus, for all γ ∈ (0, 1), the equilibrium regulatory ceiling a∗∗     ∗
                                                                  si ∈ (a , aπ ). One implication
                                 1−γ
from this is that Csi∗∗ (γ) =     γ
                                       [S (a∗ ) − S (a∗∗
                                                      si )] > 0: influence payments are strictly positive

in equilibrium. Another implication from this and from (7) is that the equilibrium ceiling is
binding (since a∗∗                                                                 ∗∗
                si < aπ ) and hence that at date 1 the firm requests action asi = asi from the

si worker. In sum, the equilibrium can be described as follows:

Lemma 3 For any given γ ∈ (0, 1), and with a self-interested employee: At date 0 the firm
makes political contribution Csi∗∗ (γ) > 0 to the government, in exchange for setting regulatory
ceiling a∗∗            ∗∗         ∗              ∗∗
         si (γ), with asi (γ) ∈ (a , aπ ), and dasi /dγ > 0. At date 1, the firm hires the si worker,

and requests action asi = a∗∗                                             ∗∗
                           si (γ). At date 2, the si worker takes action asi (γ) and receives

compensation Wsr (a∗∗                                       ∗∗
                   si (γ)); and the firm obtains payoff π (asi (γ)).



    We underline two sets of implications emerging from Lemma 3. First, as long as the gov-
ernment is not perfectly efficient, some lobbying will occur in equilibrium. More formally:

Proposition 3 As long as γ > 0, some lobbying always occurs in equilibrium: the firm offers
the government Csi∗∗ (γ) > 0 in exchange for raising the regulatory ceiling a∗∗
                                                                             si above the first-best

level a∗ .


                                                     17
   Intuitively, at the first-best ceiling a∗ , social surplus is maximized and a small increase in
the ceiling has little impact on social surplus. Hence as long as the government cares even a
little bit about influence payments - i.e. if γ > 0 - it can be convinced to raise the ceiling a bit
beyond the first-best level, to a∗∗    ∗                                                ∗∗
                                 si > a in exchange for a small political contribution Csi ≈ 0.

For the firm, this is worth doing, since at a∗ the cost of the contribution is negligible and it
stands to gain a lot - π 0 (a∗ ) > 0 - from raising the ceiling above a∗ .
   The second set of implications concerns the three types of inefficiencies that arise in equi-
librium. To see this, consider the difference between the second-best equilibrium social welfare
T S2 (asi (γ) , a∗∗        ∗∗
                 si (γ) , Csi (γ)) - obtained by substituting equilibrium ceiling, action, and influ-

ence payment into (5) - from and the first-best social welfare:

 T S ∗ (a∗ ) − T S2 (asi (γ) , a∗∗        ∗∗
                                si (γ) , Csi (γ)) =   [S (a∗ ) − (1 − γ) S (a∗∗
                                                                             si (γ))]
                                                      + (1 − γ) Csi∗∗ (γ) + (1 + ρ) [S (a∗ ) − S (asi (γ))]
                                                                                                        (23)
   First, by lobbying government, the firm ensures that the regulatory ceiling is raised to
a∗∗                                            ∗
 si (γ), strictly above the first-best action a . This lowers voters’ perception of the government’s

contribution to core surplus through regulation, from S (a∗ ) to S (a∗∗
                                                                     si (γ)). Since a government

of inefficiency γ only values a fraction (1 − γ) of the voters’ perception, this ceiling inefficiency
can be expressed as S (a∗ ) − (1 − γ) S (a∗∗
                                          si (γ)).

   Second, this increase in the regulatory ceiling above the the first-best level requires influence
payments Csi∗∗ (γ) from the firm to the government. But for every dollar that the firm spends
on political contributions, only γ < 1 dollar is actually improving the government’s utility,
while the remaining (1 − γ) goes “down the drain,” thus leading to a contribution inefficiency
(1 − γ) Csi∗∗ (γ). Note that one way to intepret (1 − γ) is as a the government’s disutility of
accepting a dollar of contribution. This could be the expected cost of getting caught and going
to jail (in the case of illegal contributions), or simply the cost of a guilty conscience (in the case
of legal or illegal contributions).
   Finally, the higher regulatory ceiling leads to a greater action asi (γ) = a∗∗        ∗
                                                                               si (γ) > a being

chosen in equilibrium. This action inefficiency leads to a decrease S (a∗ ) − S (asi (γ)) in core
surplus, and to a further decrease (1 + ρ) [S (a∗ ) − S (asi (γ))] in social welfare. Thus:

Proposition 4 For γ > 0 and self-interested workers, ceiling, contribution and action ineffi-
ciencies lead to a second-best social surplus T S2 (asi (γ) , a∗∗        ∗∗               ∗
                                                               si (γ) , Csi (γ)) < T S2 (a ).


                                                      18
4.2    Lobbying Equilibrium with Both Self-Interested and Socially
       Responsible Workers

Now suppose again that at date 1, the firm has a choice between hiring a si or a sr type. For
a given regulatory ceiling a, from date 1 onwards the equilibrium is exactly the same as in
Section 3.2. If a ≤ ausr , with ausr ∈ (a∗ , aπ ), as stated in (17) the firm is indifferent between
the two types. Either way the firm must ask the employee to select action ach equal to the
binding regulatory ceiling a; yielding gross profit π (a). In contrast, if a > ausr , the ceiling is no
longer binding if the firm hires the sr worker, and doing so enables the firm to extract the social
responsibility wedge ρ [S (ausr ) − S (asi )], with asi = min (a, aπ ), from the sr type. Accordingly,
the firm strictly prefers to hire the sr type in that case.
   Anticipating all this, when contracting with the government at date 0 the firm chooses a
regulatory ceiling level a∗∗                        ∗∗
                          ch and influence payment Cch that maximize the following program:


                                                                                        
                       
                        π (a) − C                                 if a ∈ [0, ausr ]     
                                                                                         
                       
                                                                                        
                                                                                         
                                                                                        
               max       π (ausr ) + ρ [S (ausr ) − S (a)] − C     if a ∈ (ausr , aπ ]       ,    (24)
                a,C    
                                                                                        
                                                                                         
                       
                                                                                        
                                                                                         
                         π (ausr ) + ρ [S (ausr ) − S (aπ )] − C   if a ∈ (aπ , +∞)
                                                                                        


   subject to the government’s IR constraint: (1 − γ) S (a) + γC ≥ (1 − γ) S (a∗ ). This IR
constraint is binding, and defines the equilibrium political contribution C (a) as a function of
the negotiated regulatory ceiling a:
                                             1−γ
                                   C (a) =       [S (a∗ ) − S (a)] .                              (25)
                                              γ
   Thus, the firm’s date 0 program simplifies to:


                                                                                                 
               
                π (a) − 1−γγ
                                [S (a∗ ) − S (a)]                           if a ∈ [0, ausr ]     
                                                                                                  
               
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                  
               
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                  
 max Uch (a) =   π (ausr ) + ρ [S (ausr ) − S (a)] − 1−γ
                                                      γ
                                                          [S (a∗ ) − S (a)] if a ∈ (ausr , aπ ]       .
  a                                                                                              
               
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                 
                π (au ) + ρ [S (au ) − S (aπ )] − 1−γ [S (a∗ ) − S (a)] if a ∈ (aπ , +∞)
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                  
                      sr             sr                 γ
                                                                                                  (26)

   Let us consider the equilibrium value a∗∗
                                          ch of the ceiling determined at date 0 as solution to

(26). First, note that it is never in the firm’s interest to negotiate a ceiling a > aπ . The firm’s

                                                   19
benefit from negotiating a ceiling a > ausr is that it serves as commitment to request action a
from the si type if the sr type turns down the firm’s employment offer and the si worker is
hired in his stead. This creates a social responsibility wedge ρ [S (ausr ) − S (a)] for the sr type,
which the firm can then extract. But even if a > aπ , the maximum action that the firm can
commit to request from the si worker is aπ ,13 and hence the maximum wedge that the firm can
generate is ρ [S (ausr ) − S (aπ )]. Indeed, there is no reason for the firm to pay the government
to raise a beyond aπ because it would yield no additional benefit.
       Second, let us define a threshold level of government inefficiency γsr = 1/ (1 + ρ); and inter-
pret γ ≤ γsr as relatively efficient government and γ > γsr as relatively inefficient government.
                                                                       1−γ
Consider relatively efficient government: γ ≤ γsr implies ρ ≤           γ
                                                                           ,   which in turn implies that the
marginal cost − 1−γ
                 γ
                    S 0 (a) of lobbying to raise the ceiling above ausr is greater than the marginal
rent-extraction benefit −ρS 0 (a), and hence the firm never lobbies for a > ausr with a relatively
efficient government. As in Section 4.1, when the government is almost perfectly efficient and
γ → 0, the firm’s marginal cost of lobbying to raise the ceiling above a∗ is extremely high, and
accordingly the contracted ceiling a∗∗             ∗
                                    ch approaches a . As government inefficiency γ increases,

the firm’s marginal cost of lobbying declines, thus leading to an increase in contracted ceiling
a∗∗         ∗∗    u
 ch , with ach = asr at the threshold γsr = 1/ (1 + ρ). Thus, under efficient government the firm

negotiates a∗∗     ∗ u
            ch ∈ (a , asr ], and as discussed above remains indifferent between hiring either type

of worker.
                                                                                     1−γ
       Now consider relatively inefficient government: γ > γsr implies ρ >            γ
                                                                                         .   Here the marginal
cost − 1−γ
        γ
           S 0 (a) of raising the ceiling above ausr is smaller than the marginal rent-extraction
benefit −ρS 0 (a), and this for all a ∈ (ausr , aπ ]. Hence the optimal strategy for the firm is to
set a∗∗                                     u
     ch = aπ : it maximizes the size ρ [S (asr ) − S (aπ )] of the social responsibility wedge to be

extracted from the sr worker. Clearly in that case the firm strictly prefers hiring the sr type.
       We state the equilibrium in the following lemma:14

Lemma 4 As long as γ > 0, when the firm can choose between a self-interested or a socially
responsible worker, two cases arise:

    • Relatively efficient government (γ ≤ γsr ). At date 0 the firm makes political contribu-
  13
    Recall that for all a ∈ [ausr , +∞), the regulatory ceiling is not binding, and we have asr = ausr and asi =
min (a, aπ )
 14
    See formal proof in the appendix.


                                                      20
            ∗∗
      tion Cch (γ) > 0 to the government, in exchange for setting regulatory ceiling a∗∗
                                                                                      ch (γ),

      with a∗∗         ∗ u            ∗∗
            ch (γ) ∈ (a , asr ] and dach /dγ > 0. At date 1, the firm hires either type and re-

      quests action ach = a∗∗                                                ∗∗
                           ch (γ). At date 2, the hired worker takes action ach (γ) and receives

      compensation Wsi (a∗∗              ∗∗                                       ∗∗
                         ch (γ)) = Wsr (ach (γ)); and the firm obtains payoff π (ach (γ)).


   • Relatively inefficient government (γ > γsr ). At date 0 the firm makes political contribution
       ∗∗
      Cch (γ) > 0 to the government, in exchange for setting regulatory ceiling a∗∗
                                                                                 ch (γ) = aπ .

      At date 1, the firm hires the sr type and requests action ach = ausr . At date 2, the hired
      sr worker takes action ausr and receives compensation Wsr (ausr ); and the firm obtains the
      total payoff π (ausr ) + ρ [S (ausr ) − S (aπ )].

   Similar to Section 4.1, the expression for equilibrium social welfare can be written as
T S2 (ach (γ) , a∗∗        ∗∗
                 ch (γ) , Cch (γ)), obtained by substituting equilibrium ceiling, action, and influ-

ence payment into (5). The overall decrease in social welfare associated with this equilibrium
can then be written as:

  T S ∗ (a∗ ) − T S2 (ach (γ) , a∗∗        ∗∗
                                 ch (γ) , Cch (γ)) =       [S (a∗ ) − (1 − γ) S (a∗∗
                                                                                  ch (γ))]
                                                           + (1 − γ) Cch + (1 + ρ) [S (a∗ ) − S (ach (γ))] .
                                                                        ∗∗

                                                                                                         (27)
This welfare decrease includes a ceiling inefficiency [S (a∗ ) − (1 − γ) S (a∗∗
                                                                             ch (γ))]; a contribution
                      ∗∗
inefficiency (1 − γ) Cch , and an action inefficiency (1 + ρ) [S (a∗ ) − S (ach (γ))], as described in
Section 4.1.

4.3     The Social Impact of Social Responsibility

What is the the impact of social responsibility - i.e. of the labor market availability of a sr
type worker - on the firm, and on social welfare?

   Impact on the firm. When the government is relatively efficient (γ ≤ γsr ), then as
discussed above if both types of workers are available to the firm it is never optimal to lobby for
a ceiling a > ausr . Hence, comparing (21) and (26), it is easy to see that the firm’s maximization
program at date 0 is the same whether it can hire the si type only, or either type of worker,
at date 1. Unsurprisingly then, in equilibrium regulatory ceilings, actions, and date 0 payoffs
for the firm, are identical under both scenarios: a∗∗        ∗∗                            ∗∗
                                                   si (γ) = ach (γ), asi = ach , and Uch (ach (γ)) =

Usi (a∗∗
      si (γ)) for all γ ≤ γsr .



                                                          21
   In contrast, when the government is relatively inefficient (γ > γsr ), the availability of the sr
type in the labor market clearly makes the firm better off, because the firm can use lobbying to
create a social responsibility wedge ρ [S (ausr ) − S (aπ )], which it extracts through contractual
means. Thus, Uch (a∗∗              ∗∗
                   ch (γ)) > Usi (asi (γ)) for all γ > γsr .


Proposition 5 When the government is relatively efficient (γ ≤ γsr ), social responsibility has
no impact on the firm’s payoff. When the government is relatively inefficient (γ > γsr ), socially
responsibility makes the firm strictly better off.

   The main intuition behind these results is illustrated in Figure 3, which captures equilibrium
regulatory ceilings a∗∗          ∗∗
                     si (γ) and ach (γ), as functions of government inefficiency γ, when only si

managers are available and when both types of workers are available, respectively.

   [INSERT FIGURE 3 ABOUT HERE]

   The critical government inefficiency threshold γsr is a function of ρ ∈ (0, 1) and thus must
              1
lie between   2
                  and 1. To the left of γsr , the government is sufficiently well-functioning that the
firm is indifferent between hiring the two types of employees. Lobbying occurs in equilibrium,
as the firm negotiates a regulatory ceiling superior to a∗ , but the level of lobbying is below what
is required to make CSR desirable. Whether or not a socially responsible workers are available
in the labor market, the equilibrium level of lobbying remains the same: a∗∗        ∗∗
                                                                          si (γ) = ach (γ).

   To the right of γsr , the ability to engage in CSR dramatically changes the picture. The firm
now has an incentive to increase lobbying from a ceiling of a∗∗                      ∗∗
                                                             si (γ) to a ceiling of ach (γ) = aπ . It

couples this with a socially responsible action ausr , creating a social responsibility wedge which
the firm captures contractually. Thus, in this region the firm’s payoff is the profits from regular
operations plus the value of the social responsibility wedge it extracts. As we discuss in the next
section, when we expand the model to allow for these rents to be pledged differently between
the firm’s insiders and its shareholders, a range of empirical predictions emerge.

   Impact on social welfare. When the government is relatively efficient (γ ≤ γsr ), as
discussed regulatory ceilings and actions are the same whether or not the firm employees socially
minded workers: asi = a∗∗        ∗∗
                       si (γ) = ach (γ) = ach . As a result social welfare is the same in both

cases: T S2 (ach (γ) , a∗∗        ∗∗                         ∗∗        ∗∗
                        ch (γ) , Cch (γ)) = T S2 (asi (γ) , asi (γ) , Csi (γ)) for all γ ≤ γsr .



                                                     22
       In contrast, when γ > γsr , CSR has three distinct effects, which we highlight by subtracting
T S2 (asi (γ) , a∗∗        ∗∗                            ∗∗        ∗∗
                 si (γ) , Csi (γ)) from T S2 (ach (γ) , ach (γ) , Cch (γ)):




           ∆T S2 (γ)      = T S2 (ach (γ) , a∗∗        ∗∗                         ∗∗        ∗∗
                                             ch (γ) , Cch (γ)) − T S2 (asi (γ) , asi (γ) , Csi (γ))

                         = (1 + ρ) [S (ach (γ)) − asi (γ)] + (1 − γ) [S (a∗∗            ∗∗
                                                                          ch (γ)) − S (asi (γ))]

                                                             ∗∗
                                                 − (1 − γ) [Cch (γ) − Csi∗∗ (γ)]
                                                                         1−γ
                               = (1 + ρ) [S (ausr ) − S (a∗∗
                                                          si (γ))] −      γ
                                                                               [S (a∗∗
                                                                                    si (γ)) − S (aπ )] .             (28)

       On the one hand, generating the social responsibility wedge requires a lower equilibrium
action ausr < asi = a∗∗
                     si than would otherwise be chosen;
                                                        15
                                                           and this lower equilibrium ac-
tion leads to a higher core surplus: S (ausr ) > S (a∗∗
                                                     si ). This in turn yields a welfare benefit

(1 + ρ) [S (ausr ) − S (a∗∗
                         si )] of social responsibility. In other words, CSR mitigates the action

inefficiency that would arise with a self-interested worker only.
       On the other hand, anticipating it will pursue CSR at date 1, the firm lobbies the government
for a very high regulatory ceiling a∗∗                                         ∗∗
                                    ch = aπ , higher in fact than the ceiling asi that would be

contracted if it were not going to generate the social responsibility wedge. But of course this
                                                       ∗∗                          1−γ
higher ceiling comes with greater influence payments: Cch =                         γ
                                                                                         [S (a∗ ) − S (aπ )] is strictly
                         1−γ
superior to Csi∗∗ =       γ
                               [S (a∗ ) − S (a∗∗
                                              si )] , for all γ > γsr . Indeed, CSR exacerbates the ceiling

inefficiency and the contribution inefficiency that would prevail with a self-interested worker
only, by (1 − γ) [S (a∗∗            ∗∗                     ∗∗        ∗∗
                      ch (γ)) − S (asi (γ))] and (1 − γ) [Cch (γ) − Csi (γ)], respectively. These
                                                 1−γ
two welfare costs of CSR simplify to              γ
                                                       [S (a∗∗
                                                            si (γ)) − S (aπ )], as represented in the third line

of (29).
       A careful examination of expression (29) yields several key insights. First, when γ tends to
γsr from above, the welfare impact of social responsibility is unambiguously negative. To see
this, note from Figures 1 and 3 that around γsr the action chosen if only the self-interested
employee is available is asi = a∗∗    u
                                si = asr . In other words, the action chosen in equilibrium

is identical to the one that would be chosen if the socially responsible worker were available
                                                                             1−γ
  15
     To see this, recall that asi = a∗∗ si , and hence that π0 (asi ) + γ S0 (asi ) = 0. Define Z (.) = π (.) +
ρ [S (.) − S (aπ )] as the firm’s net payoff at date 1 with the socially responsible sr employee. Now consider
marginal payoff Z0 (.), evaluated at asi : Z0 (asi ) = π0 (asi ) + ρS0 (asi ). Substituting π0 (asi ) = − 1−γ
                                                                                                           γ S0 (asi ) into
                                    
                  0              1−γ
Z (asi ) yields Z (asi ) = ρ − γ S0 (asi ) < 0 for all γ > γsr . By the strict concavity of payoff Z (.), we must
have asr < asi in order to ensure that π0 (asr ) + ρS0 (asr ) = 0.


                                                            23
in the labor market. Accordingly, the welfare benefit from social responsibility collapses to
(1 + ρ) [S (ausr ) − S (ausr )] = 0 when γ → γsr
                                              +
                                                 . Conversely, the welfare cost of social responsibility
                                                         +
                       +                             1−γsr
is maximized when γ → γsr , converging toward          +
                                                      γsr
                                                             [S (ausr ) − S (aπ )].
   Second, when γ tends to 1 (perfectly inefficient government), the welfare impact of social
responsibility is unambiguously positive. Considering Figures 1 and 3 again, it is clear that
as γ → 1, the regulatory ceiling chosen with purely self-interested employees is a∗∗
                                                                                  si → aπ . In

other words, the ceiling chosen, and hence the political contribution made to the government
is identical to the one that would be made if the socially responsible were available in the labor
                                                                                      1−γ
market. Accordingly, the welfare cost of social responsibility collapses to            γ
                                                                                            [S (aπ ) − S (aπ )] =
0 when γ → 1. Conversely, the welfare benefit from social responsibility is maximized when
γ → 1, converging toward (1 + ρ) [S (ausr ) − S (aπ )].
   More generally, note from Figures 1 and 3 that for all γ ∈ (γsr , 1), equilibrium regulatory
ceiling and managerial action when the sr worker is available are independent of γ: a∗∗
                                                                                     ch (γ) = aπ

and asr = ausr . In contrast, the ceiling chosen when only the si worker is available, a∗∗
                                                                                        si (γ) < aπ ,

is strictly increasing in government inefficiency γ, thus gradually coming closer to a∗∗
                                                                                      ch (γ), and

hence reducing the social cost of social responsibility. In addition, the managerial action chosen
in that case, asi = a∗∗        u
                     si (γ) > asr , is also strictly increasing in γ, thus gradually getting further

away from asr , and hence increasing the social benefit from social responsibility. Indeed, as
shown formally in the appendix, government inefficiency does increase the net welfare benefits
                                                                                           0
from social responsibility, and there exists a threshold level of government inefficiency γsr ∈
                                        0
(γsr , 1) such that for all γ ∈ (γsr , γsr ] the availability of a sr worker in the labor market has
                                                       0
a negative impact on social welfare; and for all γ ∈ (γsr , 1), it has a positive impact on social
welfare.
   We illustrate these results in Figure 4, and summarize them in the proposition below.

   [INSERT FIGURE 4 ABOUT HERE]


Proposition 6 When the government is relatively efficient (γ ≤ γsr ), having access to a so-
cially responsible worker in addition to a self-interested worker has no impact on social welfare.
                                                           0
When the government is moderately inefficient (γ ∈ (γsr , γsr )), access to a socially responsible
                                                                                     0
worker has a negative welfare impact. When the government is very inefficient (γ ∈ [γsr , 1)),
access to a socially responsible worker has a positive welfare impact.

                                                  24
   Other comparative statics behind these results are interesting and point us again back to
Friedman (1963). Note that the more socially responsible the sr worker - i.e. the higher the
worker’s ρ - the lower the threshold γsr , and hence the larger the region [γsr , 1) over which
having access to the sr worker is beneficial.
   Conversely, if the preference for social responsibility is low in the economy, then the cor-
responding value of ρ will be low. This will cause the critical threshold γsr to approach 1,
which as shown in Firgure 3 means that the region will shrink over which the firm lobbies for
inefficient regulation and absorbs the surplus through contractual means. This point is relevant
because it harkens back to the analysis provided by Friedman (1963): a necessary condition for
firms to engage in regulatory capture is that there is a sufficient aggregate preference for social
responsibility.

4.4    Calibrating the Model

Before we proceed to considering several extensions to the model, it is worth discussing the
relevant empirical calibrations that are implicitly assumed in our analysis, because the empirical
relevance of our model hinges on a comparison between the costs of lobbying and the gains from
CSR.
   First, the empirical evidence suggests that lobbying costs are actually quite small as a
fraction of firm value, so it is easy to imagine that they are an order of magnitude below the
social responsibility rent extraction that occurs. In particular, resources like Opensecrets.org,
which tracks political contributions in the United States, suggest that firms’ lobbying costs are
only a tiny fraction of their overall profits. For example, the top insurance company, in terms
of lobbying, in 2012 was Blue Cross/Blue Shield, which paid a little over $6 million in lobbying
costs. Total lobbying contributions by all firms in the finance sector were $500 million in that
year. General Motors spends around $10 million per year in lobbying costs.
   These anecdotes comport with a large body of empirical evidence on the magnitudes of po-
litical contributions, lobbying and their associated returns. Ansolabehere et al (2003) document
the fact that influence payments in the form of campaign contributions seem rather modest;
Milyo et al. (2000) shows that lobbying expenses are about ten times larger than all other forms
of political contributions, but argues that indeed the dollars that flow into lobbying are small
relative to the political returns from lobbying. de Figueiredo and Silverman (2006) show that


                                                25
the returns to lobbying for earmarks are on the order of $10 for every $1 of lobbying expenses.
    A second question is whether is whether the simultaneous pursuit of lobbying and CSR
is an empirical regularity. Richter (2011) finds that CSR activity and corporate lobbying are
commonly observed in the same firms. He finds that about 28% of firms on the KLD database
(a widely used database for social responsibility research) also engage in lobbying, based on data
from the Center for Responsive Politics. He documents the fact that on average, firms that do
both have higher Tobin’s q than firms that do only one or the other. This is broadly consistent
with the predictions of our model, but as we discuss below, whether the social responsibility
wedge is reflected in equity prices hinges critically on the nature of the CSR activity and the
ability to pledge it to the owners of the firm.
    In sum, therefore, the existing empirical evidence suggests that the mechanisms we highlight
in our theoretical analysis are not only plausible, they are likely. Indeed, the data on corporate
political action and CSR suggest that many firms engage in both types of activities simultane-
ously, and that it is easy to imagine that the financial or non-pecuniary gains experienced by
corporations would far outstrip their associated lobbying costs.


5       Interpretations and Extensions
The model presented thus far is intentionally stark to stress its main insights. In particular,
we have suppressed any discussion to this point of whether workers and citizens are one and
the same, as well as any agency considerations arising from disbursed ownership of the firm
and whether the social responsibility wedge created through judicious lobbying is shared among
different stakeholders of the firm. We take up these issues in this section and explore a number
of other interpretations based on related but distinct organizational arrangements that relate
to our main analysis.

5.1     Outside Equity and Managerial Agency
5.1.1    Citizens as Shareholders

Another natural question that arises in the analysis of our model is what would happen if
we allowed citizens to instead be shareholders of the firm that is choosing to engage in social
responsibility. There are two distinct issues that arise here. One is that their ownership of
the firm may partly compensate them for the utility loss associated with the firm’s production

                                                  26
activities, effectively narrowing the wedge between what is privately optimal for the firm and
what is socially optimal.
   In the main analysis of the model, there is no distinction between the two alternative sources
of firm value: profits associated with production (π(a) in the analysis) and rents that accrue to
the firm associated with allowing a socially responsible worker to take a less socially destructive
action. No such distinction is required because the main analysis is not concerned with how
the rents and profits are shared between the firm and its owners. In the simplest possible
formulation, allowing citizens to be owners of the firm would effectively lower the cost of the
negative spillovers that citizens experience, narrowing the distance between aπ and a∗ . Under
this formulation, none of the model’s results would change as long as outside shareholders do
not own 100% of the firm.

5.1.2    Can CSR Rents Be Pledged to Outsiders?

A more interesting case arises when the pledgability of production profits and social respon-
sibility rents differs. At one extreme, consider the case in which the profits associated with
production can be fully pledged to outside shareholders, while the rents extracted from so-
cially responsible agents are purely captured by the firm’s managers. If this is the case, then
shareholders are strictly worse off under socially responsible than under pure self-interest: they
receive a fraction of π(a∗si ) in the latter case but a fraction of π(a∗sr ) < π(a∗si ) in the former case.
Thus, under this formulation, pursuing CSR destroys shareholder value.
   This version of the model delivers the exact predictions tested in recent empirical work by
Cheng, Hong and Shue (2012). They use shocks to managerial ownership induced by dividend
tax cuts, as well as regression discontinuities around close shareholder votes, to find that firms
engage in less social responsibility when the level of agency problems inside the firm drops.
That is, among firms in which effective managerial ownership increased as a result of the 2003
dividend tax cuts, CSR activity dropped. Likewise, CSR activity is lower in firms just above
the 50% shareholder vote cutoff than just below it. Both these results square with a version of
our model in which the rent extraction associated with CSR accrues to insiders, and is therefore
inconsistent with shareholder value maximization.
   Alternatively, if we assume that the rents from CSR activity can be pledged to outsiders,
then outside shareholders have a stake not only on π(a) but also on P (a). At this opposite ex-


                                                    27
treme, what is good for the firm is also good for its shareholders. Formulations along these lines
are supported by work such as Edmans (2007), which shows that firms that behave responsibly
towards employees earn higher abnormal returns.
   More generally, our model stresses the fact that the welfare implications to shareholders
of CSR are not straightforward, but depend on whether the socially responsible actions flow
through to the net profits of the firm or are dissipated as private benefits inside the firm. While
ultimately it may be an empirical question as to which scenario dominates, the same basic
incentive structures between firms, the government and other stakeholders give rise to either
set of predictions.

5.2    Contrasting Social Entrepreneurship and CSR

The welfare implications of our model hinge critically on whether or not the CSR that we
observe has been purchased through inefficient regulation. In our analysis, we have considered
a situation in which a firm can lobby for inefficient regulation, then partly capture the rents
associated with the provision of social welfare. This balance between the deadweight cost of
inefficient regulation and social welfare creation associated with CSR is precisely what poses
difficulties for the welfare analysis.
   What if instead firms were too small to have an effect on government behavior? If govern-
ment is exogenously inefficient, then it is straightforward to see from our analysis that CSR
is unambiguously welfare increasing. In other words, if we simply fix an exogenously specified
level of government inefficiency and contrast social welfare before and after the introduction of
CSR, the welfare implications are clear.
   This invites a broader discussion of alternative types of corporate social behavior. In partic-
ular, social entrepreneurship—the phenomenon in which entrepreneurial startups focus solely
or partly on social, non-profit objectives—has emerged in tandem with CSR as another mode of
corporate social behavior. Given the limited ability of small entrepreneurial organizations to be
implicated in setting the equilibrium level of the inefficiency to which they respond, our model
suggests that firm size is related to the welfare consequences of social responsibility. Our model
predicts that social firms—those who operate small-scale organizations aimed at alleviating
social ills, but with a profit motive—are much more likely to be welfare increasing for society
as a whole than CSR initiatives undertaken by large organizations that could reasonably be


                                                28
expected to affect the equilibrium behavior of regulatory institutions.

5.3    A Social Venture Capital Interpretation of the Model

An alternative interpretation of our model is in terms of the relationship between a social
entrepreneur and her source of funding. In particular, by recasting the firm/worker relationship
in our model as a relationship between a venture capitalist (VC) and a social entrepreneur, our
model offers predictions about the nature of their funding relationship. Under this formulation
of the model, the firm is a venture capital organization that funds startups, and a worker of a
particular type is an entrepreneur seeking funding.
   For instance, assume that two identical entrepreneurs seek outside funding to start their
firms. One venture focuses solely on maximizing profits, while the second venture operates in
the same sector but pursues a “multi-stakeholder” approach and trades off profit maximization
against other objectives like worker happiness and socially responsible supply chains. That is,
the self-interested venture intends to operates their business plan in a profit maximizing way
while the socially responsible venture operates a similar business model but trades off monetary
profits for social considerations.
   Our model predicts that the social entrepreneur will bear the entire cost of deviating from
profit maximization. More precisely, our model predicts that the VC, acting as principal, will
allow the socially responsible firm to operate their business plan according to a multi-stakeholder
approach, but in doing so will extract more concessions from them such that their expected
returns are at least as high as they would be if they only funded profit maximizing firms. In
the eyes of the social entrepreneur, the VC appears to claim that they intend to fund socially
minded startups, but they make the startup bear the cost of the social benefits in the form of
lower valuations.

5.4    An Organizational Economics Interpretation of the Model

Suppose that instead of lobbying the government, the firm could make an ex ante investment
in organizational flexibility, where flexibibility is defined as the maximum value a that action
a ∈ [0, a] can take. Moreover, suppose that the cost of such an investment organizational
                           1−γ
flexibility were K (a) =    γ
                               k   (a), with k 0 (.) > 0 and k 00 (.) > 0.
   In this context, parameter γ could be interpreted as the firm’s inherent ability to change: the


                                                      29
larger γ, the lower the marginal cost of increasing organizational flexibility. All of the results of
our model would then take on an organizational economics interpretation in that case. Indeed
for firms with low inherent ability to change (low γ), it is too costly to invest in organizational
flexibility, and without it the availability of a sr worker would have no impact on the firm’s
hiring strategy and expected profits. On the other hand, firms with high inherent ability to
change (high γ), it may be optimal to invest in great organizational flexibility, i.e. in a high
value of a, in order to endogenously create a social responsibility wedge for the sr worker, and
which can be extract from him through lower wages. Thus, under this interpretation of the
model, social responsibility is in a way complementary to firms’ inherent ability to change.


6     Conclusion
As Benabou and Tirole (2010) note, “Society’s demands for individual and corporate social
responsibility as an alternative response to market and distributive failures are becoming in-
creasingly prominent.” We address two issues in this paper that are directly connected to this
observation. First, we derive conditions under which CSR arises endogenously as a response
to other economic forces. In this respect, our analysis offers a positive theory of CSR. Second,
we ask whether society’s increased demands for such behavior are welfare improving. In this
respect, it offers a normative theory of CSR.
    Although our analysis shows how CSR can emerge as an equilibrium response to a govern-
ment that strays from the objective of social welfare maximization, our model makes it clear
that it is far from obvious that this is good for society as a whole. In a narrow sense, the
emergence of CSR raises social welfare relative to what would obtain under a similar degree
of regulatory inefficiency. But the ability to capture economic rents associated with CSR can
create an incentive for firms to engage in socially wasteful influence behavior that effects the
equilibrium regulatory behavior of the government in the first place. This concern is captured
in sentiments expressed by observers like former United Nations Secretary General Kofi Annan,
writing “Business must restrain itself from taking away, by its lobbying activities, what it offers
through corporate responsibility...” (The Global Compact, 2005). Comments like this stress
the dark side to CSR even in a setting in which, all else equal, society is seemingly better off
with it than without it.
    In that sense, the tension in our model is related to what is sometimes referred to as the

                                                 30
cobra effect.16 Holding constant the amount of inefficient regulation, introducing CSR may be
welfare improving, but at the same time the CSR movement itself may create broader social
forces that divert resources away from institutions that would otherwise promote the adoption
of efficient regulation.
       To keep the analysis simple, our model casts CSR as an unambiguously pro-social corporate
behavior; however, our results generalize to settings in which CSR may be a form of catering
to certain special interest groups. It is possible to recast our model as one in which alternative
interest groups, some of whom want one thing and some another, compete for social action
through the corporate sector instead of through political channels. In this broader sense firms
can be seen as using political influence to purchase a right that they then give away to a special
interest group in exchange for some surplus that they capture from that group. Governments
in our model do this because there is no mechanism by which citizens can pay them directly.
       In that regard, our analysis is both an explication and a critique of Friedman’s original
analysis. His concern was that social responsibility causes business to become “unwitting
puppets of the intellectual forces that have been undermining the basis of a free society these
past decades” (Friedman, 1970). Our model illustrates how CSR, when viewed as a form of
corporate self-policing, can create incentives that undermine the quality of oversight. But in
our analysis, the concern is not that businesses are unwitting puppets of broader social forces,
but rather that they are willful puppet masters exploiting broader social forces. Regardless of
whether exploiting these forces benefits shareholders or is purely a form of managerial agency,
the mere presence of CSR cannot be viewed as a benefit or a cost without a careful examination
of the root causes of the underlying inefficiencies that give rise to its prevalence in the first place.




  16
    Allegedly the British rulers of India, frustrated by the great number of cobras in the area, offered a reward
for every cobra carcass brought to the authorities. The reward created a thriving market for the farming of
baby cobras. Upon learning that their policies had backfired, the reward was banished, which in turn caused
scores of baby cobras, now worthless, to be released, greatly exacerbating the problem.


                                                       31
A      Appendix: Proofs
The proofs of Lemmas 1 and 2; and of Propositions 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 follow directly from the
text, and are omitted here.

A.1        Proof of Lemma 3

Recall from (21) that the firm’s program at date 0 simplifies to maximizing Usi with respect to
a, with:
                                                     1−γ
                                     Usi = π (a) −       [S (a∗ ) − S (a)] .
                                                      γ
    Clearly, Usi is strictly concave in a, since it is a linear combination of π (a) and S (a) which
are both strictly concave. There is thus a unique a = a∗∗
                                                       si that maximizes Usi such that:
                          1−γ 0
U 0 (a∗∗      0  ∗∗
      si ) = π (asi ) +    γ
                             S    (a∗∗
                                    si ) = 0.


    Proof that a∗∗     ∗               0  ∗           0  ∗            0               0
                si ∈ (a , aπ ). Since π (a ) > 0 and S (a ) = 0, and π (aπ ) = 0 and S (aπ ) < 0,

we must have U 0 (a∗ ) > 0 and U 0 (aπ ) < 0. By the strict concavity of Usi , it must be that
a∗∗     ∗
 si ∈ (a , aπ ).


    Proof that da∗∗
                 si /dγ > 0. Using the implicit function theorem, we can write:

                             da∗∗
                               si    ∂U 0 /∂γ               S 0 (.)
                                  =− 0         =                              .
                                    ∂U /∂a∗∗
                                                    
                              dγ            si   γ 2 π 00 (.) + 1−γ  S 00 (.)
                                                                   γ


    By the strict concavity of Usi , we have π 00 (.) + 1−γ
                                                         γ
                                                            S 00 (.) < 0. Since S 0 (a) < 0 for all a > a∗ ,
and a∗∗    ∗                0  ∗∗                                               ∗∗
     si > a , we must have S (asi ) < 0. These results then immediately imply dasi /dγ > 0.


    The other results of Lemma 3 follow directly from the text. 

A.2        Proof of Lemma 4

Recall from the main text that γsr = 1/ (1 + ρ). Let us define Uch as the firm’s payoff from a
date 0 viewpoint:
                                                                                              
                        1−γ       ∗
           π (a) − γ [S (a ) − S (a)]
                                                                       if a ∈ [0, ausr ]      
                                                                                               
    Uch =    π (ausr ) + ρ [S (ausr ) − S (a)] − 1−γ
                                                  γ
                                                      [S (a∗ ) − S (a)] if a ∈ (ausr , aπ ]        .   (29)
           π (au ) + ρ [S (au ) − S (aπ )] − 1−γ [S (a∗ ) − S (a)] if a ∈ (aπ , +∞)
                                                                                              
                                                                                               
                  sr             sr                 γ


    Note from (30) that Uch is continuous for all a ∈ R+ . We prove Lemma 4 in several steps.


                                                       32
                                                                                      dUch          1−γ 0
   Proof that a∗∗
               ch ≤ aπ for all γ ∈ (0, 1). Note from (30) that                         da
                                                                                              =      γ
                                                                                                       S    (a) < 0 for all
a ∈ (aπ , +∞). Hence if a solution a∗∗
                                    ch exists to the maximization of Uch , it must be such that

a∗∗
 ch ≤ aπ .

                                                                                                      h               i
                                                                                             dUch               1−γ
   Let γ < γsr . Consider the region where a ∈ (ausr , aπ ]. In this region,                  da
                                                                                                    =− ρ−        γ
                                                                                                                          S 0 (a).
                                        1−γ                                  dUch
Clearly γ < γsr if and only if ρ <       γ
                                            ,   which in turn implies         da
                                                                                    < 0 for all a ∈ (ausr , aπ ]. Hence
if a solution a∗∗                                                           ∗∗    u
               sr exists to the maximization of Uch , it must be such that ach ≤ asr .
                                        1−γ
   Let us define Uch1 = π (a) −          γ
                                                [S (a∗ ) − S (a)]. As discussed in the proof of Lemma 3,
Uch1 ≡ Usi is strictly concave in a. There is thus a unique a = a∗∗
                                                                 ch that maximizes Uch1 such

that:
                                                       1 − γ 0 ∗∗
                                        π 0 (a∗∗
                                              ch ) +        S (ach ) = 0.                                                  (30)
                                                         γ
   Since π 0 (a∗ ) > 0 and S 0 (a∗ ) = 0, by the strict concavity of Uch1 we know that a∗∗
                                                                                        ch >
                                                                                                       1−γ
a∗ . Moreover, recall from (14) that π 0 (ausr ) + ρS 0 (ausr ) = 0. Since ρ <                          γ
                                                                                                           ,   this implies
π 0 (ausr ) + 1−γ
               γ
                  S 0 (ausr ) < 0, which in turn, by the strict concavity of Uch1 , yields a∗∗    u
                                                                                            ch < asr . Thus,

when γ < γsr , there exists a unique regulatory ceiling a∗∗     ∗ u
                                                         ch ∈ (a , asr ) that maximizes the firm’s

date 0 payoff Uch .
                da∗∗
   Note that      > 0 for all γ < γsr . To see this, consider expression (31). Using the implicit
                  ch
                 dγ
                                da∗∗     (1/γ 2 )S 0 (.)
function theorem, we can write dγch = π0 (.)+ 1−γ S 0 (.) > 0 by the strict concavity of Uch1 .
                                                        γ



   Let γ = γsr . It follows directly from the previous case that when γ = γsr , Uch (a) = Uch (ausr )
for all a ∈ [ausr , aπ ] and that arg max Uch (a) = [ausr , aπ ]. Indeed, there is a multiplicity of
equilibria in that case, all yielding the same payoff. By convention, we assume that the pareto
optimal solution is chosen in that case, which corresponds to the lowest value among the
feasible equilibria: a∗∗    u
                      ch = asr . This is the pareto optimal equilibrium because it involves the

lowest regularity ceiling and hence the lowest level of a in equilibrium, and the lowest level of
                                            ∗∗                    1−γ
potentially inefficient influence payments Cch (γ) =               γ
                                                                        [S (a∗ ) − S (ausr )].
                                                                                                      h               i
                                                                                             dUch               1−γ
   Let γ > γsr . Consider the region where a ∈ (ausr , aπ ]. In this region,                  da
                                                                                                    =− ρ−        γ
                                                                                                                          S 0 (a).
                                        1−γ                        dUch
Since γ > γsr if and only if ρ >         γ
                                            ,    we must have       da
                                                                           > 0 for all a ∈ (ausr , aπ ]. Hence the
value of a ∈ (ausr , aπ ] that maximizes Uch over that region is aπ .
   Now consider the region where a ∈ [0, ausr ]. Since as discussed above π 0 (ausr ) + ρS 0 (ausr ) = 0,
                1−γ                                     1−γ 0
and since ρ >    γ
                    ,   it must be that π 0 (ausr ) +    γ
                                                           S     (ausr ) > 0. The strict concavity of Uch1 then


                                                            33
                    1−γ 0
implies π 0 (a) +    γ
                       S    (a) > 0 for all a ∈ [0, ausr ]. Hence the value of a ∈ [0, ausr ] that maximizes
Uch over that region is ausr .
                                                                   dUch
   Since Uch is continuous for all a ∈ R+ , and since               da
                                                                          > 0 for all a ∈ (ausr , aπ ], it must be
that Uch (aπ ) > Uch (ausr ). Thus, when γ > γsr , there exists a unique regulatory ceiling a∗∗
                                                                                             ch = aπ

that maximizes the firm’s date 0 payoff Uch .

   In sum, in the foregoing proof we have shown the following results about the equilibrium
regulatory ceiling:
                                                      da∗∗
                             a∗∗     ∗ u
                              ch ∈ (a , asr ], with
                                                        ch
                                                       dγ
                                                             >0   for all γ ∈ (0, γsr ] ;
                             a∗∗
                              ch = aπ                             for all γ ∈ (γsr , 1) .

   The proof of the other elements of Lemma 4 follows directly from the text and is omitted
here. 

A.3       Proof of Proposition 6

We consider two scenarios in turn.

   Case where γ ∈ (0, γsr ]. As shown in the main text, regulatory ceilings and managerial
actions are the same whether or not a sr worker is available: a∗∗        ∗∗
                                                               si (γ) = ach (γ), asi = ach . As

a result social welfare is the same in both cases: T S2 (a∗∗        ∗∗               ∗∗        ∗∗
                                                          ch (γ) , Cch (γ)) = T S2 (asi (γ) , Csi (γ))

and ∆T S2 (γ) = 0 for all γ ≤ γsr .

   Case where γ ∈ (γsr , 1). Consider again expression (29) describing the welfare impact of
social responsibility:

                                                                    1−γ
              ∆T S2 (γ) = (1 + ρ) [S (ausr ) − S (a∗∗
                                                   si (γ))] −           [S (a∗∗
                                                                             si (γ)) − S (aπ )] .            (31)
                                                                     γ

   It is easy to verify from the main text and from Figure 3 that:

       lim+ a∗∗        u
             si (γ) = asr , hence           lim+ ∆T S2 (γ) = − 1−γ
                                                                γ
                                                                   [S (ausr ) − S (aπ )]             <0
      γ→γsr                                γ→γsr
      and                                                                                                    (32)
      lim a∗∗
           si (γ) =         aπ ,   hence   lim ∆T S2 (γ) =          (1 + ρ) [S   (ausr )   − S (aπ )] > 0
      γ→1                                  γ→1


   Note that a∗∗
              si (γ) is continuous in γ for all γ ∈ (γsr , 1). Since function S (.) is continuous by

assumption, then ∆T S2 (γ) must be continuous for all γ ∈ (γsr , 1).



                                                         34
   Differentiating ∆T S2 (γ) with respect to γ, we get:

                     d∆T S2 (γ)                   ∂S (a∗∗
                                                       si ) ∂asi
                                                              ∗∗

                        dγ
                                  =   − (1 + ρ)    ∂a∗∗      ∂γ
                                                      si
                                                                                                         (33)
                                                                        (1−γ) ∂S (asi ) ∂a∗∗
                                                                                   ∗∗
                                      + γ12 [S (a∗∗
                                                 si (γ)) − S (aπ )] −     γ       ∗∗
                                                                               ∂asi
                                                                                          si
                                                                                         ∂γ
                                                                                             .

   It is clear from the main text and from Figure 3 that ∂a∗∗                    ∗∗      ∗∗
                                                           si /∂γ > 0. That ∂S (asi ) /∂asi < 0

follows directly from the strict concavity of S (.), and the facts that it is maximized at a∗ and
that a∗∗    ∗                                 ∗∗                      ∗∗
      si > a . Together with the result that asi (γ) < aπ implies S (asi (γ)) > S (aπ ), this

yields d∆T S2 (γ) /dγ > 0.
   This result in turn, together with the continuity of ∆T S2 (γ) and the results that lim+ ∆T S2 (γ) <
                                                                                                 γ→γsr
                                                                    0
0 and lim ∆T S2 (γ) > 0, imply that there exists a unique          γsr    ∈ (γsr , 1) such that ∆T S2 (γ) < 0
       γ→1
                    0                                    0
for all γ ∈ (γsr , γsr ) and ∆T S2 (γ) ≥ 0 for all γ ∈ [γsr , 1). 




                                                        35
B       Robustness Considerations
While our main arguments are developed with the simplest model possible, in this section we
consider a number of extensions to show that our main analysis is robust to a number of technical
considerations: these are limited liability, non-contractibility and asymmetric information.

B.1      Limited Managerial Liability

In this appendix, we examine the scenario in which where managers have limited wealth w0 ∈
R++ . We show that the results of the main model remain very similar under this assumption.
As in the main model, we determine the equilibrium by backward induction.

B.1.1    Hiring the si Manager

Clearly when si worker is hired, nothing changes in our model: the firm continues to pay the
worker Wsi = 0; the action asi that it asks the worker to select remains determined by (7); and
its payoff as a function of regulatory ceiling a, Psi (a), is still determined by (8).

B.1.2    Hiring the sr Manager

Let us now examine the case in which a wealth-constrained sr worker is hired. As in the main
model, we consider first the “government-unconstrained” scenario in which no regulatory ceiling
is constraining the action requested by the firm from the sr worker. Similar to the main model,
the firm’s program involves choosing managerial action b
                                                       a, base salary wll , and bonus bll to
                                                                                  a) ≥ ρS (a∗ ), and
                        a) − (wll + bll ), subject to the IC constraint bll + ρS (b
maximize its program π (b
                                     a) ≥ ρS (asi ). We denote the worker’s total compensation
to the IR constraint wll + bll + ρS (b
Wll = wll + bll .
    The main difference with the main model is that the firm faces an additional constraint - the
worker’s limited liability (LL) constraint: wll + bll ≥ −w0 . Indeed, the IR and LL constraints
can be merged into one constraint expressed as:

                           wll + bll ≥ max {−ρ [S (b
                                                   a) − S (asi )] ; −w0 } .                    (34)

Thus we can express the firm’s “government-unconstrained” maximization program in a sim-
plified way as follows:

                                  a) + min {ρ [S (b
                           max π (b               a) − S (asi )] ; w0 } ,                      (35)
                             a
                             b


                                                 36
with asi = a if a ≤ aπ , and asi = aπ if a > aπ .
   It follows directly from constraint (35) and from the analysis of the main model that when
w0 ≥ ρ [S (ausr ) − S (aπ )], the LL constraint is never binding. This is because the agent’s wealth
w0 is greater than the maximum social responsibility wedge ρ [S (ausr ) − S (aπ )] that the firm
may wish to extract from him. Thus in that case the results remain exactly as in the main
model. To keep the analysis interesting in this appendix, we impose the following parametric
restriction:
                                   w0 ∈ (0, ρ [S (ausr ) − S (aπ )]) .                             (36)

   To simplify the analysis going forward, let us define the following variable and function.
First, we define a1 as the value of the regulatory ceiling a such that ρ [S (ausr ) − S (a1 )] = w0 .
We also define b
               all (a) = f (a) as the value of the selected managerial action b
                                                                              a such that, for any
                                  all ) − S (a)] = w0 , for all a > a1 . The implicit function theorem
given regulatory ceiling a, ρ [S (b
and the fact that S 0 (.) < 0 for all a > aπ imply immediately that f 0 (a) > 0 and b
                                                                                    all (a) > ausr
for all a > a1 . Moreover, condition (37) implies ausr < a1 < aπ and ausr < b
                                                                            all (aπ ) < aπ .
   In this and the following subsections we prove a series of results which will help determine
the equilibrium of the game. The first result pertains the firm’s optimal choice of action all to
be requested from the sr worker, as a function of the regulatory ceiling a.

   Result E1 For a given regularity ceiling a, the firm’s optimal choice of action all to be
requested from the sr worker is:
                                                                        
                                      
                                       a         if a ∈ [0, ausr ]      
                                                                         
                                       u
                                        asr       if a ∈ (ausr , a1 ]
                                                                         
                            all (a) =                                        .                     (37)
                                      
                                       all (a) if a ∈ (a1 , aπ ]
                                        b                                
                                                                         
                                        all (aπ ) if a ∈ (aπ , +∞)
                                                                        
                                        b


   Proof of Result E1. Let a ∈ [0, ausr ]. Then all = a for the same reasons as in the main
model: the ceiling is binding and there is no social responsibility wedge to extract from the
worker.
   Let a ∈ (ausr , a1 ]. Then all = ausr for the same reasons as in the main model: setting all = ausr
allows the firm to extract social responsibility wedge ρ [S (ausr ) − S (a)] from the worker.
   Let a ∈ (a1 , aπ ]. Then ρ [S (ausr ) − S (a)] > w0 , and the limited liability constraint is binding
   a = ausr . It follows directly from (36), and from the fact that π 0 (.) > 0 for all b
at b                                                                                    a < aπ and


                                                    37
π 0 (.) + ρS 0 (.) < 0 for all b
                               a < ausr , that the optimal strategy for the firm is to raise the requested
action b                          a) − S (a)] = w0 , i.e. to b
       a to the point where ρ [S (b                          a=b
                                                               all (a).
   Let a ∈ (aπ , +∞). Then asi = aπ , and the firm’s objective function can expressed as: π (b
                                                                                             a)+
           a) − S (aπ )] ; w0 }. Since ρ [S (ausr ) − S (aπ )] > w0 , the limited liability constraint is
min {ρ [S (b
           a = ausr . For the same reasons as in the case where a ∈ (a1 , aπ ], the optimal strategy
binding at b
for the firm is to raise the requested action b                          a) − S (aπ )] = w0 , i.e. to
                                              a to the point where ρ [S (b
a=b
b all (a). 

   We depict the firm’s optimal action all (a) to be requested from the wealth-constrained sr
worker, together with the optimal actions derived in the main model, in Figure 5.

   [INSERT FIGURE 5 ABOUT HERE]

   Note that when the regulatory ceiling a > a1 , we have all (a) > asr (a), for the reasons pro-
vided in the proof of Result E1. When a > a1 , the limited liability constraint is binding at ausr ,
and the firm will not be able to extract the entire social responsibility wedge ρ [S (ausr ) − S (a)]
from the worker, extracting instead only w0 < ρ [S (ausr ) − S (a)]. By increasing the requested
action from ausr to b                       all (a)) − S (a)] = w0 , the firm continues to extract w0
                    all (a) such that ρ [S (b
from the worker, but increases its profit from π (ausr ) to π (b
                                                               all (a)).
   Result E2 For a given regularity ceiling a, the firm’s equilibrium payoff Pll if it hires the
sr worker is:
                                                                                     
                            
                             π (a)                             if a ∈ [0, ausr ]     
                                                                                      
                              π (ausr ) + ρ [S (ausr ) − S (a)] if a ∈ (ausr , a1 ]
                                                                                     
                  Pll (a) =                                                               .          (38)
                            
                             π (b
                                 all (a)) + w0                  if a ∈ (a1 , aπ ]     
                                                                                      
                              π (b
                                 all (aπ )) + w0                if a ∈ (aπ , +∞)
                                                                                     


   Proof of Result E2. Follows directly from Result E1. 

   We depict the firm’s equilibrium payoff Pll from hiring the wealth-constrained sr worker,
together with the equilibrium payoff derived in the main model, in Figure 6.

   [INSERT FIGURE 6 ABOUT HERE]

   Note that when the regulatory ceiling a > a1 , we have Pll (a) < Psr (a). Beyond ceiling
threshold a1 , the worker’s wealth constraint prevents the firm from extracting the entire social
responsibility wedge from him, leading to a lower equilibrium payoff for the firm.

                                                   38
B.1.3     Optimal Hiring Choice as a Function of Regulatory Ceiling

Comparing payoffs Psi (a) and Pll (a), defined in (8) and (39), respectively, it follows directly
that:
                                                                                                    
        If a ∈ [0, ausr ]:    The firm is indifferent betw. managers, requests action a
                                                                                                         .   (39)
        If a ∈ (ausr , +∞):   The firm hires sr worker, requests action all (a)

   The logic behind this result is identical to that presented in the main text and is omitted
here.

B.1.4     Regulatory Ceiling, Hiring and Actions in Equilibrium

Let us define V (a) as follows:
                                                                    1−γ
               V (a) = π (b                all (a)) − S (a)] −
                          all (a)) + ρ [S (b                            [S (a∗ ) − S (a)]                    (40)
                                                                     γ
                                               1−γ
                             all (a)) + w0 −
                        = π (b                     [S (a∗ ) − S (a)]
                                                γ
   For simplicity, we assume that π (.) and S (.) are such that V (.) is strictly concave in a.

   Result E3 Let us also define a2 (γ) as the value of regulatory ceiling a such that dV (a) /da =
0. Then a2 (γ) is strictly increasing in γ.

   Proof of Result E3. Differentiating V (.) with respect to a yields:
                                                       
                 dV       ∂π ∂ball       ∂S ∂b all ∂S       1 − γ ∂S
                     =             +ρ              −      −
                 da      ∂ba ∂a          ∂b
                                          a ∂a       ∂a       γ ∂a
                         ll             ll                        
                             ∂π       ∂S ∂b   all       ∂S 1 − γ ∂S
                     =            +ρ               − ρ     −             .                                   (41)
                             ∂b
                              all    ∂ball ∂a           ∂a     γ ∂a

                                                         da2       (1/γ 2 )S 0 (.)
   Using the implicit function theorem, we can write     dγ
                                                               =     d2 V /da2
                                                                                     > 0 by the strict concavity
of V (.). 

   Result E4 Let us define ceiling thresholds γll and γπ such that a2 (γll ) = a1 and a2 (γπ ) =
aπ . Then γsr ≤ γll < γπ < 1.

   Proof of Result E4. Showing that γsr ≤ γll . Consider regulatory ceiling value γsr . By
definition, γsr is such that ρ = (1 − γsr ) /γsr , and hence the second square bracket on the
right-hand side of (42) collapses to zero at γsr :
                                                
                           dV       ∂π      ∂S ∂b  all
                               =         +ρ                when γ = γsr .
                           da       ∂b
                                     all    ∂b
                                             all ∂a

                                                  39
                all (a) > ausr for all a > a1 . Together with (14) and the strict concavity of
As shown above, b
                               ∂π         ∂S
π (.) + ρS (.), this implies   ∂b
                                all
                                      + ρ ∂b
                                           all
                                               < 0 for all a > a1 . We have also shown above that
 all /∂a > 0. Accordingly, when γ = γsr , dV /da < 0 for all a > a1 . By the strict concavity
∂b
of V (.) we must have a2 (γsr ) ≤ a1 , which implies a2 (γsr ) ≤ a2 (γll ). Result E3 then yields
γsr ≤ γll .

    Showing that γll < γπ . As discussed above, condition (37) implies a1 < aπ , which by
definition implies a2 (γll ) < a2 (γπ ). Result E3 then yields γll < γπ .

    Showing that γπ < 1. Note that lim dV /da = (∂π/∂b
                                                     all ) (∂b
                                                             all /∂a) = 0 iff ∂π/∂b
                                                                                  all = 0, iff
                                           γ→1
all (a) = aπ . It then must follow that lim a2 (γ) = f −1 (aπ ) which is strictly superior to aπ by
b
                                            γ→1
definition of f (.): lim a2 (γ) > aπ . Result E3 then implies that there must exist a γπ < 1 such
                    γ→1
that a2 (γπ ) > aπ . 

    Result E5 The optimal regulatory ceiling a∗∗
                                              ll (γ) lobbied by the firm at date 0 in exchange
                                          1−γ
for political contribution Cll∗∗ (γ) =     γ
                                                [S (a∗ ) − S (a∗∗
                                                               ll (γ))], can be expressed as follows as a

function of government inefficiency γ:
                                     ∗∗                                 
                                       a (γ) if γ ∈ (0, γsr ]
                                     ch
                                    
                                                                        
                                                                         
                                       a1     if γ ∈ (γsr , γll ]
                                                                         
                         a∗∗
                           ll (γ) =                                          .
                                    
                                      a2 (γ) if γ ∈ (γll , γπ ]         
                                                                         
                                       aπ     if γ ∈ (γπ , 1)
                                                                        


    Proof of Result E5. The firm’s date 0 payoff can be expressed as Pll (a) − Cll , with
                                                                                         1−γ
Pll (a) defined in (39) and subject to the government IR constraint Cll =                 γ
                                                                                               [S (a∗ ) − S (a)].
Substituting this IR constraint into the firm’s objective function, we define Ull as the firm’s
payoff from a date 0 viewpoint:


                                                                                                   
           
            π (a) − 1−γ γ
                            [S (a∗ ) − S (a)]                      if            a ∈ [0, ausr ]     
                                                                                                    
            π (au ) + ρ [S (au ) − S (a)] − 1−γ [S (a∗ ) − S (a)] if
           
                                                                                 a ∈ (ausr , a1 ]
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                  sr             sr                γ
     Ull =                          1−γ      ∗                                                          .   (42)
           
            π (b
                a ll (a))  + w 0 −   γ
                                        [S (a  ) − S (a)]          if            a ∈ (a1 , aπ ]     
                                                                                                    
                                    1−γ       ∗
                                                                                                    
                all (aπ )) + w0 − γ [S (a ) − S (aπ )]
            π (b                                                  if            a ∈ (aπ , +∞)      


    Note from (43) that Ull is continuous for all a ∈ R+ . We prove Result E5 in several steps.

    Proof that a∗∗
                ll ≤ aπ for all γ ∈ (0, 1). Same as in proof of Lemma 4 and omitted here.


                                                      40
    Let γ ∈ (0, γsr ). The proof that a∗∗    ∗∗    u
                                       ll = ach < asr in this case is the same as in proof of

Lemma 4 and omitted here.

    Let γ = γsr . The proof that a∗∗    u
                                  ll = asr in that case is very similar to the proof of Lemma 4

and omitted here.
                                                                                                                h          i
                                                                                                      dUll           1−γ
    Let γ ∈ (γsr , γll ]. Consider the region where a ∈            (ausr , a1 ].   In this region,     da
                                                                                                             =− ρ−    γ
                                                                                                                               S 0 (a).
                                         1−γ                       dUll
Since γ > γsr if and only if ρ >          γ
                                             ,   we must have       da
                                                                          > 0 for all a ∈ (ausr , a1 ]. Hence the value
of a ∈ (ausr , a1 ] that maximizes Ull over that region is a1 .
                                                                                           dUll        dV
    Now consider the region where a ∈ (a1 , aπ ]. In this region,                           da
                                                                                                  =    da
                                                                                                          .   By definition,
a2 (γll ) = a1 , and Result E3 implies a2 (γ) ≤ a1 for all γ ≤ γll . By the strict concavity of V (.),
                       dUll       dV
it then follows that    da
                              =   da
                                       < 0 for all a ∈ (a1 , aπ ].
    Finally, consider the region where a ∈ [0, ausr ]. Since as discussed above π 0 (ausr ) + ρS 0 (ausr ) =
                    1−γ                             dUll                     1−γ 0
0, and since ρ >     γ
                        ,   it must be that          da
                                                           = π 0 (ausr ) +    γ
                                                                                S    (ausr ) > 0. The strict concavity
                                         dUll
of Ull over [0, ausr ] then implies       da
                                                > 0 for all a ∈ [0, ausr ]. Hence the value of a ∈ [0, ausr ] that
maximizes Ull over that region is ausr .
    Since Ull is continuous for all a ∈ R+ , the preceding results imply directly that for γ ∈
(γsr , γll ], the value of a that maximizes Ull is a1 .

    Let γ ∈ (γll , γπ ]. Consider the region where a ∈ (ausr , a1 ]. As in the previous case, and for
the same reasons, the value of a ∈ (ausr , a1 ] that maximizes Ull over that region is a1 .
                                                                                           dUll        dV
    Next consider the region where a ∈ (a1 , aπ ]. In this region,                          da
                                                                                                  =    da
                                                                                                          .   By definition,
a2 (γll ) = a1 , and Result E3 implies a2 (γ) > a1 for all γ > γll . Hence the value of a ∈ (a1 , aπ ]
that maximizes Ull over that region is a2 (γ). The strict concavity of V (.) and the continuity
of Ull over R+ immediately implies Ull (a2 (γ)) > Ull (a1 ).
    Finally, consider the region where a ∈ [0, ausr ]. As in the previous case, and for the same
reasons, the value of a ∈ [0, ausr ] that maximizes Ull over that region is ausr . The continuity of
                         dUll
Ull and the fact that     da
                                > 0 for all a ∈ (ausr , a1 ] imply Ull (ausr ) < Ull (a1 ). By transitivity we
also have Ull (ausr ) < Ull (a2 (γ)). Thus, overall, for γ ∈ (γll , γπ ], the value of a that maximizes
Ull is a2 (γ).

    Let γ ∈ (γπ , 1). Consider the region where a ∈ (ausr , a1 ]. As in the previous case, and for
the same reasons, the value of a ∈ (ausr , a1 ] that maximizes Ull over that region is a1 .

                                                             41
                                                                         dUll       dV
   Next consider the region where a ∈ (a1 , aπ ]. In this region,         da
                                                                                =   da
                                                                                       .   By definition,
a2 (γπ ) = aπ , and Result E3 implies dV (a) /da > 0 for all a ∈ (a1 , aπ ]. Hence the value of
a ∈ (a1 , aπ ] that maximizes Ull over that region is aπ . The strict concavity of V (.) and the
continuity of Ull over R+ immediately implies Ull (aπ ) > Ull (a1 ).
   Finally, consider the region where a ∈ [0, ausr ]. As in the previous case, and for the same
reasons, the value of a ∈ [0, ausr ] that maximizes Ull over that region is ausr , with Ull (ausr ) <
Ull (a1 ). By transitivity we also have Ull (ausr ) < Ull (aπ ). Thus, overall, for γ ∈ (γπ , 1), the
value of a that maximizes Ull is aπ . 

   We depict the equilibrium regulatory ceiling a∗∗
                                                 ll (γ) in the case where the firm has a choice

between the two types of wealth-constrained managers, together with the equilibrium regulatory
ceilings derived in the main model, in Figure 7.

   [INSERT FIGURE 7 ABOUT HERE]

   Note that when government inefficiency γ > γsr , we have a∗∗        ∗∗
                                                             ll (γ) ≤ asr (γ). This comes from

the fact that the firm, anticipating that the worker’s wealth constraint will reduces the rents it
can extract from the worker ex post, has less incentives to lobby to raise the regulatory ceiling
ex ante.

   We state the equilibrium in the following lemma:

Lemma 5 As long as γ > 0, when the firm can choose between a self-interested worker and a
socially responsible worker, and managers are wealth-constrained with wealth w0 , the following
cases arise:

   • If γ ∈ (0, γsr ]. At date 0 the firm makes political contribution Cll∗∗ (γ) > 0 to the govern-
      ment, in exchange for setting regulatory ceiling a∗∗        ∗∗            ∗∗         ∗ u
                                                        ll (γ) = ach (γ), with ach (γ) ∈ (a , asr ]

      and da∗∗                                                                             ∗∗
            ch /dγ > 0. At date 1, the firm hires either worker and requests action all = ach (γ).

      At date 2, the hired worker takes action a∗∗                                     ∗∗
                                                ch (γ) and receives compensation Wll (ach (γ)) =

      Wsr (a∗∗              ∗∗                                       ∗∗
            ch (γ)) = Wsi (ach (γ)); and the firm obtains payoff π (ach (γ)).


   • If γ ∈ (γsr , γll ]. At date 0 the firm makes political contribution Cll∗∗ (γ) > 0 to the govern-
      ment, in exchange for setting regulatory ceiling a∗∗
                                                        ll (γ) = a1 . At date 1, the firm hires the



                                                 42
      sr worker and requests action all = ausr . At date 2, the hired sr worker takes action ausr and
      receives compensation Wsr (ausr ); and the firm obtains payoff π (ausr ) + ρ [S (ausr ) − S (a1 )].

   • If γ ∈ (γll , γπ ]. At date 0 the firm makes political contribution Cll∗∗ (γ) > 0 to the gov-
      ernment, in exchange for setting regulatory ceiling a∗∗
                                                           ll (γ) = a2 (γ). At date 1, the firm

      hires the sr worker and requests action all = b
                                                    all (a2 (γ)). At date 2, the hired sr worker
                                                               all (a2 (γ))) = −w0 ; and the firm
                   all (a2 (γ)) and receives compensation Wll (b
      takes action b
      obtains payoff π (b
                        all (a2 (γ))) + w0 .

   • If γ ∈ (γπ , 1). At date 0 the firm makes political contribution Cll∗∗ (γ) > 0 to the govern-
      ment, in exchange for setting regulatory ceiling a∗∗
                                                        ll (γ) = aπ . At date 1, the firm hires

      the sr worker and requests action all = b
                                              all (aπ ). At date 2, the hired sr worker takes ac-
      tion b                                        all (aπ )) = −w0 ; and the firm obtains payoff
           all (aπ ) and receives compensation Wll (b
      π (b
         all (aπ )) + w0 .


   Proof of Lemma 5. Follows directly from Results E1-E5. 

   The intuition behind Lemma 5 can be illustrated with Figure 7. When γ ∈ (0, γsr ], the
situation is the same as in the main model: the government is efficient and lobbying is costly.
The equilibrium ceiling a∗∗               u
                         ll (γ) is below asr , and the firm is indifferent between the two types

of entrepreneurs.
   For all γ > γsr , the firm anticipates it will hire the sr worker. When γ ∈ (γsr , γll ], the firm
sets the ceiling at a1 such that, by requesting action ausr from the worker, it can extract rents
from him equal to his entire wealth w0 = ρ [S (ausr ) − S (a1 )]. When γ ∈ (γll , γπ ], government
inefficiency increases further and lobbying becomes “cheaper.” It then becomes optimal for the
firm to raise the ceiling to a2 (γ) > a1 , and to raise the requested managerial action b
                                                                                        all (a2 (γ)) in
order to generate and extract a social responsibility wedge exactly equal to the worker’s wealth.
Finally, when γ ∈ (γπ , 1), lobbying is so cheap that the highest ceiling aπ becomes optimal, with
equilibrium action b
                   all (aπ ) still chosen so as to make the social responsibility wedge exactly equal
to w0 . In other words, for all γ > γsr , the firm extract all of the sr worker’s wealth through
the social responsibility wedge, with the regulatory ceiling weakly increasing with government
inefficiency.


                                                   43
   Importantly, the key results from the main model continue to hold overall when we assume
wealth-constrained managers. Proposition 5, for example, continues to hold (the proof follows
directly from the above analysis and is illustrated in Figure 6). Moreover, similar to Proposition
6, we can show that:

Proposition 7 When the sr worker is wealth constrained, there exist non-empty sets of values
of γ, Θ1 ⊂ (γsr , 1) and Θ2 ⊂ (γsr , 1) such that for all γ ∈ Θ1 social responsibility has a negative
impact on social welfare, and for all γ ∈ Θ2 social responsibility has a positive impact on social
welfare.


   Proof of Proposition 7. In the case of a wealth-constrained sr worker, the welfare impact
of social responsibility can be expressed as:

                                                               1−γ
            ∆T S2ll (γ) = (1 + ρ) [S (all ) − S (a∗∗
                                                  si (γ))] −       [S (a∗∗            ∗∗
                                                                        si (γ)) − S (all (γ))] .   (43)
                                                                γ

   It is easy to verify from the above analysis and from Figure 7 that:

                      lim a∗∗
                        +
                                     u
                           si (γ) = asr = lim+ all , and       lim a∗∗
                                                                  +
                                                                                   u
                                                                    ll (γ) = a1 > asr
                     γ→γsr                  γ→γsr              γ→γsr
                     hence                                                                         (44)
                      lim+ ∆T S2ll (γ) = − 1−γ
                                            γ
                                               [S (ausr ) − S (a1 )] < 0.
                     γ→γsr


   Similarly, one can verify that:

                      lim a∗∗                 ∗∗
                           si (γ) = aπ = lim asi (γ), and lim all = b
                                                                    all (aπ ) < aπ
                      γ→1                 γ→1                   γ→1
                      hence                                                                        (45)
                                                      all (aπ )) − S (aπ )] > 0.
                       lim+ ∆T S2ll (γ) = (1 + ρ) [S (b
                      γ→γsr

   It then follows directly that there must exist non-empty sets of values of γ, Θ1 ⊂ (γsr , 1)
and Θ2 ⊂ (γsr , 1) such that for all γ ∈ Θ1 social responsibility has a negative impact on social
welfare, and for all γ ∈ Θ2 social responsibility has a positive impact on social welfare. 

B.2        Non-Contractibility of Actions

Recall that in the main model we assumed for simplicity that the worker’s action a was con-
tractible and that accordingly the firm offered an action-contingent contract W (a) to the worker
it wishes to hire. Suppose instead that managerial action a were not verifiable and hence could



                                                    44
not be contracted upon. Clearly, in the case of the si worker, nothing changes: since the action
is costless, he selects the firm’s preferred action as in the main model.
   In the case of the sr worker, the only difference is that - when unconstrained by regulatory
ceiling a - the worker chooses his preferred action, first-best action a∗ , instead of the firm’s
preferred action ausr . Indeed, one can easily verify that all of the results of the model continue
to hold, simply replacing ausr by a∗ .

B.3     Asymmetric Information in Agent Type

Another implicit assumption in the main model is that the firm can identify whether the worker
is self-interested or socially responsible. But as argued by Carlin and Gervais (2009), in practice
it may be difficult for the firm to identify managerial types. Thus an natural extension to our
model would be to examine the asymmetric information scenario in which the worker’s type is
unknown to the firm. While such an extension is beyond the scope of this paper, we conjecture
that the results of our model would remain qualitatively the same.
   Intuitively, the si would have no incentive to masquerade as a sr worker, since that would
lead to a lower wage, without any benefit: the si worker does not value the lower action
asr that would be associated with this reduced compensation. On the other hand, in some
circumstances the sr worker may want to masquerade as a si worker, if the increase in wage
associated with doing more than offsets the decrease in utility associated with a greater action
asi . In equilibrium, the firm would offer a menu of contracts to screen between managers. We
anticipate that while the si worker’s chosen contract would likely remain similar to his full-
information contract, the sr worker’s chosen contract would include a greater action and/or a
greater wage than in the full-information case. This would ensure incentive compatibility - i.e.
it would eliminate the sr worker incentive to mimick the si worker - but would force the firm
to leave a so-called information rent to the sr worker. This loss of expected rent extraction for
the firm would likely reduce its incentive to lobby the government in the first place, much as
in the limited liability extension discussed above. Nevertheless, despite these minor differences,
we believe that the main insights of the paper - that access to responsible managers would lead
to socially superior actions but to more wasteful lobbying - would continue to hold.




                                                45
References
 [1] Andreoni, James. 1990. “Impure Altruism and Donations to Public Goods: A Theory of
    Warm-Glow Giving.” Economic Journal 100: 464-477.

 [2] Ansolabehere, Stephen, John de Figuieredo and James M. Snyder, Jr. 2003. “Why is their
    so little money in politics?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17(1): 105-130.

 [3] Arora, Seema and Shubhashis Gangopadhyay. 1995. “Toward a Theoretical Model of Volun-
    tary Overcompliance.” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 28 (3): 289-309.

 [4] Bangoli, Mark and Susan G. Watts. 2003. “Selling to Socially Responsible Consumers:
    Competition and the Private Provision of Public Goods.” Journal of Economic and Man-
    agement Strategy 12 (30): 419-45.

 [5] Baron, David P. 2001. “Private Politics, Corporate Social Responsibility, and Intergrated
    Strategy.” Journal of Economic and Management Strategy 10 (1): 7-45

 [6] Baron, David P. 2007. “Corporate Social Responsibility and Social Entrepreneurship.”
    Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 16 (3): 683-717.

 [7] Baron, David P. 2008. “Managerial Contracting and Corporate and Social Responsibility.”
    Journal of Public Economics 92 (1-2): 268-88.

 [8] Baron, David P. 2010. “Morally Motivated Self Regulation.” American Economic Review
    100 (4): 1299-1329.

 [9] Baron, David P. and Daniel Diemeier. 2007. “Strategic Activism and Nonmarket Strategy.”
    Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 16 (3): 599-634.

[10] Becker, Gary S. 1983. “A Theory of Competition Among Pressure Groups for Political
    Influence.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 98: 371-400.

[11] Benabou, Roland and Jean Tirole. 2003. “Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation.” Review of
    Economic Studies 70 (3): 489-520.

[12] Benabou, Roland and Jean Tirole. 2006. “Incentives and Prosocial Behavior.” American
    Economic Review 96 (5): 1652-1678.

                                             46
[13] Benabou, Roland and Jean Tirole. 2010. “Individual and Corporate Social Responsibility.”
    Economica 77. 1-19.

[14] Bergstrom, Theodore, Lawrence Blume, and Hal Varian. 1986. “On the Private Provision
    of Public Goods.” Journal of Public Economics 29 (1): 25-49.

[15] Besley, Timothy, and Maitreesh Ghatak. 2005. “Competition and Incentives with Moti-
    vated Agents.” American Economic Review 95 (3): 616-36.

[16] Besley, Timothy, and Maitreesh Ghatak. 2007. “Retailing Public Goods: The Economics
    of Corporate Social Responsibility.” Journal of Public Economics 91 (9): 1645-63.

[17] Bloom, Nicholas , Christos Genakos, Ralf Martin and Rafaella Sadun, 2010. “Modern
    Management: Good for the Environment or just Hot Air?” Economic Journal 120: 551-
    572.

[18] Brekke, Kjell Aren and Karine Nyborg. 2004. “Moral Hazard and Moral Motivation: Cor-
    porate Social Responsibility as Labor Market Screening.” University of Oslo Department
    of Economics Memorandum 35/2004

[19] Carlin, Bruce I. and Simon Gervais. 2009. “Work Ethic, Employment Contracts, and Firm
    Value.” Journal of Finance 64: 785-821.

[20] Cespa, Giovanni and Glacinta Cestone. 2007. “Corporate Social Responsibility and Man-
    agerial Entrenchment.” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 16 (3): 741-71.

[21] Cheng, Ing-Haw, Harrison Hong and Kelly Shue. 2012. “Do Managers Do Good With
    Other People’s Money?” Working Paper, University of Chicago and Princeton.

[22] de Figueiredo, John M., 2002. ”Lobbying and Information in Politics,” Business and Poli-
    tics 4(2): 125-129.

[23] de Figueiredo, John M. and Brian Silverman, 2006. “Academic Earmarks and the Returns
    to Lobbying.” Journal of Law and Economics, 49:2, 597-625.

[24] Delfgaauw, Josse and Robert Dur. 2008. “Incentives and Workers’ Motivation in the Public
    Sector.” Economic Journal 118: 171-191.


                                              47
[25] Ellingsen, Tore and Magnus Johanesson. 2008. “Pride and Prejudice: The Human Side of
    Incentive Theory.” American Economic Review 98 (3): 990-1008.

[26] Frank, Robert H., 2004. What Price the Moral High Ground? Princeton University Press.

[27] Friedman, Milton, 1963. Capitalism and Freedom. University of Chicago Press.

[28] Friedman, Milton, 1970. “The Social Responsibility of Business is to Increase its Profits.”
    The New York Times Magazine, September 13th.

[29] Galasso, Alberto and Mihkel Tombak, 2014. “Switching to Green: The Timing of Socially
    Responsible Innovation.” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 23 (3): 669-
    691.

[30] Graff Zivin, Joshua and Arthur Small III, 2005. “A Modigliani-Miller Theory of Altruistic
    Corporate Social Responsibility.” Topics in Economic Analysis and Policy 5.

[31] Greening, Daniel W. and Daniel B. Turban. 2000. “Corporate Social Performance as a
    Competitive Advantage in Attracting a Quality Workforce.” Business and Society 39 (3):
    254-80.

[32] Kitzmueller, Markus and Jay Shimshack. 2012. “Economic Perspectives on Corporate So-
    cial Responsibility.” Journal of Economic Literature 50(1): 51-84.

[33] Kotchen, Matthew J. 2006. “Green Markets and Private Provision of Public Goods.” Jour-
    nal of Political Economy 114 (4): 816-34.

[34] KPMG (2011), KPMG International Survey of Corporate Responsibility Reporting 2011.

[35] Lyon, Thomas P. and John W. Maxwell. 2004. Corporate Environmentalism and Public
    Policy. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press.

[36] Lyon, Thomas P. and John W. Maxwell. Forthcoming. “Greenwash: Corporate Envi-
    ronmental Disclosure under Threat of Audit.” Journal of Economics and Management
    Strategy.




                                              48
[37] Maxwell, John W., Thomas P. Lyon, and Steven C. Hackett. 2000. “Elf-Regulation and
    Social Welfare: The Political Economy of Corporate Environmentalism.” Journal of Law
    and Economics 43 (2): 583-617.

[38] Milyo, Jeffrey, David Primo and Timothy Groseclose. 2000. “Corporate PAC Campaign
    Contributions in Perspective,” Business and Politics 2(1): 75-88.

[39] Nilsson, Andreas and David T. Robinson. 2012. “What is the Business of Business?”
    Working Paper, SIFR and Duke University.

[40] Nike 2012. Nike Corporate Responsibility Report.

[41] Nyborg, Karine and Tao Zhang, 2013. “Is Corporate Social Responsibility Associated with
    Lower Wages?” Environmental Resource Economics 55: 107-117.

[42] Peltzman, Sam 1976. “Towards a More General Theory of Regulation.” Journal of Law
    and Economics 19: 211-240.

[43] Prendergast, Canice. 2007. “The Motivation and Bias of Bureaucrats.” American Economic
    Review 97 (1): 180-196.

[44] Prendergast, Canice. 2008. “Motivation and Incentives.” American Economic Review 98
    (2): 201-205.

[45] Rose-Ackerman, Susan. 1996. “Altruism, Nonprofits, and Economic Theory.” Journal of
    Economic Literature 34 (2): 701-28.

[46] Rosen, Sherwin. 1986. “The Theory of Equalizing Differences.” In Orley Ashenfelter and
    Richard Layard, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 1. Amsterdam: North Holland:
    641-692.

[47] Stigler, George 1971.“The Theory of Economic Regulation.” Bell Journal of Economics 2:
    3-21.

[48] Stigler, George 1974. “Free Riders and Collective Action.” Bell Journal of Economics 5:
    359-365.



                                             49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
