                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               THE DYNAMICS OF INEQUALITY

                                           Xavier Gabaix
                                         Jean-Michel Lasry
                                         Pierre-Louis Lions
                                           Benjamin Moll

                                        Working Paper 21363
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21363


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2015




We thank Fernando Alvarez, Roland Benabou, Fatih Guvenen, Chad Jones, Greg Kaplan, Erzo Luttmer,
Makoto Nirei, Ezra Oberfield, Jonathan Parker, John Shea, Joe Sullivan and Gabriel Zucman for their
insights, and seminar participants at UQAM, Queen's University, Cornell, the Chicago Fed, Princeton
and the University of Maryland for useful comments. We also thank Cristian Alonso, Joshua Bernstein,
Nik Engbom and Jason Ravit for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Xavier Gabaix, Jean-Michel Lasry, Pierre-Louis Lions, and Benjamin Moll. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Dynamics of Inequality
Xavier Gabaix, Jean-Michel Lasry, Pierre-Louis Lions, and Benjamin Moll
NBER Working Paper No. 21363
July 2015
JEL No. D31,E24

                                              ABSTRACT

The past forty years have seen a rapid rise in top income inequality in the United States. While there
is a large number of existing theories of the Pareto tails of the income and wealth distributions at a
given point in time, almost none of these address the fast rise in top inequality observed in the data.
We show that standard theories, which build on a random growth mechanism, generate transition dynamics
that are an order of magnitude too slow relative to those observed in the data. We then suggest parsimonious
deviations from the basic model that can explain such changes, namely heterogeneity in mean growth
rates or deviations from Gibrat's law. These deviations are consistent with theories in which the increase
in top income inequality is driven by the rise of "superstar" entrepreneurs or managers.


Xavier Gabaix                                        Pierre-Louis Lions
New York University                                  College de France
Finance Department                                   Rue d’Ulm 3
Stern School of Business                             75005 Paris Cedex 05, France
44 West 4th Street, 9th floor                        pierre-louis.lions@college-de-france.fr
New York, NY 10012
and NBER                                             Benjamin Moll
xgabaix@stern.nyu.edu                                Department of Economics
                                                     Princeton University
Jean-Michel Lasry                                    106 Fisher Hall
Université Paris Dauphine, Institut de Finance       Princeton, NJ 08544
Place du Marechal de Lattre de Tassigny              and NBER
75775 Paris Cedex 16, France                         moll@princeton.edu
2007lasry@gmail.com
1         Introduction
The past forty years have seen a rapid rise in top income inequality in the United States
(Piketty and Saez, 2003; Atkinson, Piketty and Saez, 2011). Since Pareto (1896), it is well-
known that the upper tail of the income distribution follows a power law, or equivalently,
that top inequality is “fractal”, and the rise in top income inequality has coincided with a
“fattening” of the right tail of the income distribution. That is, the “super rich” have pulled
ahead relative to the rich. This rise in top inequality requires an understanding of the forces
that have led to a fatter Pareto tail. There is also an ongoing debate about the dynamics of
top wealth inequality.1 To the extent that wealth inequality has also increased, we similarly
need to understand the dynamics of its Pareto tail.
    What explains the observed rapid rise in top inequality is an open question. While there is
a large number of existing theories of the Pareto tails of the income and wealth distributions
at a point in time, almost none of these address the fast rise in top inequality observed in
the data, or any fast change for that matter.
    The main contributions of this paper are: first, to show that the most common framework
(a simple Gibrat’s law for income or wealth dynamics) cannot explain rapid changes in tail
inequality, and second, to suggest parsimonious deviations from the basic model that can
explain such changes. Our analytical results bear on a large class of economic theories of top
inequality, so that our results shed light on the ultimate drivers of the rise in top inequality
observed in the data.
    The first result of our paper is negative: standard random growth models, like those
considered in much of the existing literature, feature extremely slow transition dynamics
and cannot explain the rapid changes that arise empirically. To address this issue, we
consider the following thought experiment: initially at time zero, the economy is in a steady
state with a stationary distribution that has a Pareto tail. At time zero, there is a change
in the underlying economic environment that leads to higher top inequality in the long-run,
say because capital income taxes fall. The question is: what can we say about the speed
of this transition? Will this increase in inequality come about quickly or take a long time?
We present two answers to this question. First, we derive an analytic formula for a measure
of the “average” speed of convergence throughout the distribution. We argue that, when
calibrated to be consistent with microeconomic evidence, the implied half life is an order of
magnitude too high to explain the observed rapid rise in top income inequality. It is also too
    1
        See e.g. Piketty (2014), Saez and Zucman (2014), Bricker et al. (2015) and Kopczuk (2015).



                                                       2
high to explain even the relatively gradual rise in top wealth inequality suggested by some
empirical analyses. Second, we derive a measure of the speed of convergence for the part of
the distribution we are most interested in, namely its upper tail. We argue that, in standard
theories, transitions are even slower in the tail and, additionally, that our low measure of
the average speed of convergence overestimates the speed of convergence in the upper tail.
We also show that allowing for jumps in the income or wealth process, while useful for
descriptively matching micro-level data, does not help with generating fast transitions.
   Given this negative result, we are confronted with a puzzle: what, then, explains the
observed rise in top income and (potentially) wealth inequality? We develop a “generalized
random growth model” that features two parsimonious departures from the canonical model
that do generate fast transitions. The first departure is cross-sectional heterogeneity in mean
growth rates and, in particular, a “high growth regime”.2 For instance, some highly skilled
entrepreneurs or managers may experience much higher average earnings growth rates than
other individuals over short- to medium horizons. We argue analytically and quantitatively
that this first departure can explain the observed fast rise in income inequality. The second
departure consists of deviations from Gibrat’s law (the assumption that the distribution of
income growth rates is independent of their levels), which we also refer to as “superstar
shocks”. These are shocks that disproportionately affect high incomes, e.g. shocks to the
shape production function of talent (e.g. shocks to the “span of control” as in Garicano
and Rossi-Hansberg (2006)).3 This second departure generates infinitely fast transitions in
inequality.
   To obtain our analytic formulas for the speed of convergence, we employ tools from er-
godic theory and the theory of partial differential equations. Our measure of the average
speed of convergence is the first non-trivial eigenvalue or “spectral gap” of the differential
operator governing the stochastic process for income or wealth. One of the main contri-
butions of this paper is to derive an analytic formula for this first non-trivial eigenvalue
   2
     Guvenen (2007) argues that heterogeneity in mean growth rates is an important feature of the data on
income dynamics. Luttmer (2011) studies a similar framework applied to firm dynamics and argues that
persistent heterogeneity in mean firm growth rates is needed to account for the relatively young age of very
large firms at a given point in time (a statement about the stationary distribution rather than transition
dynamics as in our paper).
   3
     Technically, the shocks to log income affect it multiplicatively, rather than additively, as in the usual
random growth model. We use the term “deviations from Gibrat’s law” only to refer to these multiplicative
shocks and not to the model with heterogeneous growth rates. Technically, also the latter constitutes such
a deviation, although a local version of Gibrat’s law still holds.



                                                      3
(i.e. the second eigenvalue) for a large variety of random growth processes. See Hansen and
Scheinkman (2009) for a related application of operator methods in economics. We obtain
our measure of the speed of convergence in the tail of the distribution by making use of
the fact that the solution to the Kolmogorov Forward equation for random growth processes
can be characterized tightly by calculating the Laplace transform of this equation. The use
of Laplace transforms to characterize the transition dynamics of a distribution is another
methodological contribution of our paper.
    A large theoretical literature builds on random growth processes to theorize about the
upper tails of income and wealth distributions. Early theories of the income distribution
include Champernowne (1953) and Simon (1955), with more recent contributions by Nirei
(2009), Toda (2012), Kim (2013), Jones and Kim (2014) and Luttmer (2015). Similarly,
random growth theories of the wealth distribution include Wold and Whittle (1957) and
more recently Benhabib, Bisin and Zhu (2011, 2013, 2014), Piketty and Zucman (2014b),
Jones (2015), and Acemoglu and Robinson (2015). All of these papers focus on the income
or wealth distribution at a given point in time by studying stationary distributions, and none
of them analyze transition dynamics. Aoki and Nirei (2015) are a notable exception, who
examine the dynamics of the income distribution and ask whether tax changes can account
for the rise in top income inequality observed in the United States. Our paper differs from
theirs in that we obtain a number of analytic results providing a tight characterization of
transition dynamics in random growth models whereas their analysis of transition dynamics
is purely numerical.4
    Our finding that heterogeneity in mean growth rates delivers fast dynamics of top in-
equality is also related to Guvenen (2007), who has argued that an income process with het-
erogeneous income profiles provides a better fit to the micro data than a model in which all
individuals face the same income profile. In our model variant with multiple growth regimes,
we also allow for heterogeneity in the standard deviation of income innovations in different
regimes which is akin to the mixture specification advocated by Guvenen et al. (2015). One
key difference between our model with multiple growth regimes and the standard random
growth model is that, in the standard model, the key determinant for an individual’s place
in the income distribution is her age. In contrast, in a model with multiple growth regimes
   4
    Also related is Luttmer (2012) who studies the speed of convergence of aggregates like GDP in response
to shocks in an economy with a power law firm size distribution. His analysis differs from ours in that it
studies the convergence of aggregates which, in his framework, can be characterized independently of the
cross-sectional distribution.



                                                    4
another important determinant is the individual’s “growth type” which may represent her
occupation or her talent as an entrepreneur. This is consistent with salient patterns of the
tail of the income distribution in the United States (Guvenen, Kaplan and Song, 2014).5
    One of the most ubiquitous regularities in economics and finance is that the empirical
distribution of many variables is well approximated by a power law. For this reason, theories
of random growth are an integral part of many different strands of the literature beside those
studying the distributions of income and wealth. For example, they have been used to study
the distribution of city sizes (Gabaix, 1999) and firm sizes (Luttmer, 2007), the shape of the
production function (Jones, 2005), and in many other contexts (see the review by Gabaix,
2009). The tools and results presented in this paper should therefore also prove useful in
other applications.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 states the main motivating facts for our
analysis, and Section 3 reviews random growth theories of the income and wealth distribu-
tions at a point in time. In Section 4, we present our main negative results on the slow
transitions generated by such models and we explore their empirical implications for the
dynamics of income inequality. Section 5 presents two theoretical mechanisms for generating
fast transitions, and shows that these have the potential to account for the fast transitions
observed in the data. Section 6 extends our results to the case of wealth inequality, and
Section 7 concludes.


2       Motivating Facts
In this section, we briefly review some facts regarding the evolution of top income and wealth
inequality in the United States. We return to these in Sections 4 and 5 when comparing
various random growth models and their ability to generate the trends observed in the data.
    Panel (a) of Figure 1 displays the evolution of measures of the top 1% income share. Panel
(a) shows the large and rapid increase in the top 1% income share that has been extensively
documented by Piketty and Saez (2003), Atkinson, Piketty and Saez (2011) and others.6 As
already noted, the upper tails of the income and wealth distributions follow power laws, or
equivalently top inequality is fractal in nature. For an exact power law, the top 0.1% are
    5
     Luttmer (2011) makes a similar observation about the relationship between a firm’s age and its place in
the firm size distribution. As Luttmer puts it succinctly: “Gibrat implies 750-year-old firms.”
   6
     The series is from the “World Top Incomes Database.” Here, we plot total income (salaries plus business
income plus capital income) excluding capital gains. The series display a similar trend when we include
capital gains or focus on salaries only (though the levels are different).


                                                     5
 Top 1% Income Share (excl. Capital Gains)   20
                                                                                                                              0.44     S(0.1)/S(1)
                                                                                                                                       S(1)/S(10)
                                             18                                                                               0.42

                                                                                                                               0.4
                                             16




                                                                                                      Relative Income Share
                                                                                                                              0.38

                                                                                                                              0.36
                                             14
                                                                                                                              0.34

                                             12                                                                               0.32

                                                                                                                               0.3
                                             10                                                                               0.28

                                                                                                                              0.26
                                              8
                                                                                                                              0.24
                                             1950     1960   1970   1980    1990    2000   2010                                 1950    1960         1970   1980    1990   2000   2010
                                                                     Year                                                                                    Year

                                                        (a) Top Income Inequality                                                        (b) Relative Income Shares

                                                    Figure 1: Evolution of Top 1% Income Share and “Fractal Inequality” in U.S.

X times richer on average than the top 1% who are, in turn, X times richer than the top
10%, where X is a fixed number. Equivalently, the top 0.1% income share is a fraction Y
of the top 1% income share, which, in turn, is a fraction Y of the top 10% income share,
and so on. We now explore this fractal pattern in the data using a strategy borrowed from
Jones and Kim (2014). Panel (b) of Figure 1 plots the income share of the top 0.1% relative
to that of the top 1% and the income share of the top 1% relative to that of the top 10%.
As expected, the two lines track each other relatively closely. More importantly, there is an
upward trend in both lines. That is, there has been a relative increase in top income shares.
As we explain in more detail below, this increase in “fractal inequality” implies equivalently
a “fattening” of the Pareto tail of the income distribution.
    In Appendix B, we present an analogous exercise for top wealth inequality. As discussed
there in more detail, the facts about the evolution of top wealth inequality are more ambigu-
ous than those for top income inequality. Different data series suggest different conclusions,
and top wealth shares appear to have increased, although it is unclear by how much.
    There are two main takeaways from this section. First, top income shares have increased
dramatically since the late 1970s. Second, the Pareto tail of the income distribution has
gotten fatter over time.




                                                                                                  6
3       Random Growth Theories of Income and Wealth In-
        equality
Our starting point is the existing theories that can explain top inequality at a point in
time, meaning that they can generate stationary distributions that have Pareto tails. Many
of these share the same basic mechanism for generating power laws, namely proportional
random growth. In this section, we give a brief overview of such theories. We start with two
concrete examples corresponding to our two main applications: a simple model of income
dynamics and a simple model of wealth accumulation. We then present a unifying framework
that nests these two examples as special cases and that will be the focus of our analysis of
transition dynamics in the next section.


3.1     Income Dynamics
Time is continuous, and there is a continuum of workers. A worker’s wage is given by
wit = ωhit where ω is an exogenous skill price and hit is her human capital or her skills.
Workers die (retire) at rate δ, in which case they are replaced by a young worker with human
capital hi0 . A worker’s human capital evolves as

                                           dhit = g(Iit , hit )dzit

where dzit denotes an ability shock and Iit investment into human capital. We make the
following four assumptions. First, ability shocks are i.i.d. over time and given by dzit =
z̄dt + σ̃dZit where Zit is a standard Brownian motion.7 Second, the function g has constant
returns. Third, an individual’s investment is proportional to her human capital Iit = θhit .8
And fourth, initial human capital is the same for everyone hi0 = h̄0 . Given these assumptions,
it is easy to show that the resulting wage dynamics are given by

                                dwit = z̄g(θ, 1)wit dt + σ̃g(θ, 1)wit dZit .                             (1)

A large number of models of the upper tail of the income distribution end up with a similar
reduced form. In some of these models, investment into human capital or skills θ is derived
    7
                                                                                         √
     That is, income innovations dZit are normally distributed. Approximately, dZit ' εit ∆t, εit ∼ N (0, 1),
for a small ∆t.
   8
     Such an investment rule can also be derived from optimizing behavior. Results available upon request.




                                                      7
from an individual optimization problem, in which case it may depend on labor income (or
other) taxes faced by individuals, that is θ = θ(τ ) where τ is a tax rate.9
    A large literature estimates reduced-form labor income processes similar to (1) using
panel data.10 In particular, (1) implies that the logarithm of income follows a Brownian
motion which is simply the continuous-time version of a random walk. Hence (1) is the
special case of the widespread “permanent-transitory model” of income dynamics, but with
only a permanent component. As a result, good estimates are available for its parameter
values. The process could easily be extended to feature a transitory component, e.g. by
introducing jumps that are distributed i.i.d. over time and across individuals.11


3.2     Wealth Accumulation
The following simple model captures the main features of a large number of models of
the upper tail of the wealth distribution.12 Time is continuous and there is a continuum of
individuals that are heterogeneous in their wealth w̃it . At the individual level, wealth evolves
as
                             dw̃it = (1 − τ )w̃it dRit + (yt − cit ) dt

where τ is the capital income tax rate, dRit is the rate of return on wealth which is stochastic
and yt is labor income, and cit is consumption. To keep things simple, we make the following
assumptions. First, capital income is i.i.d. over time and, in particular, dRit = r̃dt + ν̃dZit ,
where r̃ and ν̃ are parameters, and Zit is a standard Brownian motion, which reflects id-
iosyncratic returns to human capital or to financial capital (this idiosyncratic shock captures
the undiversified ownership of an entrepreneur, for instance).13 Second, we assume that indi-
viduals consume an exogenous fraction θ̃ of their wealth at every point in time, cit = θ̃w̃it .14
Third, we assume that all individuals earn the same labor income yt , which grows determin-
   9
     See e.g. Champernowne (1953), Simon (1955), Nirei (2009), Toda (2012), Aoki and Nirei (2015) and
Luttmer (2015) for models with similar reduced forms and Kim (2013), Jones and Kim (2014) for such
models that additionally feature taxes.
  10
     See e.g. MaCurdy (1982), Heathcote, Perri and Violante (2010) and Meghir and Pistaferri (2011).
  11
     Results are available upon request.
  12
     See e.g. Wold and Whittle (1957), Benhabib, Bisin and Zhu (2011, 2013, 2014), Piketty and Zucman
(2014b), Jones (2015) and Acemoglu and Robinson (2015).
  13
     Benhabib, Bisin and Luo (2015) argue that, in the data, such uninsured capital income risk is the main
determinant of the wealth distribution’s right tail. In Section 5.3, we additionally consider common shocks.
  14
     A consumption rule with such a constant marginal propensity to consume can also be derived from
optimizing behavior, at least for large wealth levels wit . Results available upon request.



                                                     8
istically at a rate g, yt = yegt . Given these assumptions, it is easy to show that detrended
wealth wit = w̃it e−gt follows the stochastic process

                           dwit = [y + (r − g − θ̃)wit ]dt + σwit dZit                      (2)

where r = (1 − τ )r̃ is the after-tax average rate of return on wealth and σ = (1 − τ )ν̃ is the
after-tax wealth volatility. Many other shocks (e.g. demographic shocks or shocks to saving
rates) result in a similar reduced form.


3.3    Unifying Reduced Form Model
Both of these models share a common reduced form. In particular, income or wealth wit
follows a geometric Brownian motion

                                  dwit = γ̄wit dt + σwit dZit .                             (3)

where γ̄ and σ are parameters (for the moment, we ignore the additive term ydt in (2)). All
theories of top inequality add a “friction” to the random growth process (3) to ensure the
existence of a stationary distribution (Gabaix, 1999). In the absence of such a “friction”,
the cross-sectional variance of wit grows without bound. We consider four such “frictions”:

Friction 1 Death at rate δ together with reinjection at some w0 > 0, normalized to w0 = 1.

Friction 2 A reflecting barrier at w > 0, normalized to w = 1.

Friction 3 The combination of Frictions 1 and 2.

Friction 4 The addition of an additive term ydt to (3) with y > 0.

    The simple model of income dynamics (1) is the special case of (3) with γ̄ = z̄g(θ, 1)
and σ = σ̃g(θ, 1) together with the first friction. Similarly, the simple model of wealth
accumulation (2) is the special case of (3) with γ̄ = r − g − θ together with the fourth
friction. For the remainder of the paper’s theoretical analysis, we will focus on the income
application for simplicity, and we will, therefore, refer to wit as “income.” The reader should,
however, keep in mind that all our results apply equally to the case where wit is “wealth”.
In Section 6, we explicitly return to the case of wealth dynamics.
    We will later find it useful to conduct much of the analysis in terms of the logarithm of
income wit , which we denote by xit . Applying Ito’s formula to (3), xit = log wit follows
                                                                     σ2
                         dxit = µdt + σdWit ,       where µ = γ̄ −      .                   (4)
                                                                     2
                                                9
The properties of the stationary distribution of the income process (3) are well understood.
In particular, under certain parameter restrictions, this stationary distribution has a Pareto
tail15
                                    P(wit > w) ∼ Cw−ζ

where C is a constant and ζ > 0 is a simple function of the parameters µ (equivalently γ̄),
σ and the particular friction (see e.g. Gabaix (2009)). With Friction 1 (the relevant friction
for the case of income dynamics)
                                              p
                                        −µ + µ2 + 2σ 2 δ
                                    ζ=                   .                                 (5)
                                                σ2
The constant ζ is called the “power law exponent”, with a smaller ζ corresponding to a fatter
tail. We also find it useful to refer to the inverse of the power law exponent η = 1/ζ as “top
inequality”. Intuitively, tail inequality is increasing in γ̄ = z̄g(θ, 1) and σ = σ̃g(θ, 1) and
decreasing in the death rate δ. In Appendix C, we provide a complete characterization of the
stationary distributions for all four frictions. It will be useful later to note that, equivalently,
the logarithm of w has an exponential tail, P(xit > x) ∼ Ce−ζx .
    To make the connection to the empirical evidence in the introduction, note that if the
distribution of w has a Pareto tail above the pth percentile, then the share of the top p/10th
percentile relative to that of the pth percentile is given by S(p/10)
                                                                S(p)
                                                                      = 10η−1 . There is, therefore,
a one-to-one mapping between the relative income shares in panel (b) of Figure 1 and the
top inequality parameter η = 1/ζ.16 Most existing contributions focus on the stationary
distribution of the process (3) and completely ignore the corresponding transition dynamics.
It is unclear whether these theories can explain the observed dynamics of the tail parameter
η. This is what we turn to in the next section.


3.4     Other Theories of Top Income Inequality
This paper studies the dynamics of inequality in theories that can generate power laws, and
we explicitly confine ourselves to studying such theories only. This is because we consider
the fractal feature of top inequality discussed in Section 2 an important empirical regularity
that deserves special attention. Beside random growth theories, there is one other class of
  15
     Here and elsewhere “f (x) ∼ g(x)” for two functions f and g means there are positive constants k, k 0
such that kg (x) ≤ f (x) ≤ k 0 g(x) for x large enough.
  16
     See Jones and Kim (2014) and Jones (2015) for two papers that use this fact extensively.




                                                   10
theories that can generate power laws, namely those building on “superstar” mechanisms.17
We return to these theories below.


4       The Baseline Random Growth Model Generates Slow
        Transitions
Changes in the parameters of the income process (4) lead to changes in the fatness of the
right tail of its stationary distribution. For example, an increase in the standard deviation
of income innovations σ leads to an increase in stationary tail inequality η in (5). But this
leaves the question as to whether this increase in inequality will come about quickly or will
take a long time to manifest itself unanswered. The main message of this section is that the
simple random growth model (4) gives rise to very slow transition dynamics.
     Throughout this section, we conduct the following thought experiment. Initially at time
t = 0, the economy is in a Pareto steady state corresponding to some initial parameters
µ0 , σ0 and so on. At time t = 0, a parameter changes; for example, the innovation variance
σ 2 may increase. Asymptotically as t → ∞, the distribution converges to its new stationary
distribution. The question is: what can we say about the speed of this transition? We present
two sets of results corresponding to different notions of the speed of convergence. The first
notion measures an “average” speed of convergence throughout the distribution. The second
notion captures differential speeds of convergence across the distribution, allowing us in
particular to put the spotlight on its upper tail.
     Throughout the remainder of the paper, we denote the cross-sectional distribution of the
logarithm of income x at time t by p(x, t), the initial distribution by p0 (x) and the stationary
distribution by p∞ (x). In order to talk about convergence, we also need a measure of distance
between the distribution at time t and the stationary distribution. Throughout the paper
we use the L1 -norm or total variation norm || · || defined as
                                                  Z ∞
                          ||p(x, t) − p∞ (x)|| :=     |p(x, t) − p∞ (x)|dx.                   (6)
                                                     −∞

For frictions 1 to 3, the cross-sectional distribution p(x, t) satisfies the Kolmogorov Forward
equation
                                               σ2
                                 pt = −µpx + pxx − δp + δδ0 .                               (7)
                                                2
 17
      See Rosen (1981), Gabaix and Landier (2008), Tervio (2008) and Geerolf (2014) among others.


                                                    11
with initial condition p(x, 0) = p0 (x), where we use the compact notation pt := ∂p(x,t)     ∂t
(similarly for x) and where δ0 denotes the Dirac delta function, i.e. a point mass at x = 0.18
The first two terms on the right hand side capture the evolution of x due to diffusion with drift
µ and variance σ 2 . The third term captures death and, hence, an outflow of individuals at
rate δ, and the fourth term captures birth, namely that every “dying” individual is replaced
with a newborn at x = 0.19 When there is a reflecting barrier (frictions 2 and 3), p must
additionally satisfy the boundary condition
                                           σ2
                                   0 = −µp +  px , at x = 0.                             (8)
                                            2
It is often convenient to write this partial differential equation in terms of a differential
operator
                                                                σ2
                      pt = A∗ p + δδ0 ,     A∗ p = −δp − µpx + pxx .                     (9)
                                                                 2
This formulation is quite flexible and can be extended in a number of ways. For instance, in
Section 4.4 we extend our framework to include Poisson jumps.


4.1     Average Speed of Convergence
We now state Proposition 1, one of the two main theoretical results of our paper. Before
doing so we make the following assumption.

Assumption 1 The income process (4) has a unique invariant distribution p∞ (x) and the
initial and invariant distributions, p0 (x) and p∞ (x), satisfy
                                     Z ∞
                                           (p0 (x))2
                                                     dx < ∞.                      (10)
                                      −∞ p∞ (x)

Note that (10) is a relatively weak restriction. For instance, assume that both p0 and p∞
have Pareto tails p0 (x) ∼ c0 e−αx and p∞ (x) ∼ ce−ζx for large x. Then (10) is equivalent to
α > ζ/2. In particular, it is satisfied in all cases where top inequality in the new steady state
is larger than that in the initial steady state, ζ < α, the main application we are interested
in.20
  18
     To be clear, the death rate δ is a number, while δ0 is a (generalized) function.
  19
     More generally, we can allow for the income of newborns to be drawn from an arbitrary (thin-tailed)
distribution ψ(x), in which case the fourth term reads +δψ(x). We consider the special case in which this
distribution is a point mass, ψ(x) = δ0 (x), i.e. all newborns have the same income for simplicity.
  20
     Proposition 1 can also be extended to the case where p0 does not decay fast enough, i.e. if α < ζ/2.
In particular, one can bound the speed of convergence, which becomes lower. Results are available upon
request.

                                                   12
Proposition 1 Consider the income process (4). Under Assumption 1, the cross-sectional
distribution p(x, t) converges to its stationary distribution exponentially in the total variation
norm, that is ||p(x, t) − p∞ (x)|| ∼ ke−λt for constants k and λ. The rate of convergence
                                             1
                                 λ = − lim     log ||p(x, t) − p∞ (x)||
                                         t→∞ t

depends on whether there is a reflecting barrier at x = 0. Without a reflecting barrier
(Friction 1)
                                         λ = δ.                                    (11)

With a reflecting barrier (Frictions 2 and 3)

                                             1 µ2
                                          λ=      1{µ<0} + δ                                          (12)
                                             2 σ2
where 1{·} is the indicator function.

    We shall see that Proposition 1 implies that the traditional canonical model delivers
convergence that is far too slow: λ is too low compared to the empirical estimate.
    The proof of the Proposition for the case without a reflecting barrier analyzes directly
the L1 -norm (6) by means of a differential equation for |p(x, t) − p∞ (x)|. The rough idea of
the proof of the Proposition for the case with a reflecting barrier is as follows. The entire
dynamics of the process for xit are summarized by the operator A∗ defined in (9). This
operator is the appropriate generalization of a transition matrix for a finite-state process
to processes with a continuum of states such as (4), and it can be analyzed in an exactly
analogous way. In particular, the critical property of A∗ governing the speed of convergence
of p is its largest non-trivial eigenvalue. The key contribution of the Proposition and the
main step of the proof is then to obtain an explicit formula for the second eigenvalue of A∗
in the form of (12).21
    The intuition for formulas (11) and (12) is as follows. In the case without a reflecting
barrier, the speed is simply given by the death intensity δ. This is intuitive: the higher δ is,
the more churning there is in the cross-sectional distribution and the faster the distribution
settles down to its invariant distribution. In the extreme case where δ → ∞, the distribution
jumps to its steady state immediately. Next, consider the case with a reflecting barrier, µ < 0,
  21
    Linetsky (2005) derives a related result for the special case of a reflected Brownian motion with µ < 0
and δ = 0. For the same case one can also derive the formula for the speed of convergence by “brute
force” from the standard formulas for reflected Brownian motion (see e.g. Harrison, 1985). Our results are
considerably more general.

                                                    13
and no Poisson death, δ = 0 (Friction 2). From (5), stationary tail inequality for this case is
            σ2
η = 1/ζ = − 2µ and therefore the speed of convergence can also be written as
                                               1 σ2
                                           λ=       .                                     (13)
                                               8 η2
This expression is again intuitive. It states that the transition is faster the higher is the
standard deviation of growth rates σ and the lower is the tail inequality η; that is, high
inequality goes hand in hand with slow transitions. The interpretation of the formula for
the case with a reflecting barrier and δ > 0 is similar.
    In section 4.3 we show that when the parameters µ, σ and δ are calibrated to be consistent
with the micro data and the observed inequality at a point in time, the implied speed of
convergence is an order of magnitude too low to explain the observed increase in inequality
in the data.


4.2     Speed of Convergence in the Tail
In the preceding section we characterized a measure of the average speed of convergence
across the entire distribution. The purpose of this section is to examine the possibility that
different parts of the distribution may converge at different speeds. In particular, we show
that convergence is particularly slow in the upper tail of the distribution. That is, the
formula in Proposition 1 overestimates the speed of convergence of parts of the distribution.
In this section we focus on the case with Poisson death, but without a reflecting barrier
(Friction 1) because it is possible to obtain clean analytic formulas for this case. While clean
formulas are not available if the income process features a reflecting barrier, we show by
means of numerical computations that the general lessons from our analysis carry over to
the other two cases of frictions as well.

4.2.1   An Instructive Special Case: the Steindl Model

To explain the main result of this section in the most accessible way, we first examine the
restrictive but instructive special case where σ = 0 and µ, δ > 0. In this model, originally due
to Steindl (1965), the logarithm of income xit grows at rate µ and gets reset to xi0 = 0 at rate
δ. The Steindl model has recently also been examined by Jones (2015). The distribution
p(x, t) then satisfies the Kolmogorov Forward equation (7) with σ = 0 for x > 0. The
corresponding stationary distribution is a Pareto distribution
                                                              δ
                                p∞ (x) = ζe−ζx , with ζ = .
                                                              µ

                                              14
For concreteness, consider an economy starting in a steady state with some growth rate µ0
(and death rate δ0 ). At t = 0 the growth rate changes permanently to µ > µ0 (and death
rate δ). Then, the new steady state distribution is more fat-tailed, ζ < α.

Lemma 1 (Closed form solution for the transition in the Steindl model) The time path of
p(x, t) is the solution to (7) with σ = 0 and initial condition p0 (x) = αe−αx , α = δ0 /µ0 which
is given by
                           p(x, t) = ζe−ζx 1{x≤µt} + αe−αx+(α−ζ)t 1{x>µt}                    (14)

where 1{·} is the indicator function.

   The solution is depicted in Figure 2. Consider, in particular, the local power law exponent

                                                    2


                                                    0
                        Log Density, log p(x,t)




                                                   −2


                                                   −4


                                                   −6


                                                   −8    t=0
                                                         t=10
                                                         t=20
                                                  −10
                                                     0   0.5    1    1.5     2    2.5      3   3.5   4
                                                                    Log Income/Wealth, x



           Figure 2: Transition of Distribution in Steindl Model, σ = 0, µ, δ > 0

ζ(x, t) = −∂ log p(x, t)/∂x. Since the Figure plots the log density, log p(x, t), against log
income x, this local power law exponent is simply the slope of the line in the Figure. The
time path of the distribution features a “traveling discontinuity”. Importantly, the local
power law exponent (the slope of the line) first changes only for low values of x. In contrast,
for high values of x, the distribution shifts out in parallel and the slope of the line does not
move at all. More precisely, for a given point x, the distribution fully converges at time
τ (x) = x/µ, but does not move at all when t < τ (x). In the Steindl model, the convergence
of the distribution is slower the further out in the tail we look. In particular, note from the
Figure that the asymptotic (for large x) power law exponent ζ(t) = − limx→∞ ∂ log p(x, t)/∂x
takes an infinite time to converge to its stationary distribution. In the special case of the

                                                                         15
Steindl model, this slow convergence in the tail is particularly stark in that some parts of
the distribution do not move at all. We show below that, while less stark, the general insight
that convergence is slower in the tail also carries over to the model with σ > 0.
    Consider the behavior of top income shares in response to the permanent increase in
µ considered above. Lemma 1 implies that the relative income of the 0.1% vs 1% income
quantiles is constant for a while; it budges only when the “traveling discontinuity” hits the
top 1% quantile. In contrast, the level of the top 1% income quantile and the 0.1% income
quantile increase quickly after the shock (to be more precise, after any time t > 0, they have
moved, in parallel). Hence, the ratio of the 0.1% to 1% share moves slowly (indeed, not at all
for a while), though the top 1% share moves fairly fast. This phenomenon will be confirmed
in the next subsection.
    For completeness, we note that it is also possible to characterize the time path of the
distribution for σ > 0 and for more general initial conditions p0 (x):

Lemma 2 (Closed form solution for general model without reflecting barrier) In the case
with no reflecting barrier, we have

                     p (x, t) = p∞ (x) + e−δt E [p0 (x − gt ) − p∞ (x − gt )]                  (15)

where gt := µt + σZt , and the expectation is taken over the stochastic realizations of gt .

   Note that when σ = 0, p (x, t) = p∞ (x)+e−δt [p0 (x − µt) − p∞ (x − µt)], which coincides
with (14) when the initial distribution is p0 (x) = αe−αx 1{x>0} .

4.2.2   Speed of Convergence in the Tail for the General Model

As noted earlier, the distribution p(x, t) satisfies the Kolmogorov Forward equation (7). As
in the first part of this section, we continue to focus on the case with Poisson death, but
without a reflecting barrier. One can show (see e.g. Gabaix, 2009) that in this case the
stationary distribution is a double Pareto distribution

                                 p∞ (x) = c min{e−ζ− x , e−ζ+ x }                              (16)

where c = −ζ− ζ+ /(ζ+ − ζ− ) and where ζ− < 0 < ζ+ are the two roots of
                                           σ2 2
                                      0=     ζ + ζµ − δ.                                       (17)
                                           2
Apart from the stationary distribution, the solution to the Kolmogorov Forward equation is
cumbersome.

                                               16
   The key insight of this section is that, for the case without a reflecting barrier, the
entire time path of the solution to the Kolmogorov Forward equation can be characterized
conveniently in terms of the so-called “Laplace transform” of p
                                      Z ∞
                                          e−ξx p (x, t) dx = E e−ξXt ,
                                                                   
                         pb (ξ, t) :=                                                 (18)
                                             −∞

where ξ is a real number and Xt represents the random variable (log income) with distribution
p (x, t).22 For ξ ≤ 0, the Laplace transform has the natural interpretation of the −ξth
moment of the distribution of income, that is E[w−ξ ], where w = eX is income. We show
momentarily that we can obtain a clean analytic formula for the entire time path of this
object for all t. This is useful because a complete characterization of a function’s Laplace
transform is equivalent to a complete characterization of the function itself. This is because
by varying the variable ξ, we can trace out the behavior of different parts of the distribution.
In particular, the more negative ξ is, the more we know about the distribution’s tail behavior.
In a similar vein, our analysis using Laplace transforms will allow us to characterize tightly
the behavior of a weighted version of the L1 -norm in (6) :
                                              Z ∞
                     ||p(x, t) − p∞ (x)||ξ :=     |p(x, t) − p∞ (x)|e−ξx dx.                (19)
                                                      −∞

In the special case ξ = 0, this distance measure coincides with the L1 -norm defined in (6).
But by taking ξ < 0, (19) puts more weight on the behavior of the distribution’s tail, the
main focus of the current section. Note that the Laplace transform (18) ceases to exist if
ξ is too negative or too positive. To ensure that the Laplace transform exists we impose
the restriction that −ζ+ < ξ < −ζ− where ζ− , ζ+ are the tail parameters of the stationary
distribution (16).23
    We apply the Laplace transform to the Kolmogorov Forward equation (7). We use the
                              2
usual rules: pbx = ξb
                    p, pc
                        xx = ξ pb, and obtain:

                    ∂ pb(ξ, t)                                                     σ2 2
                               = −λ(ξ)b
                                      p(ξ, t) + δ       where λ(ξ) := µξ −           ξ +δ                   (20)
                        ∂t                                                         2
with initial condition pb(ξ, 0) = pb0 (ξ), the Laplace transform of p0 (x). Here, we used that for
any x0 , the Laplace transform of the Dirac delta function δx0 is e−ξx0 and hence the Laplace
  22
     Note that we here work with the “bilateral” or “two-sided” Laplace transform which integrates over the
                                                                                     R∞
entire real line. This is in contrast to the one-sided Laplace transform defined as 0 e−ξx p (x, t) dx.
                                                                                        ζ− −ζ+
  23
     To see this, calculate the Laplace transform of (16) pb∞ (ξ) = ζ+c+ξ − ζ−c+ξ = (ζ− +ξ)(ζ + +ξ)
                                                                                                    . We therefore
need −ζ+ < ξ < −ζ− .


                                                       17
transform of δ0 equals 1. Importantly, note that for fixed ξ, (20) is a simple ordinary
differential equation for pb that can be solved analytically.

Proposition 2 (Speed of convergence in the tail) Consider the Laplace transform of the
income distribution pb(ξ, t) defined in (18) for −ζ+ < ξ < −ζ− where ζ− , ζ+ are the two roots
of (17). Its time path is given by

                                                    p0 (ξ) − pb∞ (ξ)) e−λ(ξ)t ,
                              pb(ξ, t) = pb∞ (ξ) + (b                                                   (21)
                                                  2
                                              σ 2
                                λ(ξ) := µξ −      ξ + δ,                                                (22)
                                               2
                                               δ
                              pb∞ (ξ) :=        2        .                                              (23)
                                         µξ − σ2 ξ 2 + δ

Furthermore, the weighted L1 -norm defined in (19) converges at rate λ(ξ):

                                    ||p(x, t) − p∞ (x)||ξ ∼ ke−λ(ξ)t .                                  (24)

    Consider first the speed of convergence of the weighted distance measure in (24). For the
special case ξ = 0, we have λ(ξ) = δ; when the weighted L1 -norm places no additional weight
on the behavior of the distribution’s tail, we recover our original result from Proposition 1,
as expected. As we take ξ more and more negative, the weighted norm places more and more
weight on the behavior of the distribution’s tail, and the corresponding speed of convergence
is given by λ(ξ). Note that for µ > 0, the speed of convergence λ(ξ) is always lower the
lower ξ is, for all ξ ≤ 0. If µ < 0, the same is true for all ξ less than some critical value.
The formula for λ(ξ) therefore indicates that convergence is slower the more weight we put
on observations in the distribution’s tail.
    Next consider (21) which provides a closed form solution for the evolution of the Laplace
transform or equivalently for the evolution of all moments of the cross-sectional income
distribution. These moments converge at the same rate λ(ξ) as the weighted norm in (24).
Hence, the closed form solution for the Laplace transform in (21) shows that high moments
converge more slowly than low moments.
    Figure 3 provides a graphical illustration of these theoretical results. As in the Steindl
case of Figure 2, the power law exponent ζ (equivalently top inequality η) does not change
at first and the distribution instead shifts out in parallel.24
  24
   This is more than a numerical result. Defining the local power law exponent ζ(x, t) := −Px (x, t)/P (x, t)
where P is the CDF corresponding to p, one can show using (7) that this local power law exponent does not
move on impact following a shock, ζt (x, t)|t=0 = 0 for all x.

                                                      18
                                                      0

                                                     −2

                                                     −4




                          Log Density, log p(x,t)
                                                     −6

                                                     −8

                                                    −10

                                                    −12
                                                               t=0
                                                    −14        t=10
                                                               t=20
                                                    −16        t=35
                                                               Steady State Distribution
                                                    −18
                                                      −2               0          2          4        6
                                                                             Log Income/Wealth, x


          Figure 3: Slow Convergence in the Tail in Standard Random Growth Model

    Finally, consider the expression for the stationary Laplace transform (23). Reassuringly,
one can check that it coincides with the result obtained from directly Laplace-transforming
                                                                                           2
the stationary distribution pb∞ (ξ).25 Also note that if ξ = −ζ+ or ξ = −ζ− so that µξ − σ2 ξ 2 +
δ = 0, then pb∞ (ξ) ceases to exist. This, in fact, suggests a general strategy for identifying
a distribution’s Pareto tail from knowledge of its Laplace transform only that will be useful
later: the tail parameter is simply the critical value ζ > 0 such that pb∞ (ξ) ceases to exist
for all ξ ≤ −ζ.26


4.3       The Baseline Model Cannot explain the Fast Rise in Income
          Inequality
We now revisit Figure 1 from Section 2 and ask: can standard random growth models gener-
ate the observed increase in income inequality? We find that they cannot. In particular, the
transition dynamics generated by the model are too slow relative to the dynamics observed
  25
       We have
                                                                        c        c          ζ− − ζ+
                                                          pb∞ (ξ) =          −        =                  .   (25)
                                                                      ζ+ + ξ   ζ− + ξ   (ζ− + ξ)(ζ+ + ξ)
From the quadratic for ζ (17), we have that ζ− ζ+ = −δ/(σ 2 /2), ζ− + ζ+ = −µ/(σ 2 /2) and hence (ζ− +
ξ)(ζ+ + ξ) = ζ− ζ+ + ξ(ζ− + ζ+ ) + ξ 2 = −δ/(σ 2 /2) − µξ/(σ 2 /2) + ξ 2 . Substituting into (25) we obtain (23).
  26
     In particular, one can show that for any distribution p with a Pareto tail, that is p(x) ∼ ce−ζx x → ∞
                                                        c
for constants c and ζ, the Laplace transform pb(ξ) ∼ ζ+ξ  as ξ ↓ −ζ.



                                                                                   19
in the data. This confirms, with calibrated data, the theoretical results in the preceding two
sections.
    More precisely, we ask whether an increase in the variance of the permanent component
of wages σ 2 can explain the increase in income inequality observed in the data. That an
increase in the variance of permanent earnings has contributed to the rise of inequality
observed in the data has been argued by Moffitt and Gottschalk (1995), Kopczuk, Saez and
Song (2010) and DeBacker et al. (2013) (however, Guvenen, Ozkan and Song (2014) examine
administrative data and dispute that there has been such a trend – either way our argument
is that an increase in σ cannot explain the rise in top inequality). The particular experiment
we consider is an increase in the variance of permanent earnings σ 2 from 0.01 in 1973 to
0.025 today (implying that the standard deviation σ increases from 0.1 to 0.158 broadly
consistent with evidence in Heathcote, Perri and Violante (2010)).
    We calibrate the remaining parameters µ and δ as follows. First, note that our model
is stationary whereas the U.S. economy features long-run growth. Since we normalized the
starting wage of labor force entrants to w0 = 1, µ is the growth rate of individual incomes
over the lifecycle relative to this long-run trend. We set δ = 1/30 corresponding to an
expected work life of thirty years and calibrate µ to match the observed tail inequality
in 1973, η1973 = 0.39 or equivalently ζ1973 = 1/η1973 = 2.56 which yields µ = 0.002, i.e.
individual income growth 0.2% above the economy’s long-run growth rate.27 Note that this
calibration is conservative. In particular, given that convergence rates are increasing in δ, a
longer expected work life would result in even slower transitions.
    Since the income process is not subject to a reflecting barrier, Proposition 1 implies
that the average speed of convergence is simply λ = δ and the corresponding half-life is
t1/2 = log(2)/δ = 20.8 years. As shown in Section 4.2, the speed of convergence in the
tail can be much slower. In particular, consider the formula for the speed of convergence
               2
λ(ξ) = µξ − σ2 ξ 2 + δ from Proposition 2 where the reader should recall that by varying ξ,
we can trace out the speed of convergence of all moments of the distribution and λ(ξ) is the
speed of convergence of the -ξth moment. Equivalently, −ξ is the weight on the tail in the
weighted L1 -norm (19), with the maximum admissible weight equal to the tail exponent of
the new stationary distribution which here equals ζ = 1.6.
    Figure 4 plots the corresponding half-life t1/2 (ξ) = log(2)/λ(ξ) for the parameter values
  27
     We compute η from the relative income shares in panel (b) of Figure 1 as η(p) = log S(p/10)/S(p). We
here use η(1) = S(0.1)/S(1). To understand how µ is calibrated, note that ζ satisfies (17). Therefore, given
σ 2 = 0.01 and δ = 1/30, we need µ = δ/ζ − ζσ 2 /2 = 0.002.



                                                    20
used in our experiment as a function of the moment under consideration −ξ. Consider first

                                                       100
                                                                σ2=0.025
                                                        90      σ2=0.02
                                                        80      σ2=0.03




                          Half Life t1/2(ξ) in Years
                                                        70

                                                        60

                                                        50

                                                        40

                                                        30

                                                        20

                                                        10

                                                         0
                                                          0     0.2     0.4      0.6      0.8      1        1.2        1.4
                                                              Moment under Consideration (equiv. Weight on Tail), −ξ



 Figure 4: Theoretical Speed of Convergence of Different Moments of Income Distribution

the red solid line which plots the half life t1/2 (ξ) for σ 2 = 0.025, the variance of the permanent
component of wages used in our experiment. For ξ = 0, the speed of convergence is given
by t1/2 = log(2)/δ = 20.8 years as expected. There are two main takeaways from the figure.
First, even for relatively low moments the speed of convergence is considerably lower. For
example, the half-life of convergence of the first moment (ξ = −1) is around 40 years, i.e.
twice as much as the average speed. Second, the speed of convergence becomes slower and
slower the higher the moment under consideration, with half lives of 100 years close to the
highest admissible moment ζ = 1.6. The figure also shows that the speed of convergence is
quite sensitive to the value of the variance σ 2 , particularly the speed in the tail.
    Figure 5 plots the time path for the top 1% income share (panel (a)) and the empir-
ical power law exponent (panel (b)) generated by the baseline random growth model and
compares it to that in the data.28 Not surprisingly given our analytical results, the model
fails spectacularly.29 An increase in the variance in the permanent component of income σ 2
is therefore not a promising candidate for explaining the observed increase in top income
inequality. Similarly, consider a simple tax story like that mentioned in Section 3.1 in which
the intensity of investment is affected by taxation θ = θ(τ ) where τ is a tax rate, and there-
fore so are the reduced form parameters µ and σ. Because this simple story collapses in a
  28
    We solve the Kolmogorov Forward equation (7) numerically using a finite difference method.
  29
    Note that the power law exponent in panel (b) is completely flat on impact, consistent with Figures 2
and 3, and footnote 24.


                                                                                    21
                             22

                             20
                                                                                             0.6
 Top 1% Labor Income Share




                             18

                             16                                                             0.55




                                                                                     η(1)
                             14                                                              0.5

                             12
                                                                                            0.45
                             10

                                                         Data (Piketty and Saez)             0.4                         Data (Piketty and Saez)
                              8
                                                         Model Transition                                                Model Transition
                                                         Model Steady State                                              Model Steady State
                              6                                                             0.35
                             1950                 2000                        2050            1950                2000                        2050
                                                  Year                                                            Year

                                     (a) Top 1% Labor Income Share                            (b) Empirical Inverse Power Law Exponent

                                         Figure 5: Dynamics of Income Inequality in the Baseline Model

reduced form to a standard random growth model, it cannot generate fast transitions either
(results are available upon request).


4.4                                 Jumps Cannot Explain the Fast Rise in Inequality Either
The standard random growth model we have studied so far assumes that income innovations
are log-normally distributed as implied by the assumption that the income process is a geo-
metric Brownian motion. Recent research suggests that this is a quite imperfect description
of the data. For instance, Guvenen et al. (2015) using administrative data, document that
earnings innovations are very fat-tailed and much more so than a normally distributed ran-
dom variable. In particular, they show that the distribution of income growth rates itself
has Pareto tails (and not just the income distribution). In our continuous time setup, the
most natural way of generating such kurtosis is by introducing jumps.30
    In this section, we ask whether departing from the standard log-normal framework by
introducing jumps can help resolve the puzzle raised in Section 4.3 that random growth
processes cannot explain the fast rise income inequality observed in the data. We find that
                 30
    It is not surprising that income innovations will be leptokurtic if the distribution from which jumps are
drawn features kurtosis itself. Interestingly, this is not necessary for income innovations to be leptokurtic:
even normally distributed jumps that arrive with a Poisson arrival rate can generate kurtosis in data ob-
served at discrete time intervals. The same logic is used in the theory of so-called “subordinated stochastic
processes.”



                                                                                   22
they cannot: while jumps are useful descriptively for capturing certain features of the data,
they do not increase the speed of convergence of the cross-sectional income distribution.
   To introduce jumps, we extend the income process (4) as follows:

                                 dxit = µdt + σdZit + git dNit                             (26)

where dNit is a jump process with intensity φ. That is, there is a jump in [t, t + dt) (i.e.,
dNji = 1) with probability φdt and no jump (i.e., dNit = 0) with probability 1 − φdt. The
innovations git are drawn from an exogenous distribution f . The distribution f can have
arbitrary support and it may be either thin-tailed (e.g. a normal distribution) or thick-tailed
(e.g. a double-Pareto distribution consistent with the evidence in Guvenen et al. (2015)).
With jumps, the Kolmogorov Forward equation (7) becomes
                                       σ2
                   pt = −δp − µpx +       pxx + φE [p (x − g) − p (x)] + δδ0 .
                                        2
Relative to (7), the new term is the expectation E [p (x − g) − p (x)], which is taken over the
random jump g and is multiplied by φ, the arrival rate of jumps. Note that this term can
also be written as
                                   Z ∞
           E [p (x − g) − p (x)] =     [p(x − g) − p(x)]f (g)dg = (p ∗ f ) (x) − p (x)
                                   −∞

where ∗ is the convolution operator. Our analysis of transition dynamics using Laplace
transforms in Section 4.2 can easily be extended to the case of jumps because integral trans-
forms like the Laplace transform are the ideal tool for handling convolutions. In particular,
the Laplace transform of a convolution of two functions is the product of the Laplace trans-
forms of the two functions: (p\ ∗ f )(ξ) = pb(ξ)fb(ξ). Using this fact, Proposition 2 extends
immediately to the case of jumps.

Proposition 3 (Speed of convergence when there are jumps in the growth rate) Consider
the Laplace transform of the cross-sectional income distribution pb(ξ, t) defined in (18), where
jumps are allowed. Its time path is still given by (21), but now with rate of convergence
                                                  2
                                             2σ
                           λ(ξ, φ) := ξµ − ξ      + δ − φ(fb(ξ) − 1),                      (27)
                                      Z ∞    2
                             f (ξ) :=
                             b            e−ξg f (g)dg,                                    (28)
                                        −∞

the Laplace transform of the distribution of jumps f (g) which satisfies fb(0) = 1 and fb(ξ) > 1
for all ξ < 0. The weighted L1 -norm converges at rate λ(ξ, φ):

                               ||p(x, t) − p∞ (x)||ξ ∼ ke−λ(ξ,φ)t .

                                               23
In particular, the average speed of convergence as measured by the unweighted L1 -norm equals
λ(0, φ) = δ for all φ, i.e. it is entirely unaffected by the presence of jumps. With ξ < 0, jumps
make the speed of convergence lower than in the absence of jumps: λ(ξ, φ) < λ(ξ, 0), φ > 0.

    It is worth reemphasizing the last part of the Proposition: if we confine attention to
the average speed of convergence ||p(x, t) − p∞ (x)|| jumps have no effect whatsoever. If
instead, we put more weight on observations in the distribution’s tail, ξ < 0, then the rate
of convergence becomes worse, not better. This follows from (27) and the fact that fb(ξ) > 1
for ξ < 0. Furthermore for ξ < 0, λ(ξ, φ) is decreasing in φ, that is the higher is the jump
intensity, the lower is the rate of convergence. We conclude that jump processes, though
very useful for the purpose of capturing salient features of the data, are not helpful in terms
of providing a theory of fast transitions.


5     Models that Generate Fast Transitions
Given the negative results of the preceding section, it is natural to ask: what then explains
the observed fast rise in top income inequality? We argue that fast transitions require
very specific departures from the standard random growth model. We extend the standard
random growth model along two dimensions. First, we allow for heterogeneity in mean
growth rates, in particular a “high growth regime.” Second, we consider deviations from
Gibrat’s law, a feature which we argue arises naturally in “superstar theories”. We discuss
the role of these two additions in turn in Sections 5.2 and 5.3. In Section 5.4, we then
revisit the rise in income inequality and argue that our generalized random growth model
can generate transitions that are as fast as those observed in the data.


5.1    The Augmented Random Growth Model
In its most general form, we consider a random growth model with distinct “growth regimes”
indexed by j = 1, ..., J, deviations from Gibrat’s law captured by a process St , and jumps
denoted by dNjit . In particular, the dynamics of income xit of individual i in regime j are
given by
                      xit = ebj St yit ,
                                                                                            (29)
                    dyit = µj dt + σj dZit + gjit dNjit + Injection − Death,
where dNjit is a Poisson process with intensity φj and gjit is a random variable with dis-
tribution fj . As before, we assume that workers retire at rate δ and get replaced by labor

                                               24
entrants with x = 0. We assume that a fraction θj of labor force entrants are born in regime
j and workers switch from regime j to regime k at rate φj,k . Different “growth regimes”
differ in the mean growth rate µj and the standard deviation of income changes σj . Guve-
nen (2007) has argued that an income process with heterogeneous income profiles provides
a better fit of the micro data than a model in which all individuals face the same income
profile, and he finds large heterogeneity in the slope of income profiles. The model above
also allows for heterogeneity in the standard deviation of income innovations σj . This has a
similar flavor to the mixture specification advocated by Guvenen et al. (2015). We build on
Luttmer (2011), who studies a related framework applied to firm dynamics and argues that
persistent heterogeneity in mean firm growth rates is needed to account for the relatively
young age of very large firms at a given point in time (a statement about the stationary
distribution rather than transition dynamics as in our paper). Aoki and Nirei (2015) present
a related and more complex economic model with entrepreneurs and workers that are subject
to different income growth rates, and Jones and Kim (2014) examine a model with different
types of entrepreneurs.
    Deviations from Gibrat’s law are captured by St , which is an arbitrary stochastic process
satisfying limt→∞ E[St ] < ∞. To see this, note that (29) can be written as

                dxit = µ̃jt dt + σ̃jt dZit + bj xit dSt + gjit dÑjit + Injection − Death          (30)

where µ̃jt = µj ebj St , σ̃jt = σj ebj St and dÑjit = dNjit ebj St . If bj dSt > 0, the growth rate of
income xit is increasing in income, constituting a deviation from Gibrat’s law.31 Our baseline
model analyzed in section 4 is the special case in which J = 1 and dSt = dNjit = 0.


5.2     The Role of Heterogeneity in Mean Growth Rates
First, consider the special case of (29) with multiple distinct “growth regimes”, but without
deviations from Gibrat’s law or jumps dSt = dNit = 0. Here we focus on a simple case with
two regimes, a high-growth regime and a low-growth regime, but our results can be extended
to three or more regimes.
    Denote the density of individuals who are currently in the high and low growth states by
p (x, t) and pL (x, t) and the cross-sectional wage distribution by p(x, t) = pH (x, t) + pL (x, t).
 H

We assume that a fraction θ of individuals start their career in the high-growth regime and
  31
    Also note that Zit is an idiosyncratic stochastic process whereas St is an aggregate or common shock
that hits all individuals simultaneously.



                                                   25
the remainder in the low-growth regime, that individuals switch from high to low growth
with intensity ψ and that low growth is an absorbing state that is only left upon retirement.
Then, the densities satisfy the following system of Kolmogorov Forward equations
                                               2
                                             σH
                            pH        H
                             t = −µH px +        pH      H     H
                                                  xx − ψp − δp + βH δ0 ,
                                              2                                                           (31)
                                              2
                                            σ
                             pLt = −µL pLx + L pLxx + ψpH − δpL + βL δ0 ,
                                             2
with initial conditions pH (x, 0) = pH           L             L
                                         0 (x), p (x, 0) = p0 (x) and where βH = θδ and βL =
(1 − θ)δ are the birth rates in the two regimes.32
    While we are not aware of an analytic solution method for the system of partial differential
equations (31), this system can be conveniently analyzed by means of Laplace transforms as
in Section 4.2. In particular, pbH (ξ, t) and pbL (ξ, t) satisfy
                                                                                    2
                                                                                  σH
       pbH                 pH (ξ, t) + βH ,
         t (ξ, t) = −λH (ξ)b                                   λH (ξ) := ξµH − ξ 2    + ψ + δ,            (32)
                                                                                   2
                                                                                  σ2
       pbLt (ξ, t) = −λL (ξ)b
                            pL (ξ, t) + ψb
                                         pH (ξ, t) + βL ,      λL (ξ) := ξµL − ξ 2 L + δ,                 (33)
                                                                                   2
with initial conditions pbH (ξ, 0) = pbH      bL (ξ, 0) = pbL0 (ξ). Importantly, for fixed ξ, this is
                                       0 (ξ), p
again simply a system of ordinary (rather than partial) differential equations and it can be
solved analytically. In particular, note that the system is triangular so that one can first
solve the equation for pbH (ξ, t) and then the one for pbL (ξ, t).33

Proposition 4 (Speed of convergence with heterogeneity in mean growth rates) Consider
the cross-sectional distribution p(x, t) := pH (x, t) + pL (x, t). The stationary distribution
p∞ (x) = pH         L
           ∞ (x)+p∞ (x) has a Pareto tail for large x with tail exponent ζ = min{ζL , ζH } where
                                  σ2                                                  σ2
ζH is the positive root of 0 = ζ 2 2H +ζµH −ψ−δ and ζL is the positive root of 0 = ζ 2 2L +ζµL −δ.
Next consider the Laplace transforms of pH (x, t) and p(x, t) := pH (x, t)+pL (x, t). Their time
  32
    Assuming that the fraction of individuals in the high-growth regime is stationary, it equals θδ/(ψ + δ).
  33
    Proposition 4 can easily be extended to the case where the system is not triangular, i.e. if the low
state is not an absorbing state and low types can switch to being high types. This is achieved by writing
the analogue of (32) in matrix form. The speed of convergence is then governed by the eigenvalues of that
matrix. In the triangular case, these eigenvalues are simply −λL (ξ) and −λH (ξ). The triangularity simplifies
the analysis but it is by no means a crucial assumption. Results for the general case are available on request.




                                                      26
paths are given by

                                                      −λH (ξ)t H
                             pbH (ξ, t) − pbH
                                            ∞ (ξ) = e          p0 (ξ) − pbH
                                                              (b          ∞ (ξ)),                (34)
                               pb(ξ, t) − pb∞ (ξ) = cH (ξ)e−λH (ξ)t + cL (ξ)e−λL (ξ)t ,          (35)
                                                                2
                                                              σH
                                           λH (ξ) := ξµH − ξ 2    + ψ + δ,                       (36)
                                                               2
                                                              σ2
                                           λL (ξ) := ξµL − ξ 2 L + δ,                            (37)
                                                               2
where pbH
        ∞ (ξ) and pb∞ (ξ) are the Laplace transforms of the stationary distributions and cH (ξ)
and cL (ξ) are constants of integration.34 Finally, the weighted L1 -norm of the distribution
                                                                               −λH (ξ)t
of individuals in the high-growth regime satisfies ||pH (x, t) − pH
                                                                  ∞ (x)||ξ ∼ ke         .

    The transition dynamics of the income distribution therefore take place on two different
time scales: part of the transition happens at rate λH (ξ) and another part at rate λL (ξ). The
model therefore has the theoretical potential to explain fast short-run dynamics – something
we explore quantitatively in Section 5.4.
    A natural assumption is that the rate of switching from the high- to the low-growth
regime ψ is large enough to swamp any differences between the µ’s and σ’s in the two states
and so λH (ξ) > λL (ξ) in (36) and (37). Consider now a change in parameter values that
triggers transition dynamics. In contrast to the baseline random growth model of section 4,
these now take place on two different time scales: part of the transition happens quickly at
rate λH (ξ), but the other part of the transition happens at a much slower pace λL (ξ). In
the short-run, the dynamics governed by λH (ξ) dominate whereas in the long-run the slower
dynamics due to λL (ξ) determine the dynamics of the income distribution. We argue in
the next section that such a model has the potential to explain the observed rise in income
inequality.
 34
      These are given by
                                      βH                     βH         βL             βH
                       pbH
                         ∞ (ξ) =            ,    pb∞ (ξ) =         +         +ψ
                                     λH (ξ)                 λH (ξ) λL (ξ)         λL (ξ)λH (ξ)
                                     λH (ξ) − λL (ξ) − ψ H
                           cH (ξ) :=                       p0 (ξ) − pbH
                                                          (b          ∞ (ξ))
                                        λH (ξ) − λL (ξ)
                                                                 ψ
                                      pL
                           cL (ξ) := (b        bL
                                       0 (ξ) − p∞ (ξ)) +                   pH (ξ) − pbH
                                                                          (b          ∞ (ξ)).
                                                          λH (ξ) − λL (ξ) 0




                                                          27
5.3     Superstar Shocks: Deviations from Gibrat’s Law
Next consider the special case of (29) with deviations from Gibrat’s law St 6= 0, but without
jumps dNit = 0. We call the shocks St “aggregate shocks to high incomes” or “superstar
shocks”: the reason is that they affect high incomes more than low incomes and more than
proportionately so. We explain why a model with such “superstar shocks” has the potential
to generate fast transition dynamics like those observed in the data. We then provide an
economic interpretation of such “superstar shocks”.

   The model with superstars generates fast transitions Indeed, suppose that the
process for the underlying process yit does not change, but St varies. Given that xit = eSt yit ,
we have:
                                         ζtx = e−St ζty
instantaneously. Suppose that the distribution of yit is constant over time (so ζty is constant).
The power law of x changes immediately when there is a shock to St . Hence, the process is
extremely fast – it features instantaneous transitions in the power law exponent, and if St
has a secular trend the power law exponent inherits this trend.

Proposition 5 (Infinitely fast adjustment in models with aggregate shocks to high incomes,
aka “superstar shocks”) Consider the process (29), reproduced here as: xit = eSt yit , where yit
is assumed to have a constant law of motion (and distribution) and St is an aggregate shock
to high incomes. This process has an infinitely fast speed of adjustment: λ = ∞. Indeed, we
have ζtx = e−St ζ y , where ζtx , ζ y are the power law exponent of incomes xit and yit .
                                                                                                 y
   Proof. The mechanism is so basic that the proof is very simple: if P (yit > z) = Ke−ζ z ,
                                                         y −St
      P (xit > x) = P eSt yit > x = P yit > e−St x = Ke−ζ e x               ζtx = e−St ζty . 
                                                 
                                                                      ⇒

Hence, those processes are promising, as they do generate a fast transition.

   Those fast transitions are empirically relevant at high frequencies There is
supportive evidence for the aggregate shocks to high incomes (29) in Parker and Vissing-
Jorgensen (2010). They find that in good (respectively bad) times, the incomes of top
earners increase (respectively decrease), in a manner consistent with (29) : the sensitivity to
the shock at time t is proportional to xit , as in

                                 dxit = xit dSt + µdt + σdZit .

                                               28
Note that the shock xit dSt to log income is multiplicative in log income, as opposed to
additive as in traditional random growth model. This finding appears to have been amplified
and broadly confirmed by Guvenen (2015, p.40).
   We conclude that those aggregate shocks to high incomes are an empirically grounded
source of fast transitions. Next, we present an illustrative model than gives them a concrete
theoretical interpretation.

    A microfoundation for “superstar shocks” We here provide a microfoundation
for the eSt term in equation (29). Here we adopt the model of Gabaix and Landier (GL,
2008), which is a tractable, calibratable version of the “superstars economics” ideas of Rosen
(1981). There is a continuum of firms of different size and a continuum of managers with
different talent. A CEO of talent T , matched with firm S, produces an improvement in
firm value CT S γ , where C is a constant. We use the term “CEO” but it could correspond
to top lawyers, financiers, etc. Since talented CEOs are more valuable in larger firms, the
nth most talented manager is matched with the nth largest firm in competitive equilibrium,
and earns the following competitive equilibrium pay (really n is a quantile, so that a low n
means a high talent or firm size). We assume a Pareto firm size distribution with exponent
1/α so that a firm of rank n has size: S (n) = An−α . A managerof talent rank n has talent
T (n) = Tmax − Bβ nβ . Hence, the value added of the manager is Tmax − BC   β
                                                                              nβ Aγ n−αγ .
    GL (summarized in the appendix) derive that for a CEO of upper quantile n, the market
equilibrium pay is:
                                        w (n) = eat n−χt ,

where n is the rank (quantile) of that CEO’s talent, and we define:

                                         χt = αt γt − βt .                                    (38)

Denoting the log wage by xit = log wit and the log quantile by yit = − log nit , we have

                                         xit = χt yit + at .                                  (39)

Note that χt and at depend on economy-wide forces, while xit , yit are specific to each CEO.
CEO i’s talent yit evolves stochastically as dyit = µt dt + σt dZit with death rate δt .35 Hence,
this generates a process exactly like (29) with eSt := χt .
   By construction, the quantile nit = e−yit has a uniform distribution. Therefore yit must have an
  35

exponential distribution with exponent 1 which imposes the restriction µt + 12 σt2 − δt = 0.



                                                 29
    A natural variant is one with two growth regimes corresponding to two groups of indi-
viduals: high types who have the chance of becoming CEOs, and for whom bH = 1, and
low types who never become CEOs and who are, therefore, also not affected by “superstar
shocks,” bL = 0.
    A shock to χt can be a shock to αt , βt , γt . We find it simplest to think about a shock
to βt or γt , i.e. to the (perceived) importance of talent in the production function.36 In
the baseline GL calibration, βt ' 2/3 and γt ' 1. When γt is higher or βt is lower, the
marginal impact of talent, CT 0 (n) S (n) = Aγ BCn1−χt is higher. Increases in χt correspond
to increases in the “span of control” or “scales managed by talent”, somewhat as in Garicano
and Rossi-Hansberg (2006).


5.4     Quantitative Exploration: Fast Transitions in the Augmented
        Model
We now use the framework of this section to revisit the rise in income inequality. We
argued in section 4.3 that the standard random growth model fails spectacularly in terms
of explaining the rise in top income inequality in the United States. We now argue that,
in contrast, the model with heterogeneity in mean growth rates presented in the preceding
sections has the potential to explain the observed rise in top income inequality.
    We conduct an analogous exercise to that in Section 4.3. The shock we consider in the
present exercise is an increase in the mean growth rate of individuals in the high growth
regime µH (while µL is unchanged). This is motivated in part by casual evidence of very
rapid income growth rates since the 1980s, for instance for Bill Gates, Mark Zuckerberg,
hedge fund managers and the like – their growth is very high for a while, then tails off. This
impression is confirmed by Jones and Kim (2014), who find that there has been a substantial
increase in the average growth rate in the upper tail of the growth rate distribution since
the late 1970s.37 We follow a similar calibration strategy as in Section 4.3. First, note from
  36
      Indeed, 1/αt is the tail exponent of the firm size distribution, so it is closely pinned to αt = 1 (Zipf’s
law).
   37
      Jones and Kim (2014) proxy µH with the median of the upper decile, i.e. the 95th percentile, of the
distribution of income growth rates. Combining evidence from the IRS public use panel of tax returns and
from Guvenen, Ozkan and Song (2014), they show that this measure of µH has increased substantially from
1979-81 to 1988-90, and then again from 1988-90 to 1995-96. Jones and Kim note that this evidence should
be viewed as suggestive due to limited sample sizes in the IRS data and comparability of the IRS and the
Social Security Administration data used by Guvenen, Ozkan and Song (2014). Below we discuss ongoing
work and directions for future work that could improve on these estimates. In the meantime, Jones and Kim


                                                      30
Proposition 2 that, if µH is sufficiently bigger than µL , the Pareto tail of the stationary
income distribution is determined only by the dynamics in the high regime and given by
                                                  p
                                          −µH + µ2H + 2σH    2
                                                               (δ + ψ)
                      ζ = min{ζL , ζH } =              2
                                                                       ,                (40)
                                                      σH

and the parameters σL and µL do not matter for top inequality in either the initial or terminal
steady state. As before, we set δ = 1/30 and impose that the economy is initially in a Pareto
steady state with ζ1973 = 2.56. We set σH = 0.15, which is a conservative estimate.38 We
do not have precise estimates for ψ, the rate of switching from the high- to the low-growth
regime. For our baseline results, we set ψ = 1/6, corresponding to an expected duration of
the high-growth regime of 6 years, and we report results under alternative parameter values.
Given values for σH , δ and ψ, we calibrate the initial µH so that (40) yields ζ1973 = 2.56. In
the initial steady state, the difference in mean growth rates between high- and low growth
types is µH − µL = 0.06.
    Our baseline exercise considers a once-and-for-all increase in µH by 8 percentage points.
This increase in µH is smaller in total size than the increase documented by Jones and
Kim (2014), but also much more abrupt. The resulting gap of µH − µL = 0.14 is broadly
consistent with empirical evidence in Guvenen, Kaplan and Song (2014).39 Figure 6 plots
the corresponding results. The difference to the earlier experiment in Figure 5 is striking.
The model with heterogeneity in mean growth rates can generate transition dynamics that
can replicate the rapid rise in income inequality observed in the United States.
    The key parameters that govern the speed of transition are µH and ψ, the growth rate in
the high-growth regime and the probability of leaving it. Since we do not have precise esti-
mates of these two parameters, we have explored a number of alternative parameterizations.
In particular, we have computed results for both higher and lower switching rates ψ = 1/3
and ψ = 1/12. In each case, we use (40) to recalibrate the initial µH so as to match the tail
inequality observed in the data. As expected given our theoretical results, transitions are
provide the best available evidence documenting potential drivers of the increase in top income inequality.
  38
     Larger values of σH lead to even faster transition dynamics. We set σL = 0.1 based on the evidence
discussed in Section 4.3. We view σH = 0.15 as conservative because the growth rates of parts of the
population may be much more volatile (think of startups).
  39
     Guvenen, Kaplan and Song (2014) document differences in average growth rates of different population
groups as large as 0.23 log points per year. See in particular their Figure 7 which presents the age-earnings
profiles of three groups: the top 0.1%, the next 0.9% and the bottom 99% of lifetime earnings. Over a ten
year period (ages 25 to 35), the earnings of the top 0.1% grow by 2.3 log points (0.23 per year), those of the
next 0.9% by 1.4 log points (0.14 per year) and those of the bottom 99% by 0.5 log points (0.05 per year).


                                                     31
                             30
                                                                                         0.75

                                                                                          0.7
                             25
 Top 1% Labor Income Share




                                                                                         0.65

                             20                                                           0.6




                                                                                  η(1)
                                                                                         0.55
                             15
                                                                                          0.5

                                                                                         0.45
                             10
                                                   Data (Piketty and Saez)                                       Data (Piketty and Saez)
                                                   Model w High Growth Regime             0.4
                                                                                                                 Model w High Growth Regime
                                                   Model Steady State                                            Model Steady State
                              5                                                          0.35
                             1950                2000                      2050            1950                2000                      2050
                                                 Year                                                          Year

                                    (a) Top 1% Labor Income Share                          (b) Empirical Inverse Power Law Exponent

                              Figure 6: Transition Dynamics in Model with Heterogeneity in Mean Growth Rates

fastest when ψ and µH are high, i.e. when individuals can experience very short-lived, very
high-growth spurts, what one may call “live-fast-die-young dynamics”.40 In their ongoing
work using a very similar model, Jones and Kim (2014) propose such a “live-fast-die-young”
calibration with very low ψ and high µH .41 Second, we have also conducted experiments
in which we feed in a gradual increase in µH rather than a once-and-for-all increase. We
find that in this case a higher switching rate ψ is needed than the one used in our baseline
experiment.42
    In summary, the model with heterogeneity in mean growth rates is capable of generating
fast transition dynamics of top inequality for a number of alternative parameterizations that
are broadly consistent with the micro data. The common feature of these parameterizations
is a combination of relatively high growth rates for part of the population (high enough
µH ) over relatively short time horizons (high enough ψ). In the absence of better micro
estimates of these critical parameter values, the quantitative explorations in this section
                 40
     On the other hand, the speed of convergence becomes close to that in the benchmark model as ψ and
µH become small. Indeed, as ψ → 0 the model collapses to the one-regime model of Section 4.3. This is
because in this case we need µH → µL so as to still match data on the tail exponent ζ (see (40)).
  41
     We have computed transition dynamics using their proposed calibration and confirm that it can generate
fast transitions, as also expected given our theoretical results. Results available upon request.
  42
     A parameter combination that generates time paths quite similar to those in Figure 6 is a gradual
increase over a time period of 20 years (1973 to 1993) of µH by 11%, together with ψ = 1/4. This is still
more conservative than the calibration of Jones and Kim who feature a larger increase of µH and higher ψ.



                                                                                32
should be viewed as suggestive. An advantage of our tractable theoretical approach is that
it pinpoints clearly the important parameters. Better empirical evidence is a clear priority for
future research. For instance, it would be extremely valuable to extend the work of Guvenen,
Kaplan and Song (2014) and Guvenen et al. (2015), who use administrative data from the
Social Security Administration to document the drivers of the increase in top inequality.
Better statistical methods could also help. For example, our model with multiple growth
regimes suggests estimating a version of Hamilton’s (1989) regime-switching model using
labor income panel data.


6     The Dynamics of Wealth Inequality
We now show how our theoretical results can be extended to the simple model of top wealth
inequality in Section 3.2. We then ask whether an increase in r − g, the gap between the
after-tax average rate of return and the growth rate, can explain the increase in top wealth
inequality observed in some datasets as suggested by Piketty (2014).


6.1    Stationary Wealth Inequality
The properties of the stationary wealth distribution are again well understood. Applying
the standard results in Appendix C, one can show that the stationary wealth distribution
has a Pareto tail with tail inequality

                                      1        σ 2 /2
                                 η=     = 2                                                (41)
                                      ζ  σ /2 − (r − g − θ)

provided that r − g − θ − σ 2 /2 < 0. Intuitively, tail inequality is increasing in the gap
between the after-tax rate of return to wealth and the growth rate r − g. Similarly, tail
inequality is higher the lower the marginal propensity to consume θ and the higher the after-
tax wealth volatility σ are. Given that r = (1 − τ )r̃ and σ = (1 − τ )σ̃, top wealth inequality
is also decreasing in the capital income tax rate τ . Intuitively, a higher gap between r and
g works as an “amplifier mechanism” for wealth inequality: for a given structure of shocks
(σ), the long-run magnitude of wealth inequality will tend to be magnified if the gap r − g is
higher (Piketty and Zucman, 2014b). However, this leaves unanswered the question whether
increases in top wealth inequality triggered by an increase in r − g will come about quickly
or take many hundreds of years to materialize.



                                              33
6.2    Dynamics of Wealth Inequality: Theoretical Results
We now show how our theoretical results can be extended to the case of wealth dynamics.
Individual wealth satisfies (2) or, equivalently, (3) in combination with an additive income
term ydt (friction 4). From Ito’s formula, the logarithm of wealth xit = log wit satisfies

                                 dxit = (ye−xit + µ)dt + σdZit                             (42)

where the reader should recall that y denotes labor income. The addition of this labor income
term y introduces some difficulties for extending Proposition 1. However, note that for large
wealth levels this term becomes negligible, which makes it possible to derive a tight upper
bound on the speed of convergence of the cross-sectional distribution.

Proposition 6 (Speed of convergence for wealth dynamics (friction 4)) Consider the wealth
process (42). Under Assumption 1, and if µ < 0, the cross-sectional distribution p(x, t)
converges to its stationary distribution exponentially in the total variation norm, that is
||p(x, t) − p∞ (x)|| ∼ ke−λt for constants k and λ. The rate of convergence satisfies

                                              1 µ2
                                         λ≤        +δ
                                              2 σ2
where 1{·} is the indicator function, and with equality for |µ| below a threshold |µ∗ |.

   We conjecture that with µ > 0, λ = δ, as in Proposition 1.
   In the case of friction 4, it is not possible to obtain an exact formula for the speed of
convergence. However, the speed of convergence is bounded above and, in particular, is
equal to or less than the speed with a reflecting barrier from Proposition 1. For the case of
the process (42), it is also no longer possible to characterize the corresponding Kolmogorov
Forward equation by using Laplace transforms (due to the presence of the term ye−xt ).
Numerical experiments nevertheless confirm our results from section 4.2 that the speed of
convergence in the tail can be substantially lower than the average speed of convergence
characterized in Proposition 6.


6.3    Wealth Inequality and Capital Taxes
In this section, we ask whether an increase in r − g, the gap between the (average) after-tax
rate of return on wealth and the economy’s growth rate, can explain the increase in wealth
inequality observed in some data sets, as suggested by Piketty (2014). To do so, we first

                                               34
construct a measure of the time series of r − g. This requires three data inputs: on the
average pre-tax rate of return, on capital income taxes, and on a measure of the economy’s
growth rate. We use data on the average before-tax rate of return from Piketty and Zucman
(2014a), the series of top marginal capital income tax rates from Auerbach and Hassett
(2015) and data on the growth rate of per capita GDP of the United States from the Penn
World Tables. Panel (a) of Figure 7 plots our time series for r−g, displaying a strong upward
trend starting in the late 1970s, which coincides with the time when top wealth inequality
started to increase (Figure 1).43 The Figure therefore suggests that, a priori, the theory that
variations in r − g are a potential candidate for explaining increasing wealth inequality.

      0.045                                                                        42
                                                                                          Data (SCF)
       0.04                                                                        40     Data (Saez−Zucman)
                                                                                          Model Transition
                                                                                   38
      0.035




                                                             Top 1% Wealth Share
                                                                                   36
       0.03
                                                                                   34
      0.025
                                                                                   32
r−g




       0.02                                                                        30

      0.015                                                                        28

                                                                                   26
       0.01
                                                                                   24
      0.005
                                                                                   22
                                                                                   1950   1960    1970   1980   1990   2000   2010   2020   2030
          0                                                                                                     Year
         1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010

                   (a) Evolution of of r − g                                                     (b) Top 1% Wealth Share

                   Figure 7: Dynamics of Wealth Inequality in the Baseline Model

    We now ask whether the simple model of wealth accumulation from Section 3 has the
potential to explain the different data series for wealth inequality in Figure 1. To this end,
recall equation (2) and note that the dynamics of this parsimonious model are described by
two parameter combinations only, r − g − θ, where θ is the marginal propensity to consume
out of wealth, and the cross-sectional standard deviation of the return to capital σ. Our
exercise proceeds in three steps. First, we obtain an estimate for σ. We use σ = 0.3, which
is on the upper end of values estimated or used in the existing literature.44 Second, given σ
  43
     We have tried a number of alternative exercises with different data series for the return on capital and
taxes, e.g. we set the pre-tax r equal to the yields of 10-year government bonds as in Auerbach and Hassett
(2015) and Piketty and Zucman (2014b). Results are very similar and available upon request.
  44
     Overall, good estimates of σ are quite hard to come by and relatively dispersed. Campbell (2001) provide
the only estimates for an exactly analogous parameter using Swedish wealth tax statistics on asset returns.


                                                      35
and our data for r − g in 1970, we calibrate the marginal propensity to consume θ so as to
match the amount of tail inequality observed in the data in 1970, η = 0.6. Third, we feed
the time path for r − g from panel (a) of Figure 7 into the calibrated model.
    Before comparing the model’s prediction to the evolution of top wealth inequality in the
data, we make use of our analytic formulas from section 4 to calculate measures of the speed
of convergence. To this end, revisit the average speed of convergence in Proposition 1, and
in particular the formula in terms of inequality (13). To operationalize this formula, we use
the tail exponent observed in 2010 in the SCF of η = 0.65 together with our other parameter
values.45 With these numbers in hand we obtain a half life of
                              log(2) × 8 × η 2   log(2) × 8 × (0.65)2
                     t1/2 ≥                    =                      ≈ 26 years.
                                     σ2                  0.32
That is, on average, the distribution takes 26 years to cover half the distance to the new
steady state. Panel (b) of Figure 7 displays the results of our experiment using the parameter
values just discussed. The main takeaway is that the baseline random growth model cannot
even explain the gradual rise in top wealth inequality found in the SCF. It fails even more
obviously in explaining the rise in top wealth inequality found by Saez and Zucman (2014).


6.4     Fast Dynamics of Wealth Inequality
What, then, explains the dynamics of wealth inequality observed in the data? The lessons
of Section 5 still apply. In particular, processes of the form (29) that feature heterogeneity
in mean growth rates or deviations from Gibrat’s law have the potential to deliver fast
transitions. We view both as potentially relevant for the case of wealth dynamics. First,
average growth rates may differ across individuals if some individuals have higher average
returns, e.g. because they can afford better investment advice, and the rates of return of
“superstar investors” relative to those of others may have increased over time, e.g. because
their effective capital income taxes have decreased. Second, there may be deviations from
Gibrat’s law, for example, because the saving rates of the super wealthy relative to those of
the wealthy may change over time (Saez and Zucman, 2014).46
They estimate an average σ of 0.18. Moskowitz and Vissing-Jorgensen (2002) argue for σ of 0.3.
  45
     Ideally one would use an estimate of tail inequality in the new stationary distribution η. Since λ is
decreasing in inequality, we use the tail exponent observed in 2010 in the SCF of η = 0.65, which provides
an upper bound on the speed of convergence λ. Since inequality in the new stationary distribution may be
even higher, true convergence may be even slower.
  46
     Finally, it is natural to ask whether the extension to multiple distinct growth regimes of Section 5.2 can
generate fast transition dynamics in response to the increase in r−g from Section 6.3. Numerical experiments

                                                      36
7     Conclusion
This paper makes two contributions. First, it finds that the standard random growth models
cannot explain rapid changes in tail inequality, for robust analytical reasons. This required
developing new tools to analyze transition dynamics, as most previous literature could an-
alyze only separate steady states, without being able to assess analytically the speed of
transition between them and without identifying the above-mentioned important defect of
the standard model. Second, it suggests two parsimonious deviations from the basic model
that can explain such fast changes: (i) heterogeneity in mean growth rates and (ii) “superstar
shocks” that disproportionately affect top earners (in the sense that the shock to log income
is multiplicative in log income, as opposited to additive as in traditional model). We view
them as promising, because they have some support in the data (as we argued above, see
especially Jones and Kim (2014), Parker and Vissing-Jorgensen (2010) and Guvenen (2015)).
We hope that future research explores the importance of heterogeneity in mean growth rates
in more detail. The forces we have analyzed in this paper may serve to guide future empirical
and theoretical work on the determinants of fast changes in inequality.


Appendix

A      Proof of Proposition 1
Proposition 1 is concerned with two different cases. The first case involves models with death
and reinjection where the dynamics without those terms are not ergodic. The second one
concerns ergodic models (with or without insertion and killing). The strategy of the proof
in both cases is different and we therefore present the two cases separately. In the first case
(“non-ergodic case”), the rate of convergence is obtained by directly analyzing the dynamics
of the L1 norm (6) of the cross-sectional distribution. In the second case (“ergodic case”),
the convergence is to a real invariant measure and the rate of convergence is obtained by a
spectral analysis (in particular it is given by the so-called “spectral gap”).


A.1      Proof of Proposition 1: Case without a reflecting barrier
We here study the case without the reflecting barrier, starting with a generally useful lemma.
suggest that the answer is no.



                                              37
Lemma 3 Suppose that a function q (x, t) solves qt = Aq with Aq = a (x, t) q + b(x, t)qx +
c(x, t)qxx with c(x, t) ≥ 0 for all x. Then |q(x, t)| is a “subsolution” of the same equation,
that is
                                         |q|t ≤ A |q| .                                   (43)

Proof of Lemma 3: The key is that |q| is a convex function of q. Assume ϕ is a C 2 convex
function and set z = ϕ(q). Then zt = ϕ0 (q)qt , zx = ϕ0 (q)qx , zxx = ϕ00 (q)qx2 + ϕ0 (q)qxx , so:

          zt − Az = ϕ0 (q) [qt − bqx − cqxx ] −az − c ϕ00 (q) qx2 ≤ a (ϕ0 (q) q − ϕ (q)) .
                           |       {z      }          | {z } |{z}
                                     =aq                        ≥0     ≥0
                       p
Take ϕ (q) = ϕ(ε) (q) = ε2 + q 2 for some ε > 0 and z (ε) = ϕ(ε) (q). Then ϕ0 (q)q − ϕ (q) =
   2     p               2                 (ε)
√q     − ε2 + q 2 = √−ε2 2 ∈ [−ε, 0], so zt − Az (ε) ≤ |a (x, t)| ε. As ε → 0, z (ε) → |q|, so
  2  2
  ε +q                    ε +q
this inequality becomes: |q|t − A |q| ≤ 0. 
    We next apply Lemma 3 to q (x, t) := p (x, t) − p∞ (x) to prove a useful inequality. We
                                                                       2
note that since pt = A∗ p and 0 = A∗ p∞ , we have qt = A∗ q = −µqx + σ2 qxx − δq.

Lemma 4 The decay rate of the L1 norm m (t) := kq (·, t)k is at least δ: λ ≥ δ.

                                                   R
Proof of Lemma 4: We have m (t) := kq (·, t)k = |q (x, t)| dx and hence

                                                      σ2
               Z                 Z                                  Z
          0
        m (t) = |q (x, t)|t dx ≤    −δ |q| − µ |q|x +    |q|xx dx = −δ |q| dx
                                                      2
where the inequality follows from Lemma 3 and the last equality from the boundary con-
ditions corresponding to p. Hence m0 (t) ≤ −δ |q| dx = −δm (t) and therefore m (t) ≤
                                             R

e−δt m (0) by Grönwall’s lemma. 

Lemma 5 The decay rate of the L1 norm m (t) := kq (·, t)k is at most δ: λ ≤ δ.

                                                                              R +∞
   Proof of Lemma 5: Define r(x, t) by q(x, t) = e−δt r(x, t). Therefore −∞ |q(x, t)|dx =
    R +∞
e−δt −∞ |r(x, t)|dx, i.e. r(x, t) captures the extra rate of decay additional to δ (if any). The
remainder of the proof shows that this extra rate is zero. To see this note that r satisfies
                                                              σ2
                                            rt = −µrx +          rxx                         (44)
                                                              2
Note further that                Z   +∞                   Z   +∞
                                          |r(x, t)|dx =            |r̃(x, t)|dx              (45)
                                 −∞                       −∞


                                                    38
where r̃(x, t) = r(x + µt, t). Note that this works only because the limits of integration are
±∞ and hence one can simply “translate everything” by µt, i.e. it does not work in the case
with a reflecting barrier. From (44), and using that r̃t = rt + µrx , r̃ solves the standard heat
equation
                                                    σ2
                                             r̃t = r̃xx .                                    (46)
                                                     2
It is well-appreciated in the theory of partial differential equations that the solution to the
heat equation does not decay exponentially. For completeness, we provide a proof of this
fact (the difficulty being only that r̃ (x, t) could change sign). Suppose by contradiction that
                                    Z ∞
                                          |r̃ (x, t)| dx ≤ Ce−γt
                                      −∞
                                                                                  R∞
for some constant C, and some γ > 0. Then, for all β ∈ (0, γ), we have −∞ eβt |r̃ (x, t)| dx ≤
Ce−(γ−β)t , so that
                    Z ∞Z ∞                             Z ∞
                                                                              C
                                  βt
                                e |r̃ (x, t)| dxdt ≤         Ce−(γ−β)t dt =       <∞
                     t=0 x=−∞                            t=0                 γ−β
                                                           R∞
i.e. eβt r̃ (x, t) ∈ L1 (R+ × R). Hence R (x) := 0 eβt r̃ (x, t) dt is defined and R (·) ∈ L1 .
Using the heat equation (46) (normalizing without loss of generality σ 2 = 2), we have
                  Z ∞                    Z ∞                                     Z ∞
      00               βt                       βt
                                                                 βt        ∞
     R (x) =          e r̃xx (x, t) dt =       e r̃t (x, t) dt = e r̃ (x, t) 0 −     βeβt r̃ (x, t) dt
                0                      0                                        0

            = −r̃ (0, x) − βR (x) = −r̃0 (x) − βR (x)

i.e. R00 + βR = −r̃0 . Hence, taking the Fourier transform (R̂ (ξ) :=          e−iξx R (x) dx),
                                                                           R


                                 R̂ (ξ) − |ξ|2 + β = −b̃
                                                  
                                                       r0 (ξ) .                                   (47)

                   r0 (ξ) = 0 for ξ = β 1/2 (we just plug the value ξ = β 1/2 in (47)).
This implies that b̃
                                                                                              
   But the argument worked for any β ∈ (0, γ). Hence, b̃       r0 (ξ) = 0 for any ξ ∈ 0, γ 1/2 .
We assume that |r̃0 (x)| ≤ Ae−kx for a constant A, k > 0 (see also Assumption 1), which
guarantees that b̃
                 r0 is analytic. Given that b̃ r0 is analytic and equal to 0 on a segment, we
have b̃
     r0 (ξ) = 0 for all ξ, and r̃0 = 0. We have reached a contradiction. 
   Gathering the arguments. Putting together Lemmas 4 and 5, we obtain that λ = δ.


A.2     Proof of Proposition 1: Case with a reflecting barrier
We next study the “ergodic case”: there is a reflecting barrier and additionally µ < 0. Then
the process (4) is ergodic even with δ = 0. In this case, the cross-sectional distribution

                                                 39
satisfies (9) with boundary condition (8). The key insight is that the speed of convergence
of p is governed by the second eigenvalue of the operator A∗ , and the key step is to obtain
                                                                     2
an analytic formula for this second eigenvalue given by |λ2 | = 12 σµ2 + δ. Before proceeding
with the proof, we review some mathematical concepts that will be useful.

A.2.1       Mathematical Preliminaries

The following definitions are useful. First, the inner product of two continuous functions
                          R∞
u and v is < u, v >= −∞ u(x)v(x)dx. Second, for an operator A, the adjoint of A is
the operator A∗ satisfying < Au, p >=< u, A∗ p >. Third, an operator B is self-adjoint if
B ∗ = B.47 The following theorem is standard.
    Theorem A.1: All eigenvalues of a self-adjoint operator are real.
    Finally, the infinitesimal generator of a Brownian motion reflected at x = 0 and with
death at Poisson rate δ is the operator A defined by
                                                ∂     σ2 ∂ 2
                                       Au = µ      u+        u − δu                       (48)
                                                ∂x    2 ∂x2
                                                ∂u(0, t)
                                                         = 0.                             (49)
                                                  ∂x
Lemma 6 The Kolmogorov Forward operator A∗ in (9) with boundary condition (8) is the
adjoint of the infinitesimal generator A in (48) with boundary condition (49).

Proof of Lemma 6: Using Definition 2, we have
            Z ∞ 2 2
                                            σ2 ∞ ∂ 2u
                                              Z                Z ∞             Z ∞
                   σ ∂ u      ∂u                                     ∂u
< Au, p > =               +µ     − δu pdx =             pdx + µ         pdx − δ     updx
             0      2 ∂x2     ∂x             2 0 ∂x2             0   ∂x          0
                                            Z ∞  2 2                      Z ∞
            σ 2 ∂u ∞ σ 2 ∂p ∞
                                                                  
                                         ∞          σ ∂ p      ∂p
          =        p − u           + µup +      u          −µ       dx − δ      updx
             2 ∂x 0       2 ∂x 0         0   0       2 ∂x2     ∂x           0
            Z ∞  2 2                  
                     σ ∂ p      ∂p
          =      u         2
                             −µ    − δp dx =< u, A∗ p >
             0        2 ∂x      ∂x
where the fourth equality follows from the boundary conditions (8) and (49).

A.2.2       Main Proof

With these preliminaries in hand, we proceed with the proof of the Proposition. We present
here only the proof for the case δ = 0 (friction 2). The extension to the case δ > 0 is
 47
      Note that the adjoint is the infinite-dimensional analogue of a matrix transpose.

                                                      40
straightforward. The goal is to analyze the eigenvalues of the infinitesimal generator A or
equivalently its adjoint A∗ . The difficulty is that A is not self-adjoint, A∗ 6= A, and therefore
its eigenvalues could, in principle, be anywhere in the complex plane. We therefore construct
a self-adjoint transformation B of A as follows.

Lemma 7 Consider u satisfying ut = Au and the corresponding stationary distribution,
           2                1/2       2
p∞ = e(2µ/σ )x . Then v = up∞ = ue(µ/σ )x satisfies
                                                            σ2 ∂ 2   1 µ2
                                 vt = Bv,             B=           −                           (50)
                                                            2 ∂x2 2 σ 2
                          ∂v(0,t)       µ
with boundary condition     ∂x
                                    =   σ2
                                           v(0, t).   Furthermore, B is self-adjoint.

                                                                2
Proof: (50) follows from differentiating v = ue(µ/σ )x . To see that B is self-adjoint, inte-
grate by parts as in Lemma 6 to conclude that for any u, p, < Bu, p >=< u, Bp >.
                                                                                           2
Lemma 8 The first eigenvalue of B is λ1 = 0 and the second eigenvalue is λ2 = − 21 σµ2 . All
                                                                                           2
remaining eigenvalues satisfy |λ| > |λ2 |. Hence the spectral gap of B equals |λ2 | = 12 σµ2 .

Proof of Lemma 8 Consider the eigenvalue problem Bϕ = λϕ or equivalently
                                    σ 2 00     1 µ2
                                       ϕ (x) −      ϕ(x) = λϕ(x),                              (51)
                                    2          2 σ2
                                                            µ
                                                   ϕ0 (0) = 2 ϕ(0).                            (52)
                                                           σ
We are looking for non-positive eigenvalues λ and the question is: for what values of λ ≤ 0
does (51) have a solution ϕ(x) that satisfies the boundary condition (52) and is in the domain
of B. The domain of B here is the set of C ∞ functions φ : [0, ∞) → C such that φ and all
its derivatives have at most polynomial growth: for all integers n ≥ 0, there is a Kn and a
                                           
kn > 0 such that φ(n) (x) ≤ Kn 1 + xkn for all x ≥ 0.
    To answer this question, note that for a given λ ≤ 0, the general solution to (51) is
ϕ(x) = c1 eax + c2 e−ax where a satisfies

                                            σ 2 2 1 µ2
                                               a =      + λ.                                   (53)
                                            2      2 σ2
Consider four different cases:
                                                                                µ
  1. λ = 0. In this case the solution to (53) is a = σµ2 , i.e. ϕ(x) = e σ2 x which satisfies (52)
     and stays bounded as x → ∞ (since µ < 0). Hence λ = 0 is an eigenvalue of B.

                                                       41
         2
  2. − 12 σµ2 < λ < 0. In this case, a solving (53) is real and positive. We therefore need
                                                                                 µ
     c1 = 0 so that ϕ stays bounded as x → ∞. But then (52) becomes
                                                                         −a
                                                                            = σ2 which is
                                                                         2
     a contradiction. Hence B has no eigenvalues in the interval − 12 σµ2 , 0 .
              2                                                                        2
  3. λ = − 12 σµ2 . In this case, (51) becomes ϕ00 (x) = 0 and (52) implies ϕ(x) = x + σµ which
                                                 2
     has polynomial growth. Hence λ = − 12 σµ2 is an eigenvalue of B.
                  2
  4. λ < − 12 σµ2 . In this case, a solving (53) is a purely imaginary number. We have
     eix = cos x + i sin x, so ϕ(x) = c1 eax + c2 e−ax oscillates but stays bounded as x → ∞.
                                                                                   2
     We can therefore choose c1 , c2 6= 0 to satisfy (52). Hence any λ < − 12 σµ2 is also an
     eigenvalue of B.
   Summarizing, B has an isolated eigenvalue λ1 = 0, the second highest eigenvalue (in
                               2
absolute value) is λ2 = − 12 σµ2 , and all remaining eigenvalues satisfy |λ| > |λ2 |.


References
Acemoglu, Daron, and James A. Robinson. 2015. “The Rise and Decline of General
 Laws of Capitalism.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(1): 3–28.
Aoki, Shuhei, and Makoto Nirei. 2015. “Zipf’s Law, Pareto’s Law, and the Evolution
 of Top Incomes in the U.S.” Hitotsubashi University Working Paper.
Atkinson, Anthony B., Thomas Piketty, and Emmanuel Saez. 2011. “Top Incomes
 in the Long Run of History.” Journal of Economic Literature, 49(1): 3–71.
Auerbach, Alan, and Kevin Hassett. 2015. “Capital Taxation in the 21st Century.”
 University of California, Berkeley Working Paper.
Benhabib, Jess, Alberto Bisin, and Mi Luo. 2015. “Wealth Distribution and Social
 Mobility: An Empirical Approach.” NYU Working Papers.
Benhabib, Jess, Alberto Bisin, and Shenghao Zhu. 2011. “The Distribution of Wealth
 and Fiscal Policy in Economies With Finitely Lived Agents.” Econometrica, 79(1).
Benhabib, Jess, Alberto Bisin, and Shenghao Zhu. 2013. “The Distribution of Wealth
 in the Blanchard-Yaari Model.” NYU Working Papers.
Benhabib, Jess, Alberto Bisin, and Shenghao Zhu. 2014. “The Wealth Distribution
 in Bewley Models with Investment Risk.” NYU Working Papers.
Bricker, Jesse, Alice M. Henriques, Jacob Krimmel, and John Sabelhaus. 2015.
 “Measuring Income and Wealth at the Top Using Administrative and Survey Data.” Board
 of Governors Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-30.

                                             42
Campbell, John Y. 2001. “Have Individual Stocks Become More Volatile? An Empirical
 Exploration of Idiosyncratic Risk.” Journal of Finance, 56(1): 1–43.
Champernowne, D. G. 1953. “A Model of Income Distribution.” The Economic Journal,
 63(250): pp. 318–351.
DeBacker, Jason, Bradley Heim, Vasia Panousi, Shanthi Ramnath, and Ivan
 Vidangos. 2013. “Rising Inequality: Transitory or Persistent? New Evidence from a
 Panel of U.S. Tax Returns.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 46(1): 67–142.
Gabaix, Xavier. 1999. “Zipf’s Law For Cities: An Explanation.” The Quarterly Journal
 of Economics, 114(3): 739–767.
Gabaix, Xavier. 2009. “Power Laws in Economics and Finance.” Annual Review of Eco-
 nomics, 1(1): 255–293.
Gabaix, Xavier, and Augustin Landier. 2008. “Why Has CEO Pay Increased So Much?”
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(1): 49–100.
Garicano, Luis, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2006. “Organization and Inequality in
 a Knowledge Economy.” 121(4): 1383–1435.
Geerolf, Francois. 2014. “A Static and Microfounded Theory of Zipf’s Law for Firms and
 of the Top Labor Income Distribution.” UCLA Working Paper.
Guvenen, Fatih. 2007. “Learning Your Earning: Are Labor Income Shocks Really Very
 Persistent?” American Economic Review, 97(3): 687–712.
Guvenen, Fatih. 2015. “Income Inequality and Income Risk: Old Myths vs. New Facts.”
 Lecture Slides available at https://fguvenendotcom.files.wordpress.com/2014/04/
 handout_inequality_risk_webversion_may20151.pdf.
Guvenen, Fatih, Fatih Karahan, Serdar Ozkan, and Jae Song. 2015. “What Do Data
 on Millions of U.S. Workers Reveal about Life-Cycle Earnings Risk?” National Bureau of
 Economic Research, Inc NBER Working Papers 20913.
Guvenen, Fatih, Greg Kaplan, and Jae Song. 2014. “The Glass Ceiling and The Paper
 Floor: Gender Differences among Top Earners, 1981-2012.” National Bureau of Economic
 Research, Inc NBER Working Papers 20560.
Guvenen, Fatih, Serdar Ozkan, and Jae Song. 2014. “The Nature of Countercyclical
 Income Risk.” Journal of Political Economy, 122(3): 621 – 660.
Hansen, Lars Peter, and José A. Scheinkman. 2009. “Long-Term Risk: An Operator
 Approach.” Econometrica, 77(1): 177–234.
Harrison, Michael. 1985. Brownian Motion and Stochastic Flow Systems. Wiley & Sons.



                                          43
Heathcote, Jonathan, Fabrizio Perri, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2010. “Unequal We
  Stand: An Empirical Analysis of Economic Inequality in the United States: 1967-2006.”
  Review of Economic Dynamics, 13(1): 15–51.
Jones, Charles I. 2005. “The Shape of Production Functions and the Direction of Technical
  Change.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(2): 517–549.
Jones, Charles I. 2015. “Pareto and Piketty: The Macroeconomics of Top Income and
  Wealth Inequality.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(1): 29–46.
Jones, Charles I., and Jihee Kim. 2014. “A Schumpeterian Model of Top Income In-
  equality.” Stanford Working Paper.
Kato, Tosio. 1995. Perturbation Theory for Linear Operators. Springer.
Kim, Jihee. 2013. “The Effect of the Top Marginal Tax Rate on Top Income Inequality.”
  KAIST Working Paper.
Kopczuk, Wojciech. 2015. “What Do We Know about the Evolution of Top Wealth Shares
  in the United States?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(1): 47–66.
Kopczuk, Wojciech, Emmanuel Saez, and Jae Song. 2010. “Earnings Inequality and
  Mobility in the United States: Evidence from Social Security Data since 1937.” The Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 125(1): 91–128.
Linetsky, Vadim. 2005. “On the Transition Densities for Reflected Diffusions.” Advances
  in Applied Probability, 37(2): 435–460.
Luttmer, Erzo G. J. 2007. “Selection, Growth, and the Size Distribution of Firms.” The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3): 1103–1144.
Luttmer, Erzo G. J. 2011. “On the Mechanics of Firm Growth.” Review of Economic
  Studies, 78(3): 1042–1068.
Luttmer, Erzo G.J. 2012. “Slow convergence in economies with firm heterogeneity.”
Luttmer, Erzo G. J. 2015. “An Assignment Model of Knowledge Diffusion and Income
  Inequality.” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Staff Report 509.
MaCurdy, Thomas E. 1982. “The use of time series processes to model the error structure
  of earnings in a longitudinal data analysis.” Journal of Econometrics, 18(1): 83–114.
Meghir, Costas, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2011. “Earnings, Consumption and Life Cycle
  Choices.” Vol. 4 of Handbook of Labor Economics, Chapter 9, 773–854. Elsevier.
Moffitt, Robert A., and Peter Gottschalk. 1995. “Trends in the Transitory Variance
  of Male Earnings in the U.S., 1969-1987.” Working paper.




                                           44
Moskowitz, Tobias J., and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. 2002. “The Returns to En-
  trepreneurial Investment: A Private Equity Premium Puzzle?” American Economic Re-
  view, 92(4): 745–778.
Nirei, Makoto. 2009. “Pareto Distributions in Economic Growth Models.” Institute of
  Innovation Research, Hitotsubashi University IIR Working Paper 09-05.
Pareto, Vilfredo. 1896. Cours d’conomie politique.
Parker, Jonathan A., and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. 2010. “The Increase in Income
  Cyclicality of High-Income Households and Its Relation to the Rise in Top Income Shares.”
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 41(2 (Fall)): 1–70.
Piketty, Thomas. 2014. Capital in the Twenty-First Century. Harvard University Press.
Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez. 2003. “Income Inequality In The United States,
  1913-1998.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1): 1–39.
Piketty, Thomas, and Gabriel Zucman. 2014a. “Capital is Back: Wealth-Income Ratios
  in Rich Countries 17002010.” 129(3): 1255–1310.
Piketty, Thomas, and Gabriel Zucman. 2014b. “Wealth and Inheritance in the Long
  Run.” In Handbook of Income Distribution. Handbook of Income Distribution. forthcoming.
Rosen, Sherwin. 1981. “The Economics of Superstars.” American Economic Review,
  71(5): 845–58.
Saez, Emmanuel, and Gabriel Zucman. 2014. “The Distribution of US Wealth, Capital
  Income and Returns Since 1913.” University of California, Berkeley Working Paper.
Sattinger, Michael. 1993. “Assignment Models of the Distribution of Earnings.” Journal
  of Economic Literature, 31(2): 831–80.
Simon, Herbert A. 1955. “On a Class of Skew Distribution Functions.” Biometrika,
  42(3/4): pp. 425–440.
Steindl, J. 1965. “Random Processes and the Growth of Firms: A Study of the Pareto
  Law.”
Tervio, Marko. 2008. “The Difference That CEOs Make: An Assignment Model Ap-
  proach.” American Economic Review, 98(3): 642–68.
Toda, Alexis Akira. 2012. “The double power law in income distribution: Explanations
  and evidence.” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 84(1): 364–381.
Wold, H. O. A., and P. Whittle. 1957. “A Model Explaining the Pareto Distribution of
  Wealth.” Econometrica, 25(4): pp. 591–595.




                                            45
