                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       WHY DON'T HOUSEHOLDS SMOOTH CONSUMPTION? EVIDENCE FROM
                    A 25 MILLION DOLLAR EXPERIMENT

                                        Jonathan Parker

                                      Working Paper 21369
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w21369


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2015
                                Revised February 2017




For helpful comments, I thank Christian Broda, Chris Carroll, Peter Hansen, John Heaton, Olivia
Kim, Holger Mueller, Nicholas Souleles, Jeremy Tobacman, Steven Zeldes, the referees at this
Journal, two anonymous referees on the survey grant application, and participants at seminars the
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Chicago, Columbia,
Harvard, MIT, NYU, Pennsylvania, Stanford, Yale, and the NBER Household Finance meetings
July 2014. I thank the MIT Sloan School of Management, the Kellogg School of Management at
Northwestern University, the Initiative for Global Markets at the University of Chicago, and the
Zell Center at the Kellogg School of Management for funding. I thank Ed Grove, Matt Knain and
Molly Hagen at Nielsen for their work on the survey and their careful explanation of the Nielsen
Consumer Panel. The results of this paper are calculated based on data from The Nielsen
Company (U.S.) LLC and provided by the Marketing Data Center and the University of Chicago
Booth School of Business. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Jonathan Parker. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Why Don't Households Smooth Consumption? Evidence from a 25 Million Dollar Experiment
Jonathan Parker
NBER Working Paper No. 21369
July 2015, Revised February 2017
JEL No. D14,E21

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper evaluates theoretical explanations for the propensity of households to increase
spending in response to the arrival of predictable, lump-sum payments, using households in the
Nielsen Consumer Panel who received 25 million in randomly-distributed stimulus payments.
The pattern of spending is inconsistent with models in which identical households cycle rapidly
through high and low response states as they manage liquidity, but is instead highly predictable
by income years before the payment. Spending responses are unrelated to expectation errors,
almost unrelated to crude measures of procrastination and self-control, significantly related to
sophistication and planning, and highly related to impatience.


Jonathan Parker
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-642
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
JAParker@MIT.edu
   The canonical assumption that the benefits of additional consumption decline with the
level of consumption – that marginal utility is diminishing – implies that people should
manage liquidity to stabilize their consumption over time. While many issues complicate
testing, this proposition of consumption smoothing has been frequently rejected: on av-
erage, predictable changes in household income or liquidity cause significant changes in
household spending, with the causal effects concentrated among households with low liq-
uid wealth or low income.1 This paper investigates why.
   One possibility is that illiquidity and lack of consumption smoothing are purely the result
of poor income shocks or temporary portfolio illiquidity, as in the textbook buffer stock
model or life-cycle/permanent income model (LCPIH) with borrowing constraints (e.g.,
Zeldes, 1989b; Deaton, 1991; Carroll, 1997). Similar predictions follow from a model
in which households have costly access to high-return, relatively illiquid savings vehicles
(Kaplan and Violante, 2014). When preferences are homogeneous, lack of consumption
smoothing is entirely due to temporarily low liquidity.
   An alternative hypothesis is that low liquidity and lack of consumption smoothing are
persistent household traits, significantly due to preferences or behavioral characteristics
rather than being only situational. The most straightforward version of such a theory is that
some households are highly impatient or hand to mouth households as in Campbell and
Mankiw (1989), Krusell and Smith (1998), and Hurst (2003). Other theories motivated by
evidence from laboratory experiments and neurological studies characterize lack of con-
sumption smoothing as due to the limits of human reasoning or the complexity of human
motivation in economic behaviors. As examples, lack of consumption smoothing may be
due to limited attention, limited planning, reliance on heuristics, or problems of self-control
(e.g., Caballero, 1995; Reis, 2006; Lusardi, 1999; Ameriks, Caplin and Leahy, 2003; An-
geletos et al., 2001; Gul and Pesendorfer, 2004a,b). While according to the homogeneous-
agent model, some people are unable to smooth consumption due to temporarily low liquid
wealth, according to these alternatives, some people choose not to smooth consumption and
not to accumulate liquid wealth due to persistent behavioral characteristics.
   This paper studies why household spending responds to liquidity using a setting in which
lack of consumption smoothing has already been documented (Broda and Parker, 2014): a
natural field experiment provided by disbursement of the Federal economic stimulus pay-
ments of 2008. Using data from a specially-designed survey of households that are reporting
spending in the Nielsen Consumer Panel (NCP, formerly the Homescan Consumer Panel),
I find evidence that the spending response of a household to the arrival of a payment is re-
lated to household status two years prior to the experiment, consistent with the behavior be-
ing caused by persistent characteristics (like preferences) rather than solely by temporarily
low income. What characteristics? Spending responses to liquidity in this experiment are
not significantly associated with expectations errors (mis-estimation of payment amount),
or with measures of procrastination or lack of self-control. Instead, lack of consumption
smoothing is associated with a measure of impatience, a measure of lack of financial plan-
    1 Most studies examine increases in liquidity caused by predictable increases in income (Zeldes, 1989a; Shapiro and Slem-
rod, 1995; Parker, 1999; Souleles, 1999; Johnson, Parker and Souleles, 2006; Stephens, 2003; Jappelli and Pistaferri, 2014).
Other studies have studied increases in liquidity caused by predictable increase in spending costs Souleles (2000), changes in
credit constraints (Gross and Souleles, 2002; Ludvigson, 1999), or predictable decreases in loan payments (Stephens, 2008;
Di Maggio, Kermani and Ramcharan, 2015; Keys et al., 2014).
                                                              1
2


ning, and some measures of lack of frictionless optimization in other dimensions.
   I measure the degree of consumption smoothing from the response of a household’s
spendingto the receipt of an Economic Stimulus Payment using near-random variation in the
timing of receipt.2 Among households receiving stimulus payments by check and among
those receiving payments by direct deposit, the week in which the payment was disbursed
was determined by the last two digits of the recipient’s Social Security number, digits which
are effectively randomly assigned. Following previous research, I compare the spending
patterns of households who receive their payments at different times. Because the timing
of the payment is randomly set by the government and is unrelated to a household’s charac-
teristics or economic situation, this comparison measures the increase in spending caused
by receipt. Because the variation in timing is uncorrelated with household characteristics,
comparing differences in spending responses across households with different characteris-
tics measures how spending responses to liquidity differ by household characteristic.
   The NCP data contain daily information on each household’s purchases of household
items as well as annual demographic information such as family size and income. In con-
junction with Nielsen, a multi-wave survey was designed early in 2008 and then fielded
while the stimulus payments were being disbursed in 2008. The survey, administered by
email and web for households with web access at home, and by mail and barcode scanner
for households without, collected information on i) the arrival and amount of the first stim-
ulus payment received in order to measure the spending response to the payment, and ii) the
liquid wealth, behaviors, and expectations of households in order to relate these characteris-
tics to the failure to smooth consumption spending. After dropping households that did not
receive payments or did not report valid payments, the supplemental survey measures more
than 25 thousand NCP households in 2008 as they receive more than 25 million dollars in
randomly-timed stimulus payments.
   On average, the spending of households that receive their payments early rises relative to
the spending of households that receive their payments later.3 If spending responses were
similar across households, then cross-sectional data on household responses would tell us
little about behavioral models. In fact, consistent with previous research, the majority of
the average spending response is due to households with low liquidity, who spend at a rate
three to four times that of liquid households on arrival. Thus, for any other characteristic
to be the cause of spending responses, it must exhibit variation across households. And
this variation must be correlated with liquidity in order to explain a substantial share of the
average spending response. The main findings, summarized in Table 11 in the concluding
section, are as follows.
   The first main result is that, while low liquidity is a strong predictor of large spending
responses, this does not appear to be due to current poor income shocks but rather is a per-

     2 Following the methodology of Johnson, Parker and Souleles (2006). This approach has also been used to study these
and other rebates by Agarwal, Liu and Souleles (2007); Parker et al. (2013); Broda and Parker (2014), and other outcomes
by Bertrand and Morse (2009) and Gross, Notowidigdo and Wang (2014).
     3 Specifically, the average household raises its spending on NCP-measured household goods by around 13 dollars, roughly
9 percent of average weekly spending, or about 1.4 percent of the average payment in the week of receipt, all highly sta-
tistically significant, and by 30 dollars, 2.5 to 3 percent of spending, or roughly 2.5 percent of the payment cumulative
over the first seven weeks. In addition to the earlier cited papers, the spending responses are also estimated by Bureau of
Labor Statistics (2009) and Sahm, Shapiro and Slemrod (2010).
sistent characteristic of low income households lasting years. If shocks to income cause low
liquid wealth and failure to smooth spending, then declines in income ought to be corre-
lated with spending responses. But households with low income growth are no more likely
to spend the payment on arrival than those with high income growth. And while it is the case
that low income in 2008 is associated with high rates of spending from payments, income
in 2006 is as good as income in 2008, and as liquidity in 2008, at distinguishing households
who spend from those who do not. In fact, low 2006 income predicts spending responses
even conditional on liquidity. Thus the propensity to spend out of liquidity persists across
years.
   Second, the analysis rejects models that generate spending responses through beliefs
about the payments. Few households were surprised to get payments and there is little
evidence of a larger spending effect of arrival for those who were positively surprised by
their payments. In one of two specifications, there is a statistically higher spending response
for households who were surprised, but this higher spending response occurs whether the
surprise is positive or negative. Thus, the spending response did not occur because many
households, particularly low liquidity households, were surprised by their payments. In-
stead, the evidence is suggestive of a link between consumption smoothing and economic
abilities or planning as revealed by understanding of the stimulus payment program.
   Third, and related, the data provide evidence consistent with lack of planning causing
violations of consumption smoothing, as in Reis (2006). Households that have not made
financial plans do not smooth spending across arrival of the payment, while households
that have made financial plans smooth consumption well. I also find that optimal allocation
over time (relative to a frictionless baseline) is related to optimal allocation across goods.
Households that typically use more deals or specials do a better job of smoothing spending
the week of arrival than those that do not. This is particularly true for households with low
liquidity, consistent with households differing in the degree to which they plan or optimize
economic resources, with ‘inattentive’ households having low liquidity, low incomes, and a
high propensity to spend out of liquidity. However, there is little evidence that variation in
optimization or planning is a personality trait that crosses decision-making domains. Even
households that report that they plan a great deal for vacations (22 percent of households)
increase spending significantly during the month following arrival (although they do smooth
spending reasonably well the week of arrival).
   The fourth main finding is that the majority of lack of consumption smoothing is pre-
dicted by a simple measure that can be interpreted as impatience. Consumption smoothing
is highly correlated with whether a household reports being the sort of people who would
rather spend their money and enjoy today rather than save more for the future. Households
that report being ‘savers’ smooth consumption; households that report being ‘spenders’ do
not. Not surprisingly, being a saver is also highly correlated with the level of liquid wealth,
so that the type of person is an important predictor of both low wealth and lack of con-
sumption smoothing. And the type of people who are spenders are worse at consumption
smoothing even among households with low liquidity.
   Finally, the spending response is unrelated to two measures of problems of self-control
and procrastination. First, the five percent of the sample that frequently regrets past pur-
chases has an economically large (but statistically-weak) spending response to payment
4


arrival. But this does not explain much of the average spending response. The other 95
percent of the population still exhibits substantial violations of consumption smoothing.
Second, to analyze procrastination, I sort households by their delay in responding to the
supplemental survey. This procrastination measure is unrelated to the size of spending re-
sponse.
   These findings have several implications for the modeling of consumption and saving
behavior. First, these results reject models that generate the average spending response
through surprise at the arrival of these payments. Second, in any model in which the high
spending responses are situational and occur among otherwise homogeneous populations
due to low liquidity, the low liquidity state has to be highly persistent year to year. Third,
some households frequently regret purchases and poorly smooth spending, but the small
share of such households implies that this can account for only a small fraction of the
average spending response to arrival.
   Turning to the main correlates of spending response besides liquidity, both lack of finan-
cial planning and spending-type household are strongly correlated with liquidity and have
limited predictive power beyond liquidity. This evidence is consistent with low liquidity
directly causing high spending responses or with low liquidity being merely a symptom of
these behaviors which themselves directly cause high spending responses. An example of
the former is a model with financial frictions in which some households have high levels of
impatience and face some costs of planning or optimization. Alternatively, the costs of op-
timization or behavioral characteristics could be central, causing some households to have
low incomes, hold little liquidity, not use coupons or deals, fail to plan, and spend income
when it arrives.
   Further, low income is highly correlated both with spending responses and with liquidity,
but also has significant predictive power beyond liquidity. If planning costs are negatively
correlated with permanent income, then the Reis (2006) model of information processing
frictions would generate these patterns.4
   Finally, there is some limited evidence that both the propensity to regret purchases and the
misunderstanding of payment amount is correlated with spending response. Both behaviors
have little correlation with low liquidity and so, while they do not explain the majority of
the spending response, they do suggest that some consumer behavior is driven by factors
that do not operate through liquidity.
   In interpreting these results, a number of caveats are in order. First, these estimates per-
tain to spending rather than consumption, and only over a one-month period that is precisely
measured. Second, the measured relationship between spending response and characteris-
tics would be distorted by different propensities to report spending caused by arrival across
characteristics or by different propensities to increase spending caused by arrival on non-
measured goods and services. Third, these results may or may not generalize to other do-
mains of consumption smoothing or other populations. For example, incorrect expectations

    4 Provided that household react to cash flow due to not “absorbing and processing information” despite acquiring it.
Similarly, Bernheim, Skinner and Weinberg (2001), Hurst (2003), Ameriks, Caplin and Leahy (2003), and Lusardi and
Mitchell (2007) present evidence that differences in wealth across households are not well captured by behavior in the
standard model even with financial frictions but are instead consistent with some features of models of behavior incorporating
rules of thumb, mental accounts, problems with self-control, or an important role for planning. Similar evidence on saving
behaviors is provided by Choi, Laibson and Madrian (2009) and Chetty et al. (2014).
may be a more important determinant of spending responses for less publicized payments.
Similarly, much larger or much smaller payments, may lead to different responses. How-
ever, (and not a caveat), Broda and Parker (2014) find no noticeable spending response
when households learned about their payments.

                        I.   Sample of households: The Nielsen Consumer Panel

   The subjects for this study are a subset of the households in the 2008 NCP. The NCP
is a panel survey of U.S. households in 52 metropolitan areas that measures demographic
characteristics, annual income, and daily spending on household goods. Households re-
port spending using barcode scanners and keypads at the conclusion of every shopping
trip for household goods.5 Household goods include primarily grocery, drugstore and
mass-merchandise sectors, and so the recorded expenditures primarily cover goods such
as food and drug products, small appliances and electronic goods, and some mass mer-
chandise products excluding apparel. Participants get newsletters and personalized tips and
reminders via email and/or mail to upload spending information and to answer occasional
surveys. For regularly uploading information, participants are entered in prize drawings and
receive Nielsen points that can be accumulated and used to purchase prizes or ‘gifts’ from
a catalogue.
   Participants are surveyed when they initially join the survey and at the end of each subse-
quent calendar year about their demographic characteristics, and these answers are used as
the demographic information for the following calendar year. Low performing households
are dropped, and about 80 percent of Nielsen households are retained from year to year.
Nielsen seeks to maintain a panel that is representative of the US population, and produces
sampling weights that can be used to make the sample representative of the U.S. population
along 10 demographic dimensions (including income). These weights are used throughout
the analysis.
   While the NCP is limited in the scope of spending that it covers, it has numerous bene-
fits for the purpose at hand. First, while I primarily use information on total trip spending
rather than the large amount of detail available on products (approximately 700,000 differ-
ent goods are purchased at some point by household in the sample), the use of scanners and
receipts in real time increases the accuracy of reported expenditures. The temporal preci-
sion allows analysis of weekly spending responses which increases the statistical power of
the analysis given that the stimulus payments were randomized across weeks. Second, the
NCP is relatively large: there are around 60,000 active households (of the roughly 120,000
households in the panel at any point in 2008) that meet the static reporting requirement used
by Nielsen to define participating households for the period January to April 2008. Finally,
Nielsen has in place a system to survey the households in the NCP. Nielsen typically uses
these supplemental surveys to conduct marketing studies for corporate clients, conducting
the surveys, analyzing the results, and delivering complete analyses to clients.
   Christian Broda and I worked with Nielsen in March and April of 2008 to write and
conduct a survey of the NCP households about both their characteristics and their receipt
    5 Households also scan individual items, enter a price if Nielsen does not already have it, and report whether they used
any coupons or deals. For more details on the NCP see Broda and Weinstein (2010).
6


of economic stimulus payments. The next section describes these payments, and the fol-
lowing section describes the supplemental survey. The data employed in this study are a
combination of the responses to this supplemental survey, data licensed from Nielsen, and
data available through the Kilts-Nielsen Data Center at The University of Chicago Booth
School of Business.6


                                  II.    The 2008 Economic Stimulus Payments



   Following Parker et al. (2013) and Broda and Parker (2014), I estimate the effect of
liquidity on spending from the random variation in liquidity provided by the Economic
Stimulus Act of 2008. The Act called for $100 billion in economic stimulus payments to
be disbursed to about 130 million eligible taxpayers. Because it was not administratively
possible for the IRS to mail all stimulus checks or letters accompanying direct deposits at
once, within each method of disbursement, the week in which the payment was disbursed
was determined by the last two digits of the recipient’s Social Security, digits which are
effectively randomly assigned.7 For recipients that did not provide a personal bank routing
number, the payments were mailed (using paper checks) in one of nine one-week periods
ranging from the middle of May to the middle of July.8 The IRS sent a notification letter one
week before the check was mailed. For recipients that provided the IRS with their personal
bank routing number, the stimulus payments were disbursed electronically over three one-
week periods ranging from late April to the middle of May.9 The IRS mailed a statement
to the household informing them about the deposit to arrive a few business days before the
electronic transfer of funds.10 Table 1 shows the schedule of payment disbursements.
   In terms of amount, each payment consisted of a basic payment and, if positive, an addi-
tional payment of $300 per child that qualified for the child tax credit in 2007. The basic
payment was generally the maximum of $300 ($600 for couples filing jointly) and a tax-
payer’s 2007 tax liability up to $600 ($1,200 for couples). Households without tax liability
received basic payments of $300 ($600 for couples), so long as they had at least $3,000 of
qualifying 2007 income. The stimulus payment amount was reduced by five percent of the
amount by which adjusted gross income exceeded a threshold of $75,000 for individuals
and $150,000 for couples. Thus payments were not received by high-income households
who earned enough to reduce their payments to zero nor by low-income households who
had neither positive tax liability nor sufficient qualifying income.

    6 Data  are available at: http://research.chicagobooth.edu/nielsen/.
    7 The  last four digits of a Social Security number (SSN) are assigned sequentially to applicants within geographic areas
(which determine the first three digits of the SSN) and a “group” (the middle two digits of the SSN).
    8 For late filers, if it was not possible to distribute the payment in the week proscribed by their SSN then it was distributed
as soon after as possible.
    9 The payment was mailed for any tax return for which the IRS had only the tax preparer’s routing number, as for example
would occur as part of taking out a refund anticipation loan.
   10 Banks were notified a couple of days before the date of funds transfer, and some banks showed the amount on the
beneficiary’s bank account a day or more before the actual credit date. There were reports of banks crediting accounts on
Friday April 25 for payments that were to be deposited on Monday April 28.
                         TABLE 1—T HE T IMING OF THE E CONOMIC S TIMULUS PAYMENTS

                   Panel A: Payments by transfer of         Panel B: Payments by paper
                           electronic funds                            check
                   Last two digits         Date by which   Last two digits   Date by which
                    of taxpayer            payment funds    of taxpayer      payment check
                        SSN                  deposited          SSN             in mail

                       00 – 20                May 2           00 – 09           May 16

                       21 – 75                May 9           10 – 18           May 23

                       76 – 99                May 16          19 – 25           May 30

                                                              26 – 38           June 6

                                                              39 – 51           June 13

                                                              52 – 63           June 20

                                                              64 – 75           June 27

                                                              76 – 87            July 4

                                                              88 – 99           July 11


Source: Internal Revenue Service (2008).




                                   III.      The NCP supplemental survey

  To measure the payments received by NCP households, a supplemental survey was ad-
ministered to the households in the NCP. This survey consists of two parts, each to be
answered by “the adult most knowledgeable about your household’s income tax returns.”
The survey thus only measures the first payment received by a household, or, if more than
one was received, the household was instructed to report the larger. Part I of the survey
contains questions pertaining to the household’s liquid assets and behaviors related to plan-
ning, spending, and self-control. Part II first describes the program of economic stimulus
payments and then asks “Has your household received a tax rebate (stimulus payment) this
year?” Households that respond positively, are subsequently asked about the amount and
date of arrival of their stimulus payment, whether it was received by check or direct de-
posit, the extent to which the amount was expected, whether the household mostly saved or
spent the stimulus payment, and the amount of spending across categories of goods.
  The survey was fielded in multiple waves, with each wave following the standard pro-
cedures that Nielsen uses to survey the consumer panel households. For households with
internet access and who were in communication with Nielsen by email the survey was ad-
ministered in three waves in a web-based form, and for households without access and in
8


contact with Nielsen by regular mail the survey was administered in only two waves in a
paper/barcode scanner form, since the distribution time was slower and the preparation time
greater. Repeated surveying was conditioned on earlier responses.11 The surveys covered
the main period during which payments were distributed with random timing. A supple-
mentary on-line appendix gives the timing of the surveys, the invitations and reminders,
survey, response rates, and information about data access.
   The repeated nature of the survey implies that the recall window for the payment is rel-
atively short: one month for the email/web survey when it is first fielded and just over
one and a half months for the mail/scanner survey when it first arrives. The survey was
administered to all households meeting a Nielsen static reporting requirement for January
through April 2008, which amounted to 46,620 households by email/web and 13,243 by
mail/barcode scanner. For both types of survey, the response rates were 72 percent to the
first wave, and 80 percent after all waves, giving 48,409 survey responses (of which some
are invalid for various reasons).
   To proceed, I drop all households from the analysis that: i) do not report receiving a pay-
ment (roughly 20 percent of the respondents); ii) do not report a date of payment receipt;
iii) report not having received a payment in one survey and then later report receiving a pay-
ment prior to their response to the earlier in a later survey; iv) report receiving a payment
after the date they submitted the survey; v) report receiving a payment by direct deposit
(by mail) outside the period of the randomized disbursement by direct deposit (mail), and
vi) do not report means of receipt but report receiving a payment outside both periods of
randomized disbursement.12 These cuts reduce the sample to 28,937 households report-
ing receiving a total of over 26 million dollars in payments. These households are merged
with the information on total spending on each trip taken by each household during 2008
from the KILTS NCP which includes only households that meet the Nielsen static report-
ing requirement for 2008. These data are collapsed down to total spending per week per
household.
   This sample selection is not random. It is however (presumably) uncorrelated with the
randomization, and so creates no bias for estimation of the average treatment effect in the
remaining sample. But it is important to note that given heterogeneity in treatment effect,
non-random sample attrition may create bias if there are differences in treatment effects
between households dropped from the sample and households that are included. It is also
true that there is selection involved in which households are recruited and participate in the
NCP survey.
   Average (weighted) weekly spending in the baseline, static sample is $149. The spending
of households receiving payments by mail is $16 less than that of households receiving a
payment by direct deposit. The supplemental survey seems to provide an accurate mea-

   11 Households completing part I of the survey (household characteristics) in any wave were not asked Part I again. House-
holds reporting payment information in Part II were not re-surveyed, so I measure only the first payment received by any
household. Households that responded to the first question on Part II that they don’t know whether they had received a
stimulus payment, that they have not received one and “expect to,” or respond that they “are unsure whether I will get any”
do not proceed to Part II and are re-surveyed with Part II in a later wave (if there is one). Finally, households that respond
“No, and I am definitely not getting one” do not proceed and are not re-surveyed.
   12 I allow a two day grace period for reporting relative to survey submit dates, and a seven day grace period for misreporting
relative to the period of randomization. I do not adjust the reported date of receipt in either case.
sure of payment and payment receipt. The average payment conditional on receiving one is
$898. Households receiving payments by direct deposit on average have higher payments
by about $190, which is reasonably consistent with their having on average 0.4 members
more in these households.13 As was true for the actual disbursements, most reported pay-
ments are clustered at multiple of $300.14 These features of the distributions line up well
with those in similar surveys conducted by the SIPP and the CEX (see Parker et al. (2013)).
More details and tables of summary statistics are provided in the on-line appendix.

                                          IV.     Estimation methodology

  The question of interest is which households respond more and less strongly to payment
arrival. Thus, rather than estimate the dollars spent on arrival or the percent increase in
spending, I measure the spending response in terms of the share of payment spent. Specif-
ically, I use the following specification to examine the average impact of the receipt of a
payment on spending for household i with characteristic j in week t receiving a payment
by method m:


                                                 S
                                                 X
(1)                           Ci,t = µi +              βs,j ESPi,t+s + τm,j,t + ηi,t
                                                s=−L

where Ci,t is the dollar amount of NCP spending by household i in week t; µi is a household-
specific intercept that captures differences in the average level of spending across house-
holds; ESPi,t is zero when a payment is not received and is the average amount received
for that type of household by that method of disbursement (mail or direct deposit) when
the household gets their payment; τm,j,t is a set of (regression coefficients on) indicator
variables for every week in the sample for each type of household for each method of dis-
bursement; finally ηi,t captures all expenditures unexplained by the previous factors. The
parameters of interest are the βs,j which importantly differ by type of household j. The
βs,j measure, for each type of household, the marginal propensity to spend out of a pay-
ment before arrival (up to L leads), the week of arrival, and following arrival (up to the
largest possible lag, S). These effects are identified by the restriction that βs,j = 0 for all
s, < −L.
   Because there are time effects interacted with type j and means of receipt, differences in
in the impact of aggregate changes or difference in seasonal spending between recipients
with different characteristics or means of disbursement do not bias the estimated βs,j . That
said, this specification is demanding of the data, so I also report results with a complete set
of time dummies interacted only with household type and not with means of receipt (and
where average payment amount for ESPi,t is measured separately over j but not m).
   Finally, identification of the key parameters of interest for a type j does not require that
   13 Recall that each additional child eligible for the child tax credit leads to $300 larger payment, while a married couple
receives $600 more than the equivalent family with an unmarried head.
   14 Households in the mail survey were prompted by the example of $600 as part of reminding them how to enter a dollar
amount on their barcode scanner. There was no amount prompt in the on-line survey.
10


households are similar, or unselected, across types. Consistency requires that the variation
in ESPi,t be uncorrelated with all other factors that might influence household expenditure
besides the receipt-driven variation of interest. Selection into type j – or more generally
correlation of type and average treatment effect – does not bias estimates of average effects
within type. In fact, differences in average treatment effect are the main issues of inter-
est. But it is important to note that selection into the NCP and/or selective attrition out of
our sample ex ante or over time could bias population inference of differences in average
treatment effects across household types if correlated with treatment effect. For example,
suppose that the extent of consumption smoothing were uncorrelated with wealth across
households in the population. If low wealth households that smooth consumption well did
not respond to our survey and everyone else did, then we would observe in our sample that
low wealth households smooth consumption more poorly than high wealth households. But
this would be true only for our sample and not the population.
   In estimation, standard errors are adjusted to allow for arbitrary heteroskedasticity and
within-household serial correlations.

     V.   The baseline result: the average response of spending and the importance of liquidity

   Before analyzing differences in responses across household types, I present the existing
results (e.g., Broda and Parker, 2014) that, first, there is a significant increase in spending
caused by the receipt of a payment on average across all households (only one type j), and,
second, the majority of this increase is due to households with low levels of liquid wealth.
Table 2 displays results from estimation of equation (1) for two specifications each with
three leads of ESP: one that uses all variation in timing of receipt (the first three columns;
only one category of m), and one that treats the two different methods of disbursement as
two separate experiments (the second three columns).
   According to both specifications, households on average spend one and a half percent of
the payment the week of arrival (first row, first and fourth columns). This response is highly
statistically significant. And the cumulative response over four weeks is roughly three and
a half percent of the payment, also highly statistically significant.
   These small propensities to spend do not imply small spending responses overall because
these measures include only spending on goods covered by the NCP data. Parker et al.
(2013) look at all spending categories in the CEX and find that the majority of the payments
are spent during the three-month period that includes arrival, and that the categories of
goods that comprise the majority of the spending in the NCP are those that respond the
least (e.g. food at home).
   As shown in Table D in the unpublished appendix, there is no rise in spending in the
three weeks prior to the arrival of the payment. All coefficients after the fourth week are
statistically insignificant and economically small. As a result, for the balance of the paper,
I focus on consumption smoothing on arrival and over the following four weeks.
   These results are robust to a number of alternative specifications. In a specification that
replaces ESP with a categorical variable indicating arrival, households on average increase
their spending by $13 the week of arrival and by $30 cumulatively over four weeks. In a
specification that additionally replaces the dependent variable with spending relative to the
                   TABLE 2—S PENDING P ROPENSITIES FOR ALL H OUSEHOLDS AND BY L IQUIDITY


                             Using all variation in time of                   Using only variation in timing
                                        receipt                               within each method of receipt
                                        At least two months                              At least two months
                               All      available income in                     All      available income in
                           households      liquid wealth?                   households      liquid wealth?
                                                Yes             No                               Yes             No

 Contemporaneous                1.49            0.63            2.78             1.45            0.66            2.53
 week                          (0.25)          (0.29)          (0.39)           (0.29)          (0.30)          (0.42)
 t-stat of                                              4.47                                             3.64
 `Yes' equal `No'

 Four week                      3.70            2.04            6.57             3.31            2.08            4.87
 cumulative increase           (0.70)          (0.74)          (1.01)           (0.46)          (1.03)          (1.36)
 t-stat of                                              3.63                                             1.64
 `Yes' equal `No'

 Number of                     21,386         13,685           7,656            21,320         13,654           7,621
 households

Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Table reports the propensity to consume NCP goods out of a payment in percent.
The regressions in the first triplet of columns include fixed effects for each week in the sample and in the second triplet of
columns include fixed effects for each week for each means of receipt. All regressions include household fixed effects and are
weighted by the NCP projection factor for 2008. Each sample includes only households that report receipt during the period
of the experimental variation, sufficient ESP information for that specification, and meet the standard NCP static reporting
requirement for the year. Calculated based on data from The Nielsen Company (US) LLC and provided by the Marketing
Data Center at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business.




first 12 weeks of the year households increase their spending by just under 10 percent of
average weekly spending the week of arrival and roughly 5 percent of spending over four
weeks.15 Given average weekly spending of $149 and an average payment of $898, these
numbers are consistent with columns 1 and 4 in Table 2.
   If the spending response were the same across households, then cross-sectional informa-
tion would be useless for evaluating models of lack of consumption smoothing. Instead,
there is significant heterogeneity in spending response across households correlated with
liquidity (e.g., Zeldes (1989a); Johnson, Parker and Souleles (2006); Agarwal, Liu and
Souleles (2007); and in this dataset, Broda and Parker (2014)). The investigation of liquid-

   15 These results are also displayed in Appendix Table D. Additionally, similar patterns emerge when restricting to house-
holds reporting spending in at least half the weeks or in every week, and when trimming the top and bottom 1 percent of
spending. Similar percentage changes and spending effects relative to average dollar spending are found using as a mea-
sure of weekly spending the more volatile and smaller measure of spending constructed as the sum of all individual items
purchased instead of the sum of all total trip spending and using households that do not meet the Nielsen static reporting
requirement for the year.
12


ity is motivated by models of consumption smoothing with financial frictions. If a house-
hold either is unable to borrow due to a binding liquidity constraint or does not want to
borrow due to a high elasticity of precautionary saving with respect to cash on hand, then
low current or recent income can indicate that a household has a higher propensity to spend
income on arrival. The main prediction is that households with low levels of liquid wealth
fail to smooth consumption.
  To measure liquidity, Part I of the supplemental survey contains the question “In case of
an unexpected decline in income or increase in expenses, do you have at least two months of
income available in cash, bank accounts, or easily accessible funds?” and the respondent can
answer yes or no. This measurement instrument is motivated by the canonical buffer-stock
model (e.g., Carroll, 1997) which uses scale-invariant preferences and in which liquidity is
naturally measured as available funds relative to the permanent component of income.
  Columns 3 and 6 of Table 2 show that households with low liquidity, which make up 36
percent of the sample, spend 2.5 to 2.8 percent of the payment the week of arrival and 4.9
to 6.6 percent the four weeks of and following arrival. Households with sufficient liquid
wealth still exhibit a statistically significant increase in spending in response to arrival, but
they spend only at one fourth the rate of households with insufficient wealth the week the
payment arrives, and one half to one third the rate over the four weeks of and following
arrival.16 This finding is consistent with previous research and consistent with the presence
of liquidity constraints or incomplete financial markets: lack of consumption smoothing is
concentrated among households with low liquidity.


             VI.    Differences in spending responses and models of spending responses


  The significant heterogeneity in the spending response implies that one can test models
of consumer behavior by evaluating their ability to explain cross-sectional differences in
spending responses. If a model of consumer behavior cannot generate variation in spending
responses across households, or if the determinants or indicators of this variation show no
variation in the data, then this model is inconsistent with the finding that some households
smooth spending well and some poorly. Further, given the large amount of heterogeneity
associated with liquid wealth, any such determinant that is uncorrelated with liquid wealth
will miss a large amount of variation in behavior and so is unlikely to be the main reason
that households fail to smooth consumption.
  Plausible theories then must predict variation in consumption smoothing along an observ-
able characteristic that is correlated with liquidity. Such a relationship raises the question
of whether this characteristic causes low liquidity or whether this characteristic is caused
by or merely correlated with low liquidity. This paper does not observe plausibly exoge-
nous variation in the characteristic or liquidity, and so cannot distinguish the direction of
causation.

  16 Despite the additional set of time dummies interacted with method of receipt in these subsample regressions, the sample
weighted average of the spending increases are almost exactly equal to the average spending increase.
   A.   Heterogeneity in consumption smoothing: transitory state or persistent characteristic?


   Perhaps the leading model that incorporates lack of consumption smoothing is caused
by a series of poor income shocks, as in the parametrization of models of such as Zeldes
(1989b), Deaton (1991), and Carroll (1997), or by a transitory low level of liquid assets due
to fixed costs of portfolio adjustment, as in the model of Kaplan and Violante (2014). An
alternative is that persistent behavioral traits cause low liquid wealth and, either directly or
indirectly through low liquidity, cause spending responses. This behavioral trait could be
impatience, but it could also be due to nonlinearities in budget constraints such as caused
by means tested benefit programs.
   This subsection shows that lack of consumption smoothing is a characteristic that lasts
years and is not due to temporarily low or high liquidity that might arise for example from
management of illiquid wealth, year-end bonuses, tax refunds, moderate shocks to spend-
ing needs, or insured, short-term job loss. I show that, while measured only crudely, re-
cent income growth and consumption smoothing are unrelated so that transitory income
changes play no measurable role in spending responses to the arrival of payments. The
level of income in 2008 however has a strong correlation with both liquidity and consump-
tion smoothing. Households with low current income smooth consumption poorly while
households with high current income smooth consumption well. But a similar relationship
exists for income in 2007 and, even more strikingly for income in 2006, two years prior
to the payments. This pattern also holds for households with sufficient liquidity and for
households with low liquidity. Thus, lack of consumption smoothing appears to be a persis-
tent characteristic related to low permanent income, and not primarily driven by transitory
and moderate income shocks or costs of accessing illiquid wealth and temporary low liq-
uidity. Finally, there is evidence that lack of consumption smoothing is not purely due to
low liquidity. Low income in 2006 predicts a larger spending response even conditional on
liquidity.
   Households in the NCP are surveyed about annual income at the end of each calendar
year about the previous calendar year and this information is reported in the subsequent
year’s panel. Income is reported in 19 income ranges. The ranges are each less than or
equal to $5,000 for incomes less than $50,000, then rise through $10,000 and then $25,000
ranges until the highest two ranges covering an income range or $150,000 to $200,000 and
$200,000 and above. A household is defined as having an income increase if it reports mov-
ing to a higher range and a decrease if it reports moving to a lower range. Panel A in Table
3 shows spending responses for households whose income moves to a lower range, stays
in the same range, and moves to a higher range from 2007 to 2008, the year of the pay-
ment program. There is no evidence of any differential spending response across categories
of income growth. Panel B repeats this exercise for income changes from 2006 to 2007.
In Panel B, there is no evidence that households that have had declines in income spend
more of their payments on receipt than households whose incomes have stayed in the same
range or than those whose incomes have increased. In fact, there is some evidence of the
reverse; household spending responses are increasing in income growth from 2006 to 2007.
While measurement is not precise, these results on income growth are inconsistent with the
view that the high spending response of low income households is due to temporarily low
14


                     TABLE 3—S PENDING R ESPONSES BY I NCOME G ROWTH AND I NCOME G ROUP

                                                                       Using only variation in timing
                            Using all variation in time of receipt
                                                                        within each method of receipt
     Panels A and B:         To lower         Same       To higher    To lower      Same      To higher
     Income growth           category        category    category     category category        category
                                                  Panel A: Income growth 2007 to 2008
 Contemporaneous                1.35           0.99         1.70        0.85         0.90        1.29
 week                          (0.57)         (0.39)       (0.61)      (0.64)       (0.42)      (0.67)
 Four week                      4.18           2.45         4.57        1.35         1.84        1.80
 cumulative increase           (1.55)         (1.05)       (1.61)      (2.06)       (1.46)      (2.11)
 Number of                     3,416           7,719       3,051       3,405        7,696        3,042
 households                                       Panel B: Income growth 2006 to 2007
 Contemporaneous                1.19            1.28        1.94        0.88        1.10                          1.89
 week                          (0.65)          (0.32)      (0.61)      (0.64)      (0.35)                        (0.65)
 Four week                      2.20            4.01        5.19        0.12        3.28                          4.23
 cumulative increase           (1.61)          (0.86)      (1.57)      (2.08)      (1.19)                        (2.26)
 Number of                     3,142           10,051      4,055       3,133       10,023                        4,042
 households
                             income<        $35,000 ≤               income<                   $35,000 ≤
 Panels C, D and E:           $35,000        income   $70,000 ≤      $35,000                   income   $70,000 ≤
   Income levels                            <$70,000   income                                 <$70,000   income
                                                       Panel C: 2008 Income
 Contemporaneous                2.46           1.40      0.21          2.06                       0.87            0.39
 week
 x                             (0.58)         (0.45)    (0.49)        (0.64)                     (0.49)          (0.50)
 Four week                      3.78           4.01      2.20          2.68                       1.07            1.98
 cumulative increase           (1.64)         (1.16)    (1.33)        (2.02)                     (1.46)          (1.95)
 Number of                     5,057          5,303     3,826         5,035                      5,289           3,819
 households
                                                             Panel D: 2007 Income
 Contemporaneous                2.56            1.44           0.71          2.39                 1.11            0.65
 !"#$%                         (0.55)          (0.40)         (0.44)        (0.57)               (0.44)          (0.46)
 Four week                      5.35            3.97           3.17          4.85                 3.02            1.73
 cumulative increase           (1.44)          (1.05)         (1.19)        (1.81)               (1.44)          (1.71)
 Number of                     6,067           6,398          4,783         6,049                6,377           4,772
 households
                                                             Panel E: 2006 Income
 Contemporaneous                3.13            1.41           0.56          3.09                 1.15            0.59
 week                          (0.57)          (0.34)         (0.37)        (0.59)               (0.37)          (0.39)
 Four week                      6.99            3.44           1.99          8.13                 2.16            1.10
 cumulative increase           (1.33)          (0.90)         (1.02)        (1.73)               (1.20)          (1.42)
 Number of                     7,495           7,783          6,063         7,466                7,761           6,048
 households
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. The table reports the propensity to consume NCP goods out of a payment in percent.
The regressions in the first triplet of columns include fixed effects for each week in the sample and in the second triplet of
columns include fixed effects for each week for each means of receipt. All regressions include household fixed effects and are
weighted by the NCP projection factor for 2008. Each sample includes only households that report receipt during the period
of the experimental variation, sufficient ESP information for that specification, and meet the standard NCP static reporting
requirement for the year. Calculated based on data from The Nielsen Company (US) LLC and provided by the Marketing
Data Center at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
income.17
   Panel C of Table 3 splits households into three roughly equal groups according to 2008
income.18 The bottom 36 percent of households by 2008 income – those with annual labor
incomes of less than $35,000 – spend at roughly double the rate of the other income groups.
The group with highest 2008 income does not consume a statistically significant fraction
of the payment in either specification or at either horizon. This is inconsistent with the
textbook model of liquidity constraints (or precautionary saving), in which a household’s
temporarily low income leads them to violate consumption smoothing because they are
unable to borrow against (or insure) future labor income. This same pattern is evident in
Panel D in which households are split according to their incomes in 2007.
   Most strikingly, the same pattern is observed in Panel E using income in 2006. Low
income in 2006 indicates poor consumption smoothing in 2008, and high income in 2006
indicates good consumption smoothing in 2008. In fact, low income in 2006 is as good as,
if not better than, contemporaneous liquidity (Table 2) at separating the households who
spent from those who did not. This evidence is at odds with models in which either low
transitory income or portfolio management cause quite temporary low liquidity and large
spending responses for some households, such as the textbook, scale-invariant models of
buffer-stock behavior. Rather, according to this evidence, households that have low income
over several years are poor at smoothing consumption.
   How does income interact with liquidity in explaining spending responses? Table 4 shows
how household responses differ by both income and liquidity. Panels A and B show that
2008 income level is correlated with liquidity: 45 percent of households with low liquidity
have low income in 2008 while 31 percent of households with sufficient liquidity have low
income. Panel C and D show that this correlation is just as strong between income in 2006
and liquidity in 2008.
   Conditional on sufficient liquidity, households with low income in 2006 have significant
spending responses (Panel C) while households with high incomes do not. And conditional
on low liquidity (Panel D), there are statistically significant differences in the size of the
spending response at four weeks between households with high incomes in 2006 and those
with low incomes. In sum, there is a lot of variation in spending response in 2008 across
households explained by household income in 2006, both unconditionally (Table 3 panel E)
and conditional on current liquidity (Table 4 Panels C and D).

    B.    Beliefs: are spending response due to households that are surprised by their payments?

  This subsection shows that the households who spent their payments when they arrived
did not do so because they were not expecting their payments. Most households expected
the payments, there are significant spending responses for those who were expecting their
payments, and households that are positively surprised by their payments spend similarly to
those that are negatively surprised. The responses of these two groups of surprised house-
holds do provide some weak evidence linking understanding of the stimulus program and
   17 This lack of correlation with spending responses is also found with a measure of temporarily low income based on 2007
income relative to surrounding years.
   18 These ranges/choices follow the industry standard, see Zeldes (1989a), Jappelli, Pischke and Souleles (1998), Jappelli
(1990), and Souleles (1999).
16



                         TABLE 4—S PENDING R ESPONSES BY L IQUIDITY AND I NCOME L EVEL


                                    Using all variation in time of                 Using only variation in timing
                                               receipt                             within each method of receipt
                                  income< $35,000 ≤                              income< $35,000 ≤
                                   $35,000     income $70,000 ≤                   $35,000  income $70,000 ≤
                                                 <$70,000         income                  <$70,000 income
                                    Panel A: Households with sufficient liquid wealth, by 2008 income
     Contemporaneous week            0.91       0.62       -0.06          1.08       -0.03       0.17
                                    (0.76)     (0.50)     (0.55)         (0.82)     (0.53)      (0.56)

     Four week                       -0.17          3.55           0.41             0.18           0.89           0.66
     cumulative increase             1.92          (1.44)         (1.51)           (2.51)         (1.76)         (2.26)

     Number of households            3,068          3,762         2,964             3,055          3,754          2,962
                                       Panel B: Households with low liquid wealth, by 2008 income
     Contemporaneous week            4.23        2.61      1.21          3.26        2.23       1.20
                                    (0.90)      (0.84)    (1.03)        (1.01)      (0.95)     (1.08)

     Four week                       8.41           4.74           8.31             5.77           1.10           6.44
     cumulative increase            (2.76)         (1.99)         (2.86)           (3.29)         (2.56)         (3.66)

     Number of households            1,989          1,541           862             1,980          1,535           857
                                    Panel C: Households with sufficient liquid wealth, by 2006 income
     Contemporaneous week            2.33       0.44       0.06           2.46       0.24        0.21
                                    (0.85)     (0.41)    (0.42)          (0.85)     (0.43)      (0.43)

     Four week                       3.79           2.27           1.04             5.45           1.97           0.79
     cumulative increase            (1.70)         (1.16)         (1.19)           (2.33)         (1.61)         (1.60)

     Number of households            4,147          5,047         4,491             4,134          5,036          4,484
                                       Panel D: Households with low liquid wealth, by 2006 income
     Contemporaneous week            3.79        2.60      1.81          3.69        2.23       1.52
                                    (0.76)      (0.56)    (0.75)        (0.81)      (0.61)     (0.81)
     Four week                       9.91        5.02      4.45         10.40        2.22       1.53
     cumulative increase            (2.01)      (1.40)    (2.01)        (2.53)      (1.79)     (3.06)
     Number of households           3,348       2,736     1,572         3,332       2,725      1,564

Note: Standard errors in parentheses. The table reports the propensity to consume NCP goods out of an ESP in percent.
The regressions in the first triplet of columns include fixed effects for each week in the sample and in the second triplet of
columns include fixed effects for each week for each means of receipt. All regressions include household fixed effects and are
weighted by the NCP projection factor for 2008. Each sample includes only households that report receipt during the period
of the experimental variation, sufficient ESP information for that specification, and meet the standard NCP static reporting
requirement for the year. Calculated based on data from The Nielsen Company (US) LLC and provided by the Marketing
Data Center at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
consumption smoothing: in one of two specifications spending response are greater for the
households that incorrectly understood the payments by not expecting the payment, under-
estimating the amount, or (primarily) overestimating the amount.
   One reason that the arrival of a pre-announced payment might cause an increase in spend-
ing is if some households are surprised by the arrival of the payment despite available in-
formation about the payment. Motivated in part by the findings of excess sensitivity, recent
modeling of human behavior has considered the costs of gathering and processing informa-
tion and how economizing on these costs might alter the predictions of the canonical model
of consumption and saving (e.g., Caballero, 1995; Reis, 2006; Sims, 2003).
   While these models need not imply strong spending response to receipt, Reis (2006)
shows that households with large costs of optimization choose to be ‘inattentive savers’
who follow a saving plan and optimally let consumption track income. While these mod-
els also have implications for the relationship between measures of planning and spending
responses, this subsection assesses the role of expectations in the spending response. The
supplemental survey asked households who reported that they received a payment: “Was
this about the amount your household was expecting?” Households were given the follow-
ing answers to choose from: ‘No, and we were surprised to get any rebate at all,’ ‘No, and it
was less than we were expecting,’ ‘No, and it was more than we were expecting,’ ‘Yes, and
we’ve known the approximate amount since February,’ ‘Yes, and we’ve known the approx-
imate amount since March,’ ‘Yes, and we’ve known the approximate amount since April,’
‘Yes, but we only learned about it recently,’ and ‘Not sure/don’t know.’
   Panel A of Table 5 contains the results for three groups of households and shows four
main results. First, the last row of Panel A shows that most households expected the pay-
ment when it arrived. Only 12 percent of households were positively surprised (columns
2 and 5); 5 percent of households were surprised by the arrival and 7 percent found that it
was more than they were expecting. Thirteen percent of households found that their pay-
ment was less than they expected (columns 3 and 6). Second, even those households who
had been expecting the payment in the correct amount had significant spending response
to the arrival on impact and cumulatively over 4 weeks (columns 1 and 4). Third, while
few households were positively surprised by the payment, there is some statistically weak
evidence that this led to a higher propensity to spend on impact but no consistent evidence
of more spending over four weeks.19
   Finally, not only is there no decline in spending for households who received payments
that were less than they were expecting, but point estimates suggest that these households
actually spent at higher rates than the average household. One can reject the equality of the
contemporaneous spending response between households who are expecting the payment
(columns 1) and those who are negatively surprised (column 3) (t-statistic 2.08). This is not
the case for the four week response (t-statistic = 1.47) nor at either horizon in the second
set of columns, in which the responses across groups are more similar.
   Panels B and C split households by liquidity. The mistake of expecting a larger than
actual payment is more prevalent among households with insufficient funds: 18 percent
of households with low liquid wealth are negatively surprised by the amount of their pay-
   19 The propensity to spend is larger for households surprised by the payment in the first triplet of columns, but not in the
second triplet in which the distribution by mail and by direct deposit are treated as separate experiments.
18




                        TABLE 5—S PENDING R ESPONSES BY L IQUIDITY AND I NCOME L EVEL

                                                                           Using only variation in timing within
                         Using all variation in time of receipt                   each method of receipt
                             Learned                                                   Learned
  Was this about Yes, known    more                                        Yes, known    more
 the amount your since Feb, recently or                    No, less        since Feb, recently or             No, less
  household was   March, or positively                      than            March, or positively               than
    expecting?      Apr.     surprised                    expecting           Apr.     surprised             expecting
                                                          Panel A: All households
Contemporaneous              1.19            2.37            2.80               1.30            1.68            2.00
week                        (0.25)          (0.83)          (0.73)             (0.27)          (0.81)          (0.81)
Four week                    3.31            5.13            6.69               3.42            1.91            4.52
cumulative                  (0.67)          (1.74)          (2.20)             (0.93)          (2.03)          (3.10)
Number of
                           15,991           2,525            2,693            15,956           2,505           2,685
households
                                          Panel B: Households with sufficient liquid wealth
Contemporaneous              0.39            1.07            2.08               0.59            0.43            1.35
week                        (0.29)          (1.18)          (1.13)             (0.31)          (1.15)          (1.24)
Four week                    1.69            2.61            4.68               2.56           -0.58            1.99
cumulative                  (0.82)          (2.08)          (3.00)             (1.13)          (2.58)          (4.94)
Number of
                           10,603           1,658            1,317            10,586           1,649            1,314
households
                                             Panel C: Households with low liquid wealth
Contemporaneous              2.41            4.26            3.41               2.39            3.47            2.55
week                        (0.46)          (1.06)          (0.96)             (0.50)          (1.09)          (1.07)
Four week                    5.89            8.89            8.74               4.51            5.58            6.89
cumulative                  (1.12)          (3.03)          (3.15)             (1.58)          (3.32)          (3.99)
Number of
                            5,388            867             1,376             5,370            856             1,371
households
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. The table reports the propensity to consume NCP goods out of an ESP in percent.
The regressions in the first triplet of columns include fixed effects for each week in the sample and in the second triplet
include fixed effects for each week for each means of receipt. All regressions include household fixed effects and are
weighted by the NCP projection factor for 2008. Each sample includes only households that report receipt during the period
of the experimental variation, sufficient ESP information for that specification, and meet the standard NCP static reporting
requirement for the year. Calculated based on data from The Nielsen Company (US) LLC and provided by the Marketing
Data Center at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
ments while only 10 percent of households with sufficient liquid wealth are. In terms of the
estimated coefficients, smaller samples lead to less statistical power within each level of liq-
uidity. For households with sufficient liquid wealth, where one might expect news to carry
the largest effect, there is no evidence of any role for expectations in spending responses.
For households with low liquid wealth, there is some evidence that those who expected the
payment have smaller spending responses, but even this is statistically weak (the strongest
finding is the contemporaneous spending response between columns 1 and 2 which has a
t-statistics of 1.60).
   In sum, there is no evidence that households spent the payments because they were not
expecting them. Few households were surprised by the amount of the payment upon arrival,
and there is a strong consumption response among those expecting the payments, and no
relationship between the sign of the expectation error and the size of the spending response.
Instead, these findings suggest that households with low levels of economic sophistication
or planning as measured by understanding of the stimulus payment program have little abil-
ity to smooth consumption. More households with low liquidity are negatively surprised by
their payments, and, while statistically weak, these households have the largest propensity
to spend on arrival despite this negative surprise.

      C.    Sophistication: financial planning, planners, and use of deals, specials and coupons

   This section evaluates whether lack of planning causes violations of consumption smooth-
ing. Households that have made financial plans in the last two years smooth spending across
arrival well. Might the propensit to plan be causing smoothing (and sufficient liquidity)?
A small share of households that plan extensively for vacation seem to smooth consump-
tion well. But financial planning is far more important than planning for vacation, in that
spending responds to payment arrival for households that plan for vacations but not for
households that have made financial plans. Finally, households that make use of specials,
deals, or coupons when shopping smooth consumption significantly better than those that
do not.
   Lusardi (1999) theorizes that careful planning – through making better investment choices
and considering the need to save – is a major determinant of wealth accumulation for retire-
ment. Further, the paper shows evidence that differences in the propensity to plan explain a
significant amount of the differences in wealth accumulation observed in the US. Ameriks,
Caplin and Leahy (2003) show that households who say that they have made a financial
plan have much greater financial wealth after controlling for a large set of other possible
determinants of wealth accumulation (including income and many measures of traditional
preferences). Finally, as noted, Reis (2006) shows that households with large costs of op-
timization choose to be ‘inattentive savers’ who follow a saving plan and optimally let
consumption track income.20
   Two questions were asked in the supplemental NCP survey to measure the importance
of planning behavior for consumption smoothing. The first question mimics the Ameriks,

   20 See also Lusardi and Mitchell (2007), and these results relate to those in both Agarwal et al. (2009), which shows a link
between ability and financial mistakes, and Grinblatt, Keloharju and Linnainmaa (2011) which shows a positive relationship
between IQ and stock market participation.
20




           TABLE 6—S PENDING R ESPONSES BY L IQUIDITY AND THE P ROPENSITY TO P LAN F INANCIALLY


                                                                                      Using only variation in
                                                    Using all variation in             timing within each
                                                       time of receipt                  method of receipt
        Formulated a financial plan for                Yes              No                 Yes             No
              long term future?
                                                               Panel A: All households
          Contemporaneous week                         0.73       2.25          0.83        2.01
                                                      (0.32)     (0.34)        (0.33)      (0.36)
                t-statistic of difference                   3.29                      2.42
          Four week cumulative                        1.81        5.76          1.72        4.71
                                                     (0.78)      (0.90)        (1.14)      (1.18)
               t-statistic of difference                    3.33                      1.82
         Number of households                        10,936      10,405        10,902      10,373
                                          Panel B: Households with sufficient liquid wealth
          Contemporaneous week              0.27        1.19           0.38          1.11
                                           (0.37)      (0.46)         (0.37)        (0.49)
                t-statistic of difference         1.58                        1.19
          Four week cumulative              1.35        3.15           1.41          3.13
                                           (0.90)      (1.25)         (1.32)        (1.64)
                t-statistic of difference         1.17                        0.82
         Number of households               8,598      5,087          8,578         5,076
                                                       Panel C: Households with low liquid wealth
          Contemporaneous week                         2.03        3.10          2.06        2.72
                                                      (0.65)      (0.48)        (0.70)      (0.52)
                t-statistic of difference                    1.33                      0.76
          Four week cumulative                         3.38        7.89          2.44        5.82
                                                      (1.60)      (1.26)        (2.24)      (1.68)
                t-statistic of difference                    2.21                      1.21
         Number of households                         2,338       5,318         2,324       5,297

Note: Standard errors in parentheses. The table reports the propensity to consume NCP goods out of an ESP in percent. The
regressions in the first pair of columns include fixed effects for each week in the sample and in the second pair include fixed
effects for each week for each means of receipt. All regressions include household fixed effects and are weighted by the NCP
projection factor for 2008. Each sample includes only households that report receipt during the period of the experimental
variation, sufficient ESP information for that specification, and meet the standard NCP static reporting requirement for the
year. Calculated based on data from The Nielsen Company (US) LLC and provided by the Marketing Data Center at the
University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
Caplin and Leahy (2003) question: “In the last few years, have you gathered together your
household’s financial information, reviewed it in detail, and formulated a financial plan for
your household’s long term future?” The second question relates not to financial planning,
but to planning as a trait in another sphere, in this case for vacation: “Before going on a
vacation, how much time do you spend examining where you would most like to go and
what you would like to do?” with possible answers: ‘A great deal of time,’ ‘Quite a bit of
time,’ ‘A little time,’ ‘Almost no time,’ and ‘Do not go on vacation.’ Households responding
that they do not go on vacation are dropped from the analysis of this question.
   Panel A of Table 6 shows that households that have made financial plans are much better
at smoothing consumption than those that have not. First, note that there is a lot of variation
in this question in this sample, with roughly half the households responding each way.
Second, planning is highly correlated with liquidity. Panels B and C shows that 79 percent
of households that plan have sufficient liquidity and 69 percent of households with sufficient
liquidity plan. Panel A shows economically large differences in spending responses. For
households that have formulated financial plans, the spending response is only borderline
statistically significant and roughly a third as large as for those how have not planned. About
three quarters of the total spending response in the sample is accounted for by households
that do not make financial plans.
   Finally, financial planning has some limited explanatory power beyond liquidity (Table
6, panels B and C). Among households with liquidity, those that do not plan do not smooth
spending. While pairwise tests of the equality of responses are generally statistically in-
significant, a test of equality of the average responses of planners equalling that of non-
planners rejects equality in both Panels B and C with 95 percent (90 percent) confidence
for both contemporaneous and four week responses using all variation in timing of receipt
(using only variation of timing within each means of disbursement).
   Table 7 reports the results of the same analysis for vacation planning. Again, there is lots
of variation in the sample, but time spent planning vacations is almost uncorrelated with
liquidity. Across degrees of planning, moving across the columns, 65 percent, 68 percent,
and 67 percent have sufficient liquidity. The remainder of the table presents a statistically
weak case that vacation planning matters for consumption smoothing. In Panel A house-
holds that spend a great deal of time planning for vacations do not raise spending the week
of arrival as much as the other households (statistically significant at the 90 percent confi-
dence level only). The point estimates have the same pattern over the entire month, but the
economic significance is smaller and larger standard errors preclude making any conclusion
with confidence. Looking at households with different levels of liquidity, Panel C shows
that, among households with low liquidity, those who spend a great deal of time planning
tent to smooth spending better than others. There is no such difference for households with
sufficient liquidity.
   In sum, not only are the differences across vacation planners statistically weaker than
the differences across financial planners, only twenty two percent of households plan a lot
and smooth consumption well. Forty four percent of the sample spends “quite a bit of
time” planning for vacations and these households giving this “middle” response still show
a substantial spending responses similar to households that plan less.
   The final variable dealing with sophistication is the extent to which households use deals,
22


            TABLE 7—S PENDING R ESPONSES BY L IQUIDITY AND THE P ROPENSITY TO P LAN VACATION



                                                                                Using only variation in timing
                   Using all variation in time of receipt                       within each method of receipt
                                               A little                                                 A little
   Before going on  A great                    time or                         A great                  time or
 vacation, how much deal of     Quite a bit Almost no                          deal of   Quite a bit Almost no
   time planning?     time        of time        time                           time       of time        time
                                                            Panel A: All households
Contemporaneous             0.66                1.57           1.87          0.50                1.49            1.79
week                       (0.49)              (0.38)         (0.48)        (0.50)              (0.41)          (0.48)
             t-test of
                                                1.76                                             1.86
   'A great deal...'='A little...'
Four week                   2.90                3.24            3.98              2.00           3.05            3.01
cumulative                 (1.21)              (1.02)          (1.19)            (1.63)         (1.51)          (1.50)
             t-test of
                                                0.64                                             0.09
   'A great deal...'='A little...'
Number of
                           4,065               7,818           5,602             4,053           7,796          5,583
households
                                            Panel B: Households with sufficient liquid wealth
Contemporaneous             0.00               0.66       1.03          0.01          0.79                       0.99
week                       (0.57)             (0.44)     (0.64)        (0.59)        (0.47)                     (0.60)
             t-test of
                                                1.20                                             1.17
   'A great deal...'='A little...'
Four week                   2.08                1.40            2.12              1.63           2.24            1.65
cumulative                 (1.52)              (1.26)          (1.38)            (2.03)         (1.92)          (1.69)
             t-test of
                                                0.02                                             0.15
   'A great deal...'='A little...'
Number of
                           2,630               5,285           3,771             2,625           5,274          3,761
households
                                               Panel C: Households with low liquid wealth
Contemporaneous             1.63                2.99       3.23         1.21         2.55                        3.08
week                       (0.84)              (0.68)     (0.73)       (0.87)       (0.74)                      (0.79)
             t-test of
                                                1.44                                             1.59
   'A great deal...'='A little...'
Four week                   4.44                6.49            6.96              2.56           4.19            5.09
cumulative                 (1.98)              (1.70)          (2.20)            (2.70)         (2.37)          (2.88)
             t-test of
                                                0.85                                             0.02
   'A great deal...'='A little...'
Number of
                           1,435               2,533           1,831             1,428           2,522          1,822
households
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. The table reports the propensity to consume NCP goods out of an ESP in percent.
The regressions in the first triplet of columns include fixed effects for each week in the sample and in the second triplet
include fixed effects for each week for each means of receipt. All regressions include household fixed effects and are
weighted by the NCP projection factor for 2008. Each sample includes only households that report receipt during the period
of the experimental variation, sufficient ESP information for that specification, and meet the standard NCP static reporting
requirement for the year. Calculated based on data from The Nielsen Company (US) LLC and provided by the Marketing
Data Center at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
specials or coupons when making NCP purchases. When households scan in individual
purchased items, they are asked to input whether they used one of these discounts. For
participating stores, this information is also provided by the store. I calculate the share of
individual reported purchases that use deals, and split households evenly into those whose
deal use is low and those whose deal use is high.
   On the one hand, one might expect households that have fewer resources to spend more
time on conserving them, suggesting that households that use coupons should have low
liquidity and smooth spending poorly. On the other hand, if households that use coupons
plan – that is, spend more time and effort optimizing – then they may not only make better
use of the resources that they have but also do a better job of inter-temporal optimization
and thus of consumption smoothing.
   Splitting the NCP sample into high and low coupon use households (so that they are
evenly split in Panel A of Table 8), high coupon use has only a correlation of 0.07 with liq-
uidity. Among households with sufficient liquidity slightly more use coupons (Panel B), and
among households with insufficient liquidity, slightly fewer use coupons (Panel C). Panel A
shows however that coupon use is economically significantly and statistically significantly
related to spending responses at the one week horizon, with high coupon use households
smoothing spending better. At the one month horizon, the difference is statistically weaker,
but the same pattern is present. Conditioning on liquidity, because it is largely uncorrelated
with coupon use, does not change this ordering, but it also reduces the sample size used to
estimate each coefficient, and standard errors rise as a result.
   In sum, I find that financial planning is correlated with consumption smoothing, as is
coupon use. But the case for an important casual role for planning as a general trait, ob-
servable in spheres of activity other than finances, is weak.

                    D.   Spenders, savers, self-control, and procrastination

   This section shows first that households that self-identify as the ‘type of household that
lives for today and spends’ have much larger spending response to the payment than house-
holds that identify as more patient. Second, there is an economically large but statistically-
weak higher propensity to spend on arrival among the small share of the population that
frequently regrets past purchases. But this correlation does not explain much of the ag-
gregate spending response; the other 95 percent of the population still exhibits substantial
violations of consumption smoothing. Third, and also shedding light on the potential im-
portance of self-control problems, larger delay in responding to the survey is not indicative
of larger spending responses to arrival of the payment.
   A substantial literature has suggested that households can be modeled either as having
heterogeneous impatience or as having heterogeneous behaviors with some standard lifecy-
cle consumers and other households simply consuming their incomes (e.g., Campbell and
Mankiw, 1989; Krusell and Smith, 1998). The NCP supplemental survey asked households
to characterize themselves as spenders or savers: “In general, are you or other household
members the sort of people who would rather spend your money and enjoy it today or save
more for the future?” with a binary choice of ‘spend now’ and ‘save for the future.’ There is
lots of variation in the responses, with two thirds of households reporting that they are the
24


                   TABLE 8—S PENDING R ESPONSES BY L IQUIDITY AND O PTIMIZATION :               DEAL USE
     Table 8: Spending response by liquidity and optimization: deal use
                                                                  Using only variation in
                                       Using all variation in       timing within each
                                          time of receipt            method of receipt
      Share of purchases made using
             coupons or deals           Low           High           Low         High
                                                                      Panel A: All households
       Contemporaneous week                           2.08              0.84            2.14                  0.55
                                                     (0.34)            (0.31)          (0.36)                (0.32)
             t-stat of difference                              2.71                                  3.30
       Four week                                      4.61             2.96                 4.39              1.81
       cumulative increase                           (0.83)           (0.85)               (1.18)            (1.12)
             t-stat of difference                              1.38                                  1.59
       Number of households                         10,666            10,663               10,631           10,632
                                                     Panel B: Households with sufficient liquid wealth
       Contemporaneous week                           0.85        0.43             1.03          0.27
                                                     (0.44)      (0.37)           (0.45)        (0.38)
             t-stat of difference                           0.72                           1.29
       Four week                                      2.39        1.71             3.02          1.05
       cumulative increase                           (1.08)      (0.99)           (1.59)        (1.29)
             t-stat of difference                           0.46                           0.96
       Number of households                          6,172       7,506            6,156          7,491
                                                        Panel C: Households with low liquid wealth
       Contemporaneous week                           3.49         1.57            3.39        1.07
                                                     (0.53)       (0.54)          (0.57)      (0.59)
             t-stat of difference                           2.55                         2.83
       Four week                                      7.24         5.34            5.81        3.31
       cumulative increase                           (1.30)       (1.60)          (1.75)      (2.16)
             t-stat of difference                           0.92                         0.90
       Number of households                          4,494        3,157           4,475        3,141

Note: Standard errors in parentheses. The table reports the propensity to consume NCP goods out of an ESP in percent. The
regressions in the first pair of columns include fixed effects for each week in the sample and in the second pair include fixed
effects for each week for each means of reciept. All regressions include household fixed effects and are weighted by the NCP
projection factor for 2008. Each sample includes only households that report receipt during the period of the experimental
variation, sufficient ESP information for that specification, and meet the standard NCP static reporting requirement for the
year. Calculated based on data from The Nielsen Company (US) LLC and provided by the Marketing Data Center at the
University of Chicago Booth School of Business.




type to save for the future. Low liquidity is significantly correlated with being a spender,
a correlation of 0.31. Causation of course could run in either direction, but the phrasing as
the “type of people” was designed to avoid households simply responding based on current
behavior.
  Consistent with persistent differences in households, households that report being the
type of people who spend and enjoy today have much larger spending response than those
that report being the type who save. Table 9 Panel A shows that the self-reported spend-
ing types exhibit large violations of consumption smoothing; the self-reported saving types
smooth consumption the week of arrival but still show a statistically significant spending
response over the month following arrival that is about half the size of the self-reported
spending types. In the week of arrival, saving types have an economically small and statis-
tically insignificant increase in spending, spending types have a statistically significant and
three times larger increase in spending. Over a month, the cumulative spending of spending
types is estimated to be double that of saving types, but this difference is not statistically
significant.
   Panel B and C of Table 9 show that this pattern continues to hold among households with
low liquidity, but the only statistically significant (at the 90 percent level) differences are
found for households with low liquidity the week the payment arrives. Among households
with sufficient liquid wealth, there is little evidence of greater spending by households who
characterize themselves as spenders.
   Another possible reason for spending payments when they arrive is that some households
have difficulty not spending liquidity. For example, one theory suggests that some house-
holds spend more of the payment on arrival than they would have chosen to had they been
able to commit not to spend as much at an earlier time (see Angeletos et al., 2001; Gul and
Pesendorfer, 2004a,b). I investigate this proposition in two ways.
   First, to investigate whether differences in the degree to which households perceive their
past spending to be suboptimal, households were asked “Many people sometimes buy things
that they later wish they had not bought. About how often do you or other household mem-
bers make purchases that you later regret?” and households could answer: Often, Occasion-
ally, Rarely, or Never. Panel A of Table 10 shows that there is significant variation in the
population in response to this question. About forty percent of households regret purchases
often or occasionally, while 60 percent do so rarely or never. But the variation is almost
unrelated to liquidity. And frequency of regret explains little of the differences in spending
responses across households.
   The contemporaneous response to the arrival of the payment is almost identical between
households who often or occasionally regret purchases (columns 2 and 5) and those who
rarely/never do (columns 3 and 6). Columns 1 and 4 break out only those households
who say that they often regret past purchases. Among this small set of households, the
contemporaneous and cumulative spending responses are economically much larger, but
the contemporaneous responses are only borderline statistically significantly different from
zero and the cumulative responses are statistically even weaker.
   Panels B and C show variation conditional on sufficient liquidity and low liquidity. Panel
C shows that there is no evidence for a role of regret in spending responses for households
with low liquid wealth. However in Panel B, there is some evidence that households that
rarely or never regret past purchases increase spending more in response to payment arrival
than households that regret purchases more often. The estimates are economically large,
but the small samples preclude confidence.
   While this pattern is evidence against an important role for sophisticated models of self-
control, or at least against the existence of a significant number of households who have
not successfully managed their issues of self-control, this evidence may not be inconsistent
26




                   TABLE 9—S PENDING R ESPONSES BY L IQUIDITY AND G RASSHOPPERS AND A NTS
     Table 9: Spending responses by liquidity and grasshopers and ants
                                            Using all variation in time            Using only variation in timing
                                                    of receipt                     within each method of receipt
     The sort of people who spend                                Save for                                Save for
                or save?                     Spend now            future             Spend now            future
                                                                   Panel A: All households
      Contemporaneous week                       2.37              0.92             2.19                    0.92
                                                (0.39)            (0.28)           (0.43)                  (0.29)
          t-stat of difference                            3.00                                    2.46
      Four week                                  5.14              2.96                  4.09               2.71
      cumulative increase                       (1.05)            (0.71)                (1.40)             (1.00)
          t-stat of difference                            1.72                                    0.80
      Number of households                      7,881             13,460                7,852             13,423
                                                  Panel B: Households with sufficient liquid wealth
      Contemporaneous week                       0.90         0.52            0.85            0.58
                                                (0.55)       (0.33)          (0.59)          (0.34)
          t-stat of difference                         0.59                            0.39
      Four week                                  2.53         1.84            1.65            2.25
      cumulative increase                       (1.60)       (0.81)          (2.20)          (1.14)
          t-stat of difference                         0.38                            0.24
      Number of households                      3,528       10,157            3,522          10,132
                                                     Panel C: Households with low liquid wealth
      Contemporaneous week                       3.36          1.92           3.05          1.74
                                                (0.54)        (0.54)         (0.59)        (0.57)
          t-stat of difference                         1.90                           1.60
      Four week                                  7.01          5.92           5.60          3.64
      cumulative increase                       (1.39)        (1.43)         (1.82)        (2.03)
          t-stat of difference                         0.55                           0.72
      Number of households                      4,353         3,303           4,330         3,291

Note: Standard errors in parentheses. The table reports the propensity to consume NCP goods out of an ESP in percent. The
regressions in the first pair of columns include fixed effects for each week in the sample and in the second pair include fixed
effects for each week for each means of reciept. All regressions include household fixed effects and are weighted by the NCP
projection factor for 2008. Each sample includes only households that report receipt during the period of the experimental
variation, sufficient ESP information for that specification, and meet the standard NCP static reporting requirement for the
year. Calculated based on data from The Nielsen Company (US) LLC and provided by the Marketing Data Center at the
University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
          TABLE 10—S PENDING R ESPONSES BY L IQUIDITY AND S ELF -C ONTROL :             REGRET OF PURCHASES


  About how often
                                                                                Using only variation in timing
   do you or other
                    Using all variation in time of receipt                      within each method of receipt
     household
   members make
   purchases that                 Often or      Rarely or                                   Often or    Rarely or
  you later regret?             Occasionally     Never                                     Occasionally Never
                      Often                                                    Often
                                                       Panel A: All households
 Contemporaneous          2.80                1.10        1.81          3.64                    0.92             1.80
 week                    (1.64)              (0.34)      (0.31)        (1.99)                  (0.38)           (0.33)
    t-statistic of difference                       1.53                                                1.77
 Four week                7.54                3.61        4.04          7.44                    2.83             3.61
 cumulative              (4.83)              (0.96)      (0.76)        (7.06)                  (1.29)           (1.07)
    t-statistic of difference                       0.35                                                0.47
 Number of
                          481                8,426           12,915             479            8,399           12,876
 households
                                          Panel B: Households with sufficient liquid wealth
 Contemporaneous          1.27              0.27        0.83          2.77           0.10        0.97
 week                    (2.77)            (0.45)      (0.37)        (3.25)         (0.49)      (0.37)
    t-statistic of difference                     0.96                                     1.42
 Four week                10.80             3.29        1.37          9.81           2.64        1.78
 cumulative              (8.54)            (1.27)      (0.90)       (12.40)         (1.72)      (1.28)
    t-statistic of difference                     1.23                                     0.40
 Number of
                           221               4,927            8,758             221            4,917            8,737
 households
                                              Panel C: Households with low liquid wealth
 Contemporaneous          4.17                2.02        3.49         4.40         1.77        3.24
 week                    (2.03)              (0.52)      (0.57)       (2.61)       (0.57)      (0.62)
    t-statistic of difference                       1.91                                  1.75
 Four week                7.20                4.32        8.68         6.98         2.93        6.65
 cumulative              (5.82)              (1.48)      (1.38)       (8.15)       (1.97)      (1.89)
    t-statistic of difference                       2.15                                  1.36
 Number of
                          260                3,499            4,157             258            3,482            4,139
 households
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. The table reports the propensity to consume NCP goods out of an ESP in percent.
The regressions in the first triplet of columns include fixed effects for each week in the sample and in the second triplet
include fixed effects for each week for each means of receipt. All regressions include household fixed effects and are
weighted by the NCP projection factor for 2008. Each sample includes only households that report receipt during the period
of the experimental variation, sufficient ESP information for that specification, and meet the standard NCP static reporting
requirement for the year. Calculated based on data from The Nielsen Company (US) LLC and provided by the Marketing
Data Center at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
28


with the existence of some households that are naive about their self control problems (Ak-
erlof, 1991; O’Donoghue and Rabin, 1999). That is, if the primary source of variation were
not problems of self-control, but instead the perceptions of them and therefore the where-
withal to manage them, then a response of never or rarely regretting would signal lack of
understanding and lack of management of self-control problems.
   As a second approach, I estimate whether the spending response is higher for house-
holds that delay responding to the supplemental survey, relative to households that re-
spond rapidly. Households that delay response may have more problems of short-term
self-control. Dividing the sample into three groups whose responses to the survey were
rapid, medium and slow, reveals almost no correlation between delay in survey response
and liquidity.21 Not only is there no evidence that procrastination is associated with worse
consumption smoothing but there is some statistically weak evidence that, households who
procrastinate responding to the survey have slightly lower spending responses. Among
households with sufficient liquidity, only those who respond to the survey in a middling
amount of time spend significant amount on arrival. Among households with low liquidity,
there is no detectable pattern.
   In sum, while there is statistically weak evidence that there is a small portion of the popu-
lation with ex-post perceived self-control problems who also have large spending responses
to liquidity, there is no evidence that theories of hyperbolic discounting or self-control ex-
plain a significant portion of the observed differences in spending responses in this natural
experiment for the two measures studied here.

                                 VII.    Conclusion and discussion of results

  This evidence has several implications for the modeling of consumption and saving be-
havior, summarized in Table 11.
  This paper shows that household beliefs were not an important determinant of the month
to month increase in household spending caused by the arrival of stimulus payments in
2008. The economic stimulus payments of 2008 were widely anticipated and their arrival
caused significant spending increases even among households anticipating the payments.
  The significant average response to the (largely expected) payments is almost entirely
due to the behavior of the subpopulation of households that have low levels of liquidity, less
than two months’ worth of income. Thus, on one level, the view that households smooth
consumption across predictable changes in income subject only to the financial friction
posed by a borrowing constraint receives significant support.
  However, spending responses are persistent across years rather than being reflections only
of transitory economics circumstances, such moderate income shocks or temporal manage-
ment of illiquid assets. Low income two years prior to the payments is highly correlated
with large spending responses to the payments. Income growth, although not measured
precisely, explains almost none of the variation in spending response. While this persis-
tence could be due to budget constraints, say through means-tested assistance programs,

   21 A table with the regression results is contained in the unpublished appendix. I divide households into rapid, medium,
and slow responders depending on whether they respond the day of the survey, in days 1-7, or after 8 of more days for email
surveys, and in the first 5 days, in days 6 to 12, and after 13 or more days for mail surveys.
           TABLE 11—S PENDING RESPONSES BY LIQUIDITY AND SELF CONTROL :               REGRET OF PURCHASES


                                                       If correlated with low                          Independent
                                                              liquidity                                  channel
                                                    Explanation
                            Correlated                 under        Alternative                          Is there
                           with a higher Correlation textbook      explanation of                      correlation
                           propensity to with low buffer stock        spending                       conditional on
 Factor                       spend?      liquidity    theory         response                          liquidity?


 Decrease in income              No
 (poorly measured)

 Less than median                Yes              0.13           Means-         Ability to earn Yes, channel like
                                                                testing or       and smooth      sophistication,
 income (2006)
                                                               impatience                            ability
 Positive news on                No               -0.01                                                No
 arrival

 Unexpected or             Yes, insignif          0.08                                      Possibly, channel
                                                                                                  like
 less than expected
                                                                                             sophistication
 Lack of financial               Yes              0.31         Low wealth       Planning      Yes, but not
                                                              implies little causes saving,   statistically
 planning
                                                              need to plan     smoothing         strong
 Little/no vacation                               -0.01
                           Weak, week
 planning                 of arrival only
 Low use of                                       0.13         Poor have   Optimization Yes only week of
                           Yes, week of                        little time  over goods     arrival, low
 specials, deals
                           arrival only                                      and time        liquidity
 Spender household               Yes              0.31         Impatience     Some       Yes only week of
                                                               causes low households are   arrival, low
                                                                liquidity hand-to-mouth      liquidity
 Often regret              Yes, insignif          0.06                                     5 percent of
                                                                                         households lack
 purchases
                                                                                           self-control
 Procrastination of              No               -0.03
 survey

Note: Each variable is defined as a binary variable so that correlations are comparable. Low income is defined as less than
the median income. “Yes, insignif” indicates effects that are behaviorally important but statistically insignificant.
30


I also find that a number of behaviors and measures of household type are as important
explanators of which households smooths spending across the arrival of liquidity. Arrival
causes larger spending responses for the type of households that lives for today, for those
households having made a financial plan in the last two years, and for households that us-
ing more coupons or deals when making purchases. Statically weak, arrival also causes
somewhat larger spending for households that are disappointed in their payment amount,
for households that do not plan for vacations, as well as for the small share of people who
often regret past purchase.
   A buffer stock or liquidity management model in which some households are highly
impatient would match the evidence of large spending responses among households with
low liquidity as identified by the saver-spender distinction. And costly investment in skills
could further match the relationship between impatience and low labor income (e.g. more
impatient households invest in less education). But other evidence suggests a role for so-
phistication or planning, which could potentially be a result of low liquidity or impatience.
   Alternatively, low levels of economic sophistication or high costs of optimization may
cause both low levels of liquid wealth and poor consumption smoothing. Low ability or
economic sophistication is a persistent characteristic, and can cause both poor economic
outcomes like wealth, income, and consumption volatility, and outcomes like lack of plan-
ning, lack of coupon use, and little understanding of payment programs like the stimulus
program. In this view, high spending responses to predictable income and lack of planning,
being a ‘spender,’ etc., are all symptoms of low levels of sophistication, for want of a better
term.
                                    REFERENCES

Agarwal, Sumit, Chunlin Liu, and Nicholas S. Souleles. 2007. “The Response of Con-
  sumer Spending and Debt to Tax Rebates – Evidence from Consumer Credit Data.” Jour-
  nal of Political Economy, 115(6): 986–1019.
Agarwal, Sumit, John C. Driscoll, Xavier Gabaix, and David Laibson. 2009. “The Age
  of Reason: Financial Decisions over the Life Cycle and Implications for Regulation.”
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall(51-177).
Akerlof, George. 1991. “Procrastination and Obedience.” American Economic Review, 1–
  19.
Ameriks, John, Andrew Caplin, and John Leahy. 2003. “Wealth Accumulation and the
 Propensity to Plan.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3): 1007–1047.
Angeletos, George-Marios, David Laibson, Andrea Repetto, Jeremy Tobacman, and
  Stephen Weinberg. 2001. “The Hyperbolic Consumption Model: Calibration, Simula-
  tion, and Empirical Evaluation.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 15(3): 47–68.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, Jonathan Skinner, and Steven Weinberg. 2001. “What Accounts
  for the Variation in Retirement Wealth among U.S. Households?” American Economic
  Review, 91(4): 832–857.
Bertrand, Marianne, and Adair Morse. 2009. “What do High-Interest Borrowers Do
  with their Tax Rebate?” American Economic Review, 99(2): 418–23.
Broda, Christian, and David E. Weinstein. 2010. “Product Creation and Destruction:
  Evidence and Price Implications.” American Economic Review, 100(3): 691–723.
Broda, Christian, and Jonathan Parker. 2014. “The Economic Stimulus Payments of
  2008 and the Aggregate Demand for Consumption.” Journal of Monetary Economics,
  68(S20-36).
Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor. 2009. “Consumer Expenditure
  Survey Results on the 2009 Economic Stimulus Payments (Tax Rebates).” Survey.
Caballero, Ricardo J. 1995. “Near Rationality, Heterogeneity, and Aggregate Consump-
  tion.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 27(1): 29–48.
Campbell, John Y., and N. Gregory Mankiw. 1989. “Consumption, Income, and Interest
  Rates: Reinterpreting the Time Series Evidence.” in Olivier Jean Blanchard and Stanley
  Fischer eds. NBER Macroeconomics Annual.
Carroll, Christopher D. 1997. “Buffer-Stock Saving and the Life Cycle/Permanent In-
  come Hypothesis.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(1): 1–55.
Chetty, Raj, John Friedman, Søren Leth-Petersen, Torben Nielsen, and Tore Olsen.
  2014. “Active vs. Passive Decisions and Crowd-Out in Retirement Savings Accounts:
  Evidence from Denmark.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(3): 1141–1219.
32


Choi, James J., David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian. 2009. “Mental Accounting
 in Portfolio Choice: Evidence from a Flypaper Effect.” American Economic Review,
 99(5): 2085–95.
Deaton, Angus. 1991. “Saving and Liquidity Constraints.” Econometrica, 59(5): 1221–
  1248.
Di Maggio, Marco, Amir Kermani, and Rodney Ramcharan. 2015. “Monetary Policy
  Pass-Through: Household Consumption and Voluntary Deleveraging.” Society for Eco-
  nomic Dynamics 2015 Meeting Papers 256.
Grinblatt, Mark, Matti Keloharju, and Juhani Linnainmaa. 2011. “IQ and Stock Mar-
  ket Participation.” The Journal of Finance, 66(6): 2121–2164.
Gross, David B., and Nicholas S. Souleles. 2002. “Do Liquidity Constraints and Interest
  Rates Matter for Consumer Behavior? Evidence from Credit Card Data.” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 117(1): 149–185.
Gross, Tal, Matthew J. Notowidigdo, and Jialan Wang. 2014. “Liquidity Constraints
  and Consumer Bankruptcy: Evidence from Tax Rebates.” The Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 96(3): 431–443.
Gul, Faruk, and Wolfgang Pesendorfer. 2004a. “Self-Control and the Theory of Con-
 sumption.” Econometrica, 72(1): 119–158.
Gul, Faruk, and Wolfgang Pesendorfer. 2004b. “Self Control, Revealed Preferences and
 Consumption Choice.” Review of Economic Dynamics, 7(2): 243–264.
Hurst, Erik. 2003. “Grasshoppers, Ants, and Pre-Retirement Wealth: A Test of Permanent
 Income.” National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc NBER Working Papers 10098.
Internal Revenue Service, U.S. Department of the Treasury. 2008. “IRS Announces
  Economic Stimulus Payment Schedules, Provides Online Payment Calculator.”
Jappelli, Tullio. 1990. “Who is Credit Constrained in the U. S. Economy?” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 105(1): 219–234.
Jappelli, Tullio, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2014. “Fiscal Policy and MPC Heterogeneity.”
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 6(4): 107–36.
Jappelli, Tullio, Jörn-Steffen Pischke, and Nicholas S. Souleles. 1998. “Testing For Liq-
  uidity Constraints In Euler Equations With Complementary Data Sources.” The Review
  of Economics and Statistics, 80(2): 251–262.
Johnson, David S., Jonathan A. Parker, and Nicholas S. Souleles. 2006. “House-
  hold Expenditure and the Income Tax Rebates of 2001.” American Economic Review,
  96(5): 1589–1610.
Kaplan, Greg, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2014. “A Model of the Consumption Response
 to Fiscal Stimulus Payments.” Econometrica, 82(4): 1199–1239.
Keys, Benjamin J., Tomasz Piskorski, Amit Seru, and Vincent Yao. 2014. “Mortgage
  Rates, Household Balance Sheets, and the Real Economy.” National Bureau of Economic
  Research Working Paper 20561.
Krusell, Per, and Anthony A. Smith, Jr. 1998. “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the
  Macroeconomy.” Journal of Political Economy, 106(5): 867–896.
Ludvigson, Sydney. 1999. “Consumption and credit: a model of time-varying liquidity
  constraints.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 81(3): 434–447.
Lusardi, Annamaria. 1999. Behavioral Dimensions of Retirement Economics. New York:
  Brookings Institution/Russell Sage Foundation.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2007. “Baby Boomer retirement security:
  The roles of planning, financial literacy, and housing wealth.” Journal of Monetary Eco-
  nomics, 54(1): 205–224.
O’Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin. 1999. “Doing It Now or Later.” The American
  Economic Review, 89(1): 103–124.
Parker, Jonathan A. 1999. “The Reaction of Household Consumption to Predictable
  Changes in Social Security Taxes.” The American Economic Review, 89(4): 959–973.
Parker, Jonathan A., Nicholas S. Souleles, David S. Johnson, and Robert McClelland.
  2013. “Consumer Spending and the Economic Stimulus Payments of 2008.” American
  Economic Review, 103(6): 2530–53.
Reis, Ricardo. 2006. “Inattentive consumers.” Journal of Monetary Economics,
  53(8): 1761–1800.
Sahm, Claudia R., Matthew D. Shapiro, and Joel Slemrod. 2010. “Household Response
  to the 2008 Tax Rebate: Survey Evidence and Aggregate Implications.” In Tax Policy
  and the Economy, Volume 24. NBER Chapters, 69–110. National Bureau of Economic
  Research, Inc.
Shapiro, Matthew D., and Joel Slemrod. 1995. “Consumer Response to the Timing of
  Income: Evidence from a Change in Tax Withholding.” The American Economic Review,
  85(1): 274–283.
Sims, Christopher A. 2003. “Implications of rational inattention.” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 50(3): 665–690.
Souleles, Nicholas S. 1999. “The Response of Household Consumption to Income Tax
  Refunds.” American Economic Review, 89(4): 947–958.
Souleles, Nicholas S. 2000. “College tuition and household savings and consumption.”
  Journal of Public Economics, 77(2): 185–207.
Stephens, Jr., Melvin. 2003. “3rd of tha Month: Do Social Security Recipients Smooth
  Consumption Between Checks?” American Economic Review, 93(1): 406–422.
34


Stephens, Jr., Melvin. 2008. “The Consumption Response to Predictable Changes in Dis-
  cretionary Income: Evidence from the Repayment of Vehicle Loans.” The Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 90(2): 241–252.
Zeldes, Stephen P. 1989a. “Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical Inves-
  tigation.” Journal of Political Economy, 97(2): 305–346.
Zeldes, Stephen P. 1989b. “Optimal Consumption with Stochastic Income: Deviations
  from Certainty Equivalence.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104(2): 275–298.
