                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     OPTIMAL MONETARY GROWTH




                          Andrew B. Abel




                      Working Paper No. 2136




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                            January 1987




I thank Martin Feldstein, Stanley Fischer, Robert King, Nobu
Kiyotaki, N. Gregory Mankiw, Bennett McCallum, Julio Rotemberg,
Lawrence Summers, an anonymous referee and participants in the NBER
Summer Institute and the Public Finance Seminar at Harvard
University for helpful comments on an earlier draft. Financial
support from tha Amoco Foundation Term Professorship in Finance,
the National Science Foundation and the Sloan Foundation is grate—
fully acknowledged. Earlier drafts of this paper were written when
I was an Associate Professor at Harvard University. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Economic
Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                 NBER Working Paper #2136
                                                 January 1987




                            Optimal Monetary Growth




                                    ABSTRACT




In the absence of monetary superneutrality, inflation affects capital accumul-

ation and the demand for real balances. This paper derives the combination of

monetary and lump—sum fiscal policy which maximizes the sum of discounted util-

ities of representative consumers in present and future generations. Under the

optimal policy package, the steady state has a zero nominal interest rate and

has monetary contraction at the rate of intergenerational discount. As the rate

of intergenerational discount rate approaches zero, optimal policy maximizes

steady state utility of the representative consumer. In this case, the optimal

steady state is characterized by a constant nominal money supply.




                                                Andrew B. Abel
                                                The Wharton School
                                                The University of Pennsylvania
                                                Philadelphia, PA 19104
   This paper re—examines the implications of finite hfetimes for optimal monetary and fiscal

policy. It is well—known from Sidreuski (1 967) that if consumers have infinite horizons, then

money is superneutrel) Under superneutrality, the steady state capital stock is independent of

the rate of monetary growth, and the optimal rate of monetary growth is that rate which leads

consumers to hold the satiation level of reel balances as suggested by Friedman (1 969). By

contrast, if selfish consumers have finite lives, then, as suggested by Tobin (1 980, p.90) in his

discussion of Wallace (1 980), and as demonstrated more formally by Weiss (1 980) and Drazen

(1 981 ), superneutrality does not hold. In the absence of superneutrality , the consideration of

optimal monetary growth must take account of the effects of inflation on capital accumulation as

well as on the demand for reel balances.

   Using the utility of the representative consumer in the steady state as the criterion for

evoiuatin9 policy, both Summers (1 981) and Weiss (1 980) conclude that the optimal net rate

of nominal monetary growth is positive. Summers reaches this conclusion by using U. S. data to

calibrate certain parameters of a monetary growth model in which savings is not determined by

utility mcirnization, but rather is specified to be proportional to disposable income as in Tobin

(1 965). Weiss's conclusion is a theoretical proposition based on an overlapping generations

model with money in the utility function. In addition, Weiss points out that optimal monetary

policy will not satisfy Friecknen's prescription that the satiation level of real balances be held,

or equivalently, that the nominal interest rate be equal to zero in the steady state. However,

Weiss's conclusions about optimal monetary policy are based on an analysis of second- best

policy. In general, two independent policy instruments are required to allow the competitive

economy to reach the first—best optimum. I will demonstrate in this paper that the policy

package which allows the competitive economy to mcimize the utility of the representative

consumer in the steady state is characterized by a constant nominal money supply and a zero

nominal interest rate. These results differ from Weiss's results because, (a) consistent with
                                              2




Friedman (1 969), I specify the existence of a satiation level of real balances and (b) I

determine first-best rather than second—best policy. This characterization of optimal policy

applies whether money creation takes place via lump—sum government transfers or as a result

of monetizing the fiscal deficit.

   Section I presents a model of a deterministic competitive economy with money end captel.

The analysis of optimal policy requires some criterion function to evaluate the outcome of

policy. Section II presents the criterion function introduced by Sarnuelson (1 967,1 968) and

then develops a justification for this criterion function based on individual utility maximization.

In a limiting case, maximization of this criterion function is equivalent to maximization of the

utility of the representative consumer in the steady state. Section III presents the policy

package which maximizes the policy criterion function in the steady state. Steady state utility of

the representative consumer is maximized by a constant nominal money stock and a fiscal pohcy

that supports a zero nominal interest rate. More generally, if the policy criterion function

discounts the utility of future generations, then the optimal steady state is still characterized by

a zero nominal interest rate, but has a constant (negative) growth rate of nominal money

balances rather than a constant level of nominal balances. The optimal policy in section III is

derived under the asumption that money creation is effected through lump-sum transfers. In

section IV, I model money creation as arising from the financing of fiscal deficits and

demonstrate that the optimal policy in the steady state is virtually the same as with monetary

transfers as in section III.

I. The Competitive Economg
   The model analyzed in this section follows Weiss (1 980) with minor modification so the

description will be brief. Let Nt be the number of consumers born at the beginning of period t.

Each consumer lives for two periods and inelastically supplies one unit of labor when young. Old

consumers do not work. The aggregate production function is linearly homogeneous in capital Kt
                                               3




and labor Nt, and the production function can be written in intensive form as

                                 = f(kt)                       >   0, f" < 0                     (1)
where t is the output/labor ratio and kt Kt/Nt is the capital/labor ratio.

   The homogeneous output can be consumed or used as capital in the following period. In

competitive factor marketsthe (gross) interest rate, P, end the wage rate, wt, are equal to the

marginal products of capital end labor, respectively,

                                  = P(k)           1 + f(kt)                                     (2)

                               wt = w(kt)          f(k) — ktf '(kt)                              ()
   There are two assets in the economy. In addition to capital, there is fiat money. Let Mt be the

nominal aggregate stock of fiat money outstanding at the beginning of period t and let Ht be the

nominal aggregate amount of (lump—sum) monetary transfers (i.e., new money) given to old

consumers immediately after the beginning of period t. Thus the evolution of nominal aggregate

rnoneij balances is given by

                        Mt+i = Mt + Ht               t+i1lt
In (4)     1 is defined as the gross growth rate of the nominal aggregate stock of fiat money

during period t. Letting t denote the money price of goods, define the reel stock of fiat money

and the real value of monetary transfers, each deflated by the number of young consumers as

                                   M/(pN)                                                        (5)
                                   H1/(pN)                                                       (6)
   Let iY.1         i /p be defined as the gross rate of inflation. In the steady state with a

constant rate of monetary growth, t, end with constant reel balances per capita, the rate of

inflation is constant

                           If = pIG                                                              (7)
where 6 Nt/Nt_i is the gross rate of population growth.

    Let ct denote the consumption of a young consumer in period t and let      denote the
                                                     4



consumption of en old consumer in period t. A representative consumer born in period tobtains

utility from consumption when young, Ct, consumption when old, xt+ 1 and the reel stock of

monetjheholdsattheendofperiodt. Sinceell moneijsheldbyyoungconsumersattheendof

each period, the value of real balances held by a representative consumer atthe end of period t is

     1 /(p1N1) = 6lft+ 1            The utility of a representative consumer is

                             U1 = U(c1, x1+1 , G11m11)                                                 (8)
where U( , , ) is strictly concave and is strictly increasing in ct             x1 i• In addition,

supposethatciandxt+i areeechnorrnalgoodsandthatforeechct,xt+i >Othereexistsa
satiation level of real balances m* such that OtJ(ct, xt+ 1 6'Tt+ i m*)/ôrn = 0. The existence of

a satiation level of reel balances is an important element of Frieónans optimal quantity of

monetj.

   Finally, suppose that there is a balanced—budget pay-as-you-go lump-sum tax and transfer

system which, in period t, taxes each young consumer and gives each oldconsumer a subsidy

of G.

    It   is convenient to define St as the saving of a consumer born at the beginning of period t

                            St = wt--ct                                                                ()
Recalling that at the end of period t the consumer holds real balances of 6TY 1 mt+ 1 it is clear

that the consumers holding of capital is equal to St — 6t+ 1 mt+ . In period t+ 1 , when the

consumer is old, his resources available for consumption are equal to the sum of his gross

capital income         — GiT. 1 mt+ 1 JRt+ 1 ) his money balances carried over from the previous

period (Grnt+ 1 ) the monetary transfer he receives t+ ), and the fiscal transfer he

receives (6t ). so that
                  1



                   = (St - &nt+irni+i)Rt+i               +
                                                             (m11 + h11     +
                                                                                 tt+i)G              (10)
Using the definition   of saving   in   (9), equation (10) can be used to derive the lifetime budget


constraint
                                                     5




t+ict + xt+1 +                            - 1)Gmt+i = Rt+i(wt- tt) + 6(ht+i +                                     (11)
Note that t+ 1 t+ i — 1 is the net nominal interest rate , and then observe that the left hand

side of (11) is the future value of expenditures on consumption when young, consumption when

old, and the rental of reel balances. The right hand side of (11) is the future value of lifetime

income net of taxes.

      The first-order conditions for the consumer's optimization problem are easily obtained by

using (9) and (10) to substitute for Ct end xt+ 1 in the utility function (8) and then

differentiating with respect to St and mt+ 1 Evaluating these conditions in the steady state and

using (7) to substitute for steady state inflation yields

                                              = RU<                                                                (12)
                       Iii(R/G)       111x =      (I1/G)Um                                                         (13)

where         ô1J( )/ôc, U '( )mx, 1m ii( )/o(&rrm)                   in the   steady state.

     To interpret (1 2) note that a young consumer who chooses            to hold   an additional   unit of       capital


by foregoing a unit of consumption suffers a utility loss of U from            the reduction in         consumption

when young. However, his consumption when old            is increased by R units which raises               utility by
RUx. An optimizing consumer        will invest   to the point where the      utility loss U equals          the   utility
gem RU<. To interpret        (1 3),   use the expression   for the steady state      rate of inflation in (7) to


obtain Urn =       (R - 1 /ir)U. A consumer who rearranges his portfolio              by reckicing   his holding of

capital   by one   unit and increasing   his holding of real   balances   by one    unit loses   (P -   1   /lr) units


of   second period consumption which induces a utility loss of (R - 1 uiøU. The optimizing

consumer equates this utility loss with the utility gain Urn from holding an additional unit of

real balances.

     Finally, observe that the optimal saving of a consumer, St' can be written as

                    St = s(wt — it, 6Eh +t+1J' t+i R1 )                                                            (1'1)

Theassump1ionthetcandx1 arenormelgoodsimpliesthat0<s1 <1 and-1/R ' S2 =
                                                6




—(1-si)/Rt+i < Owheres1 istheparti&denvativeofs( , , , )withrespecttoitnth
argument. In &kiition, tt follows that dst/dtt + 't't+ 1 <o so that a permanent increase in

the fiscal transfer from young consumers to old consumers leads to a reduction in individual

saving

IL The Pohcqmakers Objective Function
   The competitive monetary growth model in section i is essentially identical to that in Weiss

(1 g80). Weiss then used this model to examine the effects of policy on the utility of the

rsoresentative consumer in the steady state. In this section I adopt a more general criterion

function for policy evaluation. In particular, follow Samuelson (1 967,1 968) and assume that

in period t the policyrneker attempts to maximize


                       Wt = (1-a)               aiu+                                             (15)
                                         j=-l
subject to the aggregate resource constraint

                           C1 + x/G = f(kt) + k1 - Okt+i                                         (16)
and the constraint that     1
                                 fixed by history. As pointed out by Calvo and Obstfeld (1 985),

the utility of old consumers, Ut_ 1' must be included in the period t criterion function to avoid

clynemic inconsistency.2

   The criterion function in (1 5) may strike some readers as 1h There are two answers

that may be offered to such an objection. First, if one is willing to use Weisss criterion

function........rnaxirnizing the utility of a representative consumer in the steady sthte.._then one

metj merely set equal to one in the discussion of optimal policy in sections III and IV.

Formally, the Sarnuelson welfare function approaches the criterion function used by Weiss as

 -1.
   A second justification for (1 5) involves an alternative specification of the individual utility

function which leads to optimal decision rules for an individual consumer which are identical to
                                                     7




those derived in section I. Specifically, let V1 be the utility of an individual generation t

consumer and let     be the average utility of the entire cohort of generation t consumers. Now

suppose that an individual generation t consumer cares about the average level of utility of the

entire generation t cohort and the average level of utility of the entire generation 1+ 1 cohort, in

addition to his own consumption and real money balances es in (8). tn particular, let the utility

function of a generation t consumer be

                      Vt = Ut + aV +                                                            (17)
wherea>O, 'p0, a+'y< 1 andUisgivenby(8). ProvidedthatNtislarge,thedecision
rules for en individual which meximize (1 7) will be identical to those which meximize (8).

Thus, the behavior of a competitive economy with meximizing consumers will be unchanged if

the individual utility function (8) is replaced by (1 7).

   To obtain en expression for average utility in terms of the streams of consumption and real

money balances, calculate the average value (over generation t consumers) of both sides of

(17),
                      (1-u) =             +                                                     (18)
where     is the average value of U. Equation (18) is a linear first-order constant coefficient

difference equation. The non-explosive solution to the equation can be written eesily by defining

p /(1-o) andobservingthet 0< < 1. Withthisdefinitionobservethat
                              = (1-ui'iQ+                                                       (19)
                                              j =0
Finally, obvi e that Y4... = (1-UY'Wt where_1 is the average utility of oldconsumers

at time t aid Wt is the policy criterion function in period t es shown in (1 5). Thus, in the

steaj state, reeximization of Y is equivalent to mcimization of the Sernuelsonien criterion

function in (15).
                                                9



marginal cost of producing money is zero.



B. Optimal Police

   In this sectrnn present the combination of monetary and fiscal policies which aflows the

competitive economy to achieve the soci& optimum in the steady state. This strategy is different

from that pursued by Weiss (1 980). Weiss essentially restricted his analysis to a second— best

framework by assuming that the policy authority can "control only the size of the nominal

transfer to each old person. Particularly, the authority is denied the possibility of acquiring

real capital." (p. 568). In the optimal policy package presented below, the policy authority

will, as in Weiss, be prevented from acquiring real capital. However, the policy authority will

have two instruments: the gross rate of nominal monetary growth, p. and the size of the

balanced- budget peg- as- you- go intergenerational transfer i.'

   The optimal policy package in the steady state is

                                 =     p                                                       (21a)
c such that          pm* + Gk =         s(w(k*) - t, G((- 1 )m*411 , p/6, G/p)                 (21b)
where k* is the Modified Golden Rule capital stock and m* is the satiation level of real balances.

Equation (21a) implies that (using (7)) the steady stategross rate of inflation is i = /6 so

that the steady state gross real (pecuniary) rate of return on money is 6/u. Equation (21 b)

states that when the real rates of return on money end capital are each equal to G/ the Modified

Golden Rule capital stock and the satiation level of real balances will be willingly held by

consumers when is optimally chosen. To see that there ecists a unique optimal (which may

of course be negative) recall that the normality of c and x implies that if k, m, and p are given,

then ds/di = de/dt + dst/dt 1 •4 Finally, recall that the gross nominal interest rate is

equal to the product of the gross reel rate of return, R, and the gross rate of inflation, if. In the

optimal steady state, P = G/ and ii' = /G so that the gross nominal interest rate is equal to one
                                               10




and the net nominal interest rate is equal to zero.

   Having presented the policy package which allows the competitive economy to achieve the

social optimum, several remarks are in order:

   (1) The prescription for optimal monetary growth, t = , is independent of the production

function and is independent of the particular specification of the individual utility function.

However, the optimal fiscal transfer depends on both individual preferences and the production

function, in general.

   (2) The result that the optimal gross rate of monetary growth is equal to is the same as in

two other capitalistic monetary models with money in the utility function. Dornbusch and

Frenkel (1 973) have shown that i = is optimal in the Sidrauski model where is the discount

factor in the utility function of the representative infinitely-lived consumer. Also McCallum

(1 983) has shown that in an overlapping generations model with money in the utility function

and a fixed rate of return on capital (rather than a neoclassical production function), the

optimal rate of monetary growth is . The prescription that ,t = is also obtained for endowment

economies by Brock (1   975) and Townsend (1 980).
   (3) If money is not in the utility function, then the first—best social optimum is described

by the Atemporal Allocation condition (20a) and the Intertemporal Allocation condition (20b).

In this case, the optimal steady state policy package is simply j, = . Fiscal policy — more

specifically the choice of — is irrelevant in the steady state, provided that aggregate saving is

large enough to absorb the Modified Golden Rule capital stock and some positive level of real

balances. However, if aggregate saving is smaller than or equal to the Modified Golden Rule

capitaistock (i.e.,if Gk* s( ,,, )),thenedecreaseintisrequiredtoraiseaggregatesaving
so that the Modified Golden Rule capital stock and some real balances will be willingly held in

private portfolios. The applicability of the results in this remark to monetary policy must be

judged in light of McCallums (1 983) argument that, in this case, Mt is only a store of value,
                                                 11




and if Mt is only a store of value then it is not appropriate to interpret Mt as money.

   (4) If = 1 , so that the objective of the policy authority is to maximize steady state

individual utility (8), as in Weiss (1 980), then the optimal policy package calls for a constant

nominal money supply and a level of t which leads toe zero nominal interest rate in the long

run.5 Why do these results differ from Weis&s finding that "the maximum sustainable utility

level will require positive growth in the money supply" (p. 566) and that Friedmens "full

liquidity" rule does not hold in the presence of consumers with finite lives? The sources of the

difference are: (1) in his analysis of policy, Weiss assumes that the marginal utility of money,

Urn, is everywhere positive, which implies that the real rate of return on capital must exceed

the (pecuniary) real rate of return on money; and (2) Weiss restricts his analysis to

second- best policy. Under the assumption that Urn is everywhere positive, it should not be

surprising that the Friecknen rule (zero nominal interest rate) is not the optimal policy; it is

not even a feasible policyl If is specified Urn is specified to be strictly decreasing in the level of

reel balances, end to become zero at some level of real balances, so that the Frie&nan rule is

feasible, then as shown above, the Frie&nan full liquidity rule is part of a first-best optimal

policy package. Even if I do not assume that the policy authority has a value of equal to one, but

alternatively has a value of less than one, the first- best optimal policy package is to set p =

and to choose t to peg a zero nominal interest rate in the steady state.

IV. The Government's Budget Constraint

   In previous sections of the paper I igeored the link between the governments fiscal deficit

and money creation. I modeled the tax and transfer system as being run by a fiscal authority that

is constrained to run a balanced budget in every period. The monetary authority increases the

nominal supply of money simply by giving the money to people as if dropping it from a

helicopter (Frie&nan (1 969), p. 4). The first best optimal policy package requires a reduction

in aggregate nominal balances, and to implement this reduction "we substitute a furnace for the
                                                12




helicopter" (Friedman (1 969), p. 1 6). The use of the helicopter and the furnace, rather than

government transactions in goods markets end/or assets markets, to change the nominal money

supply has a long tradition in monetary economics and monetary growth models in particular

(For example, Friedman (1 969), McCallum (1983) endSidreuski (1967)). Nevertheless,

because the helicopter (and furnace) abstraction does not capture the /dproq.'o nature of an

open market purchase or of monetization of a dot icit, the interpretation of monetary policy is

somewhat strained. The previous section of this paper used the helicopter (and furnace)

abstraction in order to be directly comparable to the large and well- known literature that uses

this abstraction. In this section, however, I dispense with the helicopter and furnace, end model

the government's budget constraint.

   The government's budget constraint requires that the rate of creation of claims against the

government is equal to the fiscal deficit. I will maintain the assumption that the government

does not participate in the capital market so that the rate of creation of nominal moneg balances

is equal to the nominal fiscal deficit. In order to allow for a nonzero deficit I relax the

assumption that the aggregate transfers to the old are equal to the taxes levied on the young. Let

  be the reel lump-sum transfer received by each old consumer in period t and, as before, let

be the real lump-sum tax levied on each young consumer in period t. Recalling that Il is the

creation of aggregate nominal balances in period t, the governments budget constraint is

                                = pt(Nt_izt - Nt1J                                            (22)
Using the definition of reel per capita money creation in (6), the government's budget

constraint in real per capita terms can be rewritten as

                               = zt/G -                                                       (23)
   In this modified environment, the budget constraint of an indivijal consumer differs from

that in (11). An old consumer in period t+ 1 has available his gross capital income, his real

balances and the fiscal subsidy so that
                                                13




                      t+i = 1st — Gllt+imt+iJRt+i + t+i + zti.                                  (24)
Usmg the definition of saving in (9), equation (24) can be rearranged to obtain the lifetime

budget constraint

                    + xt+1 +                  - 1)6m41 = Rt+i(wt—tt) +                          (25)
The budget constraint in (25) is identical to the budget constraint in (11) except that
                                                                                          2t+
rather than G(ht+ 1 + t+ i ) is the second-period non-portfolio income on the right hand side.

    The optimal saving of a young generation t consumer is given by

                           St = s(wt—tt, zt+i,nt+i,Rt+i)                                        (26)
where the function s( ,,, ) is identical to that in (1 4) except that the second argument, which

represents net lump-sum transfers received in the second period, is 2t+ 1 rather than G(ht+ 1

+


    I can now examine opt irn& monetary and fiscal policy in this modified economy taking account

of the governments budget constraint. The socially optimal allocation in the steecj state is still

described by the Atemporel Allocation Condition, the Interternporal Allocation Condition, and the

Optimal Quantity of Money Condition (20a, b, c). The optimal steady state is characterized by

the Modified Golden Rule level of capital intensity, k*, such that R(k*) = G/ and by the optimal

level of real balances m*. The optimal (gross) rate of monetary growth is equal to and the

fiscal tex- transfer stjstern must be such that desired savings is exactly large enough to absorb

the Modified 6olden Rule capital stock and the Optimal Quantity of Money

                            + Gk* = s(w(k*) — t, z, /G, 6/a)                                    (27)
The level of fiscal transfers to old consumers in the steady state can be calculated from the

governmenVs budget constraint (23) using the stej state relation h = (it— I )m to obtain

                                  z = G((p-1)m +                                                (28)
Using (28) to substitute for z in (27), and recalling that optimal policy calls for i = , yields

                + Gk = s(w(k*) - t, G1(— 1 )m + ti, /6, G/)                                     (29)
                                               14




   Note that (29) s x1entc& to (21 b) so that in the presence of the government's budget

constraint optimal monelary and fiscal policy in the steady state are given by (21 a,b). The only

difference is that when it is recognized that the rate of money creation is identical to the nominal

fiscal deficit, the optimal lump—sum fiscal transfer to old consumers is 61 (P- I )m* + ti

rather than simply (5t, as in section III - In either formulation, each old consumer receives a

total transfer of (31 (- 1 )m* + ti. Using the helicopter/furnace abstraction, this transfer

consists of a monetary transfer of G(p- 1 )m and a fiscal transfer of Ge. Alternatively, if I rule

out monetary transfers and specify money creation to be equal to the fiscal deficit, then the

entire transfer to old consumers GE (- 1 )m + tJ is a fiscal transfer. In this case if < 1,

then the optimal policy requires monetary contraction, which implies that the fiscal authority

should run a surplus in the steady state.

   In the stylized model of this paper, the distinction between lump-sum monetary transfers

and lump—sum fiscal transfers is somewhat artificial. The formulation of the government's

budget constraint in this section captures the v,Wproqw nature of the transactions by which

money is injected or withdrawn from the economy. However, have shown that the

prescription for optimal policy is essentially the same whether money creation is effected

through transfers or the financing of fiscal deficits.



V. Concluding Remarks

   In this paper I have analyzed optimal monetary and fiscal policy in a competitive economy

populated by overlapping generations of finitely— lived consumers who obtain utility from real

balances. I have shown that maximum sustainable utility requires a constant nominal money

supply and that lump-sum balanced—budget fiscal transfers must beset ealevel that induces

consumers to be satiated with real balances. Thus, optimal policy will lead to a zero nominal

interest rate. More generally, maximization of a weighted average of utility of all future
                                               15




generations requires contraction of the nominal money supply at the rate at which the utility of

one generation is discounted relative the utility of the previous generation. However, even with

this more general criterion function, the Friedman full liquidity rule remains part of the

first-best optimal policy package. This characterization of the optimal policy package holds

regardless of whether money creation occurs via lump-sum transfers to consumers or occurs as

the means of financing fiscal deficits.

    Some readers will undoubtedly object to the presence of money in the utility function.6 If

such readers are willing to analyze policy in an economy in which Mt is purely a store of value,

despite McC&lums argument about the need to model the transactions services of money, they

may apply the results of this paper and set Urn 0. The Optimal policy package in this case will

require only one instrument end indeed is quite simple. set the rate of nominal monetary growth

equal to . Therefore, steady state utility of the representative consumer is maximized by a

constant nominal money supply.

   A second response to readers who object to putting money into the utility function is first to

point out that this formulation is intended to be a short-hand way of modelling the transactions

services of money but then to acknowledge that a more satisfactory modelling strategy would aim

at modelling the transactions services more directly, perhaps by including leisure in the utility

function. Indeed, I think that a useful extension of the research in this paper would be to analyze

monetary and fiscal policy in a model with a more complete specification of transactions

services.

   The result that the optimal rate of monetary growth is equal to is quite robust along several

dimesions. It does not depend on the particular specificietion of technology or preferences; it

does not even depend on whether money is in the utility function. However, this result must be

modified in the presence of uncertainty. An analysis of optimal policy in the presence of

uncertainty appears to be an important topic for future research.
                                                 16




                                               Footnotes




1. In a recent paper, Well (1 986) shows that if there isa continual influx of infinitely—lived

new consumers into an economy, and if these consumers do not receive transfers from existing

consumers, then the economy will not display superneutrality of money even though all

consumers have infinite horizons.

2. If the utility of old consumers,        , were not included in the period I criterion function,

then the social planner would set xt = 0, despite the fact that in period 1- 1 the social planner

had optimally planned for xt to be positive.

3. See Calvo (1978) for an analysis of the case in which the government cannot levy lump-sum

taxes but can levy distort lonary taxes.

4. I follow Diamond (1 965) and assume that preferences and technology are such that for given

tandiL there isaunique steady state.

5. Wallace (1 985) describes a policy package which allows en endowment economy with

perfectly perishable endowments to maximize steady state utility of the representative

consumer. Consistent with the results presented above, the optimal policy package has a

constant stock of nominal fiat money (ti= = 1) and a zero nominal interest rate.

6. See Kei-eken and Wallace (1980), Bryant (1983) and Wallace (1983).
                                          References



Brock, Wilharn A., 1 975, A Simple Perect Foresit Monetary Model, Journal of Monetary
Economics 1, 133-150.

Bryant, John, 1 983, The Role of Overlapping-Generations Models in Monetary Economics: A
Comment, Carnegie- Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 18,15- 50.

Calvo, Guillermo A., 1 978, On the Time Consistency of Optimal Policy in a Monetary Economy,
Econometrica46, 1111-1428.

_____________ and Maurice Obstfeld, 1 985, Optimal Time-Consistent Fiscal Policy with
Uncertain Lifetimes, Columbia University Discussion Paper Series, No. 282.

Diamond, Peter A., 1 965, National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model, American Economic
Review 55,1126-1150.

Dornbusch, Rudiger and Jacob Frenkel, 1 973, Inflation and Growth, Journal of Money, Credit
andBnnking 5,111-156.

Drazen, Allan, 1 981, Inflation and Capital Accumulation Under a Finite Horizon, Journal of
Monetary Economics 8,217-260.

Friedman, Milton, 1 969, The Optimum Quantity of Moneg,in: M. Friedman, The Optimum
Quantity of Money and Other Essays, (Aldine, Chicago) 1 -50.

Kareken, John end Neil Wallace, 1 980, Introthaction, in: J. Kereken end N. Wallace, eds.,
Models of Monetary Economics (Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Minneapolis), 1 -9.

McCallum Bennett T., 1 983, The Role of Overlapping-Generations Models in Monetary
Economics, Carnegie-Rochester CanferenceSerieson Public Policy 18, 9-11.

Sernuelson, Paul A., 1 967, A Turnpike Refutation of the Golden Rule in a Welfare- Mimizing
Many-Year Plan, in: K. Shell, ed., Essays on the Theory of Optimal Economic Growth (M.I.T.
Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts) 269-280.

_______________ 1 968, The Two- Part Golden Rule Dekiced as the Asymptotic Turnpike of
Catenary Motions, Western Economic Journal 6,85-89.

Si&auski, Miguel, 1 967, Rational Choice and Patterns of Growth in a Monetary Economy,
American Economic Review 57, 534- 511.

Summers, Lawrence, 1981 , Optimal Inflation Policy, Journal of Monetary Economics 7,
175-194.

Tobin, James, 1 965, Money and Economic Growth," Econometrica 33, 671-681.
__________ 1 980, Discussion, rn: J. Kareken and N. Wallace, eds., Models of Monetary
Economics (Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Minneapolis), 83- 90.

Townsend, Robert, 1 980, Models of Money with Spatially Separated Agents, In: J. Koreken and
N. Wallace, eds., Models of Monetary Economics (Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,
Minneapolis), 1-9.

Wallace, Neil, 1983, ACornmenton McCallum, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on
Public Policy 18, 51-56.

___________ 1 985, Ricardian Equivalence and Money Dominated in Return: Are They Mutually
Consistent Generally?, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Research Department. Staff
Report 99.

Weiss, Laurence, 1 980, The Effects of Money Supply on Economic Welfare in the Steady State,
Econornetrica 48, 565- 576.
