NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL IMPACTS OF THE MEDIA
Stefano DellaVigna
Eliana La Ferrara
Working Paper 21360
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21360
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2015

Prepared for the Handbook of Media Economics, Elsevier. We are grateful to Gordon Dahl, Matthew
Gentzkow, Magne Mogstad, Ben Olken, Jesse Shapiro and David Stromberg for comments on the
draft. We thank Benedetta Brioschi, Yizhuang Alden Cheng, Brian Wheaton, Martina Zanella, Jeffrey
Zeidel, and Michael Zhang for excellent research assistance. Correspondence: sdellavi@econ.berkeley.edu;
eliana.laferrara@unibocconi.it The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Stefano DellaVigna and Eliana La Ferrara. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Economic and Social Impacts of the Media
Stefano DellaVigna and Eliana La Ferrara
NBER Working Paper No. 21360
July 2015
JEL No. A13,D01,D10,H4,I10,I20,J0,K42,L82,L96,O10
ABSTRACT
In this survey, we review the literature on the impact of exposure to the media. We cast a wide net
and cover media impacts on education, family choices, labor and migration decisions, environmental
choices, health, crime, public economics, attitudes, consumption and savings, and development
economics. We stress five themes. First, the demand for entertainment plays a key role, with the
economic impacts emerging largely as by-products. Second, to understand the media effects one
cannot just focus on the direct effect of exposure but one needs to take into account the crowdingout of alternative activities (substitution effect). Third, the sources of identification play a critical
role in determining what is known: credible estimates of short- and long run effects are available
for some topics and some media but not for others. Fourth, most of the evidence on social and
economic impacts is for exposure to the entertainment media such as television, as opposed to the
printed press. Fifth, for the policy impacts both the substitution effect of media exposure and the
demand for entertainment play an important role.
Stefano DellaVigna
University of California, Berkeley
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
sdellavi@econ.berkeley.edu
Eliana La Ferrara
Universita' Bocconi
Dept. of Economics and IGIER
via Roentgen 1
20136 Milano
Italy
eliana.laferrara@unibocconi.it

1

Introduction

Does television exposure impair educational achievement? Does violence in the media trigger
arousal and violent crime? Can media content aﬀect deep-seated decisions like fertility choices?
Is there consistent evidence of imitation of media behavior?
Questions such as these, of relevance to both researchers and policy-makers, have motivated
the literature on the impacts of media exposure. In this survey, we review this literature,
covering a wide range of economic and social outcomes and summarizing key studies within
each area. To maximize readability, we structure the content by field of study, including
the topics of education, health, crime, consumption, and family choices. Table 1 provides a
summary of the studies we review.
We delineate the content for the survey along three boundaries: outcomes, methodology,
and media. In terms of outcomes, while we cast a wide net, the survey will not cover the
evidence on the impact of media on politics, covered in Strömberg (2015) and Enikolopov
and Petrova (2015), nor the impact of advertising, covered in Wilbur (2015). We also refer to
Tetlock (2015) for the analysis of financial choices.
As far as methodology, we examine a variety of evidence from the field, including natural
experiments, field experiments, and observational data. We do not instead cover evidence
from laboratory experiments or pure survey evidence, methods common in media studies in
psychology, political science, and sociology.
Regarding the media covered, we provide evidence on a wide variety of media outlets, from
the more traditional ones –radio, movies, and television– to the more modern ones–internet
and video games. We do not instead cover the fast-growing literature using text messages and
smartphones to deliver content, given the diﬀerence in themes.1
While we cannot succinctly summarize the results in each of the diﬀerent fields in this
Introduction, we do want to emphasize five recurring themes emerging from the survey: (i)
demand for entertainment; (ii) direct versus substitution eﬀects; (iii) identification and time
horizon; (iv) the role for entertainment media; and (v) policy impacts.
The first one is the key role of the demand for entertainment. In nearly all the settings we
consider, the consumer demand for media content is largely due to demand for entertainment,
with the economic impacts emerging as a by-product. Children watch television for its fun
value, likely not thinking of possible impacts on education. Adults choose to watch a violent
movie or to follow a soap opera for entertainment value, disregarding possible eﬀects on aggression or on family values. This implies that selection into a particular media is likely unrelated
to the preference for particular economic outcomes — say, education, violent crime, or fertility.
The overarching role of the demand for entertainment is reflected in the fact that people spend
1

While the demand for entertainment plays a key role for the applications we survey, SMS messages are
typically used to provide information and reminders.

1

a large share of time on media entertainment: in the US, the average amount of time spent
watching television (which is just one form of media entertainment) is 2.7 hours per day, half
of leisure time (Aguiar, Hurst, and Karabarbounis, 2013).
The demand for entertainment diﬀerentiates the applications we survey from the analysis of
political or financial impacts of the media. The exposure to political information often reflects
a direct demand for political content as Stromberg (2015) and Gentzkow, Shapiro, and Stone
(2015) stress. The exposure to financial-themed media like CNBC also reflects a direct interest
in investment advice.
We incorporate this insight in Section 2 into a simple model of media choice, building on
the model in Dahl and DellaVigna (2009). We assume that consumers choose the optimal use
of time between several activities, some of which are media activities and some are not. For
example, the consumers decide whether to follow a soap opera or to go out with friends. The
value of the media activities takes into account the entertainment value as well as cost factors.
Similarly, there are utility shifters for the value of alternative uses of time. The activities chosen
impact relevant economic outcomes, like education, violent crime, and fertility, but these eﬀects
are not considered as part of the utility-maximizing choice, simplifying the analysis. We then
derive comparative statics of parameters capturing some of the identifying variation in the
media studies.
This takes us to the second key theme, direct versus substitution eﬀects. We stress that
there are two main sources of variation of media eﬀects in this entertainment setting. The
first one is a shock to the entertainment value of a channel, or to its cost, which aﬀects the
audience for a media. For example, violent movies are of higher quality on a particular weekend
(a positive demand shock), or soap operas become more widely available in a given year (a
positive cost shock). In both cases, as the comparative statics indicates, the resulting media
eﬀect estimates incorporate both a direct eﬀect and a substitution eﬀect. The release of a
movie like Hannibal at the theater implies that more people will be watching a (violent) movie
and thus will be doing less of the second-best alternative activity. The net eﬀect of this shock
on crime depends on the comparative eﬀect of violent movies on crime relative to the eﬀect
of the alternative activity on crime. Similarly, to understand the impact of introduction of
a soap opera, we need to consider the activity and content that it substituted for. Thinking
of the substitute activities and evaluating the estimated impact as a net impact relative to
substitutes is a key lesson from the studies. Indeed, Stromberg (2015) stresses that a similar
direct-versus-substitution eﬀect applies to the interpretation of media eﬀects on politics.
The model also highlights a second source of variation, which is a direct shock to the
content of the media. Suppose that an episode of an ongoing soap opera features a gay couple,
or an occurrence of suicide. This change in content is likely to leave the utility-maximizing
choice of media entertainment mostly unaﬀected, especially if the content of the episode is
unanticipated. Still, the content may aﬀect economic behavior, say through imitation. In this
2

case, the estimated media eﬀect captures the direct impact of the media, since the consumption
of substitute activities is held constant.
The third key theme for the survey is the role played by identification and time horizon.
Take the analysis of imitation of media behavior. A first question of interest is whether there
is a short-run imitation eﬀect after a media episode features a particular behavior. A second
question is if there are long-term imitative eﬀects of prolonged exposure to the media. To
identify the first question, high-frequency variation in the content of a widely-seen media
outlet is suﬃcient. But for the identification of long-run eﬀects, one needs plausibly exogenous
variation across places and over time in the introduction of a media outlet which carries unique
content. The variation in identification determines the type of media eﬀects one can credibly
estimate.
For family choices, we have evidence of imitation in both the short-run and long-run.
Kearney and Levine (2014) estimate, among other outcomes, the short-run impact of the US
show 16 and Pregnant on Google searches for keywords related to fertility choices. Conversely,
La Ferrara, Chong and Duryea (2012) estimate the long-term eﬀects on fertility rates in Brazil
of exposure to telenovelas, taking advantage of the staggered introduction of Globo, which
largely introduced telenovelas in Brazil.
In most other cases, however, it is not possible to estimate both short-term and long-term
eﬀects. In the research on media violence and violent crime, Dahl and DellaVigna (2009) exploit
the natural experiment induced by the idiosyncratic release of violent movies to estimate the
short-run eﬀects of exposure to media violence. Their design, however, does not lend itself to
the analysis of long-term eﬀects. Indeed, to our knowledge, there is no study providing credible
estimates of the long-run impact of exposure to media violence. The diﬃculty is that violent
content on the media has been pervasive for a long time, making identification of long-term
exposure near impossible, at least in the United States. In cases such as this, it is tempting
to look for alternative evidence on long-term eﬀects: indeed, even the American Academy of
Pediatrics cites correlational evidence between television usage and violent behavior to support
its policy recommendations. Unfortunately, this evidence is plagued by bias–taste for violence
is likely to drive both behaviors–and should in our mind be disregarded. In these settings we
have credible estimates of short-term eﬀect but are left in the dark regarding long-term eﬀects.
In other cases, like the impact of video games consumption on crime, even short-run eﬀects are
problematic to estimate because high-frequency variation in video game consumption is very
limited.
The fourth theme is the role for entertainment media. A striking feature apparent from
Table 1 is the scarcity of evidence about print media: newspapers and periodicals. To put
things in perspective, variation in newspaper circulation plays a key role in the identification
of political impacts of the media, as local papers provide critical information on local politics
(Stromberg 2015). And yet, when it comes to the impact on outcomes such as education,
3

health, crime, or family choices, most of the available evidence concerns the entertainment
media–television, movies, and internet.2
Even within the entertainment media, the evidence available depends also on ability to find
identifying variation in exposure, as we stressed above. It is easier to find geographic variation
in radio wave penetration or penetration of specific TV channels as driven by geography, cable
programming, or content of movies released. It is harder to find credible variation of the
penetration of television overall (as opposed to a particular channel), of the internet, or of
video games. Thus, we tend to have more evidence on the impact for the first group of media
than for the second group of media.
The fifth key theme is policy impacts. A number of the topics we examine reflect policy
concerns, like the impact of television and of violent media. Yet, the research papers suggest
policy implications which can appear surprising. A first example is that the studies reviewed
do not find consistent evidence of a negative eﬀect of television on education (the evidence in
this respect is mixed), and find that the availability of violent movies in the short-run leads
to reductions, not increases, in crime. The key insight here goes back to the substitution
eﬀects: television or violent movies may be substituting other activities that are not better
for the relevant outcomes. A second example is that one of the most clearly documented
policy objectives achieved by media exposure–the reduction of the fertility rate in developing
countries (e.g., Brazil in the 1970s and 1980s)–was attained as a by-product of the success
of telenovelas, and was not a goal in the design of the entertainment material. This second
example brings us back to the first theme, the overarching role of demand for entertainment.
A more recent set of studies takes stock of the primacy of demand for entertainment for
policy purposes, and takes it one step further: why not attempt to incorporate policy goals
into the entertainment material? The parallel with advertising is clear: marketing companies
have for decades used product placement to sell products, suggesting a natural path for the
use of entertainment to ‘sell’ policies. Still, this strategy faces thorny issues, as one may
legitimately worry about its use for propaganda purposes. We return to the issue of “educational entertainment” (or “edutainment”), discussed more in depth in La Ferrara (2015), in
the Conclusions.

2

Methodological issues

To focus thoughts on the interpretation of media eﬀects, we propose a simple framework
highlighting the diﬀerent channels for the media eﬀects. This model builds on Dahl and
2

This is possibly due to the non-obvious way in which newspaper content on social issues may be coded,
compared to political content. For example, measures of ideological bias in newspaper coverage have been
proposed comparing the terminology used in the articles to that used by congressmen (e.g., Groseclose and
Milyo, 2005) but no similar strategy has been developed for themes related to education, health, etc.

4

DellaVigna (2009).
Consider a discrete choice model where an audience is choosing between activities 1  2  ..,
  Some of these activities are media choices, such as watching a television show, listening to
the news on the radio, or reading a newspaper. Other activities instead represent alternative
uses of time, such as attending a group meeting in a village, reading a book, or travelling to a
nearby concert.
Assume a standard discrete choice framework with activity  yielding utility
 ( ) =  −  + 
where  has a type I extreme distribution. This specification allows for both (i) shocks to
demand  for a media, like the fact that a show becomes very popular, and (ii) shocks to the
supply of a media, such as the introduction of a new show, captured by a change in costs  .
The standard logit derivation implies that the share of time spent on activity  will be
exp ( −  )
 = P

 exp ( −  )

(1)

Expression (1) provides intuitive comparative statics for the utility-maximizing consumption of activity  : the consumption  will be increasing in its value   decreasing in its cost
 and decreasing in the quality of the other media  (for  6= ).

The emphasis of this chapter, however, is not on the consumption  of media activity per
se, but on its impact on some outcome of interest . For example, we may be interested in how
consumption of telenovelas may aﬀect fertility, how watching television may aﬀect educational
attainment, or how watching violent movies may aﬀect crime. We thus consider the outcome
variable  (family decisions, education, crime) which is related to the activity choice. For
simplicity, we assume a linear relationship
=

X

  



That is, each activity  contributes to the outcome  with a ‘direct-eﬀect’ coeﬃcient  
For example, say that activity 1 is watching a soap opera while activity 2 is socializing with
friends. We may assume that exposure to telenovelas tends to reduce fertility (1  0) while
interaction with friends increases it (2  0). The direct eﬀect  could capture for example
an imitation eﬀect of the behavior in the media, say because of persuasion (DellaVigna and
Gentzkow, 2010).
A key assumption is that the individual does not take into account the impact on  in
choosing the utility-maximizing activity   For example, when choosing a soap opera, the
person is not thinking that watching the soap opera will aﬀect his attitudes towards fertility.
This is often a plausible assumption, at least in cases in which the outcome is an incidental
and plausibly unanticipated by-product.
5

The assumption on  implies
P

  exp ( −  )

= P
 exp ( −  )

This expression allows us to derive a set of comparative statics of determinants of activity
choice on the economic outcome , which are the modelling counterpart to the estimates of
media eﬀects. The first comparative statics is the impact of a shift in value   such as the
case in which a media outlet  has become more popular. We derive

P

X

= 
( −  )  =  ( − ̄) 



(2)

where ̄ =    is the average  across all activities, with weights given by the utilitymaximizing choices  .
Expression (2) highlights three important features. First, the sign of the eﬀect does not
depend on the ‘direct-eﬀect’ coeﬃcient  per se, but rather on the comparison between the
direct-eﬀect  and the substitution eﬀect, the average  across all other activities, ̄. That
is, what matters is not whether activity  per se would trigger behavior  but whether it
triggers behavior  more than the alternative activities. The reason is that an increase in
the attractiveness  of activity  crowds out activities   and thus aﬀects  through that
substitution channel. We are thus going to label this channel the “substitution” channel:
the impact of increased exposure to a channel on some outcome  must be evaluated with
respect to whatever it substitutes in its time use. So for example if a soap opera becomes more
popular, its eﬀect on family outcomes must be considered with respect to the activities that it
substitutes, like meeting with friends in a social context.
The second, related point is that the substitution eﬀect depends on the optimal alternative
P
use of time. That is, the net eﬀect depends on ̄ =    which is the average of the eﬀect of
the activities   with weights given by the utility-maximizing choices   So when comparing
the eﬀect of a media shift, one must pay attention to the preferences of the people aﬀected by
that shift, since that determines the weights  . For example, in the case of violent movies, the
eﬀect of the release of a blockbuster violent movie on crime must be compared relative to the
eﬀect of the activities that the relevant group would have chosen otherwise. For people with
high taste for violent movies, these alternative activities may be tilted towards other activities
with a potential violent component, like getting drunk at a bar. Furthermore, that implies that
an increase in exposure to media activity  can have diﬀerent eﬀects for two diﬀerent groups,
even if all the  parameters are the same, as long as the groups diﬀer in their activity choices
  since that aﬀects the relevant ̄ for the group.
The third point stressed by expression (2) is that the eﬀect of an increase in attractiveness
of a channel is going to be proportionately larger the larger the share of time  devoted to
activity   Intuitively, a demand shift to a media outlet will have a larger eﬀect the more
6

significant the consumption of the media outlet was. In light of this point, we track as much
as possible the intensity of exposure to the media outlet.
We can similarly derive the comparative statics with respect to shifts in the price of a media
 We obtain

= − ( − ̄) 

The response to price changes is parallel to the response to demand increases, just with the
opposite sign.
The third instance of comparative statics which we consider is with respect to a change in  
This comparative statics is relevant when there is a temporary shock to the media programming
or content which does not aﬀect consumer demand or cost. Consider for example a popular TV
show which features in a particular episode a gay couple. In this case, the unusual programming
does not lead to a change in  given that it is unanticipated, but it may have a direct eﬀect
on, say, attitudes towards same-sex relationships (the relevant  variable in this case). Another
example would be the news coverage of a prominent suicide case, with the outcome variable
being the incidence of suicide cases in the following days. We assume that activity  on this
particular occasion is associated with a diﬀerent impact  compared to its normal impact.
The comparative statics in this case is

=  


(3)

An increase in the ‘direct-eﬀect’ coeﬃcient  has a bigger eﬀect the larger the share of time
allocated to the program. In this case there is no substitution eﬀect, as individuals are not
reoptimizing their choices.
We use this framework to highlight plausible interpretations of the media eﬀects for a
number of the papers. We stress, though, that for most of the papers it is diﬃcult to disentangle
the channels lacking all the relevant information. For a shifter increasing demand for a media,
for example, one needs to know the activities that the audience substitutes away from. Such
evidence is rarely available in quantitative format. Nevertheless, we believe that this framework
can provide guidance on the interpretation of the media eﬀects.

3

Outcomes

We review the impact of media exposure on a series of outcomes. We separate the outcomes
broadly by field of study, so as to facilitate the access to researchers interested in a particular topic. We start with the impact of television on education, highlighting both lessons on
identification as well as on the direct versus substitution channel.
The next topic, family choices, provides the clearest evidence on imitation of media role
models, whereas the following three topics–the study of migration, environmental impacts,
7

and health–provide interesting caveats to the imitation eﬀects. The study of crime provides
evidence both on the emotional impact of the media and, once again, on the importance of the
substitution eﬀect.
Next, we turn to considering the eﬀect on public economics outcomes, first on social capital
where the substitution eﬀect plays a key role, and then on attitudes towards taxation and
government. Continuing on attitudes, we present evidence on the impact of the media on beliefs
regarding other groups in society or the sources of economic success. Finally, we consider the
impact on consumption and savings.
Throughout, a number of examples come from developing countries; instead of grouping
these examples under a separate ‘development’ section, we weave in the development economics
examples in the relevant topic.

3.1

Education

We start by reviewing studies that have explored the relationship between media exposure and
education. We consider in depth the education topic to illustrate two of the themes discussed
in the introduction: the channels of the eﬀect and in particular the importance of substitution
eﬀects; and the key role for identification.
Television (TV) plays a double role with regards to educational outcomes: it provides
content but also competes with other activities for time use. Regarding the direct eﬀect, to
the extent that TV programs embed useful information and a rich enough language, exposure
to this media may increase individuals’ knowledge and proficiency with the language. The
substitution eﬀect, however, implies that watching TV crowds out activities such as study,
social interaction, etc., and thus be detrimental to cognitive and non-cognitive development.
A higher amount of time spent in front of TV at early stage of childhood or adolescence
thus could induce negative consequences on cognitive development, which is crucial to human
capital formation in later years. As Heckman (2000) observes, “success or failure at this stage
feeds into success or failure in school which in turn leads to success or failure in post-school
learning.” The potential negative eﬀect in terms of time use is perceived most acutely for
children and adolescents, so many of the studies investigating these issues focus on exposure
to television for these age categories.
Zavodny (2006) examines the impact of the amount of time spent in front of TV by young
adults on their performance in standardized exams in the United States. The author uses
three sources of data, the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (NLSY79), the High
School and Beyond survey (HSB) and the National Education Longitudinal Study (NELS). She
finds a negative correlation between the number of hours spent watching TV and test scores,
although the magnitude of the eﬀect is rather small. Furthermore, the above correlations
may reflect endogeneity in TV watching, for example if children will less parental support

8

in their studies prefer to spend time watching television. The author tries to address this
concern using a twofold strategy: on the one hand, she includes individual and family fixed
eﬀects; on the other hand, she performs siblings and twins regression, in order to eliminate
unobserved household characteristics. Once fixed eﬀects are considered, no significant eﬀect
is found: comparisons across siblings, including twins, do not reveal a negative relationship
between performance on standardized exams and TV viewing.
While additional controls and sibling fixed eﬀects certainly help, they cannot ultimately
fully control for the possibility of selection into television use. If the individuals who watch
television more often have characteristics associated with worse educational outcomes, selection
biases the outcome. This issue with unobservables plagues the large majority of the early
literature on eﬀects of the media, and particular on the impact of television on educational
outcomes, since this literature simply compared individuals who self-select to watch a media
to others who do not.
To address this important confound, the literature on the economics of the media has
achieved identification largely through natural experiments aﬀecting the demand or availability of a particular media. The idea is to find plausibly exogenous reasons which aﬀect media
consumption. The first papers using natural experiments in media availability examined the
impact on political outcomes: Strömberg (2004) explored the natural variation in radio exposure and Besley and Burgess (2001) used variation in newspaper penetration to test for the
eﬀect of the media on responsiveness of politicians to citizen demands. Following up on these
papers, Gentzkow (2006) uses the roll-out of the television to test whether it aﬀects turnout
to the polls, while DellaVigna and Kaplan (2007) exploit the idiosyncratic availability of Fox
News across cable towns to test for a political impact of media bias.
In all of these examples, the identifying assumption is that the availability of a particular
media in a location and time is exogenous in a way that selection into listening to a media
is not. The papers above use a combination of historical arguments, geographic factors, and
documenting selection on observables to make their case. For example, Strömberg uses geographical factors in the availability of radio during the New Deal for identification, while
DellaVigna and Kaplan use the fact that the timing of adoption of Fox News by the local cable
companies since its inception in 1996 appears to have been largely idiosyncratic.
A relevant case for educational outcomes is the identification strategy used by Gentzkow
(2006), which exploits the fact that television licenses were granted in waves with interruptions
in the licensing process. The licensing started in 1941, was put on hold between 1942 and
1945 during World War II, restarted after the War and slowed down again from 1948 until
1952. The timing of access to television for a metropolitan area is thus plausibly idiosyncratic.
Indeed, the paper documents that the timing of licensing appears to be uncorrelated with a
set of demographic variables, conditional on population, income, previous turnout, and region
dummies. Gentzkow (2006) then shows that the arrival of television led to a change in the
9

pattern of news consumption, and a corresponding decrease in turnout especially in the oﬀ-year
congressional elections. The finding is likely explained, as in the model above, by a substitution
eﬀect: the spread of television led to a decrease in consumption of local papers, which carry the
information about congressional candidates. The spread of TV led to less information about
the candidates, and lower electoral participation.
We do not dwell in detail on the political eﬀects of the spread of television which are
summarized in Strömberg (2015). Still, we summarize the Gentzkow (2006) paper because
Gentzkow and Shapiro (2008) use the same identification strategy to study the eﬀect of exposure to television during early childhood on later educational outcomes. The staggered
provision of television licenses provides a rare natural experiment guaranteeing variation in
television exposure which is not immediately correlated with confounding variables.
It is worthwhile stressing how valuable this particular natural experiment is. A vast literature on the public health eﬀects of television exposure concludes that television generally
has adverse eﬀects on child development (Gentile et al., 2004 and American Academy of Pediatrics, 2001). Unfortunately, the large majority of these studies relies on comparing individuals
that diﬀer in television consumption, a comparison that very likely is plagued with confounds.
Researchers have looked for natural variation in television, but it is hard to come across. Television waves travel across the air over a vast expanse, and nearly all of the United States and
most other Western countries have had access to television for decades. There is, simply put,
no exogenous variation in overall television exposure in the US for the recent decades that can
be used as a natural experiment.
And yet, going back in time, that variation existed, back in the days when television was
still in the infancy. That means that, while it is not possible to quantify the impact of today’s
television on test scores, but it is possible to quantify the impact of television on test scores
half a century ago. In fact, the variation is more limited than that. By the time test score data
is available for a large enough swath of the population (the educational data from the 1965
Coleman study), there is essentially no variation in television exposure left: all metropolitan
areas have good access to television. And yet, there is variation in the length of exposure: for
some areas it is just 10 years, for other areas nearly 20 years. Thus, it is possible to compare
two groups of 9th graders as of 1965: one group was (potentially) exposed to television since
birth, while the second group was not exposed during pre-school, though it also had exposure
during elementary school. This design can help us address the question: does exposure to
television during the pre-school year have a lasting impact on elementary school achievement?
This is the only question that this strategy allows us to address but, luckily, it is also
an important question. Indeed, much of the recent interest in learning in the pre-school years
centers on whether early exposure to stimuli has a lasting eﬀect. Gentzkow and Shapiro address
this question using data from the Coleman Study–a 1965 survey of standardized test scores
for over 300,000 American students in grades 6, 9, and 12–and variation in television exposure
10

in the years before.
The first main result is that on average exposure to television during pre-school does not
have an adverse impact on educational scores, as one may have worried. Importantly, the
results are not due to imprecision of the estimates: the authors can reject an adverse eﬀect of
0.03 standard deviations or more. This contrasts with the common belief that early exposure
to television could be a powerful negative force.
The second main result is that there is important heterogeneity in this eﬀect. Among minorities and children of immigrants, in fact television leads to an improvement in educational
test score in English, though not in Mathematics. This key result lends itself to a natural
interpretation in terms of the substitution eﬀect in (2). Assume that the direct eﬀect of television 1 on English test scores (the  variable) of children is the same for natives and for
immigrants and is positive, given that television exposes children to spoken English. Still,
the two groups diﬀer in that they have a very diﬀerent mix of other activities   and thus
a diﬀerent ̄ For the natives, television is likely to substitute verbal interactions in English,
associated with a relative high ̄ — thus the null net eﬀect. But for the children of immigrants,
television (in English) substitutes interactions mostly in other languages, which would have a
null (or negative) ̄  1 . When evaluated against this alternative option, television is a real
improvement as far as building English skills for the immigrants. This argument is clearer for
English skills than for math skills, consistent with the data.
The key point here is that in asking what television does to education, one need not ask
the question, “is television good or bad”. Instead, one should ask the question, “Is television
better or worse than the alternative option?”. This is a key point that we stress at other points
in this review and that gets lost surprisingly often.
We are not aware of other papers that provide evidence on educational impacts of the
media using equally clear natural variation in media exposure. Still, a number of other papers
use observational data to aim to understand the relationship between television and education
under a set of identifying assumptions. We discuss this evidence with a caveat about the
diﬃculty of controlling for selection in these cases.
The relationship between television and learning outcomes should not be regarded as a
static one: exposure to television can influence cognitive development, which in turn may
aﬀect the amount of TV watched in the future. To provide some evidence on this issue, Huang
and Lee (2010) develop a two-stage procedure and estimate a “dynamic causal eﬀect”. They
use the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (NLSY79) and estimate the eﬀect of TV
watching on child cognitive development, measured through standardized mathematics and
reading scores. Once they take into account the dynamic nature of the relationship, Huang
and Lee estimate that watching TV for any amount of time during the age of 6-7 and 8-9 has
a negative impact on math test scores at ages 8-9, where the negative eﬀects of TV watching
at younger ages 6-7 are much larger. In addition, panel data econometric approaches using
11

continuous response variables suggest that around two hours spent watching television per day
are associated with an improvement in reading scores, while the eﬀects of TV watching on
math scores are usually negative. Overall, this paper is consistent with the non-univocal eﬀect
of television on education mentioned before: the final impact varies depending on the age at
which TV is watched, the subject in which performance is assessed, it is nonlinear and its
magnitude is relatively small. Still, one should keep in mind that the evidence used in this
paper is based on observational data and cannot take advantage of a natural experiment as in
Gentzkow and Shapiro (2008).
At this point, one may wonder what should be the optimal allocation of children’s time for
the purpose of improving their cognitive and non-cognitive development. An attempt to answer this question is provided by Keane and Fiorini (2014), who investigate how the allocation
of children’s time among several activities influences cognitive and non-cognitive development.
They use the Longitudinal Study of Australian Children (LSAC), which includes 24-hour diaries that allow the authors to measure time inputs such as time spent with parents vs time
spent with other relatives, time devoted to educational activities vs time using media, etc.
The production function of children’s cognitive and non-cognitive skills is allowed to depend
on time inputs and parental background characteristics, and the controls include child fixed
eﬀects, lagged inputs and lagged test scores. Potential endogeneity of the time inputs, however,
remains an issue. The main conclusions of this study are that (i) educational activities like being talked or reading a story are the most productive for cognitive skill development, especially
when they are performed together with parents; (ii) non-cognitive skills appear insensitive to
alternative time allocations: they are influenced especially by the mother’s parenting style
(which is captured by two indices of mother warmth and eﬀective mother discipline, using parents’ answers to the LSAC questionnaire). Focusing specifically on time devoted to the media,
the authors find that media time is not worse than other non-educational activities (like time
in before/after school care) for skills development.
The fact that exposure to television could be exploited for educational purposes was recognized early on, giving rise to popular programs such as Sesame Street. Sesame Street can
probably be considered one of the largest (and possibly the cheapest) early childhood interventions, although it is not typically considered as such. This show was introduced in 1969
with the aim of improving first grade readiness and reducing the gap between disadvantaged
children and better oﬀ ones in terms of preschool experience. A recent paper by Kearney and
Levine (2015) estimates the eﬀects of this program on educational and labor market outcomes.
To identify these eﬀects, they exploit the fact that Sesame Street was initially aired by PBSaﬃliated stations, which broadcast on UHF in about half of the cases. Because many TV sets
at the time did not receive UHF, and because distance from transmitters also reduced access,
about one third of the population did not have access to the show initially. The authors thus
exploit variation in coverage across counties and among cohorts (with children younger than 7

12

in 1969 considered as ‘treated’ and older ones as ‘control’ and adopt a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences
strategy using data from three Census waves (1980 through 2000).
They find evidence of sizeable and significant impacts during school years: children living
in counties with better reception had a higher probability of attending the right grade for their
age, especially so if they were boys, non-Hispanic blacks, and living in disadvantaged areas. On
the other hand, the evidence is mixed for educational attainment and labor market outcomes:
no significant impact is found on high school dropout rates or college attendance, and the
eﬀects on employment and wages, albeit marginally significant, are quantitatively very small.
Overall these results suggest that the main impact of the program was in improving school
readiness, with more nuanced eﬀects in the long run.
Another channel through which media exposure may aﬀect education is not directly through
exposure of the children, but rather exposure of their parents or teachers. Using survey data,
Keefer and Khemani (2011) study the eﬀects of exposure to community radios in Benin on
children’s school performance. In Benin, radio is widely used as means of communication and
there is a high degree of variation in access across villages. A first channel of the radio eﬀect is
through accountability: radio may provide information that households then use to organize
collective action and demand better services from the government. In this respect, Benin
represents a good setting to explore the accountability channel since it has a relatively long
tradition of competitive elections and peaceful turnovers of political power. A second channel
for impact comes from the focus of community radios on educational content. Exposure to
programming on the importance of education may generate higher parental investments in
children’s education. In this regard, the radio content in this case is an exception to the
general preponderance of entertainment content.
The identification of the eﬀects relies on variation in access to radio generated by accidental
features of the topography and signal strength, most notably of out-of-commune radio stations.
The results indicate a substantial eﬀect of media exposure on education performance: access
to one additional radio station increases the share of literate children by 8 percentage points.
If this eﬀect were driven by increased accountability, villages with greater access should see
higher government provision of those inputs that are closely related to child literacy (e.g.,
textbooks per pupil, teacher-pupil ratio, teacher absenteeism, number of classrooms). This
does not seem to be the case. Also, access to community radios is not associated with better
knowledge by parents of government education policies (e.g., of a massive program to hire new
teachers, of test requirements to pass primary school examinations, etc.). Accountability thus
seems to play a relatively limited role in the eﬀects on literacy. On the other hand, households
with greater exposure to community radios invest more in their children’s education (e.g., they
buy more books for their children) suggesting that parents’ exposure to educational messages
leads to positive changes in private behaviors.
To conclude, the empirical evidence on the eﬀect of media exposure on educational outcomes
13

is not univocal. Media can be an important vehicle for sensitizing individuals on the importance
of education and hence can stimulate parental investments, but when it comes to children’s
direct exposure to media (especially television), the crowding out of alternative activities can
have counteracting eﬀects. Particularly notable in this respect are the diﬀering eﬀects of TV
exposure on mathematics versus language test scores found in some of the literature.

3.2

Family outcomes

In the previous section on education outcomes, we considered mainly the eﬀect of exposure
to television, compared to alternative uses of time. In this next Section, we consider a more
detailed channel, and in particular the exposure to role models embedded in the entertainment
content on television. To what extent do these role models lead to imitation of their behavior?
We consider the imitation of role models in the media with respect to family outcomes, such
as fertility, family planning, age at marriage, and attitudes towards domestic violence. This is
an important setting on at least two grounds. First, family choices are of first order importance
for both research and policy, especially in developing countries where the reduction of fertility
rates is often a policy target. Even setting aside the policy importance, family choices are an
ideal setting to test for the importance of imitation: since family choices stem from deep-seated
preferences and cultural factors, to the extent that exposure to peer eﬀects from the media
leads to changes in behavior, it constitutes a particularly compelling case of media imitation.
We consider the impact of the media on family outcomes mainly in the context of developing
countries. In these countries, media exposure vastly increases the availability of information
about the outside world and exposure to diﬀerent ways of life. This is especially true for remote
and rural areas, where television is one of the primary sources through which households acquire
information on the life outside their village (Fernandes, 2000; Johnson, 2001; Scrase, 2002).
The majority of popular TV programs feature urban settings, whose lifestyles are in stark
contrast with those of rural regions. Importantly, the main characters of many soap operas
broadcast in developing countries have smaller families, marry later and usually have higher
educational attainment than the average viewer. Furthermore, many female characters work
outside the home and have significant decision-making power within the household. To the
extent that these characters act as implicit role models, exposure to these characters and their
ways of life may aﬀect marital outcomes and fertility choices.
La Ferrara, Chong and Duryea (2012) estimate the eﬀect of soap operas on fertility rates
in Brazil. Brazil is an interesting case study for two reasons. First, fertility has declined
dramatically in a very short time: the total fertility rate went from 63 in 1960 to 29 in 1991,
without any specific government policy to encourage population control. Second, soap operas
(or novelas, as they are called in Brazil), are by far the most popular TV program, and they
are broadcast by the media giant Rede Globo, which has basically preserved a monopoly in

14

this sector. Interestingly, the timing of expansion of Rede Globo across the country largely
coincided with the fertility transition. The authors combine these two aspects and advance
the hypothesis that the diﬀusion of television and the lifestyles portrayed by soap operas may
have contributed to the fertility decline. This hypothesis is supported by the content of Rede
Globo’s telenovelas, which between 1965 and 1999 overwhelmingly showed female characters
with no children or one child, in marked contrast with the fertility rates prevalent in society.
To identify the eﬀects of exposure to these programs on fertility, La Ferrara et al. use a
diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences strategy, exploiting the staggered entry of Globo into diﬀerent municipal areas. Combining Census data with data on antenna location of Globo stations, they find
that exposure to the Globo signal decreases the probability of giving birth by 05 percentage
points (a 5 percent reduction over the mean), which is comparable in magnitude to the eﬀect
of increasing a woman’s education by 16 years. This eﬀect is not driven by pre-trends, and the
reduction in fertility begins exactly one year after the entry of Globo in the area. Furthermore,
the impact is larger for women of lower socioeconomic status, as one would expect given that
these women are less likely to have been exposed to written information on these aspects, and
for women who are in the middle and late phase of their childbearing life. These estimates
suggest that in the decade 1980-1991 the expansion of Globo accounted for about 7 percent of
the reduction in the probability of giving birth.
An interesting aspect of the study by La Ferrara et al. is the attempt to provide direct
evidence on the role played by the content of the soap operas leading to imitative behavior.
A first piece of evidence is that children born in areas covered by Globo have a significantly
higher probability of being named after the main characters of the novela broadcast during
the year in which they were born.3 Second, the authors exploit variation in the plots over the
years, as well as variation in the potential empathy and identification between characters and
viewers based on individual factors. They find that fertility decreases by more in years when
the plot features upward social mobility, and for women whose age is closer to that of the main
female character.
In a separate paper, Chong and La Ferrara (2009) investigate the impact of Brazilian
novelas on a diﬀerent family outcome: divorce. In addition to showing small families, the
content of Rede Globo’s novelas promoted the circulation of modern ideas, such as women’s
empowerment and emancipation. Using the same diﬀ-in-diﬀ strategy of the paper above, the
authors estimate the eﬀect of exposure to Globo on the probability of marital dissolution.
They find that separation and divorce rates increase in municipalities covered by the Globo
signal in the years after the arrival of the network.
An influential study on the impact of television on women’s emancipation is that by Jensen
and Oster (2009). These authors study the eﬀect of the introduction of cable television on
3

This probability is 33 percent for areas covered by Globo and 85 percent for those not covered, a significant
diﬀerence.

15

women’s status in rural India. They use a three-year panel covering 180 villages in five Indian states from 2001 to 2003 and their empirical strategy relies on comparing changes in
attitudes towards women between survey rounds across villages, based on whether and when
they introduced cable TV: 21 of the 180 sample villages introduced cable during 2001-2003.
Given this framework, a crucial empirical issue could be the presence of unobserved factors
(such as income or attitude towards “modernity”) that determine cable television access and
are also correlated with women’s socioeconomic status. In order to rule out this concern, the
authors adopt a twofold strategy. On the one hand, they show that there are no pre-existing
diﬀerential trends in women’s conditions for villages with and without cable TV and that the
timing of changes in the outcomes of interest is closely related with the introduction of the
cable. On the other hand, they show that outcomes are not correlated with cable access in the
future. They find that exposure to cable is associated with a significant reduction in the number of reported situations in which it is acceptable for a man to beat his wife and a decrease
in son preference. In addition, getting cable TV significantly improves women’s bargaining
power within the household, as measured by autonomy in decision making, and it decreases
the likelihood of being pregnant. Finally, they also find benefits for younger children, since the
introduction of cable encourages their enrollment in school, an eﬀect that may be driven by
the higher participation of women in household decision making.
Decision making and children’s educational outcomes have been found to be influenced
by the media also in other settings. Cheung (2012) uncovers a media eﬀect in Cambodia,
where women’s decision-making power within the household and children’s primary school
attendance increase within the signal range of Women’s Station FM 102. This is a popular
radio station launched by the Women’s Media Center of Cambodia (WMC) in order to change
the stereotypes of women in traditional gender roles using an “educational entertainment”
approach. To obtain credible causal evidence, two complementing identification strategies
are employed. The first one exploits the variation in over-the-air signal strength between
radio transmitters and villages within a district due to topographical characteristics (such
as the presence of mountains) and it performs a cross-section analysis using individual data
from the Cambodia Demographic and Health Survey 2005. The second approach exploits the
fact that the radio coverage is gradually expanded over time and across regions to perform
a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences estimation. Irrespective of the identification strategy, the author
observes that radio exposure improves women’s bargaining power within the household and
children’s primary school attendance. The empirical investigation also aims at dealing with
possible trends in other factors that might confound the results and potential correlation
between the outcome of interest and future radio coverage, concluding that these are not a
concern for the identification strategy. Finally, this work provides suggestive evidence on the
impact of radio exposure on attitudes towards domestic violence and son preference and this
is in line with previous findings presented in this section.

16

The persuasion eﬀect of the media when it comes to family outcomes is not confined to
the developing world. Kearney and Levine (2014) examine the impact of the widely viewed
MTV show 16 and Pregnant (16P), which follows the lives of teenagers during pregnancy and
early days of motherhood, on teenage fertility in the United States. The authors employ four
distinct sources of data: Google Trends, to capture changes in searches on Google; Twitter,
used to analyze all “tweets” made by individuals; Nielsen ratings data to capture geographic
variation in TV viewership; and the Vital Statistics Natality Microdata, to measure changes
in teen births. The key variation exploited in the paper is the diﬀerential viewership across
designated market areas, as measured by Nielsen ratings. This creates a potential endogeneity
problem, since viewers’ interest in 16P is presumably higher in areas where teenagers are
prone to getting pregnant. To address this problem, the authors perform an IV estimation,
instrumenting the show’s ratings with ratings for all shows that aired on MTV in the four
sweeps months preceding the introduction of 16P. The underlying assumption is that ratings
obtained before 16P was created should be orthogonal to subsequent trends in teen pregnancies.
The authors oﬀer three sets of results. First, they document a significant interest in the
show: during the weeks in which 16P is showing, there are clear spikes in Google searches and
tweets containing the terms “16 and Pregnant”. Second, there is suggestive evidence that the
show triggers information seeking on birth control and abortion: on the day a new episode is
released, there is a spike in Google searches and Twitter messages containing the term “birth
control” and “abortion”. Third, the show leads to a 57% reduction in teen births in the 18
months following its introduction, an eﬀect size explaining around one-third of the total decline
in teen births in the country over that period. When they split the sample into diﬀerent age
groups, they find that the eﬀect is similar in magnitude and significant up to age 24, while it
becomes insignificant for older age groups, consistent with the fact that the viewership of 16P
is relatively young.
To conclude, there is robust evidence that exposure to a particular behavior on television
changes behavior in the audience. In most cases, the generally positive media portrayal of a
role model leads to imitation, as in the case of Brazilian soap operas leading to lower fertility
and higher divorce rates. In other cases, the media portrayal of a diﬃcult situation leads to the
opposite behavior, as in the case of 16 and Pregnant. The persuasion eﬀect is consistent across
diﬀerent settings and applies to decisions as consequential as fertility and divorce. Furthermore,
the research designs allow us to detect evidence of role model eﬀects not only in the short-run
but also in the long-run, after years of exposure. The eﬀect on family outcome is one of the
clearest cases of substantial media impacts.
This literature also highlights an important point on identification. In contrast to the eﬀects
of television on education where there is little credible evidence, we have quite extensive and
detailed evidence on the imitation of family choices seen on television. From a methodological
point of view, the key diﬀerence is in the variation in media access needed. To examine
17

the impact of television overall (say on education) one needs credible variation in exposure
to television, which is hard to find. Conversely, to document the impact of imitation of a
particular behavior seen on television, one needs variation in a particular show with unique
content, which is easier to find.

3.3

Labor markets and migration

In the same way that television delivers information on family choices, it also exposes viewers
to information regarding labor market opportunities, both domestically and abroad. Especially
in developing countries or lower-income areas within a country, television exposes viewers to
higher standards of living. The imitation hypothesis holds that exposure to these lifestyles
induces attempts to emulate them, including migrating to higher-income areas and countries.
The evidence on this topic turns out to be more nuanced than that.
A first piece of evidence is provided by Braga (2007), who investigates the impact of Italian
television on individual migration decisions in Albania. The Albanian case is emblematic,
since both economic and political contact with the rest of the world were absent during the
communist regime. From 1941 to the late 1980s, the media and broadcasting system was
strictly controlled by the Communist party and there was only one national television channel,
broadcasting propaganda and politicized documentaries. However, although foreign TV was
forbidden, Albanians could easily watch Italian TV starting from the early 1960s, due to
geographical proximity between the two countries.
Italy has experienced a large inflow of immigrants from Albania in recent decades. To
test if this can at least in part be attributed to Italian television, Braga (2007) uses data
from the Albanian Living Standard Measurement Survey and estimates individual migration
status as a function of a number of controls plus foreign media exposure. Exposure to foreign
television is measured by the shortest distance between the location of Italian transmitters and
the place of residence of the respondent (in Albania). The results show that the probability
of migrating significantly increases the shorter is the distance from Italian transmitters (07
percentage points for every additional kilometer). This is a large eﬀect, considering that the
baseline rate of international migration is 8 percent. Furthermore, exposure to Italian media
increases migration not only to Italy but also to other countries, suggesting that images on
Italian television favored Albanians’ openness towards other countries.
Interestingly, Farré and Fasani (2013) reach an opposite conclusion for the case of Indonesia. Using the Indonesian Family Life Survey (IFLS) and The Village Potential Statistics
(PODES), they investigate the eﬀect of media exposure on internal migration in Indonesia.
In particular, they exploit the diﬀerential introduction of private TV throughout the country
and the variation in signal reception across districts due to topography. They consider both
“early” exposure to television during adolescence and “current” exposure. The first variable is

18

motivated by the fact that migration movements usually occur at a young age, thus individuals
may be substantially influenced by expectations formed early in life. The second variable captures the fact that individuals also update their expectations when new information becomes
available. The authors uncover a negative eﬀect of both early and current TV exposure on the
propensity to migrate: a one standard deviation increase in exposure to television decreases the
overall migration rate by 8-15% of a standard deviation, depending on the model specification.
How does one reconcile the two findings? As Farré and Fasani suggest, the imitation
hypothesis is somewhat simplistic: one should not expect that all role models presented in
the media would lead individuals to attempt to imitate them. In many circumstances, it is
reasonable for media audiences to update on a particular behavior in the direction of the
role model. In other cases, however, the updating could go the opposite way: exposure to a
behavior on television could lead audiences to change their beliefs in a way leading to behavior
opposite the role model. In the Indonesian case, it is possible that Indonesian citizens prior to
the expansion of private TV broadcasting were too optimistic in assessing the potential gains
from moving, and that television helps to correct this optimism.
This is an important caveat to keep in mind when studying the impact of media role models:
the eﬀect of what people see on television or hear on the radio depends on content not only in
“absolute” terms, but relative to the baseline values and beliefs held by the individuals. It is
thus very helpful if information on baseline beliefs and values is available so as to accurately
interpret the empirical findings.
Another dimension in which exposure to the media can aﬀect labor market outcomes is by
influencing occupational choice. Bjorvatn et al. (2015) analyze a field experiment with around
2,000 secondary school students from Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. The experiment consisted
in encouraging students and their families to watch an educational TV show about entrepreneurship, business skills and financial literacy. A total of 21 school were randomly assigned
to watch this show, while 22 schools were assigned to a control non-educational movie. The
educational show consisted of 11 weekly episodes on the lives of six young entrepreneurs (males
and females). The authors estimate both short-term eﬀects and long-term (two years after the
end of the show) impact on a number of variables. In the short term, the show is eﬀective
in increasing ambition and some entrepreneurial traits (measured through lab experiments),
and this maps into a diﬀerential propensity to starting a business which persists in the long
run: two years later, the probability of having started a business is about 9 percentage points
higher for the treatment group, representing a 30 percent increase relative to the mean for
the control. Interestingly, there is no impact on business knowledge in the short run. An
important result in the paper is that the show has a negative impact on school performance in
the long run: treated students are less likely to pass the final exam and to continue studying
beyond secondary school. While this result may be specific to the Tanzanian context, where
the quality of formal education may have been considered by the participants relatively low,
19

it does caution us about possible unintended eﬀects of the instrumental use of television for
‘educational’ purposes.

3.4

Environmental economics

In this section, we examine the extent to which documentaries, which often have the purpose of
changing behavior, achieve their goals by triggering imitation of a desirable behavior. Within
the field of environmental choices, a good example is the documentary An Inconvenient Truth
by Al Gore, which presents in dramatic fashion the evidence on global warning and suggests
the need to act. Did it then aﬀect environmental choices? Notice that this example diﬀers from
the “edutainment” examples, since An Inconvenient Truth was not conceived as entertainment,
but rather as a content-packed exhortation to action.
Jacobsen (2011) examines the impact of exposure to this movie on a form of environmentalism, the purchase of carbon oﬀsets. For identification, the author exploits closeness to the
nearest movie theater that showed An Inconvenient Truth. The diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence specification shows an increase in carbon oﬀset purchases of about 50 percent relative to the baseline
for individuals living within 10 miles of a movie theater showing the movie. Still, it is quantitatively a relatively small increase given that the baseline purchases are quite limited, and it
is a transitory eﬀect, with no evidence of persistence a few months later.
There is a natural comparison between the eﬀect of a documentary intended to persuade
versus the evidence from entertainment options like telenovelas which are not per se intended
to change behavior. Documentaries can indeed have an impact on behavior as the Jacobsen
(2011) paper stresses; however, this impact is likely to be limited given that the audience
interested in documentaries is relatively small and mostly consisting of individuals already
embracing a cause. In contrast, entertainment shows reach millions of individuals across all
walks of life: the large and persistent impact documented on family choices by La Ferrara,
Chong and Duryea (2012) is particularly striking given the cultural values associated with
choices such as the number of children.

3.5

Health

As for the case of family choices, migration, and environmental choices, researchers have considered the eﬀect of media exposure on health. Most papers examine the impact of information
about desirable (or undesirable) health behavior contained in media programming. Surprisingly given the interest in health economics, the evidence is limited and mostly comes from
outside economics, such as health and communication studies. The estimates often lack a convincing design, document only short-run eﬀects of exposure, or employ an outcome variable
that is an indirect measure, such as the number of calls to a hotline, as opposed to the ultimate
variable of interest.
20

Suicide. The literature on suicide provides an example of the promise and limitations
of the existing health evidence. A motivation for the studies on suicides is the worry that
media coverage of the suicide of a celebrity may lead to a wave of suicides among vulnerable
individuals in a copycat eﬀect.
In a prominent series of early papers, David Phillips and coauthors find that the occurrence
of suicides appears to increase after major suicide episodes are in the news. In a representative
paper, Bollen and Phillips (1982) use the Vanderbilt data set of television news stories on ABC,
CBS, and NBC to code all stories under the heading ‘suicide’ broadcast between 1972 and 1976.
They then link the data to the U.S. daily suicide statistics. In a time series regression with
seasonality controls, the authors find evidence of a significant increase in suicides occurring on
the first two days and on days 6-7 after the story. The coeﬃcients, which are significant at
the 5 percent level in a one-tailed test, imply an overall increase of 28 suicides for each suicide
story, a large imitation eﬀect.
In a follow-up study, however, Baron and Reiss (1985) show that the evidence in Bollen
and Phillips (1982) and in other related papers is not reliable. First, the imitation eﬀect is
not statistically significant if one considers all lags jointly, rather than focusing only on the
significant ones. Second, the eﬀects appear due to improper controls for seasonality. Indeed,
when running a placebo regression which lags the suicide story by exactly one year and thus
keeps constant the seasonality structure, the authors find similar imitation eﬀects, pointing to
problems in the econometric specification.
Follow-up studies in the thirty years since number in the dozens in sociology and medical
journals. Still, in our reading the evidence on imitation of media portrayals of suicide is not
convincing. A comprehensive study with attention to the channels and to confounding factors
is missing.
Smoking. Smoking remains the most important avoidable public health risk in the United
States and in a number of countries. What do we know about the impacts of exposure to
media content on smoking? Since advertising by cigarette companies has been severely limited
in the United States in the recent past, most media studies focus on the impact of anti-smoking
media campaigns on smoking.
Bauman et al. (1991) examine a field experiment on smoking cessation messages broadcast
via radio in the U.S. South. Two MSAs served as treatment groups and four as control
MSAs, and in these MSAs about 2,000 adolescents were surveyed one and a half years after
the exposure to the radio messages. The evidence suggests that the messages aﬀected the
self-reported valuation of smoking, but not smoking rates.
While the previous paper examined randomized exposure on a small sample, Farrelly,
Nonnemaker, Davis, and Hussin (2009) evaluate the exposure to the national ‘truth’ smokeprevention Campaign that was launched in 2000 in the U.S. The roll-out of the ‘truth’ campaign, however, was not randomized, so the analysis is based on comparisons across media
21

markets controlling for observables. Using NLSY data on smoking initiation, the authors estimate that the media campaign significantly reduced smoking initiation by as much as 20
percent.
These two representative papers in a vast literature provide suggestive evidence on the
impact of anti-smoking campaigns. While the evidence is in our reading of higher quality than
the evidence on suicide imitation, we are not aware of a study that combines the strengths of
the two papers above–a clear design for identification and large scale evidence–without the
respective weaknesses.
HIV/AIDS. As a third outcome, we consider the impact of media exposure on HIV
prevention. In this case, the two papers we review examine the impact of educational messages
embedded within entertainment content.
A first piece of evidence is provided in a study on HIV prevention in Tanzania by Vaughan,
Rogers, Singhal and Swalehe (2000). They evaluate the eﬀects of an educational-entertainment
radio soap opera, Twende na Wakati (Let’s Go with the Times) on knowledge, attitudes and
behaviors towards HIV. HIV rates in Tanzania are among the highest in the world, and radio is
one of the most important sources of information regarding AIDS in the country. Radio Tanzania, together with the government and UNFPA (United Nations Population Fund), produced
this soap opera to convey messages regarding HIV prevention, family planning, gender equity
and other health-related themes. The program was broadcast twice a week for 30 minutes
from 1993 to 1999. To evaluate its eﬀects, Vaughan et al. exploit the fact that the soap opera
was not broadcast by the Dodoma regional transmitter from 1993 to 1995, allowing the use
of this region as a “control group”. The authors compare outcomes before and after exposure
to the radio program across treatment and control locations, and find that it was eﬀective in
promoting HIV-responsible behaviors, e.g. reducing the number of sexual partners by both
men and women and increasing condom adoption.
Additional evidence in a diﬀerent setting is provided by Kennedy, O’leary, Beck, Pollard
and Simpson (2004). In their work, media impact is measured by the total number of calls
received by the CDC National STD and AIDS Hotline after the introduction of a subplot
regarding AIDS in the soap opera The Bold and The Beautiful in the US. Calling this hotline
is employed as a proxy for health information seeking behavior. After two of the episodes
—when a character was diagnosed with HIV and when he told his partner— the toll free number
of the hotline was displayed on screen. The study reports a large increase in the number of
attempted calls on the days of the two episodes, in the time slot during and immediately after
the soap opera broadcast. This suggests that the soap opera is eﬀective in sensitizing viewers
towards HIV/AIDS.
While the above studies provide suggestive evidence that TV and radio soap operas can
be eﬀective in sensitizing people to health issues, more work is needed to credibly establish a
causal link and to understand if the positive eﬀects found shortly after the exposure persist in
22

the long run. The recent work by Banerjee, La Ferrara and Orozco (2015), which we briefly
discuss in the conclusion, is an attempt to make progress in both directions.

3.6

Crime

For our sixth topic, we consider the impact of the media on crime, and especially violent
crime. A leading research hypothesis akin to the imitation hypothesis studied in the context
of family choices and immigration is that exposure to violence leads to arousal, triggering
further violence. The converse hypothesis also has followers: exposure to media violence has a
cathartic eﬀect, freeing potential aggressiveness and lowering real-life violence.
Whether media violence triggers violent crime has clear policy implications. Indeed, in
2000, the American Medical Association, together with five other public-health organizations,
issued a joint statement on the risks of exposure to media violence (Cook et al., 2000). The
evidence cited in these reports, surveyed by Anderson and Buschman (2001) and Anderson et
al. (2003), however, does not establish a causal link between media violence and violent crime.
The evidence on the topic is of two types, experimental and correlational.
The experimental literature consist of exposing subjects in the laboratory (typically children or college students) to short, violent video clips. An example is Josephson (1987) who
randomizes exposure to short violent clips versus clips with action scenes, but no violence.
After the media exposure, the subjects play a game of hockey, and the group exposed to violent clips is more likely to engage in aggressive play. These experiments typically find a sharp
increase in aggressive behavior immediately after the media exposure, compared to a control
group exposed to non-violent clips, supporting the arousal hypothesis. This literature provides
causal evidence on the short-run impact of media violence on aggressiveness. However, this
evidence does not address whether this translates into higher levels of violent crime in the field.
A second literature (e.g., Johnson et al. 2002) documents that survey respondents who
watch more violent media are substantially more likely to be involved in self-reported violence
and criminal behavior. This correlational evidence, while indeed linking media violence and
crime, has the standard problems of endogeneity and reverse causation. The individuals who
watch more violent television are not comparable to the ones who do not, confounding the
correlation.
Dahl and DellaVigna (2009) propose a diﬀerent strategy to capture the impact of violent
media on actual violent crime without the confounds of endogeneity. Namely, they exploit
the natural experiment induced by time-series variation in the violence of movies shown in
theaters. Using a violence rating system from kids-in-mind.com and daily movie revenue data,
they generate a daily measure of national-level box oﬃce audience for strongly violent (e.g.,
“Hannibal”), mildly violent (e.g., “Spider-Man”), and non-violent movies (e.g., “Runaway
Bride”). Since blockbuster movies diﬀer significantly in violence rating, and movie sales are

23

concentrated in the initial weekends after release, there is substantial variation in exposure
to movie violence over time. The audience for strongly violent and mildly violent movies,
respectively, is as high as 12 million and 25 million people on some weekends, and is close to zero
on others. This variation creates the conditions for identification using time-series variation.
The authors match this data to crime data from the National Incident Based Reporting System
(NIBRS) to estimate the short-run impact of exposure to violent media on violent crime. Notice
that the short-run (as opposed to long-run) impact is what the laboratory experiments also
capture, and is the relevant variation to identify the arousal hypothesis.
The results appear to contradict the laboratory evidence supporting the arousal hypothesis:
on days with a high audience for violent movies, violent crime is lower, even after controlling
flexibly for seasonality, weather and other potential confounds. Breaking down the eﬀects into
time blocks, which is possible given the granularity of the crime data, helps assess the channel
of the findings. There is no eﬀect in the morning or in the afternoon before movie exposure,
as one would expect. In the evening hours (6PM-12AM), for each million people watching a
strongly or mildly violent movie, respectively, violent crimes decrease by 1.3 and 1.1 percent,
a statistically and economically significant impact. In the nighttime hours following the movie
showing (12AM-6AM), the delayed eﬀect of exposure to movie violence is even more negative.
Is the negative eﬀect then evidence of a cathartic eﬀect? Not so fast. Returning to the
model in Section 2, the relevant variation for identification is in the quality  of violent versus
non-violent movies, leading to sharply diﬀerent audiences on diﬀerent weekends. As the model
makes clear, this variation identifies the net eﬀect on crime of exposure to violent movies versus
the next best alternative use of time, that is,  − ̄. Even if violent movies trigger crime,
that is   0, the estimated impact on violent movies will be negative if alternative activities
trigger crime at an even higher rate, that is   ̄. With this in mind, the negative eﬀect in
the evening hour reflects the voluntary incapacitation of individuals into the movie theaters,
a low-crime setting compared to almost any alternative: thus, surely  − ̄ is negative.

In the night hours, though, the theaters are closed: how should one interpret the results?
The findings indicate that spending an evening at the movie theater leads to less violent
behavior in the night thereafter compared to the alternative activity that the (potentially
violent) audience of the movies would have chosen. A natural channel is alcohol: individuals
who spend two or more hours at the movie theater in the evening are more likely to be sober
by midnight compared to spending the evening at a bar or drinking with friends. Dahl and
DellaVigna (2009) provide some direct evidence on this channel: If alcohol is a key channel,
the eﬀect of movie exposure should be larger for people who are barely of drinking age (2124 year olds) compared to people who are barely below drinking age (17-20 year olds), since
drunkenness is significantly less likely in this second group. Notice that the comparative statics
here exploits variation in ̄ the impact of the alternative option, across the two groups, holding
constant  . This comparison is akin to the comparison in the eﬀects of television between
24

natives and immigrants in Gentzkow and Shapiro (2008). Consistent with an important role for
intoxication, the negative impact of exposure to violent movies on crime is large and negative
for individuals aged 21-24, but close to zero for individuals aged 17-20.
What does one learn from a natural experiment of this type? The identification of the
impact of violent media relative to the alternative option, that is,  − ̄, provides some
relevant policy counterfactuals. For example, based on these estimates, a policy that would
ban violent movies on certain weekends would increase assaults by roughly 1,000 occurrences
per weekend given the ensuing shift to more dangerous activities.4 The estimates, however,
do not tell us whether exposure to violent media per se leads to arousal (  0), catharsis
(  0), or neither. One can, however, estimate the direct eﬀect of exposure to violent movies
 under some assumptions about the eﬀect of alternative activities. Under one such set of
assumptions, Dahl and DellaVigna (2009) decompose the observed eﬀect into a direct eﬀect
 and a substitution eﬀect ̄ and find that the evidence is most consistent with the arousal
hypothesis: the direct eﬀect of exposure to violent movies is to increase violent behavior ( 
0). Thus, the field evidence is consistent with the laboratory findings, once one does the proper
comparison. Yet, this decomposition is more tentative given the additional assumptions needed;
additional evidence that is able to parse the diﬀerent parameters would be very valuable.
A second point is that this evidence does not teach us anything about the long-term eﬀects
of exposure to violent media. Given the high-frequency nature of the instruments, the authors
can examine the eﬀects within a month of exposure (finding no evidence of a delayed impact on
crime), but cannot pin down the long-term eﬀects, which is a key question for policy. To identify
such eﬀects, one needs variation in prolonged exposure to a media, as in La Ferrara, Chong
and Duryea (2012) or Gentzkow (2006). Unfortunately, we are not aware of any such evidence
that plausibly varies the long-term exposure to violent media. We stress that correlational
evidence between media use and violence as in Johnson et al. (2002) is no substitute for this
evidence, and should not be used for policy recommendations.
Returning to the role of arousal in violent crime, an alternative identification strategy is
variation in media content, holding constant the use of time. That is, suppose that individuals
are exposed to a particular media program which they choose for entertainment value, but the
content of the program varies in its arousing content in unexpected ways. As the model in
Section 2 details, this direct comparative statics on  would uncover the direct eﬀect of media
arousal, given that there is no substitution to other activities.
While we are not aware of a paper using this identification for media violence, Card and Dahl
(2011) use it to identify the impact of emotions, in particular disappointment and elatedness,
on violent crime, and more specifically domestic violence. The motivation for the paper is
4

More generally, this research is consistent with the hypothesis that other activities with a controlled environment that attract young men, like Midnight Basketball proposed by Bill Clinton in the 1990s, would also
reduce crime in the short run.

25

understanding the role of emotional triggers on domestic violence. In the paper, emotional
triggers are the results of football games broadcast via television. The design allows the
authors to distinguish between the impact on fans of the winning versus losing team based on
the location of the domestic crimes in the NIBRS crime data.
An appealing feature of the research design is that it allows for a measure of expectations,
and deviations from such expectations, with the resulting emotional trigger. Namely, the
authors use the betting line to measure expectations about outcomes of football matches
so they can distinguish between expected and unexpected losses, and between expected and
unexpected wins. The authors then measure domestic crimes in the hours surrounding the
game.
The results point to the importance of disappointment for violent crime: unexpected losses
increase domestic violence by 7 percent, compared to the expected result (a win). As one would
expect, the eﬀect is larger for more important games and it is entirely driven by violence of men
on women and not by violence of women on men. Furthermore, the eﬀect disappears within
a few hours of game end, consistent with the impact of transient emotions. In comparison,
there is no converse eﬀect of a positive surprise: there is no evidence that a surprising win
(compared to the expected loss) lowers violent crime.
These results indicate that the triggers of violence originating from the media need not be
violent themselves: in this case, the emotional trigger is disappointment from an unexpected
loss.
So far, we have discussed the potential impact on crime of exposure to two traditional
media outlets, movies and television. Yet, access to Internet and broadband access introduces
its own potential for an impact on crime. In particular, access to the internet introduces access
to content that is harder to find in traditional media, such as pornography. As such, some
researchers have worried that the spread of the internet may lead to a spike in sex crimes to
the extent that sexual arousal leads to sexual aggression. Alternatively, it is also possible that
pornography may be a substitute for sexual assaults, rather than a complement.
There are two main diﬃculties in documenting the eﬀect of access to pornography via
internet on outcomes such as crime. First, the internet provides access to a bundle of content,
of which pornography is only a part (if one with heavy traﬃc); thus, one should speak of the
eﬀect of the internet overall, rather than of its individual components. Second, internet access
in most countries such as the United States expanded in a relatively linear fashion over time,
making identification diﬃcult.
Bhuller, Havnes, Leuven, and Mogstad (2013) provide evidence from Norway where a public
program with limited funding rolled out broadband access points in 2000—2008, providing
plausibly exogenous variation in internet use across diﬀerent municipalities over time. The
authors adopt an IV strategy, instrumenting the fraction of households with broadband internet
subscriptions in a given municipality/year with the fraction of households that were covered by
26

the relevant infrastructure in the previous year. They find that exposure to internet content
significantly increased the number of sex crimes, with the impact occurring in the year of the
increased coverage, and lasting over the next two years. The eﬀect is sizeable: during the
sample period about 3.2 % of the total number of rapes and 2.5 % of the total number of sex
crimes and child sex abuses can be attributed to broadband internet exposure.
To pin down the interpretation of the results, the authors consider additional results. A first
possibility is that availability of the internet changed reporting of sex crimes, with no changes
in the underlying occurrence. There is, however, no evidence that the types of reported crimes
have changed over time along the lines one would expect if this were the case. A second
possibility is that the internet may have increased the match rate between potential oﬀenders
and victims, while a third possibility is that the eﬀect occurs through an arousal eﬀect. While
it is diﬃcult to separate the last two channels, an interesting source of variation occurs in the
alternative choices available, namely non-internet pornography. Since pornography is banned
in Norway but allowed in Sweden, Norwegians living near the border with Sweden are likely
to experience a smaller impact of the internet, especially if the channel is arousal. Indeed, the
impact is larger further from the border.
Bhuller et al. (2013) also stress the importance of identifying the media users who are on the
margin of media adoption, or technically the compliers in the IV local average treatment eﬀect.
This is the population that is induced to internet consumption due to the recent expansion
of infrastructure. Survey data on internet consumption shows that young males are overrepresented among the compliers. Similarly, Dahl and DellaVigna (2009) show that violent
movies are more likely to draw an audience of young males compared to other movies. The
self-selection into media adoption plays an important role in understanding the media eﬀects.
The model stresses this role in that the substitution eﬀect ̄ must be evaluated with respect
to the activity choice  of the relevant individuals, the compliers. This relevant population,
with young males overrepresented, could else diﬀer in the crime eﬀects  compared to the rest
of the population. This becomes particularly relevant when extrapolating the media eﬀects
to another population. For example, as the internet roll-out continues, the marginal users
may have a lower propensity to violence compared to young males, or diﬀerent substitution
patterns.
Aside from the internet, a diﬀerent modern media with a possible relationship to crime
is video games. On the one hand, some experts worry that violent video games may trigger
aggression as in the arousal hypothesis. On the other hand, having potentially violent individuals spend much time playing video games may induce substitution away from more dangerous
activities, leading to a reduction in crime.
Unfortunately, even setting aside the identification of long-run eﬀects, the identification
of short-run eﬀects of exposure to video games is more diﬃcult than the analysis for violent
movies, on two grounds. First, while one can obtain weekly measures of the sales of new video
27

games similarly to weekly measures of movie audience, for video games the sale represents
just the beginning of a period of play, while for movies purchase equals consumption. This
weakens significantly the power of the instrument induced by timing of release. Second, the
release of major new video games displays a massive spike around Christmas that is more
accentuated than the spikes for releases of movies. This further limits the remaining variation
after controlling for seasonality. In this light, the evidence in Cunningham, Engelstätter, and
Ward (2011) of a negative relation between video game sales and violent crime should be
seen as a tentative assessment. Hopefully, future research will suggest sources of variation to
precisely pin down the impact of video games, a topic of real importance given the significant
number of hours spent by the youth on video games.

3.7

Public economics

In this section, we review the eﬀect of media coverage on a set of public outcomes, including
participation in social organizations and attitudes towards the government. In this respect
as well, it is helpful to return to the direct eﬀect and substitution eﬀect of media coverage.
The direct eﬀect is such that, if media outlets convey information on politicians’ performance,
they can aﬀect individuals’ trust toward government, tax compliance and knowledge of public
policies. This is a point studied since the seminal papers by Strömberg (2004) and Besley and
Burgess (2001) and surveyed in Stromberg (2015). At the same time, through a substitution
eﬀect, exposure to mass media can have detrimental eﬀects on social capital, since the large
amount of time spent in front of TV or listening to the radio can crowd out significant social
activities.
The latter point was originally made by Putnam (2000) in his influential ‘Bowling Alone’
book. The contention in the book is that the availability of television and other modern
entertainment possibilities have contributed to isolate individuals who previously used to spend
leisure time in social activities like going bowling together. In turn, this leads to a loss in social
capital.
Olken (2009) provides evidence on this in a study of the impact of television and radio
on social capital in Indonesia. He exploits two diﬀerent sources of exogenous variation in the
number of television and radio channels that households receive. First, he takes advantage
of the diﬀerential introduction of private television in the country between the 1990s, when
there was just one government TV station, and the mid-2000s, when eleven TV channels were
present in Indonesia. Second, he considers the variation in the propagation of the signal due
to topographical and geographical conformation of the territory (for instance, the presence of
mountains in Central and East Java generates a variation in TV reception that is unrelated to
village characteristics). Specifically, he adapts the Irregular Terrain Model by Huﬀord (2002),
which predicts that locations in direct line of sight to a transmitter will receive the strongest

28

signal, while if mountains block sight lines, the signal will diﬀract around the mountains and
signal strength will depend on the frequency of the signal. This approach has since been used
in a variety of studies of television and radio eﬀects.
In the first set of results, Olken uses the number of channels received by each subdistrict as
a proxy for TV and radio exposure. In a first stage, the reception of an additional channel is
associated with 14 additional minutes per day spent watching TV and listening to the radio.
In the second stage, each additional channel received is associated with about 7 percent fewer
social groups existing in the village and 11 percent lower attendance at meetings, suggesting a
significant negative impact of television on social capital. The author finds similar results when
introducing the model of electromagnetic signal propagation to isolate the eﬀect of topography:
greater TV reception is associated with lower levels of participation in village development
meetings and with lower levels of self-reported trust.
Olken also explores the relationship between media exposure and governance. As a measure of governance, Olken uses attendance at village level meetings that planned and monitored
roads construction, the quality of discussion at those meetings and the percentage of funds used
in the project that could not be accounted for by an independent engineering team. Despite
finding a negative impact of television access on attendance at village meetings on the roads
project, he finds no impact on what happens during these meetings and on “missing expenditures” in the road project. Altogether, media exposure can lead to a significant decrease in
participation in social activities and in self-reported trust, especially if it appears to substitute
group activities. However, the link to government outcomes is unclear, at least in this study.
While Olken’s paper is focused on pernicious eﬀects of television, television programming
also oﬀers positive opportunities. In particular, entertainment TV programs can be used to convey information regarding government’s action and programs and, under some circumstances,
they can encourage support and trust toward the government. In this direction, Trujillo and
Paluck (2011) show that a specifically designed soap opera can influence political attitudes
and engagement. The authors test the impact of the telenovela Más Sabe El Diablo (The devil
knows best), a Spanish language soap opera broadcast by Telemundo which portrays Latino
characters’ involvement with the 2010 Census. The Census has historically had trouble estimating the Latino population living in the US for two main reasons: the diﬃculty faced by
Spanish-speaking individuals in understanding the information about the census and completing the forms, and the diﬀused lack of trust in government authorities, in particular regarding
the use of the information collected. The latter reached a peak in 2010, when Latino religious
leaders organized a boycott of the Census with the objective of pressing the government into
enacting immigration reforms.
Given this scenario, Trujillo and Paluck investigated whether a telenovela could aﬀect
census attitudes and engagement among US Latinos. During the census collection period, they
organized a hybrid lab-field experiment and randomly assigned Latino community members in
29

Arizona, New Jersey and Texas to watch pro-Census scenes or control scenes that featured the
same character but not the Census. The census clip overall had a positive eﬀect: compared to
control viewers, census viewers expressed more positive attitudes toward the US government
and displayed more behavioral support for the Census, for instance by wearing pro-Census
stickers and taking informational flyers. This eﬀect is interestingly heterogeneous. In Arizona,
which had recently passed anti-immigrant legislation (Senate Bill 1070), the attitudes towards
the government were actually worse among the group that watched the Census clip. This
suggests that the local context plays a critical role in mediating the eﬀect of media programs
on outcomes.
Additional evidence on the eﬀect of media on trust and attitudes’ toward the government is
provided by Kasper, Kogler and Kirchler (2015). They address the question of how taxpayers’
perceptions of government and tax authorities are influenced by media coverage. In order to
do so, they randomly assign a sample of 487 employees living in Vienna to a 2 × 2 media
manipulation exercise, randomizing trust in authorities (low/high) and perceived enforcement
power of authorities (low/high). The treatments consists in media reports on trust and power.
In the high trust scenario, the political situation in Austria is described as very stable, while in
the low trust scenario, Austria is described as a country with relatively low political stability,
referring to frequent premature government terminations. The high power scenario depicts
the Austrian tax authorities as very eﬃcient, punishing tax evasion eﬀectively and severely,
while the low power scenario describes tax authorities as ineﬀective regarding prosecution
and punishment of tax evasion. The authors test the impact of these media reports on three
diﬀerent outcomes: trust in authorities (i.e., belief that they act in a fair way and on behalf
of their citizens), perceived ability to detect tax evasion, and intended tax compliance (i.e.,
self-reported likelihood of paying one’s taxes). Overall, media coverage significantly aﬀects the
indicated level of trust in tax authorities and the perceived power of governmental institutions.
Both these conditions were also eﬀective in inducing a higher self-reported tax compliance.
Dutta, Murgai, Ravallion, and van de Walle (2013) provide an interesting example of how
entertainment movies can be used to convey useful information regarding governmental policy.
Their goal is to improve public service delivery in the context of India’s “Mahatma Gandhi
National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme” (NREGS), which is the country’s largest
national antipoverty program. To increase the low participation rates in the state of Bihar,
the authors implemented a randomized control trial for an information intervention, in the
form of a short movie. This movie conveyed information about rights and entitlements under
the program, describing how it works, who is eligible and how to apply. From a sample of 150
villages, 40 were randomly selected for a screening of this movie. Two to four months after
the intervention the authors collected a follow-up survey with a variety of outcomes including
knowledge, perceptions and usage of the scheme. They found that respondents from treatment
villages were significantly more likely to know the key features of NREGS (e.g., number of

30

days of work, wage, etc.). They also had more positive perceptions, e.g., regarding increases
in employment and decreases in migration due to NREGS, and were more likely to state that
economic opportunities had improved for their family in the past year. Interestingly, they were
significantly less likely than the control group to believe that women could get work under the
scheme —despite this being a feature of the program— possibly because the main character in
the movie was male.
The latter point illustrates one of the dangers of conveying information exclusively through
entertainment programs, i.e., the possibility that the partial set of information that can fit in
a short entertaining product may give a biased perception about complex realities. But the
most interesting result in the study by Dutta et al. (2013) is probably the discrepancy between
perceived and actual outcomes. In fact, objectively measured employment shows no gain on
average, neither on the extensive nor on the intensive margin, suggesting that the movie was
eﬀective in changing social perceptions about the scheme but not actual utilization.

3.8

Attitudes

In this section, we briefly discuss the relationship between media exposure and individual
attitudes, focusing as an example on inter-ethnic attitudes and material aspirations. More
specifically, we examine whether exposure to the media can aﬀect deeply rooted prejudice,
norms of inter-group cooperation, and individual beliefs about the drivers of success in life.
Studies by Paluck (2009) and Paluck and Green (2009) provide evidence that education
entertainment can be eﬀectively used to change perceived social norms. The authors exploit an
experiment in Rwanda that used a radio soap opera to promote reconciliation in the country
ten years after the genocide. This program, named Musekeweya (New Dawn), was explicitly
designed to teach listeners about the roots of violence, the importance of independent thought
and the danger of excessive deference to authority. The studies are based on a randomized
control trial, where treatment consisted in the reconciliation radio program, while the control
group was assigned to listen to a radio soap opera about reproductive health and AIDS. The
communities in the study were chosen to represent salient political, regional and ethnic breakdowns of present-day Rwanda: two genocide survivor communities (mostly Tutsi), two Twa
communities (the Pygmy minority), two prisons and eight general population communities.
Within each category, each community was matched to the most similar one (on the basis of
education, gender ratio, quality of dwellings) and one community in each pair was randomly
assigned to treatment. Overall, the radio program proved eﬀective in influencing social norms
and behaviors, while no eﬀect was found on beliefs. Compared with listeners in the control
group, treated listeners’ perceptions of social norms and behaviors changed with respect to
intermarriage, open dissent, trust, empathy, cooperation and trauma healing, while the radio
soap opera did little to change listeners’ personal beliefs.

31

An important question is whether positive eﬀects on attitudes found in the short run
persist in the medium or long run. After all, norms and attitudes are deeply rooted and
one may suspect that the eﬀects uncovered in experimental evaluations may be short-lived.
Hennighausen (forthcoming) tries to address this concern by investigating if the information
provided by mass media have the power to persistently aﬀect individual beliefs about the
drivers of success in life. Similar to Bursztyn and Cantoni (forthcoming), she exploits a natural
experiment on West German television reception in former East Germany to analyze its impact
on East Germans’ beliefs before reunification and up to one decade after. While most citizens of
East Germany had access to West German television already before reunification, 15 percent
of the inhabitants in the Northeastern and Southeastern areas did not, due to geographic
characteristics such as distance from transmitters or presence of mountains. This variation
allows her to use survey data from the 1980s and test whether exposure to West German
programs aﬀected the beliefs of East Germans before reunification. Living in a district without
access to Western TV decreases the probability of believing that eﬀort matters for success by
7 percentage points, from a mean of 60 in other parts of Germany. The authors then use
data from the German Socio-Economic Panel (GSOEP) during 1994-99 to test if the eﬀects
of pre-reunification exposure persist a decade later. She finds that they do: respondents from
districts that did not receive West German programs are 3 to 5 percentage points more likely
to believe that success in life is a matter of luck.
These findings suggest that Western TV programs vehicled important messages on the
relationship between eﬀort and success in life and had a long-lasing eﬀect on the corresponding
beliefs of East Germans. Given that beliefs about the determinants of success in life are
also correlated with voters’ preferences for redistribution (e.g., Fong, 2001; Alesina and La
Ferrara, 2002), these findings can have important policy implications: media exposure may
aﬀect redistributive preferences and other policy outcomes even if these eﬀects are not intended.

3.9

Consumption and savings

Another set of outcomes which can be aﬀected by media exposure include consumption and
savings decisions. While we do not cover the substantial literature on the impact of the media
on financial choices of investors (see Tetlock, 2015), we summarize two papers on the impact
of the media on household consumption and financial choices.
Bursztyn and Cantoni (forthcoming) study the exposure to Western television during the
communist regime in East Germany, with a focus on the impact on household consumption.
Similar to Hennighausen (forthcoming), they take advantage of the natural experiment created
by diﬀerential reach of Western signal broadcast across regions of the former German Democratic Republic (GDR) during the communist era. The authors’ hypothesis is that exposure
to Western TV during the communist regime aﬀected preferences for diﬀerent consumption

32

goods but, because of rationing, the impact on preferences could not translate into consumption choices. However, after reunification, citizens in East Germany have access to the same
stores and consumption goods as West Germans, so if television had an impact we would
expect diﬀerences in consumption for citizens exposed to Western TV after 1990.
Using a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences strategy, Bursztyn and Cantoni find that West German TV
did not aﬀect aggregate consumption and savings, but rather the composition of consumption.
In particular, product categories with high intensity of advertising during the decade before
reunification were purchased in higher proportions by East German citizens who had been
exposed to Western TV. This result is consistent with long-lasting eﬀects of media exposure,
ultimately resulting in imitative behavior as in other papers surveyed in this review.
While the above study examines the eﬀect of “unintentional” exposure to consumption
messages, a recent study in South Africa explores the possibility of intentionally embedding
information in entertainment programs to aﬀect savings behavior. Berg and Zia (2013) analyze
the impact of financial education messages on debt management delivered through the soap
opera Scandal!. This soap opera had been running for over eight years, with 4 weekly episodes,
and was broadcast by the second most popular TV station in South Africa. In 2012 a sub-plot
was included for a period of two months to show the consequences of debt mismanagement and
advise on how to avoid debt traps and get out of debt. To address possible concerns related to
self-selection into watching the soap opera, the authors adopted a symmetric encouragement
design. From a sample of about 1,000 individuals, a randomly selected group was encouraged to
watch Scandal!, while the remaining group was encouraged to watch a comparable soap opera
that overlapped with Scandal! in television prime time. The encouragement took the form of
financial incentives: participants were informed that they would be called on the phone during
the weeks in which the soap opera was showing and would be asked some questions about
the plot, receiving a monetary compensation in case of mostly correct answers. A follow up
questionnaire was added three months later. Berg and Zia found encouraging results: treated
individuals had significantly better financial knowledge of the specific issues presented in the
soap opera storyline (not better general financial knowledge). Concerning behaviors, viewers
of “Scandal!” were almost twice as likely to borrow from formal sources, less likely to engage
in gambling, and less prone to enter hire purchase agreements compared to the control group.
These two papers suggest that information and behaviors portrayed on TV can aﬀect
consumption and savings choices in ways that are not purely mediated by the advertising
role that has traditionally been attributed to television.

3.10

Development economics

We have not kept a separate discussion of impacts of the media in developing countries because
indeed some of the best evidence comes from these settings, as Table 1 shows. One of the

33

earliest empirical papers on the economics of the media was indeed focused on India (Besley
and Burgess, 2001). Up to today, important sections of our knowledge on media eﬀects come
from studies set in these countries. Notable examples from the contributions discussed in
the previous sections include Jensen and Oster (2009) and La Ferrara, Chong and Duryea
(2012) for family outcomes in India and Brazil, respectively; Olken (2009) on social capital in
Indonesia; Paluck (2009) on inter-ethnic attitudes in Rwanda; and Berge and Zia (2013) on
financial choices in South Africa.
Without re-summarizing the impact in developing-country contexts, it is worth emphasizing
three natural reasons for the richness of media evidence in these context. The first is the
wealth of identifying variation. The uneven speed of development in these economies implies
that access to media often arrives suddenly, monopolies of content are not uncommon, and
geographic factors, such as those that aﬀect radio reception, provide natural variation in access.
In high-income countries, instead, media markets are saturated, and competition between
media outlets is so stiﬀ, that idiosyncratic variation in exposure or content across places and
over time is hard to find.
A second reason has to do with the scope for impact. Exposure to the media often outlines
role models and portrays societies that are particularly diﬀerent from local behavior. This
diﬀerence implies that the potential for behavior change is larger. The impact of telenovelas
on fertility is a case in point. Telenovelas are common not just in developing countries but in
the developed world, and they often involve similar plots and role models. The behavior of
such role models, for example with respect to fertility, is, however, more similar to the typical
behavior of the audience in developed countries than in developing countries. In turn, this
implies that, to the extent that there are peer eﬀects from the role models, these eﬀects will
be felt much more in developing countries than in developed settings.
A third reason is that media such as radio and television play an even more important
role in countries with low literacy rates, in which print media has limited diﬀusion. In these
countries there is a particular interest, as we stress in the concluding section, in the role that
radio and television can play for educational purposes.

4

Policy and Conclusion

Having reviewed the impact of media exposure across a variety of settings, we return to the
policy implications briefly outlined in the Introduction. In particular, what are the perspectives
for the use of media programming for social policy?
As we discussed, an important opportunity emerges from the complementarity between
entertainment and education in the “educational entertainment” (or “edutainment”) combination: entertainment shows that incorporate role model lessons. A precedent for this combination is the case of product placement, in which a particular product, such as a particular beer,
34

is consumed by a character during a movie or television show. In the case of edutainment, the
content placed is not a product, but a social behavior, presented so that it would be imitated,
or the opposite. La Ferrara (2015) discusses the underpinnings of this approach from the social
psychology literature and its applications to anti-poverty policies.
The studies above on family outcomes highlight the potential of such combination: soap
operas played an important role in lowering fertility rates in a country with very high fertility
like Brazil. Importantly, this policy impact occurred with no apparent loss of audience. Indeed,
the role models in the soap operas were not explicitly designed, as far as we know, to aﬀect
social change, but were a by-product of the entertainment plot. The examples of such success
stories stress the potential of such interventions.
Other points, however, suggest a cautionary note. We discussed an example regarding
migration in which media exposure had the opposite eﬀect of what one may have thought:
exposure to higher standard of living reduced, rather than increased, migration. In other
cases, exposure to edutainment just had no impact on behavior.
While scattered examples of evaluations exist, it seems that more systematic and rigorous
evaluations could greatly help in assessing the eﬀectiveness of edutainment policies across
diﬀerent contexts. Specifically designing evaluations to understand through what channels
these programs aﬀect behavior is an exercise still relatively rare in this field. A recent example
is the work by Banerjee, La Ferrara and Orozco (2015), who have implemented a randomized
control trial to estimate the impact of the MTV series Shuga 3 on risky sexual behavior, gender
norms and domestic violence in Nigeria. A key feature of this evaluation is that it embeds in the
design the estimation of spillovers and the role that individual ex ante beliefs play in shaping
reactions to the program. Future evaluations of edutainment productions would ideally foresee
variations in the design, e.g. in the content delivered, to improve our understanding of this
potential policy tool.
A diﬀerent, delicate issue concerns the ethics of the interventions: what are the limits
of using commercial television for social development? (Brown and Singhal 1990). Some
interventions, like the placement of ethnic examples designed to lead to ethnic reconciliation,
are unlikely to be controversial. Yet, other cases are likely to spur controversies. After all,
a major motivation for the study of media eﬀects was understanding the exploitation of the
media for propaganda purposes by autocratic governments. As part of this manipulation,
dictators such as Hitler and Mussolini embedded political messages in entertainment content
provided by the state, an early example of edutainment. Which of the modern edutainment
applications cross the line from contribution to society to controversial propaganda? More
debate on the topic, together with further evidence on the eﬀectiveness of the placed media
content, is surely in order.
It is important to add that the policy implications are not limited to the placement of
content within entertainment. A general message throughout the paper is the importance of
35

the substitution channel for the media eﬀects: so much time is spent on media entertainment
that even moderate shifts in the time allocated to media consumption can crowd out, or crowd
in, activities with policy relevance. A first example is the study of eﬀects on social capital:
the expansion of television takes time away from activities that we tend to think of as having
high value added: social interactions and participation in groups providing public goods.
An opposite example emerges from the finding that releases of violent movies lower violent
crime because they reduce the allocation of time to even more pernicious activities. This is a
surprising policy impact for a media genre that generally is seen very critically. This finding
is not likely isolated. More generally, media entertainment that attracts groups with violent
inclinations has the potential to play an important positive role.
All in all, the study of the economic and social impacts of the media is an area in transition
that exhibits great potential. The large majority of what we know in the area did not even
exist ten years ago. That only leads one to imagine what breakthroughs lie ahead for the field.

36

5

References

References
[1] Aguiar, M., Hurst, E., and Karabarbounis, L. (2013). “Time Use During the Great Recession.” American Economic Review 103(5), 1664-1696.
[2] Alesina, A., and La Ferrara, E. (2002). “Who Trusts Others?”Journal of Public Economics
85(2), 207-234.
[3] American Academy of Pediatrics (2001). “American Academy of Pediatrics: Children,
Adolescents, and Television.” Pediatrics 107(2), 423-426.
[4] Anderson, C.A., and Bushman, B.J. (2001). “Eﬀects of Violent Video Games on Aggressive
Behavior, Aggressive Cognition, Aggressive Aﬀect, Physiological Arousal, and Prosocial
Behavior: A Meta-analytic Review of the Scientific Literature.” Psychological Science 12,
353-359.
[5] Anderson, C.A., Berkowitz, L., Donnerstein, E., Huesmann, L.R., Johnson, J.D., Linz,
D., Malamut, N.M. and Wartella, E. (2003). “The Influence of Media Violence on Youth”,
Psychological Science in The Public Interest 4, 81-110.
[6] Banerjee, A., E. La Ferrara and V. Orozco (2015), “Changing norms and behavior of young
people in Nigeria: An evaluation of entertainment TV”, mimeo, Bocconi University.
[7] Baron, J. N. and Reiss, P. C. (1985) “Same Time, Next Year: Aggregate Analysis of the
Mass Media and Violent Behavior” American Sociological Review 50, 347-363.
[8] Bauman, K.E., LaPrelle, J., Brown, J.D., Koch, G.G., and Padgett, C.A. (1991). ”The
Influence of Three Mass Media Campaigns on Variables Related to Adolescent Cigarette
Smoking: Results of a Field Experiment.” American Journal of Public Health, 81(5):
597—604.
[9] Berg, G., and Zia, B. (2013). “Harnessing Emotional Connections to Improve Financial
Decisions: Evaluating the Impact of Financial Education in Mainstream Media.”World
Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 6407.
[10] Besley, T., and Burgess, R. (2001). “Political Agency, Government Responsiveness and
the Role of the Media.”European Economic Review 45, 629-640.
[11] Bjorvatn, K., A. Cappelen, L. Helgesson Sekeiz, E. Sørensen, B. Tungodden (2015),
“Teaching through television: Experimental evidence on entrepreneurship education in
Tanzania”, mimeo, NHH Norwegian School of Economics.
37

[12] Bollen, K. A., and Phillips, D. P. (1982). ”Imitative Suicides: A National Study of The
Eﬀects of Television News Stories”.American Sociological Review: 802-809.
[13] Bhuller, M., Havnes, T., Leuven, E. and Mostad, M. (2013). ”Broadband Internet: An
Information Superhighway to Sex Crime?”. Review of Economics Studies 80, 1237-1266.
[14] Braga, M. (2007). “Dreaming Another Life: The Role of Foreign Media in Migration
Decision—Evidence from Albania.”World Bank Working Paper.
[15] Brown, W.J., and Singhal, A. (1990). “Ethical Dilemmas of Prosocial Television.”Communication Quarterly 38(3), 1990.
[16] Bursztyn, L. and Cantoni, D. (forthcoming). “A Tear in the Iron Curtain: The Impact of
Western Television on Consumption Behavior”. Review of Economics and Statistics.
[17] Card, D., and Dahl, G.B. (2011). ”Family Violence and Football: The Eﬀect of Unexpected
Emotional Cues on Violent Behavior”. Quarterly Journal of Economics 126, 1-41.
[18] Cheung, M. (2012). “Edutainment Radio, Women’s Status and Primary School Participation: Evidence from Cambodia”. Stockholm University, Working Paper.
[19] Chong, A. and La Ferrara, E. (2009). “Television and Divorce: Evidence from Brazilian
Novelas”Journal of the European Economic Association: Papers & Proceedings 7(2-3),
458-468.
[20] Cook, D.E., Kestenbaum, C., Honaker, L.M., and Anderson, E.R., Jr. (2000). Joint Statement on the Impact of Entertainment Violence on Children. Congressional Public Health
Summit. http://www2.aap.org/advocacy/releases/jstmtevc.htm
[21] Cunningham, S., Engelstätter, B., and Ward, M.R. (2011). “Understanding the Eﬀects of
Violent Video Games on Violent Crime.”ZEW Discussion Papers, No. 11-042.
[22] Dahl, G. and DellaVigna, S. (2009). “Does Movie Violence Increase Violent Crime? ”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(2), 677-734.
[23] DellaVigna, S., and Gentzkow, M. (2010). “Persuasion: Empirical Evidence”, Annual
Review of Economics, 2, 643-669.
[24] DellaVigna, S., and Kaplan, E. (2007) “The Fox News Eﬀect: Media Bias and Voting.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(2), 807-860.
[25] Dutta, P., Ravallion, M., Murgai, R., and van de Walle, D. (2013). “Testing Information Constraints on India’s Largest Antipoverty Program.”World Bank, Policy Research
Working Paper No. 6598.
38

[26] Enikolopov, R. and Petrova, M. (2015). “Media Capture: Empirical Evidence” In: Anderson, S., Strömberg, D., and Waldfogel, J. (Eds.), Handbook of Media Economics, vol.
1. North-Holland, Amsterdam.
[27] Farré, L., and Fasani, F. (2013).“Media Exposure and Internal Migration – Evidence
from Indonesia.”Journal of Development Economics 102(C), 48-61.
[28] Farrelly, M.C., Nonnemaker, J., Davis, K.C. and Hussin, A. (2009). ”The Influence of
the National truth Campaign on Smoking Initiation”.American Journal of Preventive
Medicine, 36(5):379-84.
[29] Fernandes, L. (2000). “Nationalizing ‘The Global’: Media Images, Cultural Politics, and
the Middle Class in India.”Media, Culture, & Society 22(5), 611-628.
[30] Fong, C. (2001): “Social Preferences, Self Interest, and the Demand for Redistribution,”
Journal of Public Economics 82(2), 225-246.
[31] Gentile, D. A., Oberg, C., Sherwood, N.E., Story, M., Walsh, D.A., and Hogan, M.
(2004). “Well-Child Visits in the Video Age: Pediatricians and the American Academy of
Pediatrics’ Guidelines for Children’s Media Use.”Pediatrics 114(5), 1235-1241.
[32] Gentzkow, M. (2006). “Television and Voter Turnout.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
121(3), 931-972.
[33] Gentzkow, M., and Shapiro, J.M. (2008). “Preschool Television Viewing and Adolescent
Test Scores Historical Evidence from the Coleman Study.”Quarterly Journal of Economics
123(1), 279-323.
[34] Gentzkow, M., Shapiro, J. and Stone, D. (2015) “Media Bias in the Marketplace: Theory”
In: Anderson, S., Strömberg, D., and Waldfogel, J. (Eds.), Handbook of Media Economics,
vol. 1. North-Holland, Amsterdam.
[35] Groseclose, T. and Milyo, J. (2005). “A Measure of Media Bias”, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 120, 1191-1237.
[36] Heckman, J.J. (2000). “Policies to Foster Human Capital.” Research in Economics 54(1),
3-56.
[37] Hennighausen, T. (forthcoming), “Exposure to Television and Individual Beliefs: Evidence
from a Natural Experiment.”Journal of Comparative Economics, forthcoming.
[38] Huang, F., and Lee, M. (2010). “Dynamic Treatment Eﬀect Analysis of TV Eﬀects on
Child Cognitive Development.”Journal of Applied Econometrics 25(3), 392-419.
39

[39] Huﬀord, G. (2002) The ITS Irregular Terrain Model, Version 1.2.2: The Algorithm. Institute for Telecommunication Sciences, National Telecommunications and Information
Administration. http://www.its.bldrdoc.gov/media/50674/itm.pdf.
[40] Jacobsen, G.D. (2011). “The Al Gore eﬀect: An Inconvenient Truth and voluntary carbon
oﬀsets”. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 61: 67—78.
[41] Jensen, R., and Oster, E. (2009). “The Power of TV: Cable Television and Women’s Status
in India.”The Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(3), 1057-1094.
[42] Johnson, K. (2001). “Media and Social Change: The Modernizing Influences of Television
in Rural India.”Media, Culture, & Society 23(2), 147-169.
[43] Johnson, J.G., Cohen, P., Smailes, E.M., Kasen, S., and Brook, J.S. (2002) “Television
Viewing and Aggressive Behavior During Adolescence and Adulthood”, Science 295, 24682471.
[44] Josephson, W.L. (1987) “Television Violence and Children’s Aggression: Testing the Priming, Social Script, and Disinhibition Predictions.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 53, 882-890.
[45] Kasper, M., Kogler, C. and Kirchler, E. (2015). “Tax Policy and the News: An Empirical
Analysis of Taxpayers’ Perceptions of Tax-related Media Coverage and its Impact on Tax
Compliance.”Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Economics 54, 58-63.
[46] Keane, M., and Fiorini, M. (2014). “How the Allocation of Children’s Time Aﬀects Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Development.”Journal of Labor Economics 32(4), 787-836.
[47] Kearney, M.S., and Levine, P.B. (2014). “Media Influences on Social Outcomes: The
Impact of MTV’s 16 and Pregnant on Teen Childbearing.” NBER Working Paper No.
19795.
[48] Kearney, M.S., and Levine, P.B. (2015). “Early Childhood Education by MOOC: Lessons
from Sesame Street”. NBER Working Paper No. 21229.
[49] Keefer, P., and Khemani, S. (2011). “Mass Media and Public Services: The Eﬀects of
Radio Access on Public Education in Benin.”Policy Research Working Paper Series 5559,
The World Bank.
[50] Kennedy, M. G., O’Leary, A., Beck, V., Pollard, W. E., and Simpson, P. (2004). “Increases
in Calls to The CDC National STD and AIDS Hotline Following AIDS-related Episodes
in a Soap Opera.”Journal of Communication 54(2), 287-301.

40

[51] La Ferrara, E., Chong, A., and Duryea, S. (2012). “Soap Operas and Fertility: Evidence
from Brazil.”American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4(4), 1-31.
[52] La Ferrara, E. (2015), “Mass media and social change: Can we use television to fight
poverty?”, JEEA-FBBVA lecture.
[53] Olken (2009). “Do TV and Radio Destroy Social Capital? Evidence from Indonesian
Villages.”American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1(4), 1-33.
[54] Paluck, E.L. (2009), “Reducing intergroup prejudice and conflict using the media: A field
experiment in Rwanda”, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 96, 574-587.
[55] Paluck, E.L., and Green, D.P. (2009). “Deference, Dissent, and Dispute Resolution: A
Field Experiment on a Mass Media Intervention in Rwanda.”American Political Science
Review 103(4), 622-644.
[56] Putnam. (2000). Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community.
[57] Scrase, T.J. (2002). “Television, The Middle Classes and the Transformation of Cultural
Identities in West Bengal, India.”International Communication Gazette 64(4), 323-342.
[58] Strömberg, D. (2004). “Radio’s Impact on Public Spending.”Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(1), 189-221.
[59] Strömberg, D. (2015). “Media Coverage and Political Accountability: Theory and Evidence. ” In: Anderson, S., Strömberg, D., and Waldfogel, J. (Eds.), Handbook of Media
Economics, vol. 1. North-Holland, Amsterdam.
[60] Tetlock, P. (2015). “The Role of Media in Finance. ” In: Anderson, S., Strömberg, D., and
Waldfogel, J. (Eds.), Handbook of Media Economics, vol. 1. North-Holland, Amsterdam.
[61] Trujillo, M., and Paluck, E.L. (2011). “The Devil Knows Best: Experimental Eﬀects
of a Televised Soap Opera on Latino Trust in Government and Support for The 2010
Census.”Analyses of Social Issues and Public Policy 12(1), 113-132.
[62] Vaughan, P., Rogers, E., Singhal, A., and Swalehe, R. (2000). “Entertainment-education
and HIV/AIDS Prevention: A Field Experiment in Tanzania.”Journal of Health Communications 5(1), 81-100.
[63] Wilbur, K. (2015). “Recent Developments in Mass Media: Digitization and Multitasking.”
In: Anderson, S., Strömberg, D., and Waldfogel, J. (Eds.), Handbook of Media Economics,
vol. 1. North-Holland, Amsterdam.

41

[64] Zavodny, M. (2006). “Does Watching Television Rot Your Mind? Estimates of The Eﬀect
on Test Scores”. Economics of Education Review 25(5), 565-573.

42

Table 1. Summary of Papers on the Economic and Social Effects of the Media
Empirical
Main Outcome
Media
Country
Strategy

Paper
Economics of Education

Identification

Zavodny, M. (2006)

Scores in standardized tests

TV

USA

Correlation

Fixed effects and Restriction to Twins
Variation in years of television introduction across
media markets

Gentzkow, M., and Shapiro, J. M. (2008)

Cognitive and non cognitive outcomes

TV

USA

Natural Experiment

Huang, F., and Lee, M. (2010)

Cognitive outcomes - Math and reading scores

TV

USA

Correlation

Dynamic panel data model with feedback

Keane, M., and Fiorini, M. (2012)

Ranking of productivity of different activities

Media

Australia

Correlation

Econometric modelling and exclusion restrictions

Kearney, M.S., and Levine, P.B. (2015)

Educational and labor market outcomes

Exposure to Sesame
USA
Street on PBS
(Television)

Natural experiment

Variation in signal coverage across counties due to
technological features and distance, and in exposure
among cohorts

Keefer, P., and Khemani, S. (2011)

Share of literate children in the village

Radio

Benin

Natural experiment

Variation in radio coverage across villages

La Ferrara, E., Chong, A., and Duryea, S.
(2012)

Fertility rates

Telenovelas (TV)

Brazil

Natural Experiment

Geographic and temporal variation in access to Rede
Globo network telenovelas

Chong, A., and La Ferrara, E. (2009)

Divorce rates

Telenovelas (TV)

Brazil

Natural Experiment

Geographic and temporal variation in access to Rede
Globo network telenovelas

Jensen, R., and Oster, E. (2009)

Acceptability of domestic violence, degree of
preference for male children, female
autonomy/decision-making ability, female school
enrollment, fertility

TV

India

Natural Experiment

Geographic and temporal (2001-2003) variation in
access to cable television.

Cheung, M. (2012)

School enrollment, Women Status: ideal number of
Radio
sons, acceptability of domestic violence, sole final say

Cambodia

Natural Experiment

Geographic and temporal variation in access to radio

Kearney, M.S., and Levine, P.B. (2014)

Talking about related topics: Twitter and Google
16 and Pregnant
searches; Rates of teen childbearing: birth certificates
(TV)
information

USA

Correlation/IV

Panel data/ variation in searching trends/ instrumental
variables

Braga, M. (2007)

Individual migration decisions

TV

Albania

Natural Experiment

Variation in distance from Italian television
transmitters due to topographic characteristics

Farré, L., and Fasani, F. (2013)

Migration

TV

Indonesia

Natural Experiment

Variation in reception due to the topography of the
terrain

Bjorvatn, K., A. Cappelen, L. Helgesson
Sekeiz, E. Sørensen, B. Tungodden (2015)

Entrepreneurship

Show on
enterpreneurship
(TV)

Tanzania

Randomized
controlled trial

Randomized encouragement to watch TV show on
entrepreneurship

Economics of the Family

LABOR/ Migration Decisions

43

Environmental Economics
Environmental friendly behavior: Carbon offsets
purchase

Documentary Movie
USA
An Inconvenient
Truth

Natural Experiment

Spatial variation in film release to theaters

Bollen, K.A., and Phillips, D. P. (1982)

Suicide incidence

TV

USA

Event Study

Compares day/week following the news about
celebrity suicide to other periods

Baron, J.N., and Reiss, P.C. (1985)

Suicide incidence, homicide incidence

TV

USA

Event Study

Compares day/week following the news about
celebrity suicide to other periods. Relative to Bollen
and Phillips, Baron and Reiss include additional
controls

Jacobsen, G.D. (2011)

Health
Suicide

Smoking
Bauman, K.E., LaPrelle, J., Brown, J.D.,
Koch, G.G., and Padgett, C.A. (1991)

Adolescents - Subjective expected Utility for smoking, Anti-smoking
advertisement via
Friends approval, Friends encouragement, smoking
radio
intentions

USA

Field experiment

Two MSAs in US South allocated as treatments, four
MSAs as controls

Farrelly, M.C., Nonnemaker, J., Davis, K.C.
and Hussin, A. (2009)

Smoking initiation among adolescents aged 12-17
years

Anti-smoking
Advertisement

USA

Natural experiment

As proxy of exposure Gross Rating Points - indicators of
reach and frequency of a campaign in each media
market - are used

HIV/AIDS
Vaughan, P., Rogers, E., Singhal, A., and
Swalehe, R. (2000)

Communication about HIV, HIV Awareness,
Prevention behaviors, Number of partners

Radio Soap Opera

Tanzania

Natural experiment

Exposure to radio Soap opera with content on HIV
prevention

Kennedy, M. G., O'Leary, A., Beck, V.,
Pollard, W. E., and Simpson, P. (2004)

Number of calls received by the CDC National STD
and AIDS Hotlines English service

TV Soap opera The
Bold and the
Beautiful

USA

Interrupted time
series design

HIV related episode in soap opera + message with
Hotline Number

Crime
Josephson, W.L. (1987)

Boys' Aggression (as reported by teachers completing
the 9-item Rip van Winkle Peer Rated Index of
Short Video
Aggression)

Canada

Experiment

Random assignment to one of six treatment groups--2
orders of frustration (before/after TV-watching)
crossed with 3 TV violence exposure conditions

Dahl, G. and DellaVigna, S. (2009)

Violent crime

Violent Movies

USA

Natural experiment

Day-to-day variation in the movie audiences of
strongly violent, mildly violent, and non-violent
movies.

Card, D. and Dahl, G.B. (2011)

Family violence

Football game shown
USA
on TV

Natural Experiment

Variation in football score, compared to the predicted
score of the game (Las Vegas bookmakers), comparing
locals fans to other viewers

Bhuller, M., Havnes, T., Leuven, E. and
Mogstad, M. (2013)

Sex crime and rape and child sex abuse

Internet

Norway

Natural Experiment

Spatial and temporal variation in access to internet
due to implementation of National Broadband Policy

Cunningham, A. S.; Engelstätter, B., Ward,
M. R. (2011)

Weekly crime

Video Games

USA

Instrumental
Variables

Instrument: Ratings of video games by a video games
rating agency, exploiting the variation in game sales
correlated with the variation in quality.

44

Public Economics

Olken, B. (2009)

Social Capital: trust, participation to social groups,
number of activities in the village; Governance:
Radio and TV
attendance at village meetings, quality of discussion,
percentage of funds used in the project

Trujillo, M., and Paluck, E.L. (2011)

Support for the US census and attitudes toward
government amongst US latinos

Kasper, M., Kogler, C., and Kirchler, E.
(2013)

Government Trust and Power; Tax compliance

Instrumental
Variables

Variation in propagation of signal due to topographical
and geographical conformation of the territory

Telenovela Más Sabe
El Diablo (The devil USA
knows best )

Randomized
controlled trial

Random assignment of subjects into treatment group
exposed to pro-census messaging in a latino soap
opera or into control group exposed to an episode of
the same soap opera not involving the census

TV

Randomized
controlled trial

Assignemnt to 4 conditions: High vs Low Trust
Scenarios and High vs Low Power Scenarios

Randomized
controlled trial

Random assignment of villages to screening of movie

Indonesia

Austria

Knowledge of BREGS; Perceptions that BREGS
Movie about rights
Dutta, P., Ravallion, M., Murgai, R., and van increase employment, reduce migration, enhance
under an entitlement India
de Walle, D. (2013)
infrastructures; actual or desired participation, wage
program
rates or days worked.

Attitudes
Paluck, E.L., and Green, D.P. (2009)

Beliefs regarding prejudice, violence and trauma;
Radio Soap Opera
norms regarding how to behave in situations related
Musekaweya (or
to prejudice, conflict and trauma; behaviors: speak,
New Dawn )
dissent and cooperate

Rwanda

Randomized
controlled trial

Randomized assignment to radio soap opera versus
control programming

Hennighausen, T. (forthcoming)

Beliefs about the drivers of success

TV

Eastern
Germany

Natural Experiment

Variation in access to western television due to
geographical and topographical characteristics of the
territory

Bursztyn, L. and Cantoni, D. (forthcoming)

Disposable income, total private consumption, and
savings; use of financial instruments; consumption
choices

TV

Eastern
Germany

Natural Experiment

Variation in access to western television due to
geographical and topographical characteristics of the
territory

Berg, G., and Zia, B. (2013)

General and Specific financial literacy, borrowing
from formal banks, borrowing for investment
purposes, saving propensity, likelihood of using
money for gambling and hire expenses, seek for
financial advice

TV Soap opera
Scandal!

South Africa

Randomized
controlled trial

Randomized encouragement to watch soap opera

Consumption and Savings

45

