NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

APPLY YOURSELF: RACIAL AND ETHNIC DIFFERENCES IN COLLEGE APPLICATION
Sandra E. Black
Kalena E. Cortes
Jane Arnold Lincove
Working Paper 21368
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21368
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2015

The authors are grateful to the Texas Workforce Data Quality Initiative at the University of Texas
at Austin’s Ray Marshall Center, funded by the U.S. Department of Labor. The research presented
here utilizes confidential data from the State of Texas supplied by the Texas Education Research Center
(ERC) at the University of Texas at Austin. The authors gratefully acknowledge the use of these data.
The views expressed are those of the authors and should not be attributed to the ERC or any of the
funders or supporting organizations mentioned herein, including the University of Texas, Texas A&M
University, the State of Texas, or the study’s sponsor. Any errors are attributable to the authors. Special
thanks for helpful comments from Daniel Hamermesh, Darrick Hamilton, Laura Dague, Jonathan Meer,
as well as seminar and conference participants at the Association for Public Policy Analysis and Management,
Southern Economic Association, American Economic Association, UT-Austin’s Economics Department,
Texas A&M’s Bush Schools Quantitative Brown Bag Series, Teachers College Columbia University,
and Stanford Graduate School of Education. The authors thank Jenna Cullinane, Matt Farber, Katherine
Keisler, Chester Polson, Emily Weisburst, and Alan Blanch who provided outstanding research assistance.
Institutional support was provided by the University of Texas at Austin, Texas A&M University, Tulane
University, and Stanford’s Graduate School of Education, Center for Education Policy Analysis. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Sandra E. Black, Kalena E. Cortes, and Jane Arnold Lincove. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Apply Yourself: Racial and Ethnic Differences in College Application
Sandra E. Black, Kalena E. Cortes, and Jane Arnold Lincove
NBER Working Paper No. 21368
July 2015
JEL No. I21,I23,I24,J15,J18
ABSTRACT
Access to higher education begins with a student’s decision whether and where to apply to college.
This paper examines racial and ethnic differences in college application behavior of high school graduates,
using two recent graduation cohorts from Texas. We estimate racial and ethnic differences in the probability
of applying to college, controlling for a student’s college readiness, high school quality, certainty of
college admissions, and high school fixed effects. We then investigate racial and ethnic differences
in the choice of where to apply. We enhance the typical model of college matching by considering
the social setting and high school feeder patterns of state universities. We find that racial and ethnic
gaps in application rates, particularly for Hispanic students, are not explained by differential levels
of college readiness, high school quality, or information regarding college admission processes. When
applying to college, minorities are influenced by more than just matching their academic ability to
the institution, and prefer institutions with a large proportion of same race students and campuses where
same race students from their high school have been successful in the past.
Sandra E. Black
Department of Economics
University of Texas
Austin, TX 78712
and IZA and NBER
sblack@austin.utexas.edu
Kalena E. Cortes
The Bush School
Texas A&M University
4220 TAMU
1049 Allen Building
College Station, TX 77843
and IZA and NBER
kcortes@tamu.edu

Jane Arnold Lincove
LBJ School of Public Affairs
University of Texas, Austin
Austin, TX 78712
lincove@mail.utexas.edu

I.

Introduction
Substantial disparities in college enrollment rates exist across racial and socioeconomic

groups in the United States. Nationally, only 62 percent of black and 60 percent of Hispanic high
school graduates enrolled in college the fall semester after high school graduation, compared to 71
percent of white graduates (U.S. Department of Education, 2010). A key goal of education policy
is to help remediate this inequity by providing equal opportunity and access to all students.
However, to develop better policy, one needs to understand the underlying causes of these
disparities. There are many possible explanations, including lack of information and different
preferences. Moreover, selective admissions processes can limit college access among minorities
if high school quality and high school outcomes are unequally distributed by race and ethnicity.
Even before a student can enter an admissions process, she must apply – a process that may
be particularly daunting for a potential first-generation college student. While there are a few
studies that investigate the admissions and enrollment process for minority students, most begin
with a sample of students who express college interest by taking a college entrance exam (SAT or
ACT). In this study, we investigate racial and ethnic differences in the first step in college
enrollment – the application decision – using two full cohorts of recent Texas high school
graduates. Because there is a common college application in Texas (See www.ApplyTexas.org,
hereafter referred to as ApplyTexas), we are able to observe whether each student applied to each
of the 37 four-year public postsecondary institutions in the state. Importantly, because we observe
the population of students and not just those students who applied or took the SAT or ACT exam,
we can learn more broadly about differences in college application behavior. We are also able to
assess the differential roles of student demographics, high school quality, and student preparedness
in the college application decision. Finally, we examine the importance of student-campus fit, by

3

estimating the influence of academic match, campus demographics, and high school feeder
patterns on behavior regarding where students apply to college.
One possible explanation for the disparities observed is that students have incorrect
assessments of the likelihood of gaining admission to college, and this varies by race and ethnicity.
To address this possibility, we take advantage of a unique institutional feature of the Texas public
university system. Texas is one of several states that employs both “percent plan” and holistic
admissions policies. During the time period under study, students who graduated from the top 10%
of their senior class at all Texas public high schools were eligible for automatic admissions to all
Texas public universities, including the highly-selective flagship campuses of the University of
Texas at Austin (UT Austin) and Texas A&M University at College Station (TAMU). Academic
slots not filled by automatically admitted students were given to students who underwent a more
traditional holistic admissions process that includes race as one of many background factors.2 Top
10% students were informed during their junior year of high school of their guaranteed admissions
status and provided with information about campus options, while students below the top 10%
faced the uncertainty and costs associated with a typical college search and application process.
Thus, comparing the application choices of top 10% graduates, who were guaranteed admission,
against top 11-25% graduates who faced holistic admissions processes, is particularly useful for
understanding the interaction of race/ethnicity and admissions uncertainty.
There are several key findings from our analysis. First, we find that lower Hispanic college
enrollment begins with a lower propensity to apply to college – that is, Hispanic students are less
likely to apply to college than all other races, despite having higher average college readiness than
black students. These results are robust to controls for student-level college readiness measures,

2

In holistic admissions, top 11-25% students compete with a larger pool of lower-performing Texas public high school
graduates, out-of-state applicants, international students, and Texas private school students for remaining slots.

4

high school characteristics, and high school fixed effects. Second, black students are in fact more
likely to apply to college than students of other races with similar college readiness and high school
quality, but this effect is concentrated among black students who are less prepared for college.
Finally, we find racial and ethnic differences in the selection of college applied to, with blacks and
Asians showing a strong preference for campuses with students within their own racial group, and
black and Hispanics influenced by the prior experiences of their high school peers on the campus.
Thus, inequality in college access and quality begins with the decision to apply to college and is
influenced by college factors including student demographics and past high school feeder patterns.
The paper unfolds as follows. Section II provides a brief overview of related literature,
Section III describes the data, Sections IV, V, and VI discuss the results on college application and
college choice behavior, and Section VII concludes.
II.

Related Literature
Our work relates to a number of literatures on the application decisions of minority

students. One strand of literature examines how the presence or absence of affirmative action
changes college application and enrollment decisions. Long (2004a) uses data from the College
Board containing a 10 percent random sample of SAT takers and considers how white and minority
applications changed with the elimination of affirmative action in California and Texas. He finds
that both minority and non-minority students changed their behaviors; white and Asian students
increased the selectivity of schools to which they applied, while under-represented minority
students applied to less selective schools. While he cannot observe the actual colleges to which the
student applied, he can observe college characteristics. He finds that, relative to white and Asian
Americans, underrepresented minorities significantly lowered the number of score reports sent to
in-state public colleges, regardless of quality; these results are slightly stronger in California than
5

in Texas.3 Card and Krueger (2005) also use a sample of SAT takers to examine how application
decisions responded to the elimination of affirmative action and find little evidence of a change in
the propensity of high-ability minorities to apply to at least one selective public institution in
California and Texas.
While the aforementioned papers analyze the implications of changes in affirmative action
policies on college application behaviors, we focus on a variety of other factors, such as differences
in student preparation and differences in high school quality, using data on the full population of
high school graduates in Texas; we are thus not limited to students who reveal their college
preferences by taking entrance exams. In addition, we consider black and Hispanic students
separately while prior studies consider both groups in an aggregate category of under-represented
minorities.
There is also a recent and influential literature examining underserved populations and their
decisions to apply to selective institutions (Griffith and Rothstein, 2009; Hoxby and Turner, 2013;
Hoxby and Avery, 2013; Smith, Pender, and Howell, 2013; Dillon and Smith, 2013; and Pallais,
2015). In general, this literature examines a sample of students who are applying to college and
trying to understand the college choices they make. Work by Hoxby and Avery (2013) focuses on
high-ability high school students to examine the phenomenon of “undermatching.” They show that

3

Considering the role of the Texas Top 10% Plan on minority decision-making, Niu, Tienda, and Cortes (2006)
analyze a representative survey of Texas high school seniors in the spring of 2002, who were re-interviewed one year
later to evaluate differences in college preferences and enrollment decisions according to three criteria targeted by the
Top 10% Plan: high school type, class rank, and minority status. They find that Texas seniors and top 10% graduates,
in particular, consider institutional selectivity in making college choices. Moreover, graduates from feeder and
resource-affluent high schools are more likely to preference selective institutions, while graduates from resource-poor
high schools and high schools that rarely feed to selective state universities are less likely to choose selective
institutions as their first preference. Also, both for first college preference and enrollment decisions, black and
Hispanic students are less likely than white students to opt for selective universities. Long (2004b) uses data from the
National Education Longitudinal Study (NELS) and documents that there would be substantial changes in the racial
composition of universities following the elimination of affirmative action, even holding application behavior
constant.

6

low-income high-achieving students who are likely to undermatch are those who are more isolated
from other achieving students; those who do not undermatch tend to be highly concentrated in a
small number of high schools. Pallais (2015) documents that low-income students may be more
sensitive to application costs; she shows that a decline in the cost of applying to an additional
college generated through a decline in the cost of sending one’s ACT scores to an additional
university leads students to apply to more selective universities. Finally, Dillon and Smith (2013)
use the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 (NLSY97) to document the degree of
“mismatch” among students in the NLSY97. Importantly, these data include a variety of
demographic characteristics, and the authors use a unique definition of mismatch – the difference
between a student’s percentile in the ability distribution and the percentile of her college in the
student-weighted distribution of a college quality index. They find that a large fraction of students
are either undermatched or overmatched, and this is due to student decisions. They also find that
features of the state university system the student faces affect the probability of mismatch. Our
research focuses on racial and ethnic differences, considers the population of high school
graduates, and examines a much broader set of institutional characteristics on which students may
base their college application decisions.
Finally, there is also a recent literature examining racial and ethnic differences in college
enrollment. Reardon, Baker, and Klasik (2012) document differences in enrollment patterns in
highly selective colleges by race/ethnicity and income, and find that both black and Hispanic
students are underrepresented in the most selective colleges, even after controlling for family
income. Most recently work by Clotfelter, Ladd, and Vigdor (2014) use data from North Carolina
to examine the role of the public university system in explaining the racial disparities in college
enrollment and completion. They document significant racial and socioeconomic disparities in the

7

likelihood of obtaining a four-year college degree at a University of North Carolina campus.
However, these disparities can be fully explained by differential student readiness; once they
control for 8th grade test scores, black students are more likely to enroll and succeed than nonHispanic white students, largely due to the presence of historically black universities.
Our study builds on this literature using the population of students from Texas, with a focus
on the racial and ethnic differences in college application behavior; in addition, because we have
such a large sample, we are able to estimate differences in application behavior across students
within the same high school. Finally, Texas’ automatic admissions policy enables us to examine
the issue of application behavior for a subsample of the population guaranteed admission, thereby
ruling out mistaken beliefs in the probability of acceptance as an explanation for differential
application behavior.
III.

Data
The data sources for this study were collected by the Texas Workforce Data Quality

Initiative (WDQI) at the University of Texas at Austin, funded by the United States Department
of Labor. The dataset includes high school enrollment and performance measures for all Texas
public school students who graduated in 2008 and 2009. High school measures of college readiness
(such as type and number of courses completed and performance on high school exit exams) and
basic demographics (race and ethnicity, eligibility for free lunch, English proficiency) were
obtained from high school academic records. The WDQI database improves on data sets from prior
studies of race and admissions by including all high school graduates rather than just those who
expressed interest in college and including a sufficient minority population to disaggregate effects
for blacks and Hispanics. In addition, links between high school and university administrative data
sets allow for estimation of within high school differences by race and ethnicity, as well as
8

measurement of a high school’s historical feeder relationship with a university campus. Finally,
the Texas context allows us to directly test the role of admissions uncertainty by comparing
automatically admitted students to students who must undergo holistic admissions.
The two high school graduation cohorts include over 490,000 individuals. Reflecting the
diversity of Texas, 44 percent of high school graduates in our analysis are white, 39 percent
Hispanic, 14 percent black, and 4 percent Asian. We are able to include approximately 430,000
graduates in our regressions after excluding those with incomplete data and high schools that
graduated fewer than five students within a year.4
Table 1 displays post-high school college enrollment choices by race and ethnicity. Both
black and Hispanic students are under-represented in enrollment at elite state flagships universities,
other selective state universities, Texas private universities, and out-of-state universities. Black
students make up some ground in total enrollment at open-enrollment state universities, while
Hispanic students are most likely to not enroll in any type of higher education. In this study, we
examine whether these inequalities begin with college application behavior.
Table 2 displays summary statistics for all high school graduates and then disaggregated
statistics by race and ethnicity. The graduates were 50 percent female, 44 percent eligible for
free/reduce price lunch (FRL), and were on average 17.1 years old the September of their senior
year in high school. In terms of college readiness, graduates average 2.5 semesters of Advanced
Placement (AP) or International Baccalaureate (IB) courses. Twenty-four percent took AP English,
15 percent took AP mathematics, and 12 percent took AP science. The average graduate attended
a high school that is 44 percent FRL, 14 percent black, and 41 percent Hispanic. In terms of the

4

Typically, missing data are college readiness measures for students who transferred into Texas public schools in
their junior or senior year. These students have incomplete high school coursework records and were not required to
take the Texas high school exit exam.

9

high school’s emphasis on college readiness, graduates on average attended schools where 11
percent of students earn college credit by passing an AP exam, 67 percent took SATs or ACTs,
and SAT scores averaged 976. On average, black and Hispanic students have both lower individual
college readiness and lower average high school college readiness than white and Asian students.
For example, black and Hispanic students attended high schools where, on average, fewer than 9
percent of students earned AP credit and average SAT scores were below 950. Black students had
lower average college readiness than Hispanic students across AP coursework and exit exam
scores. Black and Hispanic students attended high schools with similar college readiness, but
Hispanic students attended schools with a larger percent minority and FRL, on average.
K-12 public school data were merged with college application data for all those who
applied to Texas public colleges and universities. Because all Texas public universities use a
common online application called ApplyTexas, we are able to observe application behavior to any
Texas public university; we used these records to identify students who applied to any public fouryear university within one year of high school graduation.5 The application data also provides
additional information on family income, parent education, and college readiness, including SAT
scores and eligibility for top 10% automatic admissions, which is not provided in the high school
data set. We also can observe enrollment, financial aid, college grades, and college graduation data
for all those who enrolled in any Texas public university.
Unfortunately, we do not have access to college application information for students who
applied only to out-of-state schools. However, we were able to use the National Student
Clearinghouse (NSC) data from the 2008-09 and 2009-10 academic years to identify Texas high
school graduates who did not apply to any four-year Texas public university but who did enroll at

5

See www.applytexas.org for more information.

10

any other four-year university in the United States in the fall following graduation. Individuals
who applied to any Texas public university or enrolled in any other University are considered to
be college applicants in our analysis. 6 When we consider applications to the most selective
institutions, we include individuals who applied to the state flagship campuses of UT Austin and
TAMU or who were observed enrolled at a college that was ranked higher than either Texas
flagship university by Barron’s Profiles of American Colleges (2007).7
Table 3 presents the application decisions by race and ethnicity for our graduation cohorts.
Row 1 presents statistics for the sample observed in the Texas public university application sample,
and row 2 then presents similar statistics when we augment the sample with the NSC enrollment
data. For four-year public universities in Texas, black and white application rates were similar at
35 percent for blacks and 36 percent for whites, and the Asian application rate was substantially
higher at 52 percent. Hispanic students, who make up the second largest group of graduates, have
a much lower application rate at only 27 percent.
The adjustment resulting from incorporating the NSC data is relatively small; the gaps are
largest for whites and Asians, with 9 percent of Asians and 7 percent of whites appearing as
enrolled in the NSC without applying to any four-year public university in Texas. The gaps are
smaller for blacks and Hispanics at only 4 and 3 percent, respectively.
When we look at applications to elite state flagship universities in row 3, black and
Hispanic application rates fall to only 5 percent, compared to 14 percent for white and nearly 30

6

In 2008 and 2009, Texas had a total of 37 public four-year universities, all of which participated in ApplyTexas. This
includes campuses of the UT System, Texas A&M System, Texas State system, University of Houston System, Texas
Tech University, and several other campuses. A full list of included public universities is available from the authors.
7
The cost of postsecondary education in Texas is about the same across public universities, and it is significantly more
expensive for a Texas resident to enroll out-of-state. For example, in 2006, the total cost of attendance (tuition, fees,
plus room and board) ranged from $11,919–$12,845 at Texas flagship university, and from $7,445–$13,027 at other
Texas selective public universities. Thus, cost of attendance at state universities, relative to other college options, is
not the driving mechanism behind the low enrollment rates, in particular, for Hispanic students observed in Table 1.

11

percent for Asian students. Row 4 then uses the NSC data to incorporate those who enrolled in
four-year universities ranked higher than the flagship universities (according to Barron’s) and who
did not apply to either flagship in Texas. We see that approximately 3 percent of Asians appear as
enrolled at elite universities without applying to either flagship university in Texas. The gaps for
other groups are quite small. Only 0.6 percent of whites, 0.3 percent of blacks, and 0.2 percent of
Hispanics appear as enrolled in higher-ranked universities without applying to at least one Texas
flagship university as well. Since the gaps for blacks and Hispanics are always lower than whites,
omitted information for students who apply only to non-Texas universities and do not enroll is
likely to result in understating racial differences, as it is likely that more whites than blacks or
Hispanics also apply and don’t enroll.8
IV.

Decision to Apply
These summary statistics suggest that racial and ethnic gaps in college access can be

partially explained by differential application behavior; however, these statistics do not account
for students’ preparation and ability, which vary by race/ethnicity and influence the likelihood of
college admission. In this setting, it is possible that high school sorting and college readiness
explains much of the difference in college application behavior for Hispanic students, and it is
unclear why blacks have similar application rates to white students.
To better understand the relationship between student characteristics and their application
decisions in the context of high school sorting, we estimate the following simple model:
1

∙

∙

∙

8

We may, however, overstate differences between whites and Asians, because Asians are probably also more likely
to apply and not enroll than whites. Other demographics, college readiness, and high school quality are similar across
the sample of students who applied to a four-year public university in Texas and the larger sample that only appears
in the NSC (see Appendix 1).

12

where

is an indicator of whether student i, who attended high school s and graduated at time

t, applied to any four-year college.

represents indicator variables for race and ethnicity,

is a vector of individual student characteristics such as college readiness and indicators for free
and reduced lunch and limited English proficiency.

is a time-varying vector of high school

characteristics related to both the demographics and the college preparedness of graduates, and
represents graduation year indicators.9 We estimate this equation as a linear probability model both
with and without high school fixed effects,

.

Table 4 presents results for regression specifications for the full sample of high school
graduates for our two main outcomes of interest. As noted earlier, our first outcome is an indicator
of whether an individual applies to a four-year university—this is equal to one if the student either
applied to any four-year Texas public university or appeared in the NSC as enrolled at any fouryear university (panel A). Our second outcome in an indicator of whether an individual applied to
a selective university—this is equal to one if the individual applied to either Texas flagship
university or appeared in the NSC as enrolled in a four-year university ranked higher than the
Texas flagships (panel B).
We first consider the probability of applying to a four-year college (as defined above).
Column 1 presents the results from a simple model that controls for race and ethnicity along with
a parsimonious set of demographic controls that includes graduation year, age, gender, and
indicators for limited English proficiency (LEP) and FRL in high school. This specification
confirms substantial differences across races, controlling for this limited set of demographics, in
the probability of applying to a public university, with blacks and Asians significantly more likely
to apply and Hispanics significantly less likely to apply than whites.
9

Throughout this study, high school characteristics are lagged one year prior to the student’s senior year in high
school.

13

However, these application differences could be due to differences in college preparation
or ability. Column 2 adds controls for observable college readiness including the total number of
AP semesters taken, indicators for whether the student took AP English, AP mathematics, and AP
science courses, the total number of failing grades received on semester report cards, and
performance on the state exit exam (standardized composite of English and math scores). All of
these additional variables are significant predictors of college application behavior in the expected
direction, and the estimated racial and ethnic differences change in distinct ways. The positive
black coefficient becomes even more positive, the positive Asian coefficient becomes smaller in
magnitude, and the negative significant Hispanic coefficient becomes insignificant and smaller in
magnitude. Thus, difference in individual college readiness variables appear to explain much of
the difference between white and Hispanic and white and Asian application rates, but not the
differences between blacks and whites.
Even controlling for student characteristics, differences in application behavior may still
be due to differences in high school quality. School quality can affect students through a variety
of channels, including college preparedness, opportunities to take AP coursework, and
expectations for higher education. School quality will vary by race and ethnicity due to historic
segregation of neighborhoods and school districts, as well as selective admissions at magnet high
schools. It is likely that race and ethnicity also influence a student’s experiences within a racially
integrated high school in ways that affect college choices. To examine this, we add observable
measures of high school quality, including demographic measures (logged total enrollment,
percent FRL, percent black, and percent Hispanic), indicators of typical college expectations
(percent of graduates who enroll in four-year colleges, percent of students earning AP credit, and
percent of students taking SATs – all lagged one year to reflect prior graduating classes), and

14

geographical proximity to the nearest public university. 10 Minorities may live further from
universities than whites; thus, the costs of attending college may be higher.11 Column 3 presents
the results when we include these controls. Controlling for college readiness, observable high
school characteristics, and distance to college, we find once again that a black student is
significantly more likely than a white student to apply to college, ceteris paribus. In contrast,
Hispanics are again significantly less likely to apply than similar white students, while Asians and
whites are not significantly different.
In our final specification, we include high school fixed effects, thereby controlling for any
school characteristics that are constant across this two-year time period (column 4). Here, we are
comparing students with equal college preparedness who graduated from the same high school to
see if there are racial and ethnic disparities in application behavior within high schools. With high
school fixed effects, the positive effects of black and negative effects of Hispanic from column 3
are confirmed and with similar magnitudes. We estimate that within high schools, a black student
is 13.8 percentage points more likely to apply to college than a similar white student, while a
Hispanic student is 6.1 percentage points less likely to apply than a similar white student. For
Asians, unlike prior specifications, the within school difference in application behavior is

10

The distance variables are generated using longitude and latitude to compute the distance between each high school
and each public university campus. The program used in the computation of the distance variables is called “Distance
and Bearing between Matched Features” (distbyid.avx) by Jenness (2004), which is an application for ArcView. The
extension distbyid.avx calculates the distance and bearing between features with identical attribute values, allowing
one to generate connecting lines and calculate data for specific sets of features. The output options in this extension
include a results table containing various user-selected fields such as: distance and bearing between features, X/Y
coordinates, centroids versus closest edges, etc. Since we had all school address, we first generated X/Y coordinates
based on longitude and latitude of all of the Texas high schools. Then, using the option X/Y coordinates, we compute
a 2,412 distance matrix. Lastly, the function option in Stata Statistics/Data Analysis called min(x1, x2, x3, … , xk) is
used to generate miles to nearest public university and public flagship university. In the case of missing distance data,
we used the average distance for non-missing observations within in the same school district or county.
11
Although many Texas cities have large Hispanic populations, Hispanics are more likely than other races to live in
rural areas near the Texas-Mexico border.

15

significant and negative, suggesting that Asians are less likely to apply than white peers from the
same high school by approximately 2 percentage points.12
Our results so far indicate that the large Hispanic minority in Texas is least likely to apply
to college while black students are more likely to apply than equally qualified whites with similar
high school characteristics. While racial and ethnic differences in application to public universities
in general is important, work by Hoxby and Avery (2013) suggests that another important
difference for long-run economic outcomes may be racial and ethnic differences in application to
elite schools. Texas’ automatic admissions policy is designed to increase minority admissions to
these elite schools, but the effects on minority application are unclear (Long 2004a; Card and
Krueger 2005; Niu, Tienda, and Cortes 2006).
Panel B of Table 4 replicates the four specifications above for the outcome of applying to
a selective institution as defined earlier. 13 Across all four specifications, black and Hispanic
students are significantly less likely than whites to apply to a flagship university. Asian students
are significantly more likely to apply than white students, but a large portion of this effect is
explained by differences in college readiness and high school quality. The effects for all races and
ethnicities are larger in the parsimonious specification in column 5, suggesting that some, but not
all, racial and ethnic differences are explained by differential levels of college preparation and high
school quality.

12

To further support these results, we re-estimated all regression specifications on a subset of colleges that excludes
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs). Since Texas has two public HBCUs, our previous results on
black application rates could be driven by these colleges. These regression results are shown in Appendix 2 of this
paper. The black student coefficients are a bit smaller in magnitude, but still statistically significant, suggesting that
higher application rates for less-qualified black student are not driven by the availability of HBCUs.
13
For estimation of the probability of applying to a flagship university the “distance to college” variable is replaced
with the distance to the nearest of the two flagship campuses.

16

V.

Heterogeneity
So far, our estimates have assumed constant effects of race and ethnicity across both

student and high school characteristics. It is possible, however, that these application patterns vary
depending on the characteristics of the high school a student attended. Minorities attending a high
school where more graduates take AP exams or enroll in college might be more likely to consider
college options than those attending a high school where graduates rarely attend college. 14
Application patterns could also vary depending on the characteristics of the student, and in
particular on the student’s level of college readiness. For example, less college-ready minorities
may behave differently than minorities who are more prepared for college. We next examine
whether we observe differential college application patterns based on high school and student
characteristics.

High School Characteristics
As noted above, it is possible that our results are driven by a tendency for black or Hispanic
students, on average, to attend high schools with a low college-going culture or low expectations
for postsecondary enrollment. Minority students may have different college application behaviors
when they attend a high school with greater postsecondary expectations or with differential
treatment of minorities relative to college expectations. Table 5 presents results when we examine
whether gaps in application behavior are different at schools with high fraction of Hispanics vs.
low fraction of Hispanics and schools with high college enrollment rates for graduates vs. low
rates. In each case, a high school is characterized as “high” for a given characteristic if it is in the

14

For example, Hoxby and Avery (2013) find that low-income, high achieving students who are in schools with other
high-achieving students are more likely to apply to elite institutions, while those who are more isolated are not.

17

top 20% of all high schools statewide and “low” if it is in the bottom 20%.15 Each specification
includes controls for gender, age, race and ethnicity, demographics, college readiness, graduation
year, and high school fixed effects.
The findings that black students are more likely to apply to college than whites, and that
Hispanic students are less likely to apply to college than white students, are remarkably consistent
across high school types. The estimated racial and ethnic differences are smallest in high schools
with low college entrance rates (column 4 of panel A). Interestingly, the Hispanic effects were
negative even in high schools with the highest college entrance rates (column 3) and percentage
Hispanic (column 1). Other high school characteristics were also tested (results not displayed) with
consistent results for black and Hispanic students.16
In panel B of Table 5, we examine whether racial differences in application to selective
universities vary by high school type. Minorities should be more likely to apply from high schools
where minorities are more likely to be represented in the top 10% – for example, a high school
with more than 90% minority students. The results in panel B also control for gender, age,
demographics, college readiness, graduation year, and high school fixed effects. Again, we observe
that Hispanic students are less likely to apply to elite flagship universities compared to their white
student counterparts, and their lower application rate is remarkably consistent across all high
school types. The results for black and Asian students vary by high school type. Most notably,

15

These cut-off values are 0.115, 0.302, and 0.669 for percentage Hispanic (bottom 20%, median, and top 20%,
respectively), and 0.086, 0.223, and 0.366 for percentage of graduates from the high school who enrolled in a fouryear college (bottom 20%, median, and top 20%, respectively).
16
Specifically, we tested specification by the high school’s percent FRL, percent SAT-tested and percent earning AP
credit, along with specifications by the high school’s rate of Hispanic SAT testing, Hispanic AP credit, and Hispanic
college entry with similar results. Even in schools with high rates of Hispanic college readiness indicators and high
rates of Hispanic college entry, Hispanics were significantly less likely to apply to college than whites with similar
college readiness.

18

black students are significantly more likely to apply than whites at schools with high college
enrollment.

College Readiness
We next examine whether racial and ethnic differences are constant across the distribution
of student preparation for college. Students should be more likely to apply to college when their
high school outcomes signal the potential for college success, and racial gaps might diminish for
minority students who are highly qualified for postsecondary education. To examine this, we
divide high school graduates by their observed high school preparation in comparison to what is
typical for Texas public universities. This comparison proxies for information students might know
about their own college readiness through observation of peers. First, we measured average levels
of college readiness based on AP courses completed and high school exit exams for freshman
entering all non-open enrollment public universities in Texas in the year prior to the student’s
graduation. We then selected three institutions from across the distribution of average freshman
college readiness – the top-ranked campus (UT Austin), a mid-ranked campus (UT San Antonio),
and the bottom-ranked campus (UT El Paso) among campuses that are not open enrollment. Next,
from among the sample of high school graduates, we identified students whose exit exams and AP
courses exceeded that of the average entering freshman at those three institutions during the
student’s senior year in high school. Thus, a “highly qualified student” is above average compared
to an entering freshmen at the top ranked public university, a “somewhat qualified student” is
above average for a median public university but not the top ranked, and a “less qualified student”
is above average for a low-ranked public university but not the median university. Students who
are below average for the bottom ranked campus are excluded from this analysis. High school
students who are similar to students who successfully gain admissions and enroll should view
19

themselves as college ready and should receive encouragement to apply from teachers and
counselors. In addition, student college readiness should partially overcome the information
problem regarding the probability of admissions.
Table 6 displays regression results by college-readiness level for the specifications that
includes both student college readiness measures and high school fixed effects. Thus, we are
estimating within-school racial differences across the three qualification groups. We again present
our results for our two main outcomes of interest: application to any four-year university (panel
A) and application to a flagship university (panel B), both as defined earlier. For either outcome,
the results for Hispanic students are remarkably similar to prior point estimates. At all collegereadiness levels, a Hispanic student is less likely to apply to college than a similarly prepared white
student within the same high school. These effects are statistically significant for all groups except
highly-qualified applicants to a flagship university. A highly-qualified Hispanic student is 3.2
percentage points less likely to apply to any college than a white student, and a less-qualified
Hispanic student is 6.1 percentage points less likely to apply to any college than a white student.
The results for black students in Table 6 provide new insight into the positive effects
previously reported. Black students from the medium- and less-qualified groups are significantly
more likely to apply to college than similarly qualified whites, but black students from the highly
qualified group are less likely to apply to college than highly qualified white students, although
this difference is not statistically significant. Thus, the black application rate is high because of
higher propensity to apply among students who are more marginal for college admissions. In
addition, a highly qualified black student is 5 percentage points more likely to apply to a flagship
university than a similar white student from the same high school.

20

Lastly, as shown in panel B, both highly and somewhat qualified Asian students are more
likely to apply to selective universities than white students. Interestingly, these results suggest that
Hispanic students are less likely to apply to any college at most levels of college readiness relative
to whites, but that less prepared black students are more likely to apply to college than whites, and
better prepared black students are more likely to apply to flagships. Asians are more likely to apply
to flagship universities than white students. Put differently, among highly qualified graduates,
Hispanic students are significantly more likely to “undermatch” (i.e., apply to campuses for which
they are overqualified) relative to white students, but Asian students are more likely to
“overmatch” (i.e., apply to campuses for which they are underqualified) relative to white
students.17
VI.

College Choice
So far, we have shown that Hispanic students are less likely to apply to four-year

postsecondary education relative to whites, black students are more likely to apply than whites,
and that Asian students are more likely to apply to selective universities in comparison to white
students. Next, we examine how college characteristics influence application behavior by race and
ethnicity. Why do students choose to apply to one university over another? Are there particular
institutional characteristics that are more appealing to students of different races and ethnicities?
A number of papers have estimated college choice behavior. Long (2004) first examined
college enrollment choices using McFadden’s (1973) choice model. This strategy exploits the

17

In other work (Black, Cortes, and Lincove 2015), we estimated interactions between college qualifications, as
defined above, and the propensity to apply to elite flagship public universities by race and ethnicity. Here, we find
that Hispanic students in the top 11-25% who were highly qualified for flagships were less likely to apply to flagships
than similar white students. In addition, we find that black undermatch occurs among top 10% graduates who choose
not to take advantage of automatic admissions to flagships (but do apply to less competitive campuses), while the
Hispanic undermatch occurs among highly qualified students who miss the cut for automatic admissions and must
compete in a holistic process.

21

variation across college characteristics in a student’s choice set to estimate the influence of
observable characteristics (such as tuition, distance from home, and college inputs) on enrollment.
Hoxby and Avery (2013) applied the same approach to college application decisions to examine
the application behavior of high-achieving, low-income high school students to explain the
phenomenon of “undermatch,” where highly qualified students opt for less competitive
universities, despite a high probability of admissions and financial support at elite universities.18
Here, we expand on Hoxby and Avery (2013) to better understand racial and ethnic differences in
application choices. This strategy provides insight into how the characteristics of public
universities may contribute to racial gaps in applications.
We also expand on prior models of college choice by examining academic, social, and
informational influences on student choices. Prior studies primarily test how students are
influenced by campus academics by estimating the effects of similarities or differences between
the student’s SAT scores and campus average, with controls for geographic and financial
accessibility. To better understand racial and ethnic differences in application, we also consider
characteristics describing the social setting of the college campus. Minority students may be
reluctant to enroll in campuses with few students from the same racial or ethnic group. We also
include measures of the feeder patterns between the student’s high school and the college campus.
Students may have better information about campuses attended by prior graduates from their own
high school and may be more willing to attend a campus if their older peers are currently attending
that campus.
Following Long (2004) and Hoxby and Avery (2013), we model the college application
decision as a conditional logit:

18

Bettinger and Long (2004) use the same empirical strategy to investigate the effects of a specific college input and
academic remediation on college outcomes.

22

∙

2 Pr
∙

3

∙

∙

∑

∙

∙

∙

∙
where Pr

is an indicator if student i applied to university j,

cost at institution j,

represents in-state tuition

is the distance from student i’s high school address to institution j,

is a vector of indicator variables representing the student i’s academic readiness
compared to mean readiness on campus j (i.e., the distance between the student’s SAT scores and
the institution mean),

is a vector of campus racial and ethnic demographics based on prior

year’s freshmen class at institution j (i.e., % Black, % Hispanic, and % Asian enrolled on campus),
is a vector of variables indicating feeder patterns of student i’s high school to each
institution j (i.e., # enrolled from the same high school in prior year, # of college graduates from
the same high school in prior year, # enrolled of the same race/ethnicity from the same high school,
and # of college graduates of the same race/ethnicity from the same high school – all lagged one
year prior to the student’s high school graduation), and lastly,

is independent and identically

distributed with the extreme value distribution.
In the estimation, a student appears in one observation for each four-year public university
in Texas, reflecting the full choice set of public universities. The outcome variable is coded as one
if the student applied to that campus and zero otherwise, and multiple positive outcomes occur for
students who applied to more than one university. The conditional logit requires that individuals
must have at least one positive outcome across the choice set, so this analysis is limited to students
who applied to at least one university. Six universities that received fewer than five total
applications are also omitted, creating a choice set of 31 public universities. The conditional logit
23

is estimated with student fixed effects, controlling for all fixed student characteristics. All
independent variables must vary across college campuses within a student’s choice set. Our
estimations include robust standard errors for clustering within high schools.
Table 7 presents our first set of results on what specific institutional attributes are appealing
to students. Conditional logit results are displayed as odds ratios of the change in the odds of
applying to a campus based on marginal changes in a campus characteristic, ceteris paribus. We
estimate three specifications across racial and ethnic groups. Similar to prior work (Long, 2004;
Hoxby and Avery 2013), the first specification includes controls for tuition, distance, and academic
match (columns 1-4). Our second specification adds controls for social match, measured as the
proportion of each minority race and ethnic group on the campus (columns 5-8). Lastly, the third
specification adds controls for high school feeder patterns both for the whole high school and for
students of the same race and ethnicity as the student (columns 9-12).
Across specifications, students of all races and ethnicities are more likely to apply to
universities that are closer to home (either within commuting or visiting distance). Controlling for
academic match, Hispanic students are the most sensitive to distance, followed by blacks and
Asians, and white students are the least influenced by distance. In terms of academic campus
match, all races and ethnicities are more likely to apply to campuses where their SATs are below
the campus mean, and less likely to apply to campuses where their SATs are above the campus
mean. However, Hispanic and black students are more likely to apply to campuses that are a far
reach academically, with average SATs 200 or more points above their own score, while whites
are significantly less likely to apply to a campus that are a far reach. With higher average SAT
scores, white and Asian students have fewer “reach” campuses than black and Hispanic students,

24

but the evidence does not suggest that a lack of close academic match campuses explains racial
and ethnic differences in application behavior.
Looking at specifications with controls for social match, that is the racial demographic
composition of the college campus (columns 5-8), we observe that black, Hispanic, and Asian
students are all more likely to apply to campuses with a higher concentration within their own
racial and ethnic group. The effect is particularly large for Asian and black students. Interestingly,
whites’ application behavior is negatively associated with minority concentrations of all other
racial and ethnic groups on campus. For Asian students, the coefficients for academic match
variables are influenced by the addition of campus racial demographic variables (column 7).
Specifically, controlling for the percent Asian on campus, Asians are most likely to enroll on a
campus where their SAT scores are within 100 points of the campus mean. This suggests that
Asians are most likely to apply to campuses with a concentrated population of other Asian students
with similar academic readiness. Hispanic and black students, in contrast, remain more likely to
apply to reach schools, holding racial demographic composition of the university constant.
Our final specifications add controls for the information and familiarity students would
gain about a campus by attending a high school that frequently sends graduates from their own
school to that particular college campus. Our measures include the number of students from one’s
own high school who enrolled at the college in the previous year, as well as the number of students
from one’s own high school who graduated from that college in the previous year. We calculate
both of these measures for the high school overall as well as for the student’s own racial group.
Hispanic and black students are more likely to apply to a campus that has recently enrolled any
students from the same high school and recently graduated students from the same high school of
the same race. Asians are positively influenced by both recent enrollment and recent graduation

25

from their high school, but the race of the enrollers and completers is not relevant. White students
are influenced by enrollment and completion of any race, as well as by enrollment specifically by
whites. It appears that all students learn something about a college campus through the feeder
relationship of their high school peers, but for black and Hispanic students, information about
successful completion by same race and ethnicity of older peers is also important. The addition of
high school feeder variables does reduce the size of coefficients on campus level racial
composition variables, but large effects remain, particularly for black and Asian students.
Differences in application behavior by race and ethnicity could mask associated differences
in income levels across racial and ethnic groups. In Table 8, we further disaggregate students into
three brackets of family income (below $40,000, $40-80,000, and above $80,000). Results are
displayed for the full specification in columns 1-4 for low income, columns 5-8 for middle income,
and columns 9-12 for high income. We find that students of all races and ethnicities are less
sensitive to distance to college as income level increases. The effects of academic matching are
similar across income brackets, and there is little evidence that low-income minorities are less
likely to apply to reach schools than high-income minorities. The effects of social match are
different across income brackets, however, with the presence of students from the same minority
having a smaller influence on black and Hispanic students as family income increases. We find
that high-income Hispanics are actually are less likely to apply to a campus with a high proportion
of Hispanic students, holding other characteristics equal. At all income levels, white students are
less likely to apply to campuses with a high proportion of students in all minority groups. The
results for high school feeder variables are similar across income brackets, with black and Hispanic
students at all income levels influenced by the successful completion of same race students from
their high schools.

26

Finally, we consider the role of information in college application behavior. Hoxby and
Avery (2013) hypothesize that college undermatch is related to a lack of information about
admissions and financial aid among low-income, high-achieving high school students. In our final
estimation, we exploit Texas’s unique college admissions policy to test this hypothesis in relation
to racial and ethnic application gaps in the state. Specifically, we examine whether racial and ethnic
differences in college application behavior are similar between students in the top 10%, who have
full information about their admission to the state’s top universities, and those in the top 11-25%
or bottom 75%, who face typical college admissions uncertainty.
The results, reported in Table 9, show very little effect of automatic admissions on the
application choices of black, Asian, and white students. In comparison, Hispanic students in the
top 10% are the only minority group not significantly influenced by same-race enrollment on
campus (column 2 of panel A). Similarly, Hispanics in the top 10% are not significantly influenced
by the feeder history of same-race students from their high school to the campus, while Hispanics
subject to admissions uncertainty are more likely to apply to campuses where Hispanic students
from their high school have recently completed a college degree.
VII.

Conclusion
Minority access to higher education is a growing concern across the nation. Obstacles to

higher education for minorities will limit growth in human capital and competitiveness for the
United States in the very near future. In this study, we identify the college application decision as
a pivotal first step in college access that precedes the processes of admissions and enrollment. Our
study benefits from the use of a statewide student dataset that includes the full range of student
ability and college readiness that exists within two high school graduation cohorts, and a single
college application procedure that is common to most four-year universities in the state. We are
27

also able to provide further insight into the decision process by analyzing campus preferences of
applicants in a state where highly-qualified students are automatically admitted to the top public
universities.
From a standpoint of population size, the growing Hispanic minority (soon to be a majority
in Texas) is of great concern in Texas and across the nation. We consistently find that Hispanic
students are least likely of all ethnic groups to apply to college overall and to elite flagship
universities in particular. This finding is robust to controls for college readiness, high school
quality, and high school fixed effects. The gap between Hispanic and white students in college
application is consistent across levels of observable college readiness and high school quality.
Even when Hispanic students attend high schools where a majority of students move on to college
or where Hispanics are statistically high likely to achieve automatic admissions, Hispanic students
are significantly less likely to apply to college than white students.
We find a more nuanced type of inequality in the college application behavior of black
high school graduates, an issue not previously identified in studies that aggregate black and
Hispanic students as a single group. On average, black students are actually more likely to apply
to college than white and Hispanic students with similar levels of college readiness and high school
quality. However, this is driven mostly by high application rates among less-prepared black
students. Among the most qualified students, blacks have similar overall application rates to whites
but are more likely to apply to flagship universities.
We also find that college application decisions for minorities are responsive to more than
just the average academic performance of students on a campus. Black, Hispanic, and Asian
students are more sensitive than whites to distance to college, and black, Hispanic, and Asian
students are all influenced by the presence of same-race students on campus. Black and Hispanic

28

students are also influenced by the historical feeder pattern of their high school to a campus,
including past successful degree completion of same-race students from their high school. These
social and information effects are mitigated only among high-income Hispanics and Hispanics
who are guaranteed admission. Thus, minority application rates respond not only to student college
readiness, but also the enrollment and outcomes of minority students on a campus. Automatic
admissions might expand the application choices of Hispanics to include campuses with fewer
Hispanics students, but black students are highly responsive to the racial composition of a campus
even when they are guaranteed admissions to any campus.
While our results provide significant insight into the racial and ethnic disparities in college
application behavior, we can offer little insight into the source of these inequalities. Our findings
of race and ethnicity effects are robust to the inclusion of high school fixed effects, and the
significant effect of high school characteristics on minority students suggest that high schools are
an important source of information regarding college application. Overall, these potential frictions
are not offset by the prospect of guaranteed admissions policies in higher education.

29

References
Barron’s Profiles of American Colleges, 2007, 27th Edition. Barron’s Educational Series, Inc.,
Hauppauge, NY.
Bettinger, E., and Long, Bridget T. 2004. “Shape Up or Ship Out: The Effects of Remediation on
Students at Four-Year Colleges.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.
10369.
Black, Sandra E., Cortes, Kalena E., and Lincove, Jane Arnold. 2015. “Academic Undermatching
of High-Achieving Minority Students: Evidence from Race-Neutral and Holistic Admissions
Policies.” American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, May, 105(5): 604-610.
Card, David and Krueger, Alan B. 2005. “Would the Elimination of Affirmative Action Effect
Highly Qualified Minority Applicants? Evidence from California and Texas.” Industrial and
Labor Relations Review 58(3): 416-434.
Clotfelter, Charles T., Ladd, Helen F., and Vigdor, Jacob L. 2014. “What Role Do Public
Universities Play in Educational Inequality? Evidence from North Carolina.” Unpublished mimeo,
September 4, 2014.
Dillon, Eleanor Wiske and Smith, Jeffrey A. 2013. “The Determinants of Mismatch Between
Students and Colleges.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 19286.
Griffith, Amanda and Rothstein, Donna. 2009. “Can't Get Here from There: The Decision to Apply
to a Selective Institution.” Economics of Education Review 28 (5): 620-628.
Hoxby, Caroline M. and Avery, Christopher. 2013. “The Missing "One-offs": The Hidden Supply
of High-Achieving, Low Income Students.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 46(Spring):
1-61.
Hoxby, Caroline M. and Turner, Sarah. 2013. “Informing Students about Their College Options:
A Proposal for Broadening the Expanding College Opportunities Project.” Brookings
InstituteDiscussion Paper 2013-03.
Jenness, J. 2004. “Distance and Bearing Between Matched Features (distbyid.avx) Extension for
ArcView 3.x, v. 2.” Jenness Enterprises.
Long, Bridget T. 2004. “How Have College Decisions Changed Over Time? An Application of
the Conditional Logistic Choice Model.” Journal of Econometrics 121(1-2): 271‐296.
Long, Mark C. 2004a. “College Application and the Effect of Affirmative Action.” Journal of
Econometrics 121(1-2): 319-342.
Long, Mark C. 2004b. “Race and College Admission: An Alternative to Affirmative Action?” The
Review of Economics and Statistics 86(4): 1020-1033.

30

McFadden, Daniel. 1973. Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behavior, in: P.
Zrembka, ed., Frontiers in Econometrics. Academic Press, New York.
Niu, Sunny X., Tienda, Marta, and Cortes, Kalena. 2006. “College Selectivity and the Texas Top
10% Law: How Constrained Are the Options?” Economics of Education Review 25(3): 259-272.
Pallais, Amanda. 2015. “Small Differences that Matter: Mistakes in Applying to College.” Journal
of Labor Economics 33(2): 493-520.
Reardon, Sean F., Baker, Rachel, and Klasik, Daniel. 2012. “Race, Income, and Enrollment
Patterns in Highly Selective Colleges, 1982-2004” Unpublished mimeo.
Smith, Jonathan, Pender, Matea, and Howell, Jessica. 2013. “The Full Extent of Student-College
Academic Undermatch.” Economics of Education Review 32: 247-261.
U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. 2010. “Percentage of
Recent High School Completers Enrolled in 2- and 4-Year Colleges, by Race/Ethnicity: 19602012, Table 302.20; and “Percentage of Recent High School Completers Enrolled in 2- and 4-Year
Colleges, by Income Level: 1975-2012, Table 302.

31

Table 1: Summary Statistics - Racial and Ethnic Composition of High School Graduates by College Enrollment
Texas Private
Other Texas Texas Open4-Year
Out-of-State 4Texas
Not
Public
Enrollment
College or Year College 2-Year
Flagship Universities Universities
University or University College Enrolled
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
White (non-Hispanic)

0.638

0.474

0.438

0.584

0.622

0.468

0.351

Black

0.049

0.115

0.403

0.126

0.180

0.125

0.140

Hispanic

0.188

0.337

0.136

0.234

0.139

0.369

0.482

Asian

0.123

0.070

0.020

0.053

0.053

0.033

0.023

No. of observations

23,836

66,744

14,233

21,155

18,660

128,341

217,738

Notes: Based on enrollment in fall semester following high school graduation.
Sources: Authors’ calculations from Texas Workforce Data Quality Initiative (WDQI) Database, graduating student cohorts from spring
2008 and 2009. National Student Clearinghouse (NSC) data from the 2008-09 and 2009-10 academic years.

Table 2: Summary Statistics - Student and High School Characteristics by Race and Ethnicity

Demographics:
Female
Age
Free/reduced lunch eligible
Limited English proficient
High school coursework:
No. of AP/IB courses completed (semesters)a
Took AP English language arts
Took AP mathematics
Took AP science
No. of courses failed (semesters)

High school exam exit (z-scores):
English language arts
Mathematics
Science
Social studies

High school characteristics:
% Free/reduced lunch eligible
% Black
% Hispanic
% Earning AP credit
% SAT tested
Average SAT score

Black

Hispanic

Asian

White

All Graduates

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.518
17.12
(0.500)
0.503
<0.01

0.507
17.16
(0.526)
0.626
<0.01

0.488
17.03
(0.539)
0.251
0.064

0.494
17.11
(0.434)
0.134
<0.01

0.502
17.12
(0.486)
0.435
0.137

1.56
(3.31)
0.182
0.074
0.064
3.54
(4.67)

1.94
(3.66)
0.200
0.096
0.081
4.01
(5.20)

6.72
(7.08)
0.449
0.437
0.387
1.47
(3.22)

2.90
(4.59)
0.277
0.184
0.141
2.01
(3.66)

2.50
(4.34)
0.241
0.145
0.117
2.97
(4.54)

-0.224
(0.947)
-0.366
(0.860)
-0.34
(0.872)
-0.24
(0.936)

-0.187
(0.958)
-0.212
(0.928)
-0.268
(0.907)
-0.243
(0.949)

0.313
(1.003)
0.660
(1.094)
0.477
(1.049)
0.379
(0.983)

0.213
(0.975)
0.243
(0.982)
0.301
(0.983)
0.261
(0.962)

0.008
(0.989)
0.008
(0.992)
0.008
(0.991)
0.009
(0.989)

0.490
(0.213)
0.338
(0.237)
0.327
(0.193)
0.087
(0.110)
0.659
(0.195)
941.51
(100.02)

0.587
(0.247)
0.105
(0.136)
0.636
(0.291)
0.086
(0.114)
0.636
(0.216)
934.13
(92.98)

0.300
(0.200)
0.168
(0.131)
0.285
(0.186)
0.188
(0.141)
0.767
(0.182)
1031.51
(88.93)

0.305
(0.175)
0.108
(0.105)
0.256
(0.183)
0.130
(0.132)
0.688
(0.209)
1018.32
(75.44)

0.439
(0.249)
0.141
(0.163)
0.414
(0.292)
0.110
(0.125)
0.667
(0.211)
976.00
(96.19)

67,215
188,835
19,405
213,486
490,707
Number of Graduates
Percent of Graduates
0.137
0.385
0.040
0.435
1.000
Notes: Summary statistics for graduates of Texas public high schools from 2008 and 2009. Standard errors are in parentheses
for continuous variables. aTotal number of Advanced Placement (AP) and International Baccalaureate (IB) courses completed
(semesters).
Sources: Authors’ calculations from Texas Workforce Data Quality Initiative (WDQI) Database, graduating student cohorts
from spring 2008 and 2009.

Table 3: Summary Statistics by Four-Year College Application Rates for Texas High School Graduates
Black
(1)

Hispanic
(2)

Asian
(3)

White
(4)

Applied to any college

0.351

0.267

0.524

0.364

Applied to any college or enrolled

0.393

0.295

0.613

0.434

Applied to flagship

0.050

0.054

0.295

0.141

Applied to flagship or enrolled at higher-ranked campus

0.053

0.056

0.326

0.147

Number of Graduates
Percent of Graduates

67,215
0.137

188,835
0.385

19,405
0.040

213,486
0.435

Notes: Includes all Texas high school graduates from 2008 and 2009. Application data are available for students who applied to
Texas public universities. Additional enrollment data are available for all U.S. universities through the National Student
Clearinghouse (NSC).
Sources: Authors’ calculations from Texas Workforce Data Quality Initiative (WDQI) Database, graduating student cohorts from
spring 2008 and 2009. National Student Clearinghouse (NSC) data from the 2008-09 and 2009-10 academic years. Schools ranked
higher than Texas flagships universities were identified from 2008 & 2009 Barrons' rankings.

Table 4: Ordinary Least Squares Regression Results for Applying to College
Panel A: Any 4-Year University

Panel B: Flagship University or Better

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.023*
(0.008)
-0.077*
(0.009)

0.127*
(0.006)
-0.002
(0.007)

0.135*
(0.005)
-0.062*
(0.003)

0.138*
(0.004)
-0.061*
(0.003)

-0.074*
(0.004)
-0.060*
(0.004)

-0.016*
(0.003)
-0.025*
(0.002)

-0.010*
(0.002)
-0.022*
(0.002)

-0.008*
(0.002)
-0.021*
(0.002)

0.177*
(0.009)

0.018*
(0.009)

-0.005
(0.007)

-0.019*
(0.006)

0.185*
(0.011)

0.048*
(0.008)

0.040*
(0.007)

0.026*
(0.005)

Free/reduced lunch eligible

-0.114*
(0.006)

-0.047*
(0.005)

-0.053*
(0.002)

-0.054*
(0.002)

-0.070*
(0.003)

-0.030*
(0.002)

-0.020*
(0.001)

-0.020*
(0.001)

Limited English proficient

-0.204*
(0.006)

-0.096*
(0.006)

-0.098*
(0.006)

-0.097*
(0.005)

-0.060*
(0.003)

0.009*
(0.002)

0.009*
(0.002)

0.011*
(0.002)

No. of AP and IB semesters

0.014*
(0.001)

0.011*
(0.001)

0.013*
(0.001)

0.017*
(0.001)

0.016*
(0.001)

0.018*
(0.001)

Took AP English language arts

0.132*
(0.007)

0.129*
(0.005)

0.138*
(0.004)

0.013*
(0.005)

0.017*
(0.005)

0.019*
(0.004)

Took AP mathematics

0.121*
(0.005)
0.051*
(0.006)
-0.020*
(0.001)
0.079*
(0.002)

0.121*
(0.004)
0.048*
(0.005)
-0.018*
(0.000)
0.071*
(0.001)

0.116*
(0.004)
0.048*
(0.004)
-0.020*
(0.000)
0.067*
(0.001)

0.151*
(0.006)
0.058*
(0.005)
-0.003*
(0.000)
0.038*
(0.001)

0.147*
(0.005)
0.057*
(0.005)
-0.003*
(0.000)
0.035*
(0.001)

0.140*
(0.004)
0.056*
(0.004)
-0.003*
(0.000)
0.031*
(0.001)

Race and ethnicity:
Black
Hispanic
Asian
Other demographics:

High school coursework (college readiness):

Took AP science
Total semesters failed
High school exit exam (z-score)a
Geographic proximity: b
Distance to nearest university (100 miles)

-0.051
(0.031)
0.016
(0.029)

Distance squared
No. of observations
Other controls:
c
High school characteristics
High school fixed effects

427,300

427,300

427,300

-0.059*
(0.005)
0.008*
(0.001)
427,300

Yes

427,300

427,300

427,300

427,300

Yes
Yes

Yes

Notes: Robust standard errors (shown in parentheses) are clustered at the high school level. Overall college application rate to a 4-year public university is
0.382 (panel A) and flagship university application rate is 0.106 (panel B). Regressions also control for graduation year, gender, and age. Linear
probability models for high school graduates from 2008 and 2009. Panel A dependent variable is equal to one if the student applied to any Texas 4-year
university or enrolled at any 4-year university within one year of graduation. Panel B dependent variable is equal to one if the student applied to a Texas
flagship public university (UT Austin or Texas A&M), enrolled in a Texas flagship public university, or enrolled at an elite 4-year university that is
ranked higher than UT Austin by Barron’s within one year of graduation. Enrollment data are available for all U.S. universities through the National
Student Clearinghouse (NSC). aHigh school exit exam scores are a composite z-score of both English language arts and mathematics. bThe distance
variables are generated using longitude and latitude to compute the distance between all high schools and public universities in Texas. Panel A includes the
distance to the nearest 4-year public university. Panel B includes the distance to the nearest flagship university. cCharacteristics include logged enrollment,
% FRL, % Black, % Hispanic, lagged measures of % of graduates entering 4-year colleges, % earning AP credit, and % SAT tested.
* indicates statistical significance at p<0.05 level.

Table 5: Ordinary Least Squares Regression Results for Applying to College by High School Characteristics
Panel A: Any 4-Year University
% Hispanic

Panel B: Flagship University or Better

College Entrance Rate

% Hispanic

College Entrance Rate

(1)
Top

(2)
Bottom

(3)
Top

(4)
Bottom

(5)
Top

(6)
Bottom

(7)
Top

(8)
Bottom

20%

20%

20%

20%

20%

20%

20%

20%

Black

0.157*
(0.016)

0.114*
(0.012)

0.113*
(0.008)

0.049*
(0.009)

0.125*
(0.015)

0.084*
(0.012)

0.075*
(0.007)

0.038*
(0.008)

Hispanic

-0.026*
(0.009)
0.017
(0.023)

-0.049*
(0.009)
-0.040*
(0.010)

-0.072*
(0.006)
-0.022*
(0.006)

-0.017*
(0.005)
0.007
(0.018)

-0.022*
(0.009)
0.017
(0.022)

-0.049*
(0.009)
-0.038*
(0.011)

-0.068*
(0.006)
-0.022*
(0.007)

-0.015*
(0.005)
0.007
(0.018)

-0.040*
(0.004)
-0.117*
(0.009)

-0.062*
(0.006)
-0.159*
(0.021)

-0.072*
(0.005)
-0.170*
(0.011)

-0.008*
(0.004)
-0.021*
(0.009)

-0.039*
(0.004)
-0.116*
(0.009)

-0.053*
(0.005)
-0.164*
(0.022)

-0.066*
(0.005)
-0.162*
(0.011)

-0.007*
(0.004)
-0.022*
(0.009)

0.021*
(0.002)
0.115*
(0.009)

0.005*
(0.002)
0.144*
(0.013)

0.007*
(0.001)
0.123*
(0.007)

0.028*
(0.005)
0.015
(0.018)

0.022*
(0.002)
0.113*
(0.009)

0.006*
(0.002)
0.135*
(0.013)

0.007*
(0.001)
0.123*
(0.007)

0.027*
(0.005)
0.010
(0.018)

0.062*
(0.010)
0.040*
(0.010)
-0.015*
(0.001)

0.115*
(0.010)
0.056*
(0.013)
-0.028*
(0.001)

0.095*
(0.006)
0.037*
(0.006)
-0.032*
(0.001)

0.121*
(0.032)
0.024
(0.031)
-0.002*
(0.000)

0.062*
(0.010)
0.041*
(0.011)
-0.015*
(0.001)

0.126*
(0.011)
0.053*
(0.012)
-0.024*
(0.002)

0.102*
(0.006)
0.038*
(0.006)
-0.029*
(0.001)

0.124*
(0.033)
0.019
(0.031)
-0.002*
(0.000)

0.056*
(0.002)
94,289

0.078*
(0.004)
55,795

0.067*
(0.002)
132,050

0.015*
(0.002)
19,938

0.055*
(0.002)
94,289

0.073*
(0.003)
55,795

0.066*
(0.002)
132,050

0.014*
(0.002)
19,938

Race and ethnicity:

Asian
Other demographics:
Free/reduced lunch eligible
Limited English proficient
High school coursework (college readiness):
No. of AP and IB semesters
Took AP English language arts
Took AP mathematics
Took AP science
Total semesters failed
High school exit exam (z-score)a
No. of observations
Other controls:

High school fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Notes: Robust standard errors (shown in parentheses) are clustered at the high school level. Regressions also control for graduation year, gender, and age.
Linear probability model regressions for high school graduates from 2008 and 2009. Panel A dependent variable is equal to one if the student applied to any
Texas 4-year university or enrolled at any 4-year university within one year of graduation. Panel B dependent variable is equal to one if the student applied to
a Texas flagship public university (UT Austin or Texas A&M), enrolled in a Texas flagship public university, or enrolled at an elite 4-year university that is
ranked higher than UT Austin by Barron’s within one year of graduation. Enrollment data are available for all U.S. universities through the National Student
Clearinghouse (NSC). Regression subsamples are based on characteristics of high school attended compared to statewide quintiles. Quintile cut-off values are
0.115 and 0.669 for percentage Hispanic (bottom 20% and top 20%, respectively); 0.086 and 0.366 for percentage of graduates from the high school who
enrolled in a four-year college (bottom 20% and top 20%, respectively). aHigh school exit exam scores are a composite z-score of both English language arts
and mathematics.
* indicates statistical significance at p<0.05 level.

Table 6: Ordinary Least Squares Regression by College-Readiness Levels for Applying to College
College Readiness Based on High School Exit Exam and
Advanced Placement Courseworka
Panel A: Any 4-Year University
(1)
(2)
(3)
Highly
Somewhat
Less
Qualified
Qualified
Qualified

Panel B: Flagship University or Better
(4)
(5)
(6)
Highly
Somewhat
Less
Qualified
Qualified
Qualified

Race and ethnicity:
Black

-0.021
(0.017)
-0.032*
(0.010)
-0.004
(0.008)

0.073*
(0.008)
-0.032*
(0.006)
-0.004
(0.007)

0.136*
(0.011)
-0.061*
(0.009)
0.004
(0.013)

0.050*
(0.023)
-0.022
(0.015)
0.073*
(0.012)

-0.000
(0.010)
-0.027*
(0.006)
0.042*
(0.009)

-0.012
(0.010)
-0.040*
(0.007)
0.002
(0.013)

-0.043*
(0.010)
-0.119
(0.105)

-0.059*
(0.006)
-0.280*
(0.038)

-0.064*
(0.007)
-0.257*
(0.040)

-0.074*
(0.016)
-0.130
(0.111)

-0.068*
(0.006)
-0.166*
(0.032)

-0.041*
(0.006)
-0.076*
(0.027)

-0.001
(0.001)
-0.000
(0.017)
0.030*
(0.012)
0.010
(0.007)

0.008*
(0.001)
0.024*
(0.006)
0.059*
(0.004)
0.018*
(0.004)

0.013*
(0.001)
0.033*
(0.008)
0.067*
(0.006)
0.040*
(0.007)

0.006*
(0.002)
-0.018
(0.026)
0.175*
(0.017)
0.041*
(0.012)

0.016*
(0.001)
0.038*
(0.007)
0.110*
(0.006)
0.054*
(0.005)

0.014*
(0.001)
0.032*
(0.007)
0.093*
(0.007)
0.053*
(0.007)

Total semesters failed

-0.034*
(0.005)

-0.039*
(0.002)

-0.040*
(0.002)

-0.059*
(0.006)

-0.041*
(0.002)

-0.025*
(0.001)

High school exit exam (z-score)b

-0.004
(0.006)
1.035*
(0.155)

0.032*
(0.004)
0.475*
(0.095)

0.061*
(0.006)
0.190
(0.145)

0.044*
(0.009)
0.298
(0.217)

0.088*
(0.004)
-0.091
(0.110)

0.093*
(0.007)
-0.144
(0.127)

No. of observations

13,037

53,412

30,521

13,037

53,412

30,521

Dependent variable mean

0.889

0.815

0.698

0.653

0.404

0.218

Hispanic
Asian
Other demographics:
Free/reduce lunch (FRL) eligible
Limited English proficient (LEP)
High school coursework (college readiness):
No. of AP and IB semesters
Took AP English language arts (ELA)
Took AP mathematics
Took AP science

Constant

Other controls:
High school fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Notes: Robust standard errors (shown in parentheses) are clustered at the high school level. All regressions control for graduation year,
gender, and age. Linear probability model regressions for high school graduates from 2008 and 2009. Panel A dependent variable is equal
to one if the student applied to any Texas 4-year university or enrolled at any 4-year university within one year of graduation. Panel B
dependent variable is equal to one if the student applied to a Texas flagship public university (UT Austin or Texas A&M), enrolled in a
Texas flagship public university, or enrolled at an elite 4-year university that is ranked higher than UT Austin by Barron’s within one year
of graduation. Enrollment data are available for all U.S. universities through the National Student Clearinghouse (NSC).
a
College qualification levels are based on the average performance of entering freshmen on high school exit exams and Advanced
Placement (AP) coursework completion at Texas state universities of varying levels of selectivity. "Highly qualified" is greater than the
average entering freshman at the University of Texas at Austin (most selective state university). "Somewhat qualified" is less than average
for UT Austin, but greater than average for the University of Texas at San Antonio (mid-range state university). "Less qualified" is less than
average for UT San Antonio, but greater than average for the University of Texas at El Paso (less selective state university).
b
High school exit exam scores are a composite z-score of both English language arts and mathematics.
* indicates statistical significance at p<0.05 level.

Table 7: Factors Associated with Applying to College by Race and Ethnicity - Results of a Conditional Logit Estimation (expressed in odds ratios)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
Black
Hispanic
Asian
White
Black
Hispanic
Asian
White
Black
Hispanic
Asian
Geographic Proximity: a
Can commute (distance ≤ 60 miles)
14.863*
63.030*
20.098*
8.744*
8.550*
46.519* 18.721* 12.398*
4.407*
15.335*
5.485*
(0.651)
(5.083)
(1.179)
(0.594)
(0.497)
(3.025)
(1.225)
(0.752)
(0.278)
(0.953)
(0.436)
Can visit home (distance between 61-250 miles)
4.942*
6.819*
4.183*
3.123*
3.464*
5.271*
4.381*
3.271*
2.929*
4.171*
2.905*
(0.185)
(0.319)
(0.199)
(0.107)
(0.137)
(0.199)
(0.219)
(0.096)
(0.112)
(0.176)
(0.146)
College Preparedness: Measures of SAT Match b
Own SAT 100-149 pts above campus mean
0.571*
0.523*
0.536*
0.612*
0.421*
0.506*
0.693*
0.605*
0.439*
0.506*
0.739*
(0.019)
(0.015)
(0.027)
(0.010)
(0.014)
(0.015)
(0.038)
(0.012)
(0.015)
(0.014)
(0.040)
Own SAT 150-199 pts above campus mean
0.389*
0.310*
0.353*
0.422*
0.230*
0.303*
0.548*
0.406*
0.246*
0.302*
0.579*
(0.017)
(0.014)
(0.024)
(0.009)
(0.009)
(0.013)
(0.044)
(0.012)
(0.010)
(0.012)
(0.048)
Own SAT greater than 200 pts above campus mean
0.127*
0.083*
0.065*
0.103*
0.042*
0.083*
0.183*
0.106*
0.053*
0.077*
0.203*
(0.011)
(0.007)
(0.008)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.006)
(0.024)
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.006)
(0.026)
Own SAT 1-99 pts below campus mean
1.537*
1.924*
1.476*
1.375*
2.348*
1.950*
1.006
1.409*
2.249*
1.913*
0.965
(0.038)
(0.059)
(0.083)
(0.028)
(0.060)
(0.056)
(0.061)
(0.036)
(0.059)
(0.047)
(0.061)
Own SAT 100-149 pts below campus mean
1.702*
2.505*
1.740*
1.396*
3.538*
2.632*
0.894
1.457*
3.259*
2.569*
0.794*
(0.058)
(0.124)
(0.155)
(0.050)
(0.129)
(0.122)
(0.087)
(0.067)
(0.121)
(0.097)
(0.082)
Own SAT 150-199 pts below campus mean
1.687*
2.591*
1.673*
1.143*
4.211*
2.776*
0.720*
1.200*
3.804*
2.768*
0.659*
(0.060)
(0.157)
(0.206)
(0.052)
(0.175)
(0.157)
(0.098)
(0.072)
(0.158)
(0.135)
(0.090)
Own SAT 200 or more pts below campus mean
1.285*
2.246*
1.194
0.616*
4.883*
2.516*
0.318*
0.689*
4.319*
2.501*
0.287*
(0.058)
(0.212)
(0.206)
(0.039)
(0.292)
(0.212)
(0.063)
(0.058)
(0.252)
(0.177)
(0.057)
Campus Racial Demographics (prior year's freshman class):
% Black enrolled on campus
8.572*
0.222*
0.162*
0.068*
6.566*
0.306*
0.208*
(0.627)
(0.020)
(0.016)
(0.004)
(0.558)
(0.023)
(0.022)
% Hispanic enrolled on campus
0.564*
2.269*
1.637*
0.210*
0.442*
1.269*
0.799
(0.046)
(0.170)
(0.193)
(0.013)
(0.037)
(0.092)
(0.105)
% Asian enrolled on campus
0.963
0.590* 532.241* 0.002*
0.676
0.458* 294.081*
(0.194)
(0.140) (212.072) (0.001)
(0.140)
(0.081) (102.809)
Feeder Patterns of Student's High School to College Campus:
# Enrolled from same high school in prior year
1.029*
1.032*
1.031*
(0.004)
(0.006)
(0.006)
# Graduated from same high school in prior year
0.996
1.002
1.026*
(0.004)
(0.005)
(0.006)
# Enrolled of same race from same high school
1.004
0.989
1.016
(0.009)
(0.007)
(0.015)
# Graduated of same race from same high school
1.109*
1.048*
0.981
(0.017)
(0.012)
(0.012)

(12)
White
5.323*
(0.338)
2.612*
(0.072)
0.653*
(0.014)
0.462*
(0.015)
0.141*
(0.007)
1.271*
(0.035)
1.200*
(0.059)
0.965
(0.060)
0.507*
(0.045)
0.067*
(0.003)
0.129*
(0.007)
0.013*
(0.003)
1.017*
(0.004)
1.019*
(0.007)
1.017*
(0.005)
0.996
(0.009)

No. of observations
616,559 1,374,664 305,660 2,250,259
616,559 1,374,664 305,660 2,250,259
616,559 1,374,664 305,660 2,250,259
Notes: Conditional logit estimates are reported in odds ratios (with student fixed effects) of the probability of application to 31 state universities. Robust standard errors for clustering within high
schools. Sample includes students who graduated from a Texas public high school in 2008 and 2009 and applied to at least one Texas public university for admission in the fall following high school
graduation. A small number of students (<1%) are omitted who were missing distance to college or SAT scores. aDistance is measured from the student's high school to each college campus.
b
Dichotomous measures of SAT match (omitted group has SATs 0-99 points above campus mean). Specifications also control for in-state tuition. All college campus variables (i.e., enrollment,
graduation, SAT, and tuition) are lagged one year to information the student would have as she enterred her senior year of high school.
* indicates statistical significance at p<0.05 level.

Table 8: Factors Associated with Applying to College by Family Income and Race/Ethnicity - Results of a Conditional Logit Estimation (expressed in odds ratios)

Geographic Proximity: a
Can commute (distance ≤ 60 miles)
Can visit home (distance between 61-250 miles)
College Preparedness: Measures of SAT Match b
Own SAT 100-149 pts above campus mean

Panel A: Low Income (<$40k)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Black
Hispanic
Asian
White
5.458*
19.365*
8.378*
11.779*
(0.395)
(1.327)
(0.858)
(0.785)
3.246*
4.688*
3.319*
3.469*
(0.155)
(0.253)
(0.262)
(0.139)

0.441*
(0.021)
Own SAT 150-199 pts above campus mean
0.255*
(0.015)
Own SAT greater than 200 pts above campus mean
0.069*
(0.007)
Own SAT 1-99 pts below campus mean
2.279*
(0.074)
Own SAT 100-149 pts below campus mean
3.196*
(0.132)
Own SAT 150-199 pts below campus mean
3.896*
(0.176)
Own SAT 200 or more pts below campus mean
4.776*
(0.275)
Campus Racial Demographics (prior year's freshman class):
% Black enrolled on campus
7.646*
(0.664)
% Hispanic enrolled on campus
0.396*
(0.040)
% Asian enrolled on campus
0.693
(0.160)
Feeder Patterns of Student's High School to College Campus:
# Enrolled from same high school in prior year
1.029*
(0.005)
# Graduated from same high school in prior year
0.991
(0.005)
# Enrolled of same race from same high school
1.000
(0.009)
# Graduated of same race from same high school
1.105*
(0.019)

Panel B: Middle Income ($40-80k)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Black
Hispanic
Asian
White
3.540*
13.148*
5.489*
7.838*
(0.254)
(0.839)
(0.552)
(0.452)
2.568*
3.760*
2.712*
2.963*
(0.119)
(0.162)
(0.188)
(0.095)

Panel C: High Income (>$80k)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
Black
Hispanic
Asian
White
2.761*
6.581*
3.888*
3.491*
(0.256)
(0.518)
(0.455)
(0.226)
2.352*
3.036*
2.928*
2.283*
(0.128)
(0.141)
(0.218)
(0.065)

0.495*
(0.021)
0.308*
(0.017)
0.102*
(0.009)
1.960*
(0.059)
2.795*
(0.123)
2.984*
(0.163)
3.139*
(0.231)

0.535*
(0.048)
0.350*
(0.040)
0.078*
(0.012)
1.524*
(0.109)
1.599*
(0.185)
1.601*
(0.230)
1.255
(0.238)

0.613*
(0.023)
0.388*
(0.019)
0.113*
(0.008)
1.589*
(0.054)
1.822*
(0.099)
1.618*
(0.106)
1.297*
(0.111)

0.459*
(0.029)
0.257*
(0.020)
0.064*
(0.007)
2.160*
(0.103)
3.349*
(0.220)
3.788*
(0.280)
4.219*
(0.397)

0.527*
(0.024)
0.312*
(0.019)
0.087*
(0.008)
1.973*
(0.070)
2.633*
(0.139)
3.036*
(0.188)
2.538*
(0.215)

0.742*
(0.057)
0.481*
(0.056)
0.178*
(0.029)
1.093
(0.081)
0.996
(0.109)
0.919
(0.139)
0.402*
(0.078)

0.624*
(0.019)
0.421*
(0.016)
0.133*
(0.007)
1.472*
(0.040)
1.479*
(0.066)
1.268*
(0.072)
0.852*
(0.066)

0.450*
(0.032)
0.269*
(0.026)
0.056*
(0.008)
2.045*
(0.119)
2.730*
(0.224)
2.694*
(0.280)
2.316*
(0.308)

0.579*
(0.029)
0.375*
(0.024)
0.102*
(0.011)
1.499*
(0.073)
1.641*
(0.130)
1.537*
(0.142)
1.003
(0.127)

0.897
(0.068)
0.926
(0.094)
0.427*
(0.057)
0.625*
(0.056)
0.391*
(0.054)
0.261*
(0.051)
0.063*
(0.017)

0.675*
(0.018)
0.515*
(0.019)
0.171*
(0.010)
1.115*
(0.036)
0.972
(0.057)
0.743*
(0.056)
0.314*
(0.033)

0.350*
(0.031)
1.333*
(0.127)
0.752
(0.151)

0.402*
(0.061)
1.669*
(0.302)
257.298*
(117.235)

0.079*
(0.007)
0.190*
(0.012)
0.003*
(0.001)

5.540*
(0.642)
0.394*
(0.040)
1.036
(0.265)

0.283*
(0.026)
1.145
(0.086)
0.574*
(0.122)

0.263*
(0.038)
0.868
(0.134)
234.142*
(97.073)

0.055*
(0.004)
0.144*
(0.009)
0.011*
(0.003)

3.790*
(0.447)
0.441*
(0.051)
1.325
(0.397)

0.169*
(0.016)
0.721*
(0.062)
0.316*
(0.081)

0.142*
(0.017)
0.550*
(0.102)
291.763*
(120.375)

0.068*
(0.003)
0.101*
(0.006)
0.031*
(0.009)

1.043*
(0.005)
0.992
(0.005)
0.985*
(0.007)
1.050*
(0.014)

1.038*
(0.006)
1.015*
(0.006)
1.009
(0.016)
0.990
(0.012)

1.026*
(0.005)
1.015*
(0.008)
1.005
(0.007)
0.993
(0.010)

1.030*
(0.003)
0.994
(0.004)
1.006
(0.010)
1.126*
(0.020)

1.036*
(0.006)
0.998
(0.005)
0.981*
(0.007)
1.061*
(0.012)

1.030*
(0.007)
1.025*
(0.007)
1.026
(0.020)
0.973
(0.014)

1.018*
(0.004)
1.022*
(0.007)
1.015*
(0.006)
0.989
(0.009)

1.026*
(0.004)
1.004
(0.004)
1.017
(0.011)
1.128*
(0.024)

1.030*
(0.006)
1.008
(0.005)
0.969*
(0.007)
1.079*
(0.014)

1.024*
(0.006)
1.035*
(0.007)
1.026*
(0.013)
0.972
(0.016)

1.012*
(0.005)
1.018*
(0.007)
1.021*
(0.006)
0.999
(0.010)

No. of observations
323,857
711,202
99,417
388,678
176,142
365,149
91,729
547,305
87,451
187,364
106,640 1,191,392
Notes: Conditional logit estimates are reported in odds ratios (with student fixed effects) of the probability of application to 31 state universities. Robust standard errors for clustering within high schools.
Sample includes students who graduated from a Texas public high school in 2008 and 2009 and applied to at least one Texas public university for admission in the fall following high school graduation and
provided income data on ApplyTexas. A small number of students (<1%) are omitted who were missing distance to college or SAT scores. aDistance is measured from the student's high school to each
college campus. bDichotomous measures of SAT match (omitted group has SATs 0-99 points above campus mean). Specifications also control for in-state tuition. All college campus variables (i.e.,
enrollment, graduation, SAT, and tuition) are lagged one year to information the student would have as she enterred her senior year of high school.
* indicates statistical significance at p<0.05 level.

Table 9: Factors Associated with Applying to College by High School Class Rank and Race/Ethnicity - Results of a Conditional Logit Estimation (expressed in odds ratios)

Geographic Proximity: a
Can commute (distance ≤ 60 miles)
Can visit home (distance between 61-250 miles)

(1)
Black
3.698*
(0.412)
3.121*
(0.244)

College Preparedness: Measures of SAT Match b
Own SAT 100-149 pts above campus mean

0.511*
(0.041)
Own SAT 150-199 pts above campus mean
0.311*
(0.031)
Own SAT greater than 200 pts above campus mean 0.082*
(0.012)
Own SAT 1-99 pts below campus mean
1.957*
(0.127)
Own SAT 100-149 pts below campus mean
2.788*
(0.284)
Own SAT 150-199 pts below campus mean
3.073*
(0.353)
Own SAT 200 or more pts below campus mean
4.548*
(0.651)
Campus Racial Demographics (prior year's freshman class):
% Black enrolled on campus
4.280*
(0.760)
% Hispanic enrolled on campus
0.371*
(0.057)
% Asian enrolled on campus
1.865
(0.664)
Feeder Patterns of Student's High School to College Campus:
# Enrolled from same high school in prior year
1.016*
(0.005)
# Graduated from same high school in prior year
1.047*
(0.008)
# Enrolled of same race from same high school
1.020
(0.011)
# Graduated of same race from same high school
1.081*
(0.028)
No. of observations

70,215

Panel A: Top 10%
(2)
(3)
Hispanic
Asian
13.207*
4.100*
(1.138)
(0.580)
4.301*
3.909*
(0.220)
(0.379)

(4)
White
4.710*
(0.314)
3.309*
(0.158)

(5)
Black
4.580*
(0.493)
2.997*
(0.184)

Panel B: Top 11-25%
(6)
(7)
Hispanic
Asian
17.590*
4.329*
(1.401)
(0.507)
4.734*
2.732*
(0.291)
(0.231)

(8)
White
6.275*
(0.456)
2.760*
(0.103)

(9)
Black
4.385*
(0.284)
2.852*
(0.120)

Panel C: Botton 75%
(10)
(11)
Hispanic
Asian
15.694*
6.090*
(0.967)
(0.567)
3.963*
2.249*
(0.184)
(0.136)

(12)
White
4.951*
(0.359)
2.238*
(0.073)

0.526*
(0.028)
0.341*
(0.023)
0.092*
(0.010)
1.792*
(0.086)
2.562*
(0.181)
3.230*
(0.282)
3.570*
(0.429)

0.831*
(0.068)
0.667*
(0.066)
0.340*
(0.048)
0.833
(0.085)
0.793
(0.102)
0.685*
(0.111)
0.429*
(0.084)

0.772*
(0.024)
0.653*
(0.027)
0.290*
(0.018)
1.075*
(0.038)
1.146*
(0.068)
0.905
(0.070)
0.731*
(0.073)

0.449*
(0.040)
0.235*
(0.027)
0.077*
(0.013)
1.993*
(0.117)
3.084*
(0.254)
3.165*
(0.318)
3.425*
(0.423)

0.565*
(0.031)
0.373*
(0.027)
0.147*
(0.016)
1.561*
(0.069)
1.871*
(0.122)
2.014*
(0.154)
1.613*
(0.164)

0.778
(0.101)
0.784
(0.112)
0.279*
(0.062)
1.027
(0.116)
0.753
(0.126)
0.729
(0.146)
0.412*
(0.113)

0.699*
(0.027)
0.515*
(0.028)
0.200*
(0.016)
1.231*
(0.047)
1.147*
(0.073)
0.962
(0.078)
0.484*
(0.054)

0.445*
(0.019)
0.261*
(0.013)
0.058*
(0.006)
2.265*
(0.067)
3.190*
(0.128)
3.829*
(0.169)
4.355*
(0.246)

0.537*
(0.020)
0.315*
(0.017)
0.091*
(0.008)
1.930*
(0.053)
2.508*
(0.102)
2.536*
(0.127)
2.361*
(0.157)

0.637*
(0.042)
0.422*
(0.039)
0.118*
(0.014)
1.201*
(0.076)
1.091
(0.110)
0.953
(0.126)
0.509*
(0.095)

0.580*
(0.015)
0.372*
(0.014)
0.105*
(0.006)
1.501*
(0.045)
1.588*
(0.081)
1.398*
(0.090)
0.903
(0.081)

0.416*
(0.041)
1.187
(0.131)
0.354*
(0.088)

0.302*
(0.053)
0.943
(0.183)
103.599*
(49.354)

0.108*
(0.007)
0.129*
(0.010)
0.030*
(0.008)

3.393*
(0.496)
0.466*
(0.059)
0.308*
(0.104)

0.184*
(0.019)
0.892
(0.089)
0.189*
(0.048)

0.134*
(0.031)
0.821
(0.150)
83.512*
(50.649)

0.052*
(0.004)
0.134*
(0.009)
0.001*
(0.000)

7.273*
(0.595)
0.426*
(0.039)
0.680
(0.153)

0.277*
(0.024)
1.360*
(0.092)
0.639*
(0.131)

0.253*
(0.036)
0.894
(0.146)
538.506*
(210.846)

0.071*
(0.005)
0.139*
(0.009)
0.009*
(0.002)

1.008
(0.007)
1.071*
(0.009)
1.008
(0.009)
0.987
(0.016)

1.011*
(0.005)
1.060*
(0.009)
1.030
(0.024)
1.025
(0.020)

1.007
(0.004)
1.062*
(0.009)
1.000
(0.007)
1.010
(0.013)

1.029*
(0.005)
1.003
(0.007)
1.005
(0.012)
1.100*
(0.027)

1.034*
(0.007)
1.013
(0.007)
0.988
(0.009)
1.035*
(0.013)

1.056*
(0.008)
1.013
(0.008)
0.981
(0.020)
1.013
(0.017)

1.013*
(0.004)
1.025*
(0.007)
1.020*
(0.007)
1.003
(0.010)

1.029*
(0.004)
0.993
(0.004)
1.004
(0.009)
1.110*
(0.016)

1.036*
(0.005)
0.994
(0.004)
0.990
(0.007)
1.047*
(0.012)

1.048*
(0.004)
1.009*
(0.004)
0.999
(0.011)
0.980*
(0.008)

1.021*
(0.005)
1.014*
(0.006)
1.020*
(0.006)
0.987
(0.008)

286,998

115,010

576,321

88,474

290,997

44,206

477,214

457,870

796,669

146,444

1,196,724

Notes: Conditional logit estimates are reported in odds ratios (with student fixed effects) of the probability of application to 31 state universities. Robust standard errors for clustering within high schools.
Sample includes students who graduated from a Texas public high school in 2008 and 2009 and applied to at least one Texas public university for admission in the fall following high school graduation.
Class rank bracket is included on ApplyTexas. A small number of students (<1%) are omitted who were missing distance to college or SAT scores. aDistance is measured from the student's high school to
each college campus. bDichotomous measures of SAT match (omitted group has SATs 0-99 points above campus mean). Specifications also control for in-state tuition. All college campus variables (i.e.,
enrollment, graduation, SAT, and tuition) are lagged one year to information the student would have as she enterred her senior year of high school.
* indicates statistical significance at p<0.05 level

Appendix 1: Summary Statistics by College Application Behavior
Submitted
ApplyTexas

Submitted
Applied to a
ApplyTexas or
Flagship
enrolled at a 4-year University

All
graduates

College application:
Submitted ApplyTexas

1.000

0.874

1.000

0.331

Submitted ApplyTexas or enrolled at a 4-year

1.000

1.000

1.000

0.379

Applied to a Flagship University

0.306

0.267

1.000

0.101

0.547

0.545

0.529

0.502

Student demographics:
Female
Age

17.03

17.03

17.02

17.12

(0.346)

(0.350)

(0.330)

(0.486)

White (non-Hispanic)

0.478

0.497

0.608

0.435

Black

0.145

0.147

0.068

0.137

Hispanic

0.311

0.293

0.206

0.385

Asian

0.063

0.059

0.116

0.040

Free/reduced lunch eligible

0.293

0.280

0.155

0.379

Limited English proficient

0.008

0.008

0.002

0.036

High school coursework:
a
No. of AP/IB courses completed (semesters)

4.82

4.86

8.45

2.50

(5.36)

(5.41)

(5.96)

(4.34)

Took AP English language arts

0.447

0.448

0.677

0.241

Took AP mathematics

0.299

0.301

0.586

0.145

Took AP science

0.235

0.235

0.442

0.117

Total semesters failed

1.14

1.13

0.32

2.97

(2.53)

(2.52)

(1.04)

(4.54)

0.435

0.444

0.966

0.009

(0.877)

(0.886)

(0.805)

(0.990)

b

High school exit exam (z-score)
High school characteristics:
Campus size
% Free/reduced lunch eligible
% Black
% Hispanic
% Earning AP credit
% SAT tested
Average SAT score

1992.44

1991.08

2167.56

1836.93

(943.93)

(945.22)

(890.66)

(1012.26)

0.415

0.403

0.325

0.439

(0.263)

(0.259)

(0.236)

(0.249)

0.134

0.135

0.123

0.141

(0.167)

(0.165)

(0.134)

(0.163)

0.410

0.395

0.332

0.414

(0.303)

(0.297)

(0.258)

(0.292)

0.131

0.136

0.178

0.109

(0.130)

(0.133)

(0.149)

(0.125)

0.728

0.730

0.764

0.667

(0.177)

(0.178)

(0.172)

(0.211)

987.59

991.76

1022.09

976.00

(98.08)

(97.83)

(92.52)

(96.18)

No. of observations
162,271
185,742
49,580
490,561
Notes: Summary statistics for all graduates of Texas public high schools from 2008 and 2009. Standard errors are in
a
parentheses for continuous variables. Total number of Advanced Placement (AP) and International Baccalaureate
b
(IB) courses completed (semesters). High school exit exam scores are a composite z-score of both English language
arts and mathematics.
Sources: Authors’ calculations from Texas Workforce Data Quality Initiative (WDQI) Database, graduating student
cohorts from spring 2008 and 2009. National Student Clearinghouse (NSC) data from the 2008-09 and 2009-10
academic years.

Appendix 2: Ordinary Least Squares Regression Results for Applying to College
Excluding from the Analysis Historically Black Colleges and Universities (non-HBCUs)
Dependent Variable: Any 4-Year University
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Race and ethnicity:
Black
-0.012
0.092*
0.106*
0.109*
0.106*
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)
Hispanic
-0.077*
-0.003
-0.061*
-0.060*
-0.061*
(0.009)
(0.007)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
Asian
0.177*
0.017*
-0.004
-0.019*
-0.004
(0.009)
(0.009)
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.007)
Other demographics:
Free/reduce lunch eligible
-0.114*
-0.047*
-0.052*
-0.053*
-0.052*
(0.006)
(0.005)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
Limited English proficient
-0.203*
-0.095*
-0.096*
-0.096*
-0.096*
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.005)
(0.006)
High school coursework (college readiness):
No. of AP and IB semesters
0.014*
0.011*
0.013*
0.011*
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
Took AP English language arts
0.132*
0.130*
0.138*
0.130*
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.004)
(0.005)
Took AP mathematics
0.122*
0.123*
0.117*
0.123*
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)
Took AP science
0.051*
0.047*
0.048*
0.048*
(0.006)
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.005)
Total semesters failed
-0.019*
-0.018*
-0.020*
-0.018*
(0.001)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
High school exit exam (z-score)a

0.079*
(0.002)

0.071*
(0.001)

0.067*
(0.001)

0.071*
(0.001)

427,300

-0.049
(0.031)
0.018
(0.028)
427,300

Geographic proximity: b
Distance to nearest university (100 miles)
Distance squared
No. of observations

427,300

427,300

427,300

Other controls:
High school characteristicsc
High school fixed effects

Yes

Yes
Yes

Notes: Robust standard errors (shown in parentheses) are clustered at the high school level. Regressions
also control for graduation year, gender, and age. Linear probability models for high school graduates
from 2008 and 2009. Dependent variable is equal to one if the student applied to any Texas 4-year
university or enrolled at any 4-year university within one year of graduation. Enrollment data are available
for all U.S. universities through the National Student Clearinghouse (NSC). aHigh school exit exam scores
are a composite z-score of both English language arts and mathematics. bThe distance variables are
generated using longitude and latitude to compute the distance between all high schools and the flagship
public institutions in Texas. cCharacteristics include logged enrollment, % FRL, % Black, % Hispanic,
lagged measures of % of graduates entering 4-year colleges, % earning AP credit, and % SAT tested.
* indicates statistical significance at p<0.05 level.

