                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        MULTIDIMENSIONAL SKILL MISMATCH

                                       Fatih Guvenen
                                     Burhanettin Kuruscu
                                       Satoshi Tanaka
                                        David Wiczer

                                     Working Paper 21376
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w21376


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            July 2015, Revised April 2018




For comments and discussions, we thank Joe Altonji, Alessandra Fogli, Tim Kautz, Philipp
Kircher, Jeremy Lise, Fabien Postel-Vinay, Rob Shimer, Kjetil Storesletten, José-Víctor Ríos-
Rull, Carl Sanders, and Uta Schönberg as well as the participants at the 2011 and 2015 SED
conferences, 2014 NBER Summer Institute, 2014 Barcelona GSE Summer Forum, 2015 CIREQ
Conference on Information Frictions and at the Universities of Copenhagen, Hitotsubashi, Tokyo,
California at Santa Barbara and Western Ontario. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Banks of Minneapolis or St. Louis, nor
of the NAtional Bureau of Economic Research. Guvenen acknowledges financial support from
the National Science Foundation. Kuruscu acknowledges financial support from Social Sciences
Humanities Research Council of Canada.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Fatih Guvenen, Burhanettin Kuruscu, Satoshi Tanaka, and David Wiczer. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Multidimensional Skill Mismatch
Fatih Guvenen, Burhanettin Kuruscu, Satoshi Tanaka, and David Wiczer
NBER Working Paper No. 21376
July 2015, Revised April 2018
JEL No. E24,J24,J31

                                         ABSTRACT

What determines the earnings of a worker relative to his peers in the same occupation? What
makes a worker fail in one occupation but succeed in another? More broadly, what are the factors
that determine the productivity of a worker-occupation match? To help answer questions like
these, we propose an empirical measure of multidimensional skill mismatch, which is based on
the discrepancy between the portfolio of skills required by an occupation and the portfolio of
abilities possessed by a worker for learning those skills. This measure arises naturally in a
dynamic model of occupational choice and human capital accumulation with multidimensional
skills and Bayesian learning about one’s ability to learn skills. Not only does mismatch depress
wage growth in the current occupation, it also leaves a scarring effect—by stunting skill
acquisition—that reduces wages in future occupations. Mismatch also predicts different aspects
of occupational switching behavior. We construct the empirical analog of our skill mismatch
measure from readily available US panel data on individuals and occupations and find empirical
support for these implications. The magnitudes of these effects are large: moving from the worst-
to the best-matched decile can improve wages by 11% per year for the rest of one’s career.


Fatih Guvenen                                   Satoshi Tanaka
Department of Economics                         Level 6 Colin Clark Building, Blair Dr.
University of Minnesota                         University of Queensland
4-101 Hanson Hall                               QLD4072, Australia
1925 Fourth Street South                        s.tanaka@uq.edu.au
Minneapolis, MN, 55455
and NBER                                        David Wiczer
guvenen@umn.edu                                 100 Nicolls Rd
                                                Economics Department, S617 SBS
Burhanettin Kuruscu                             Stony Brook, NY 11794
University of Toronto                           US
Deparment of Economics                          david.wiczer@stonybrook.edu
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
kuruscu@gmail.com
1       Introduction
    What determines the earnings of a worker relative to his peers in the same occupation?
What makes a worker fail in one occupation but succeed in another? More broadly, what
are the factors that determine the productivity of a worker-occupation match? Each of
these questions highlights a different aspect of the career search process that all workers
go through in the labor market.
    To explain the differences in outcomes of worker-occupation (job) matches, economists
often appeal to the idea of “match quality,” that is, some unobservable match-specific
factor that determines the productivity of a match after controlling for the observable
characteristics of the worker and the job. A long list of papers, going as far back as Jo-
vanovic (1979) and Mortensen and Pissarides (1994), have shown that allowing for such
an idiosyncratic match quality can help explain a wide range of labor market phenomena,
such as how wages and job separations vary by job tenure, among others (see Rogerson
et al. (2005) for a survey of this literature). While theoretically convenient, mapping this
abstract notion of match quality onto empirical constructs that can be easily measured
has proved elusive. Consequently, in empirical work, match quality is often treated as
a residual, whose value is pinned down by making the model fit data on various labor
market outcomes.1
    In this paper, we propose an empirical measure of match quality that can be con-
structed by combining micro data on workers and on their occupations. It turns out to
be convenient to measure the lack of match quality, or what we call skill mismatch. We
model an occupation as a set of tasks to be completed, and our measure of skill mismatch
is based on the discrepancy between the portfolio of skills required by an occupation (for
performing the tasks that produce output) and the portfolio of abilities possessed by a
worker for learning those skills. If the vector of required skills does not align well with
the vector of a worker’s abilities, the worker is mismatched, being either overqualified
(positive mismatch) or underqualified (negative mismatch) along different dimensions of
this vector.
    Our notion of skill mismatch is multidimensional, which is motivated by a great deal
of psychometric and educational research emphasizing multiple intelligences that act
and develop independently of each other. In fact, developmental psychologist Howard
    1
    Examples of this approach include Miller (1984), Flinn (1986), Jovanovic and Moffitt (1990),
Moscarini (2001), and Nagypal (2007).

                                               1
Figure 1 – Wage Gap Between the Best- and Worst-Matched Workers Persists For
Many Years.



                                           .16
                                           .08
                    Log Wage (residuals)
                                           0
                                           −.08




                                                      Best Matched 10%
                                                      Worst Matched 10%
                                           −.16




                                                  1   3       5           7       9     11   13   15
                                                                  Experience since Age 30

Note: Workers are grouped by their rank in the average of our mismatch measure over all the occupations they held
before age 30. Residual wages are obtained by regressing log real wages on demographics, polynomials for occupation
tenure, employer tenure, worker experience, a worker’s ability measure, an occupational skill requirement measure, and
their interactions with occupation tenure, and dummy variables for one-digit-level occupations and industries. Tenure
variables are instrumented following Altonji and Shakotko (1987). See Section 4 for details of those variables. To obtain
two lines, we run local polynomial regressions with residual wages on labor market experience for each group of workers,
with a rule-of-thumb bandwidth.


Gardner, who first proposed the theory of multiple intelligences in his 1983 book found
particular motivation for this idea in the proliferation of occupations (see, e.g., Gardner
(2011, p. xxii)). Of course, economists are no strangers to the idea of multidimensional
skills. After all, a long list of papers have built on the Roy model—which features
multiple skills and comparative advantage—to study wages and occupational choice.
Our paper follows this tradition by proposing a measure of mismatch in a world with
multiple skills.

    Before delving into the details of the paper, we highlight one of our main findings:
workers who are poorly matched with their occupations earn lower wages even many
years after they have left the occupation. In other words, not only does skill mismatch
depress wages at the current occupation, it also leaves a lasting negative impact on the
future career path of the worker. To give an idea about the potential magnitudes of
this effect, Figure 1 plots the average (residual) wage paths for two groups of workers
that differ in their skill mismatch averaged over all occupations they held before age
30 (controlling for a long list of worker and occupation characteristics). After age 30,


                                                                              2
the best-matched 10% (blue dashed line) earn consistently higher wages than the worst-
matched 10% (red solid line), for a cumulative gap of $128,000 over 15 years (in 2002
dollars). The more rigorous calculations we conduct in the empirical analysis later below
confirm these large losses from skill mismatch.

    The empirical measure of skill mismatch we propose naturally emerges from a struc-
tural model of occupational choice, multidimensional skill accumulation, and Bayesian
learning about abilities to acquire skills. In this model, output is produced at economic
units called “occupations,” which combine a vector of distinct skills supplied by their
workers. The technology operated by an occupation is given by a vector of skill require-
ments, which determines both how much output a worker with a given ability (vector)
produces and how much human capital he accumulates. This technology is specified such
that for every worker there is a unique optimal amount of investment in each skill type
depending on his abilities, and thus an optimal/ideal occupation choice. Skill mismatch
is defined as a situation where the worker is not working his ideal occupation.

    Our first contribution is to derive a Mincer-style wage equation that shows that the
current wage is negatively related to mismatch at a worker’s both current and past
occupations. Because the derivation of this equation does not require any assumptions
about what creates mismatch, the empirical wage regressions we estimate later in the
paper provide support for the long-lasting effects of mismatch on wages—even after a
worker leaves the mismatched occupation—without having to take a stance on the precise
friction that gives rise to mismatch.

    To investigate the relationship between skill mismatch and occupational switching,
we do need to take a stand on what creates mismatch. We explore one plausible source,
the idea that workers have imperfect information about their true abilities (to acquire
different types of skills) at the time they join the labor market.2 Skill mismatch will
happen as young workers misjudge their learning abilities and choose occupations with
skill requirements that do not align with their skill portfolio. Each period workers up-
date their beliefs about their true abilities in a Bayesian fashion, which causes them to
optimally switch occupations. As beliefs converge closer to the truth, leading to a decline
in occupational switching rates and skill mismatch, consistent with the data.

   2
     Different versions of this friction has been studied in a number of previous papers, see, for example,
Farber and Gibbons (1996); Gibbons et al. (2005); Antonovics and Golan (2012); Papageorgiou (2014).
One difference however is that these studies assumed learning was about comparative advantage whereas
here it is about the ability to accumulate skills.

                                                    3
    In the empirical analysis, we study four key predictions of this model. First, as
noted earlier, we find that mismatch reduces both the level and the growth rate of wages
with tenure. Second, current wages also depend negatively on cumulative mismatch in
previous occupations, consistent with the model’s prediction. Third, the probability of
switching occupations increases with mismatch in the data, as predicted by the model:
higher mismatch indicates current beliefs are farther away from truth, so a given wage
realization causes a larger Bayesian updating of beliefs. Fourth, occupational switches
are directional: workers who are overqualified in a given skill dimension tend to switch to
occupations that are more skill intensive in that dimension, and vice versa for a skill they
are underqualified in. Furthermore, conditional on switching, the reduction in mismatch
is proportional to the level of mismatch in previous occupation.

    To study these implications of skill mismatch, we use the 1979 National Longitu-
dinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79) for information on workers’ occupations and wage
histories. NLSY79 respondents were also given an occupational placement test—the
Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB)—that provides detailed mea-
sures of occupation-relevant skills and abilities.3 In addition, respondents also reported
various measures of noncognitive skills, which we use to describe a worker’s ability for
socially interactive work. For comparability with existing work, we focus on male work-
ers. Turning to the skill requirements of each occupation, we use data from the U.S.
Department of Labor’s O*NET project.4 Combining these two sources of information
allows us to compute our mismatch measure for each worker in our NLSY sample. In
the most detailed case, we measure mismatch along three skill dimensions: (cognitive)
math skills, (cognitive) verbal skills, and (noncognitive) social skills.

    We incorporate these (contemporaneous and cumulative) mismatch measures into a
Mincerian wage regression along with flexible interactions with occupational tenure (and
a large set of other controls). Consistent with our theory, we find that the coefficient
on mismatch is robustly negative and that its interaction with occupational tenure is

   3
      We interpret workers’ test scores as corresponding to (noisy measures of) abilities in our model.
Although these scores probably reflect a combination of abilities and accumulated skills, this distinction
is probably not critical for our purposes, because the two are highly correlated at young ages. Huggett
et al. (2011) estimate that this correlation exceeds 0.85 at age 20. Since these tests are taken at the
beginning of workers’ careers, we interpret them as abilities.
    4
      The reader might wonder why workers do not choose their ideal occupation if they know their
ASVAB scores for each ability type. This is because, first, the NLSY respondents were not told their
exact test score—they were given a fairly wide range; and second, these test scores are themselves noisy
measures of individuals’ true underlying abilities as discussed further later.

                                                    4
robustly negative. The estimates imply that, after 10 years of occupational tenure,
the average wage of workers in the top decile of the mismatch distribution is 6.8%
lower than those in the bottom decile (i.e., best-matched workers). Perhaps even more
important, cumulative past mismatch has a similarly large effect: wages are 9.4% lower
for workers in the top decile of cumulative mismatch distribution compared with those in
the bottom decile. These long-lasting effects of mismatch are consistent with the human
capital accumulation channel captured by our model; it would be missed by theories
that postulate that match quality only affects the current match. Overall, eliminating
all mismatch would raise the average wages of workers by 11% every year.
   Turning to occupational switching behavior, the data reveal patterns consistent with
our model. First, estimating a hazard model for occupational switching shows that the
probability of a switch is increasing in mismatch. The magnitudes are also fairly large:
the switching probability is about 3.4 percentage points higher for a worker at the 90th
percentile of the mismatch distribution relative to another worker at the 10th percentile.
This gap is about one-fifth of the average switching probability in our sample. Second,
we follow workers across occupational transitions to see if they tend to “correct” previous
mismatches. Indeed, they do: if a worker is overqualified in his current occupation along a
certain skill dimension, the next occupation, on average, has higher skill requirements in
that dimension (as well as in other skill dimensions, but to a lesser extent). Furthermore,
consistent with our theory, we find that the step size of these switches are proportional
to the level of current mismatch.
   A multidimensional measure of mismatch has important empirical implications. For
example, if a worker who is very talented in one type of skill currently works in an
occupation requiring another skill intensively, he would be considered mismatched even
though both the worker and the occupation would be described as high skill on average.
It also allows us to see the potentially different effects of being over- or underqualified
along different dimensions, and we show that there are important qualitative differences.
For example, mathematical mismatch contributes more to the level of wages, whereas
verbal mismatch affects the growth of wages with occupational tenure.
   Finally, we extend our wage regressions to distinguish mismatch for overqualified and
underqualified workers. We find that both those who were overqualified and those who
were underqualified in previous occupations have lower wages today. This implication is
consistent with our model, but is inconsistent with a standard Ben-Porath model with
multidimensional skills, as we discuss in Section 2.2.

                                            5
    The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2 we present our model. In Section 3
we describe our data, and Section 4 describes our methodology and how we create our
mismatch measures. Section 5 presents the results, and finally, we conclude in Section 6.

1.1     Related Literature
    Our paper contributes to an active and growing literature that studies the skill content
of occupations. One strand of this literature uses data on occupation characteristics (e.g.,
from the O*NET) and explores how these occupational skill requirements are related to
the wages and career trajectories of workers employed in those occupations. Notable
examples of this approach include Ingram and Neumann (2006), Poletaev and Robinson
(2008), Gathmann and Schönberg (2010), Bacolod and Blum (2010), and Yamaguchi
(2012). A second strand of this literature focuses exclusively on worker-side information
to study occupations and skill mismatch. Perry et al. (2014) reviews various attempts to
quantify skill mismatch using this approach. A recent notable example of this approach
is Fredriksson et al. (2015), which uses data on Swedish workers and defines mismatch as
the gap between the skills of a new hire and his experienced peers in the same occupation
and establishment, where the skills of the latter are taken as a measure of the skill
requirements of the occupation.

    The main difference of our approach from this earlier work is that we construct a
mismatch measure that combines information from both sides—worker skills and occu-
pational skill requirements. We then show that this measure is a significant predictor of
current and future wages, even after controlling for worker skills and occupational skill
requirements separately.

    Our paper also has useful points of contact with the literature that studies career
outcomes in the presence of comparative advantage or employer/worker learning or both.
Because different sectors can reward skills differently, as workers learn about their skills
they switch toward sectors that maximize their comparative advantage (Gibbons et al.
(2005), Antonovics and Golan (2012), Gervais et al. (2016), and Papageorgiou (2014)).
We show that our empirical mismatch measure contains critical information about this
switching propensity and direction, along with implications for workers’ current and
future wages.5
   5
      In a slightly different context, Farber and Gibbons (1996) and Altonji and Pierret (2001) investigate
the extent of employer learning about worker abilities. They show that an interaction term between
ability and job tenure included in a Mincer wage regression is positive—so wages reflect abilities more

                                                    6
    A precursor to our paper is Groes et al. (2015) who study how mismatch affects
occupational switching by using a one-dimensional measure of mismatch based on the
deviation of a worker’s own wage from the average of his peers in the same occupation.
Our results on occupation switching is consistent with theirs. However, they did not
examine the effect of mismatch on wages, which is a major focus of our paper.

    Lise and Postel-Vinay (2016) and Sanders (2016) are two contemporaneous papers
that share similarities with ours: they both estimate models with multidimensional
skills, sorting, and human capital accumulation, using data similar to ours (NLSY79
and O*NET).6 Sanders (2016)’s main focus is on the effects of uncertainty about one’s
skills, so he classifies job tasks based on how much workers may know about their skills
to perform that task. Instead, we focus on different classes of skills, such as math, ver-
bal, and social, and construct skill mismatch along these dimensions. Sanders does not
directly examine the effects of mismatch on labor market outcomes. Lise and Postel-
Vinay (2016) study a model where mismatch results from search frictions rather than
from learning. Our empirical findings in Section 5 lend support to learning but does
not provide evidence against the existence of search frictions as an additional source
of mismatch. The second difference is about the focus: their approach infers mismatch
through the lens of a structural model by matching data moments, whereas our approach
is to develop a model-based measure of skill mismatch that can be constructed directly
from micro data, and we then turn to examine if this measure is informative about wages
and occupational switching as predicted by the model. These are two complementary
approaches, each with its distinct advantages.


2     Model
    In this section, we present a life-cycle model of occupational choice and human capital
accumulation, which provides a natural framework to analyze how skill mismatch arises
and, more importantly, how it affects current and future wages of a worker in different
occupations.7 The model delivers some testable implications, which we will empirically
study in Section 5.

closely over time—which they interpret as evidence of employers learning about workers’ abilities during
their relationship.
    6
      Speer (2017) is also methodologically relevant to our work by combining worker- and occupation-
side skill measures to study how gender discrimination and layoffs shape occupational choice.
    7
      Throughout the paper we use the terms “human capital” and “skill” interchangeably.

                                                   7
   Briefly, the structure of the labor market builds upon Rosen (1972), wherein workers
supply labor services to firms (where we think of each firm as a distinct occupation), and
firms in turn offer different training/learning opportunities. Consequently, a worker’s
compensation from a job/occupation is not only a wage but also a rise in his skill level.
Our model introduces two key features into this framework. First, human capital is
multidimensional, and the rate at which a worker acquires each new skill depends both
on his learning ability of that skill and the occupation’s requirements for investment in
that skill. Second, workers enter the labor market without full knowledge about their
learning abilities; instead, they have a prior belief about their abilities, which they update
over time in a Bayesian fashion. This information friction is the source of skill mismatch
between workers and their occupations. We now turn to the details of the model.

2.1     Environment
   Each worker lives for T periods and supplies one unit of labor inelastically in the
labor market. The objective of a worker is to maximize the expected present value of
earnings/wages:
                                                   T
                                               "                     #
                                                             t−1
                                                   X
                                         E0              β         wt ,
                                                   t=1

where β is the subjective time discount factor.

Occupations and Technology. There is a continuum of occupations, each using n
types of skills, indexed with j ∈ {1, 2, ..., n}. Occupations differ in their skill intensity
(alternatively called skill requirement) of each skill type, denoted with the vector r =
(r1 , r2 , ..., rn ) ≥ 0, which is fixed over time. With a slight abuse of notation, we will use
rt = (r1,t , r2,t , ..., rn,t ) to denote the particular occupation chosen by the worker in period
t. Just as skills are multidimensional, so are the abilities to accumulate them, which we
stack in a vector, A ≡ (A1 , A2 , ..., An ).
   A worker starts period t with the skill portfolio ht = (h1,t , h2,t , ..., hn,t ), chooses an
occupation rt , accumulates new skills at that occupation, and then produces output with
these upgraded skills. The technology for skill accumulation is a key ingredient in our
model and is given by


                                                                 2
                              kj,t ≡ hj,t + (Aj + εj,t ) rj,t − rj,t /2,                      (1)

where kj,t is the upgraded skill of type j, which is used in production in period t and

                                                         8
determines next period’s starting human capital level (as explained in a moment), and
εj,t is a random disturbance term (whose role will become clear later). One way to think
about this structure is that, in a given period, workers first go through training and then
produce output with their new/upgraded skills.

   This specification has two important features. First, the occupation’s skill require-
ment, rj,t , affects human capital accumulation nonmonotonically—the linear positive
term captures the benefit of an occupation whereas the negative quadratic captures the
costs of skill acquisition, such as additional training required at high-skill jobs. As will
become clear later, this nonmonotonicity ensures that optimal occupational choice is an
interior one (i.e., workers do not all flock to the occupations with the highest rj,t ). Sec-
ond, with the formulation in (1), the linear benefit term is proportional to the worker’s
ability (Aj + εj,t ), whereas the cost term is independent of ability, which gives rise to
comparative advantage and sorting by ability level—workers choose occupations with
higher skill requirements only in dimensions where their ability is relatively high. These
two features will come to play important roles in what follows.

   The output of a worker in a given occupation is the sum of his end-of-period skills,
and perfect competition among occupations for workers ensures that a worker’s wage
equals the output he produces:
                                       X
                                wt =       kj,t (hj,t , Aj ; rj,t , εj,t ).                (2)
                                       j



   At first blush, this wage equation (2) may appear a bit peculiar as there is no explicit
price multiplying each skill (as would be the case in a standard human capital model, e.g.,
Ben-Porath (1967) or Rosen (1972)), which makes it seem as if there is no variation in
the value of skills across occupations or even a relative price of each skill at the aggregate
level. This is not the case however: the kj,t ’s already embed how productive each (newly
produced) skill is in each occupation (through equation (1)). So, two workers with the
same human capital portfolio at the beginning of the period, ht , who work at different
occupations during the period, will end up with different amounts of kj,t ’s and therefore
receive different levels of compensation. Thus, a worker’s wage depends on his human
capital vector ht , learning ability, A, occupation rt , and stochastic disturbance, εj,t . The
occupation-specific skill intensity, rt , plays a dual role, determining the relative price of
each skill in each occupation in addition to also affecting the rate of skill accumulation


                                                   9
in each occupation.8
    Finally, the beginning-of-period human capital in period t + 1 is equal to kj,t adjusted
for depreciation:
                                                                                        
                                                                            2
                hj,t+1 = (1 − δ) kj,t = (1 − δ) hj,t + (Aj + εj,t ) rj,t − rj,t /2 ,                  (3)

where the depreciation rate δ is the same for all skill types and occupations.

2.2     Empirical Wage Equation and Skill Mismatch
    We can now derive our first key equation, which shows how a worker’s wage depends
on his abilities and the history of occupations he has been employed at. To this end,
first, combining equations (1)–(2) and rearranging yields:

                                   n 
                                   X            A2j   (Aj − rj,t )2
                                                                     X n
                       wt =              hj,t +     −                +     rj,t εj,t .                (4)
                                   j=1          2          2           j=1


    This expression makes clear that a worker’s wage depends positively on his (beginning-
of-period) human capital and his ability, and negatively on (Aj − rj,t )2 , which simply the
deviation between his ability level and his occupation’s skill requirement—or what we
will call, skill mismatch. Next, using equation (3) and repeatedly substituting for human
capital (and setting δ ≡ 0 for clarity) yields:9

                                         A2j           t−1
                                                       X   (Aj − rj,s )2 Xt−1
                   hj,t = hj,1 +             (t − 1) −                  +     rj,s j,s ,             (5)
                                         2             s=1      2         s=1


which shows that human capital grows with experience at a rate that is proportional to
ability (second term) and, more importantly for our purposes, is depressed by the degree
of mismatches at all his past occupations. Finally, substituting this expression into (4)
delivers the key empirical wage equation that we will use in the empirical analysis:

                                       n               n X t                   n X t
                                    1X              1X
                                          A2j × t −           (Aj − rj,s )2 +
                     X                                                        X
           wt =           hj,1 +                                                      rj,s εj,s .     (6)
                      j             2 j=1           2 j=1 s=1                 j=1 s=1
                                    |     {z      }     |        {z          }
                                   ability×experience         mismatch

   8
      In this sense, our model fully captures the spirit of comparative advantage as in the Roy model but
does so in a way that both retains tractability, which will allow us to derive a number of key predictions
and deliver implications of mismatch as will become clear in a moment. The generality afforded by this
formulation is also in the same spirit as the “skill weights” approach in Lazear (2009).
    9
      The analogous expression with δ > 0 is given in Appendix A.

                                                        10
    Two remarks are in order. First, the wage inherits the two properties of human
capital noted above; in particular, its growth is proportional to a weighted average of
the worker’s ability portfolio, and it is depressed by the history of past mismatches.10
This long-lasting negative effect of past mismatches on future wages is the one of the
key implications of the model that we will test in the data. Second, notice that we
did not yet specify how workers choose occupations or what causes mismatch. So, the
empirical implications of this wage equation do not depend on those specifics. Instead,
they come from the specification of technology that determines how wages and human
capital accumulation depend on abilities and occupations.11
    Turning to the wage equation, we rearrange it slightly to distinguish between the
effect of current mismatch and past cumulative mismatch on wages. To this end, let tc
denote the period in which the worker switched to his current occupation (i.e., rj,s = rj,tc
for s ≥ tc ), so his tenure in the current occupation is t − tc + 1. We can rewrite equation
(6) as

                                        1X 2         1X
                                                         (Aj − rj,tc )2 × (t − tc + 1)
                       X
              wt =            hj,1 +        Aj × t −                                                         (7)
                         j              2 j          2 j                  |    {z    }
                                        |     {z        }        |         {z           }   current tenure
                                       ability×experience            current mismatch
                        c −1
                     1 tX                       t X
                               (Aj − rj,s )2 +
                             X                 X
                   −                                 rj,s εj,s ,
                     2 s=1 j                   s=1 j
                             |          {z          }
                             cumulative past mismatch


which shows the separate effects of current mismatch and past cumulative mismatches,
which we will map into the data in Section 5.

2.3      Information Structure and Bayesian Learning
    Each worker draws ability Aj from a normal distribution at the beginning of his
life: Aj ∼ N (µAj , σA2 j ). The worker does not know his true Aj but observes a signal,
Âj,1 = Aj + ηj , where ηj ∼ N (0, ση2j ). So, his prior beliefs are normally distributed with
mean Âj,1 (unbiased) and precision λj,1 ≡ 1/ση2j .
   10
      With positive depreciation, mismatches that are farther in the past will be discounted in calculating
cumulative mismatch. See equation (11) in Appendix A.
   11
      It might seem that if the model is correctly specified and we were to estimate the wage equation
(6) from data, we should get coefficients of 1/2 on the ability and mismatch terms. But this would only
be true if Aj and rj,s were cardinal variables that had exact analogues in the data, which is not the
case. Therefore, the model’s prediction is more about the significance of these variables for determining
wages rather than about particular values for the estimated coefficients.

                                                            11
                                                                                   
    Each period, the worker observes Aj + εj,t , where εj,t ∼ N 0, σε2j . This is equivalent
to saying the worker observes each of his skills each period and knows his initial skill
vector, h1 . Then, given his current beliefs, the worker updates his belief about Aj . The
worker’s belief at the beginning of each period is normally distributed. Let Âj,t be the
mean and λj,t be the precision of this distribution at the beginning of period t and λεj
be the precision of εj,t . After observing Aj + εj,t , the worker updates his belief according
to the following recursive Bayesian formula:

                                           λj,t           λεj
                              Âj,t+1 =          Âj,t +        (Aj + εj,t ) ,                          (8)
                                          λj,t+1         λj,t+1

where λj,t+1 = λj,t + λεj .12

2.4     Workers’ Problem
    Given the current beliefs about his abilities, the problem of the worker in period t is
given as follows:
                                                 X                               
                       Vt (ht , Ât ) = max Et         kj,t + βVt+1 (ht+1 , Ât+1 ) ,
                                       {rj,t }
                                                   j


subject to (1), (3), and (8). Since occupations are represented by a vector of skill
intensities, this problem yields a choice of occupation in the current period, which then
determines not only current wages but also future human capital levels. The expectation
in the worker’s problem is taken with respect to the distribution of his beliefs about Aj
(for j = 1, ..., n), given by N (Âj,t , 1/λj,t ), and the distribution of εj,t , given by N (0, σε2j ).

Proposition 1. The optimal solution to the worker’s problem is characterized by the
following two functions:

    1. Occupational choice: rj,t = Âj,t ;
   12
      Notice that to the extent that abilities are correlated, each new observation about one ability
also provides information about other abilities, which we implicitly assumed away here. Taking this
additional information into account is possible but will turn the learning problem into a multidimensional
Kalman filtering problem, which makes the solution of the model analytically less tractable, so we do
not consider it here. It is a potential extension in future work. That said, the extent to which this cross-
updating of beliefs empirically matters depends on the magnitude of the correlation between abilities
(c.f., Guvenen (2007)), which is low for 2 out of the 3 ability pairs we study later and high between the
other pair (see Table I. Finally, we also assume that a worker’s occupation and its skill requirements
does not influence the quality of signal a worker gets about his ability. These assumptions allow us to
derive the analytical results.

                                                       12
   2. Value function:

                                          T
                                         X                n 
                                                         X                      
                                                   s−t
                      Vt (ht , Ât ) =         β                 hj,t +   Â2j,t /2    + Bt (Ât ),
                                         s=t              j=1


where Bt is a known time-varying function that does not affect the worker’s choices.13

   Three remarks about this solution are in order. First, given that rj,t = Âj,t , skill
mismatch in dimension j can be written either as (Aj − Âj,t )2 or (Aj − rj,t )2 . In the
empirical section, we use the worker’s test scores that proxy Aj ’s and his occupation’s
skill intensities that correspond to rj,t ’s in order to construct our mismatch measure.
Second, since Aj ’s enter into the worker’s objective function linearly, the solution only
depends on the worker’s expectation of Aj , which is Âj,t . Third, the worker’s human
capital and wage depend both on his belief Âj,t and also his true ability Aj and the
shock εj,t . Thus, his realized wage and human capital will be different from his own
expectations of these two variables.

Relationship to the Standard Human Capital Framework
   Before moving further, it is instructive to point out three key ways our model differs
from the standard Ben-Porath formulation. The first two should be obvious by now.
First, we introduce multidimensional skills and abilities; and second, here, skill accumu-
lation depends not only on a worker’s learning abilities (Aj ) but also with his occupation.
This latter feature is in the spirit of Rosen (1972).
   Third, and less obvious, the incentives that drive skill acquisition are quite different
here compared to the Ben-Porath framework. To see this, notice that in the Ben-Porath
model (assuming perfect information and one type of skill, and interpreting rt as human
capital investment), the current wage would be wt = ht − rt2 /2, and the next period’s
human capital would be ht+1 = ht +Art . Thus, the choice of rt that maximizes the current
wage is zero, whereas the one that maximizes future human capital is infinite, so there is a
strong intertemporal trade-off that determines the choice of rt . In contrast, in our model,
the analogues of the two equations are wt = ht +(Art −rt2 /2) and ht+1 = ht +(Art −rt2 /2),
where both equations have the common term: Art − rt2 /2. Because of this symmetry, the
same interior choice of rt maximizes both current wage and future human capital—the
intertemporal trade-off disappears.14 This makes our setup more similar to a learning-
  13
       The proof of this proposition for the general case with positive depreciation is in Appendix A.
  14
       We show this result more formally in Appendix A.2.

                                                           13
by-doing model where more work today raises both the current wage and future human
capital.
    Fourth, in our framework, both overqualified and underqualified workers (i.e., those
with rj 6= A) experience lower rates of skill accumulation, which is clear from the law
of motion for ht+1 . In contrast, in the Ben-Porath version, if a worker is underqualified
today (i.e., A < rj ), he would earn lower wages today but higher wages in the future
because he over-accumulates skills (compared to his optimal occupation) in the higher
r occupation (recall ht+1 = ht + Art ). Consequently, in a wage regression, negative past
mismatch (reflecting the extent to which a worker was underqualified in the past) will
have a positive effect on the current wage. In contrast, in our setup both positive and
negative past mismatches have a negative effect on current wages. Our empirical wage
regressions will speak to these different predictions of our formulation compared to the
standard human capital framework.

Two Issues With Implementation
    Before concluding this section, we discuss two practical issues that arise when the
wage equation (7) is estimated. The first one is that the error term in (7) is correlated
with mismatch measures because the mean of a worker’s posterior beliefs about his
abilities is correlated with past shocks.15 As a result, our estimates of the coefficient
on mismatch will be biased. Fortunately, as we state formally in Lemma 1, we can
determine the sign of the bias, which will become useful in interpreting our results.
    Specifically, first, current mismatch and past shocks are positively correlated. If we
observe a high (low) wage in a period due to positive (negative) shocks, we will also
observe a high (low) mismatch. Because we expect wages and mismatch to be negatively
correlated and wages and errors to be positively correlated, the direction of the bias will
be towards zero and the true effect of mismatch on wages should be stronger than the
effect we estimate in our empirical analysis.16 The following lemma summarizes this
result.

                                    (Aj − rj,s )2 and Ωj,t ≡
                           Pt                                  Pt
Lemma 1. Let Mj,t ≡           s=1                               s=1 rj,s εj,s .   Then, Cov (Mj,t , Ωj,t ) >
0. Therefore, the estimated coefficient of mismatch provides a lower bound (in magnitude)
for the true effect.
   15
      This is a direct implication of Bayesian learning and can be seen by repeatedly substituting equation
(8) backward.
   16
      “True” mismatch effect is the one when workers are randomly assigned to occupations and therefore
mismatch happens exogenously.

                                                    14
     Another issue that concerns the empirical estimation of the wage equation is that we
do not directly observe Aj ’s. Instead, we will use workers’ ASVAB test scores, which are
noisy signals about their true abilities. To illustrate how this might affect our estimates,
let Aej ≡ Aj + νj , where νj ∼ N (0, σν2j ), denote the test scores. To see how using Aej
instead of Aj in the estimation affects our results, insert Aj = Aej − νj into (6), which
gives

                                                t X               t X
                   X            1 X e2       1X                2 X
            wt =       hj,1 +       Aj × t −         Aej − rj,s +       rj,s (εj,s − νj ) .
                   j            2 j          2 s=1 j              s=1 j


In the following lemma, we show that estimating this equation delivers estimates of the
coefficients on both the ability term and mismatch that are biased toward zero.

                                                              e2
Lemma 2. [Measurement Error and Attenuation Bias] Let ∆ j,t = Aj × t and Mj,t ≡
                                                      e                  f
Pt                    2
                       
                         e ≡ Pt r (ε − ν ). Then,
            Aej − rj,s , Ω
  s=1                     j,t s=1 j,s j,s j
                          
     1. Cov ∆
            e ,Ω
              j,t
                  e
                    j,t < 0: Therefore, the estimated coefficient of ability-experience in-

teraction provides a lower bound for the true effect.
                          
            f ,Ω
     2. Cov M       j,t > 0: Therefore, the estimated coefficient of mismatch provides a
                  e
              j,t

lower bound for the true effect.

     Lemmas 1 and 2 establish that the coefficients we obtain in the empirical analysis
provide lower bounds on the effects of mismatch on wages.

2.5         Occupational Switching
     We now turn to workers’ occupational switching decisions and how they relate to
past and current mismatch. Note that workers’ beliefs are unbiased at any point in
time, so mean beliefs over the population are equal to mean abilities. However, each
worker will typically over- or under-estimate his abilities in a given period. Over time,
beliefs will become more precise and converge to his true abilities. Thus, workers choose
occupations with which they are better matched and mismatch declines. The following
lemma formalizes this simple result.

Lemma 3. [Mismatch by Labor Market Experience] Average mismatch is given
by E[(Aj −rj,t )2 ] = 1/λj,t . Since the precision λj,t increases with labor market experience,
average mismatch declines with experience.


                                                    15
    The occupational switching decision is closely linked to mismatch. To illustrate this
point, assume that an occupational switch occurs if a worker chooses an occupation whose
skill intensities fall outside a certain neighborhood of the skill intensities of his previous
occupation in at least one skill dimension. More formally, letting κj > 0 be a positive
number, an occupational switch occurs in period t if rj,t > rj,t−1 + κj or rj,t < rj,t−1 − κj
for some j. The following two propositions characterize the patterns of occupational
switches.

Proposition 2. [Probability of Occupational Switching] The probability of occu-
pation switching increases with current mismatch and declines with age.

    Mismatch is higher when the mean of a worker’s belief is further away from his true
ability. In that case, conditional on labor market experience, each observation causes a
bigger update of the mean of a worker’s belief. Because occupational switching is related
to the change in the mean belief, the probability of switching increases with mismatch.17
Moreover, conditional on mismatch, if the precision of beliefs is higher, the probability
of switching occupations will be lower since each observation will update the belief by
a smaller amount. Since the precision of beliefs increases and the worker’s occupational
choice converges to his ideal occupation with experience (i.e., mismatch declines), the
probability of switching occupation declines. In Table IX, we show empirical evidence in
support of this prediction.
    We now turn to some key predictions of our model for the “direction” of occupational
switching, which we test in the data in Section 5.4. In particular, we can show that
occupational switches tend to be in the direction of reducing existing mismatch. That
is, workers who are overqualified (positive mismatch) in a certain skill j will, on average,
switch to an occupation with a higher requirement of skill j, thereby reducing the amount
by which they are overqualified. And the opposite applies for skill dimensions along which
they are negatively mismatched (underqualified). The following proposition formalizes
this result.
                                    up
    Introducing some notation, let πj,t ≡ Pr(rj,t+1 − rj,t > κj ) denote the probability that
a worker’s occupation next period will have skill requirement j that is higher than his
current occupation. We refer to this as “moving up.” Similarly, define the probability of
              down
moving down: πj,t  ≡ Pr(rj,t+1 − rj,t < −κj ).
   17
    Since rj,t = Âj,t , notice that occupational switch would occur if Âj,t − Âj,t−1 > κj or Âj,t − Âj,t−1 <
−κj for some j.

                                                       16
Lemma 4. [Direction of Occupational Switches] If the worker is overqualified in
skill j, that is, Aj − rj,t > 0, then:

       1. the probability of moving up in skill j is larger than the probability of moving down:
 up       down
πj,t   > πj,t  , and

       2. the probability of moving up in skill j increases with the extent of overqualification:
      up
   ∂πj,t
∂(Aj −rj,t−1 )
                  > 0.

       A worker has positive mismatch (is overqualified) for his occupation in skill dimen-
sion j if he chose an occupation with a lower skill-j intensity than his ability. This
would happen if he underestimates his ability in dimension j. For such a worker, a new
observation, on average, increases his expectations of his ability, and as a result, he be-
comes more likely to switch to an occupation with a higher skill-j intensity. While the
proposition is stated in terms of upward mobility of overqualified workers, the opposite
is also true: underqualified workers are more likely to move to occupations with lower
skill intensities.

       In addition to predicting the likelihood of switching, the model also delivers a pre-
diction for the size of the change in the skill space conditional on switching, and how it
varies with the level of mismatch in the current occupation. The following proposition
states the result.

Proposition 3. Conditional on switching occupations, the reduction in mismatch in
                                 ! of mismatch in previous occupation. rj,t − rj,t−1 ∼
skill j is proportional to the level
                                           2
       λj                           λj
N      λj,t
              (Aj − rj,t−1 ) ,       λj,t
                                                 σ2j .


       In addition to providing a clear testable prediction (which we will test in 5.4), this
proposition also provides a way to distinguish between information frictions from search
frictions as the source of mismatch. More concretely, with undirected search (e.g., as in
Lise and Postel-Vinay (2016)), an overqualified worker will switch to occupations that
require higher skills as he samples more occupations, but conditional on switching the
reduction in mismatch will be independent of his initial level of mismatch. Thus, in
our model the average change in skills upon switching is an increasing function of initial
mismatch, whereas with undirected search it is a flat line. We will revisit this discussion
in the empirical analysis.


                                                          17
3     Data
    The main source of data for our analysis is the NLSY79, which tracks a nationally
representative sample of individuals who were 14 to 22 years of age on January 1, 1979.
It contains detailed information on earnings, employment, and occupational titles for
each job, of each worker. In addition, all respondents took the ASVAB test at the start
of the survey. The respondents were also given a behavioral test to elicit their social
attitudes (e.g., self-esteem, willingness to engage with others, etc.).
    Using these test scores, we construct three ability measures for each worker—verbal,
math, and social. We then link these ability measures to the skill requirements of his
main occupation (expressed in a way that is comparable to these abilities). The latter
are constructed from O*NET data on occupations (as described later). Combining these
two pieces of information allows us to create a measure of skill mismatch for each worker-
occupation pair. We now provide a brief description of the data sources and methods, and
relegate further details of sample selection, variable construction, and sample statistics
to Appendix C.

3.1    NLSY79
    We use the Work History Data File of the NLSY79 to construct yearly panels from
1978 to 2010, providing up to 33 years of labor market information for each individual.
We restrict our analysis to males and focus on the nationally representative sample of
3,003 individuals. We exclude individuals who were already working when the sample
began so as to avoid the left truncation in their employment history. Such truncation
would pose problems for our empirical measures, which require the complete work history
to be recorded for each individual. We further drop individuals that are weakly attached
to the labor force. The complete description of our sample selection is in Appendix C.
Our final sample runs from 1978 through 2010 and includes 1,992 individuals and 44,591
individual-year observations.
    Measurement error in occupational switching has received particular attention, and
we address it by dropping transitions that immediately revert (which often indicates in-
correct coding in the middle year) and conditioning occupation switches on simultaneous
employer switches. The latter condition corresponds to one of the filters used by Kam-
bourov and Manovskii (2009b), which Visschers and Carrillo-Tudela (2014) show is quite
important because the majority of miscoded occupational switches are within employers.

                                             18
Annual occupational mobility in our sample is 15.94% compared with 18.48% reported in
Kambourov and Manovskii (2008) who use the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID)
for the period 1968–1997. Appendix C contains further details.

Data on Workers’ Abilities

   The version of the ASVAB taken by NLSY79 respondents had 10 component tests.18
We focus on the following 4 components on verbal and math abilities, which can be
linked to skill counterparts: Word Knowledge, Paragraph Comprehension, Arithmetic
Reasoning, and Mathematics Knowledge. We followed Altonji et al. (2012) to process
the ASVAB scores. In particular, because age differences can have a systematic effect on
the score and respondents ranged from age 14 to 21, we normalize the mean and variance
of each test score by their age-specific values following these authors.

   The NLSY79 included three attitudinal scales, which measure a respondent’s non-
cognitive abilities. We focus on two of these measures: the Rotter Locus of Control Scale
and Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale. Both were administered early in the sample, 1979 and
1980, respectively. The Rosenberg scale measures a respondent’s feelings about oneself,
his self-worth and satisfaction. The Rotter scale elicits a respondent’s feelings about his
autonomy in the world, the primacy of his self-determination rather than chance. These
scores were previously used by Heckman et al. (2006), and Bowles et al. (2001) review
evidence on the effects of noncognitive abilities on earnings. Just as with the ASVAB
scores, we equalized the mean and variance across ages. We call this dimension of a
noncognitive ability social ability hereafter.

Occupational Skill Requirements

   The U.S. Department of Labor’s O*NET project aims to characterize the mix of
knowledge, skills, and abilities that are used to perform the tasks that make up an
occupation. It includes information on 974 occupations, which can be mapped into
the 292 occupation categories included in the NLSY79. For each of these occupations,
analysts at O*NET give a score for the importance of each of 277 descriptors.19 We use
26 of these descriptors that are most related to the ASVAB component tests—a choice

  18
     These 10 components are arithmetic reasoning, mathematics knowledge, paragraph comprehension,
word knowledge, general science, numerical operations, coding speed, automotive and shop information,
mechanical comprehension, and electronics information.
  19
     We use the analysts database, version 4.0, which does not include data from survey respondents
and should yield a more consistent picture across occupations.

                                                 19
dictated by our measures that relate ASVAB to O*NET and described below—and
another 6 descriptors related to the social skills. The complete list is in Appendix C.2.

3.2     Creating Verbal, Math, and Social Components
   Information about workers’ abilities and occupational skill requirements in verbal
and math fields are aggregated in two steps. First, we convert the O*NET skills into
4 ASVAB test categories using the cross-walk created by the Defense Manpower Data
Center (DMDC).20 The DMDC selected 26 O*NET descriptors that were particularly
relevant and assigned each a relatedness score to each ASVAB category test. For each
ASVAB category test, we create an O*NET analog by summing the 26 descriptors and
weighting them by this relatedness score. The result is that each occupation gets a set
of scores that are comparable to the ASVAB categories, each a weighted average of the
26 original O*NET descriptors.

   Second, after normalizing each dimension’s standard deviation to be one, we reduce
these 4 ASVAB categories into 2 composite dimensions, verbal and math, by applying
Principal Component Analysis (PCA). The verbal score is the first principle component
of Word Knowledge and Paragraph Comprehension, and the math score is that of Math
Knowledge and Arithmetic Reasoning. Because the scale of these principal components
is somewhat arbitrary, we convert all four scores (verbal worker ability, math worker
ability, verbal occupation requirement, math requirement) into percentile ranks among
individuals or among occupations.21

   Likewise, we create a single index of social ability both on workers’ and occupations’
sides. From the O*NET, we reduce the six O*NET descriptors to a single dimension by
taking the first principal component after scaling each dimension’s standard deviation
to be one. For the worker’s side, we first take the negative of the Rotter scale, because
a lower score implies more feeling of self-determination. After scaling both NLSY79
measures to have a standard deviation of one, we take the first principal component.
Both occupation- and worker-side data are then converted into percentile rank scores.

  20
      To increase the ASVAB’s general appeal, the ASVAB Career Exploration Program
was established by the U.S. Department of Defense to provide career guidance to high
school students.     As part of the program, they created a mapping between ASVAB test
scores and O*NET occupation requirements (OCCU-Find).                The mapping is available at:
http://www.asvabprogram.com/downloads/Technical_Chapter_2010.pdf.
   21
      The rank scores of skills among occupations are calculated by weighting each occupation by the
number of observations of individuals in that occupation in NLSY79.

                                                20
          Table I – Correlations among Ability and Skill Requirement Scores

                        (a) Worker Ability         (b) Occupational Skill Requirement
    Workers’ Ability   Verbal    Math   Social       Verbal      Math        Social
      Verbal            1.00                          0.37       0.34         0.35
      Math              0.78     1.00                 0.44       0.40         0.35
      Social            0.30     0.27   1.00          0.13       0.11         0.16
Note: The correlations reported in panel (a) are computed using data on 1,992 individuals in
our sample and those in panel (b) are computed using 44,591 worker-occupation pairs observed
during the sample period.


    Table I reports (a) the correlation between workers’ verbal, math, and social ability
scores for 1,992 individuals in our sample, and (b) the correlation between workers’
abilities and the corresponding skill requirements in their current occupation for 44,591
observations in our sample. In the left panel (a), the highest correlation between ability
scores is 0.78 (math and verbal), and the others are 0.27 and 0.30, indicating that
each component carries useful independent information. Panel (b) provides a rough
measure of sorting of workers into occupations by skills. While the correlations are
fairly low (reflecting both mismatch but also measurement error) they are all positive.
Workers with strong math skills tend to sort into occupations with generally high skill
requirements. A worker’s social skills have a relatively low correlation with occupation
requirements along every dimension.


4     Empirical Methodology
    In this section, we introduce our empirical measure of (contemporaneous) skill mis-
match as well as cumulative mismatch—to analyze the persistent effects of past mismatch
on current wages. We also present two additional statistics—called positive and negative
mismatch—to analyze the effects of over- and underqualification at a given occupation.
These measures are then incorporated into the wage equation developed in Section 2 and
estimated in the next section.




                                             21
4.1     An Empirical Measure of Skill Mismatch
(Contemporaneous) Mismatch

    Specifically, as in Section 2.2, Ãi,j is the measured ability of individual i in skill
dimension j, and r̃c,j is the measured skill requirement of occupation (or career) c in
the same dimension. Let q(Ãi,j ) and q(r̃c,j ) denote the corresponding percentile ranks
of the worker ability and the occupation skill requirements. To define our measure, we
take the difference in each skill dimension j between worker abilities and occupational
requirements. We sum the absolute value of each of these differences using weights {ωj }
to obtain:22                             n n
                                         X                                  o
                                mi,c ≡         ωj × q(Ãi,j ) − q(r̃c,j )       .
                                         j=1

The weights are chosen to be the factor loadings from the first principal component,
normalized to sum to 1.23 To help understand magnitudes in our analysis, we rescale our
mismatch measure so that its standard deviation is equal to 1. Table B.1 in Appendix B
shows descriptive statistics for the mismatch measure, which reveal that the prevalence
of mismatch is not specific to a particular educational group, race, or industry.

Cumulative Past Mismatch

    A key idea that we will explore in this paper is whether a poor match between a
worker and his current occupation can have persistent effects that last beyond the current
job. To this end, we construct a measure of cumulative mismatch as follows. Consider
a worker who has worked at p different occupations as of period t, whose indices are
given by the vector {c(1), c(2), . . . , c(p)}. The tenure in each of these matches is given
                 n                                  o
by the vector T̂c(1) , T̂c(2) . . . , T̂c(p−1) , Tc(p),t where T̂c(s) denotes total tenure in the past
occupation c(s), and Tc(p),t is the tenure in the current occupation at period t. These must
   22
       We use absolute deviations instead of another metric like quadratic deviations, as would be sug-
gested by the quadratic mismatch terms that appear in Equation 7. This is because our measures q(Ãi,j )
and q(r̃c,j ) are ordinal rather than cardinal. In Section 2, we derived the quadratic form knowing the
cardinal values. Given that we can only measure ranks, absolute deviations are the more robust measure
of distance. Having said this, we also tried with quadratic distance and the results were substantively
unchanged.
    23
       That is, we apply principal component analysis (PCA) to the set of absolute values of differences,
                        n
   q(Ãi,j ) − q(r̃c,j ) j=1 , and obtain the first principle component. The weights for the first principle
component through PCA turned out to be (verbal, math, social) = (0.43, 0.43, 0.12). We do not know
a priori the relative importance of each skills dimension to wages, which could have been a preferable
basis for weighting. However, our results were little changed when we used other reasonable weights,
like the one which sets an equal weight for all dimensions.

                                                     22
add up to total experience of the worker at period t: T̂c(1) + T̂c(2) + · · · + T̂c(p−1) + Tc(p),t =
Et . Cumulative mismatch is defined as the average mismatch in the p − 1 previous
occupations:
                                                                                          Pp−1
                    mi,c(1) T̂c(1) + mi,c(2) T̂c(2) + · · · + mi,c(p−1) T̂c(p−1)              s=1   mi,c(s) T̂c(s)
          mi,t ≡                                                                     =        Pp−1                   .       (9)
                                 T̂c(1) + T̂c(2) + · · · + T̂c(p−1)                                 s=1   T̂c(s)


   Each past mismatch value is weighted by its corresponding T̂c(s) , so the duration the
worker was exposed to an occupation determines its influence on average. This variable
is the empirical analogue of the cumulative mismatch term in equation (7) and represents
the lingering effect of previous mismatches on the current wage. If occupational match
quality only had an effect within a given match (as in, e.g., Jovanovic (1979) or Mortensen
and Pissarides (1994)), this variable would have no effect on later wages. On the other
hand, if dynamic decisions—such as human capital accumulation—are important and
mismatch depresses it, then poor matches in past occupations can reduce current wages.



Positive vs. Negative Mismatch

   Equation (7) in Section 2 tells us mismatch may reduce a worker’s wages for two
reasons: a worker’s ability may exceed the occupational requirement, and/or his ability
does not meet the occupational requirement. To analyze these positive and negative
effects of mismatch separately, we introduce two additional measures. We call them
positive mismatch and negative mismatch, which are defined as
              n             h                       i                     n               h                              i
   m+                                                         m−
              X                                                           X
    i,c   ≡         ωj max q(Ãi,j ) − q(r̃c,j ), 0 , and      i,c    ≡         ωj min q(Ãi,j ) − q(r̃c,j ), 0 ,
              j=1                                                         j=1

                                                                                     
                                                          −
respectively. These definitions mean that mi,c = m+
                                                  i,c + −mi,c . That is, we decompose
our mismatch measure into a part where some of the worker’s abilities are overquali-
fied (positive mismatch) and a part where some of them are underqualified (negative
mismatch). We can also define positive cumulative mismatch and negative cumulative
mismatch based on these two measures by applying the definition of cumulative mismatch
in Section 4.1.




                                                         23
4.2     Empirical Specification of the Wage Equation
    Based on our theory in Section 2, we augment the standard Mincer wage regression
with measures of mismatch to investigate whether current or cumulative mismatch (or
both) matters for current wages. To the extent that current mismatch matters for
the level of wages, it can be viewed as a useful, measurable proxy for occupational
match quality, which has been treated as an unobservable component of the regression
residual by much of the extant literature.24 Furthermore, if cumulative mismatch or the
interaction between match quality and tenure turns out to matter for current wages,
then this would provide evidence that match quality affects human capital accumulation
and life-cycle wage dynamics.

    We will estimate the empirical analogue of the wage equation (7) with a few modifi-
cations to consider the wage equation for individual i who is working with employer l in
occupation c at time t:

          ln wi,l,c,t =       γ1 mi,c        + γ2 (mi,c × Ti,c,t ) +             γ3 mi,t
                              | {z }             |       {z       }              | {z }
                          current mismatch     current mismatch×tenure   cumulative past mismatch
                                                       
                          + γ4 Ai + γ5 Ai × Ti,c,t + γ6 rc + γ7 (rc × Ti,c,t )
                                                                                   0
                          + Φ1 (Ji,l,t ) + Φ2 (Ti,c,t ) + Φ3 (Ei,t ) + α4 OJi,t + Xi,t β + θi,l,c,t .   (10)

In the above equation, we have our mismatch measure, mi,c , and its interaction term with
occupational tenure, mi,c ×Ti,c,t . We also include our cumulative mismatch measure, mi,t ,
to capture the potential scarring effects of previous mismatches on current wages. This
form comes from Equation (7) in our model, which suggests there should be dynamic
effects from mismatch.

    In the second line of Equation (10), Ai is the ability of worker i averaged across skill
dimensions, and rc is the skill requirement of occupation c averaged over skill dimen-
sions.25 We also include their interactions with occupational tenure. These variables are
important to include because we might worry that our match quality measures are just
proxies for an individual effect from worker or occupation. Equation (7) would suggest
  24
     See, for example, Altonji and Shakotko (1987); Topel (1991); Altonji and Williams (2005); Kam-
bourov and Manovskii (2009b).
  25
n More    onprecisely, Ai is the average of the percentile rank scores of the measured worker’s abilities,
                                                                                      n
 q(Ai,j )
   e          , and rc is that of the measured occupational requirements, {q (erc,j )}j=1 . Both Ai and rc
          j=1
are again converted into percentile rank scores among individuals or among occupations.

                                                         24
that we include Āi × Ei,t instead of Āi × Ti,c,t . We have also estimated the equation
including Āi × Ei,t term instead, and obtained very similar results (See Appendix J.5).
We have chosen to present the results with Āi × Ti,c,t in the regression as our baseline
because we are principally concerned with the coefficient on mi,c × Ti,c,t and, by including
Āi ×Ti,c,t , we want to convince readers that the mismatch terms are not simply capturing
ability, as mi,c is correlated with Āi by construction.
   In the last line of Equation (10), we have employer tenure, Ji,l,t , occupational tenure,
Ti,c,t , labor market experience, Ei,t , and a dummy variable that indicates a continuing
job, OJi,t , where Φ1 , Φ2 , and Φ3 denote polynomials.26 Finally, when estimating Equa-
tion (10), we include one-digit level occupation and industry dummies and a vector of
education education and demographic characteristics, Xi,t .
   The last term, θi,l,c,t , corresponds to the accumulated informational noise in the model
and as shown above in Lemma 1, the correlation of this term with mismatch biases the
estimated coefficient on mismatch terms towards zero. To the extent that this correlation
is large, the true effect of mismatch on wages will be larger than our estimates in the
next section indicate.
   In addition, θi,l,c,t may also include unobserved individual- and match-specific factors
and a serial correlation structure. To deal with serial correlation, we allow for an AR(1)
structure for the residual, θi,l,c,t = ρθ θi,l,c,t−1 + εi,l,c,t .27 Although this structure is not
as general as an unrestricted correlation structure, it provides large gains in efficiency
(see Cameron and Miller (2015) for a detailed discussion of this point). We will conduct
sensitivity analyses allowing for more general error structures later below.

Instrumenting Tenure Variables
   As Proposition 2 established, the probability of occupational switching is a function
of match quality. Consequently, occupational tenure is endogenous a wage regression
because both tenure and wages are functions of match quality.28 This particular endo-
geneity problem is well recognized in the literature, going back to Altonji and Shakotko
(1987), who proposed and implemented an instrumental variables estimator to avoid the
resulting bias. To be clear, if our empirical mismatch measure captured all relevant
  26
     We use a second-order polynomial for Φ1 (·) and third-order polynomials for Φ2 (·) and Φ3 (·).
  27
     This assumption is common in the income dynamics literature and was also used in Kambourov
and Manovskii (2009b).
  28
     This endogeneity bias is separate from the bias discussed in Lemma 1, which showed how the
mismatch term was correlated with errors.

                                                25
aspects of mismatch as well as unobservable individual heterogeneity that mattered for
occupational tenure, including this mismatch measure—which we do—would take care
of the endogeneity problem. But clearly, our measure is a proxy and very likely misses
some aspects of mismatch that matters for both wages and tenure, so to preempt an
endogeneity bias, we follow Altonji and Shakotko (1987)’s IV approach to instrument for
experience and tenure variables. This method has been used extensively in the previous
literature (see, among others, Topel (1991) and Altonji and Williams (2005)). Because
our regressors also include variables that interact with tenure, we create a corresponding
instrument replacing tenure with its instrument. Employer tenure, labor market expe-
rience, and the dummy variable for a continuing job are also instrumented in the same
manner.29

4.3     Workers’ Information Set
   Before concluding this section, it is important to discuss why workers in our NLSY
sample might be uncertain about their abilities, as assumed in our model, even after they
have taken the ASVAB, Rotter, and Rosenberg tests. There are at least two reasons for
this uncertainty. First, and most important, the NLSY respondents were not told their
rank in the test, but were rather given a relatively broad range where their score landed.
For example, a respondent knew he scored 10 out of 25 on mathematics knowledge, but
was only told that his score corresponded to a rank between 20th and 40th percentiles.
Just as in our theoretical model, this is a noisy signal centered around the true mean. As
the econometrician, we see the entire NLSY79 sample, so we can compute the worker’s
precise rank.

   Second, as the econometrician, we can process these test scores to extract more
information than what the respondents could do. For example, we removed age affects
from the test scores, which affects the scores the respondents see but is probably not
economically relevant. Similarly, by taking the first principal component from several
related tests, we are, statistically speaking, uncovering the underlying ability from several
tests that are individually noisy measures. Not knowing the population-level correlations,
the respondents could not possibly do the same analysis.


  29
     Similar to an occupational match component, an employer match component is potentially corre-
lated with employer tenure and the dummy variable of a continuation of a job. An individual-specific
component is potentially correlated with labor market experience.

                                                26
5     Empirical Results
    In this section, we discuss the empirical evidence using our mismatch measures. We
will first relate mismatch to wages by incorporating it into a Mincer regression and then
study its relationship to switching probability and the direction of switching. We find
that the mismatch-tenure interaction and cumulative past mismatch are quite important
in the determination of wages. Mismatch also increases the probability of a switch, and
once one does switch, it predicts whether a worker will move up or down in the skills
required by his occupation. Furthermore, the reduction in mismatch upon switching is
proportional to the level of mismatch in the previous occupation.

5.1    Mismatch and Wages
    Equation (7) of our model suggested a direct link between mismatch, the history
of mismatch and wages. With this motivation in mind, we operationalized it in the
regression in Equation (10). Table II presents the main coefficients from these wage
regressions and the rest are in Appendix B. The first column includes our measure of
mismatch into a standard wage regression. The next adds its interaction with occupa-
tional tenure. The full, baseline specification is in the third column, where we introduce
our measure of cumulative mismatch. As we discussed in the previous section, we in-
strument all the tenure variables in the columns labeled “IV-GLS” and show the results
without instrumenting in the “GLS” columns. In columns (3) and (6), there are fewer
observations because estimating cumulative mismatch requires that the worker held at
least one previous occupation.
    In column (1) of Table II, contemporaneous mismatch has an estimated coefficient of
–0.0205 (and is significant at 1% level), indicating a strong effect on wages. To give an
economic interpretation to this coefficient, recall that we have normalized the standard
deviation of mismatch to 1, so wages are predicted to be about 4.1% (2.05% × 2) lower
for workers whose mismatch is one standard deviation above the mean relative to those
one standard deviation below it.
    In the next column, we introduce a mismatch interaction with occupation tenure.
Now part of the level effect is replaced by a negative tenure effect (also significant at
1% level). Mismatch depresses initial wages and also leads to slower wage growth over
the duration of the match. After 5 years, the overall depression in wages due to slower
growth exceeds the losses due to the initial impact.

                                           27
                          Table II – Wage Regressions with Mismatch
                                    (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
                                 IV-GLS       IV-GLS       IV-GLS         GLS          GLS          GLS
  Mismatch                      -0.0205∗∗∗   -0.0091∗     -0.0054      -0.0196∗∗∗   -0.0136∗∗∗   -0.0128∗∗
  Mismatch × Occ Tenure                      -0.0020∗∗∗   -0.0022∗∗                 -0.0010∗∗    -0.0007
  Cumul Mismatch                                          -0.0374∗∗∗                             -0.0383∗∗∗
  Worker Ability (Mean)          0.3015∗∗∗   0.3044∗∗∗     0.4095∗∗∗   0.3094∗∗∗    0.3101∗∗∗     0.3987∗∗∗
  Worker Ability × Occ Tenure    0.0115∗∗∗   0.0109∗∗∗     0.0072∗∗    0.0090∗∗∗    0.0088∗∗∗     0.0081∗∗∗
  Occ Reqs (Mean)                0.0977∗∗∗   0.0962∗∗∗     0.0878∗∗∗   0.1383∗∗∗    0.1374∗∗∗     0.1426∗∗∗
  Occ Reqs × Occ Tenure          0.0144∗∗∗   0.0144∗∗∗     0.0182∗∗∗   0.0084∗∗∗    0.0084∗∗∗     0.0092∗∗∗
  Observations                    41596       41596         30599       41596        41596         30599
Note: ∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. All regressions include a constant, terms for demographics,
occupational tenure, employer tenure, work experience, and dummies for one-digit-level occupation
and industry. Standard errors are estimated via GLS assuming AR(1) autocorrelation. More detailed
regression results are in Appendix B.


    In column (3), we introduce cumulative mismatch while keeping all the regressors
from column (2). Cumulative mismatch has a significant and negative effect on wages.
The tenure effect of mismatch in the current match is unaffected, though the initial level
effect becomes smaller and insignificant. To help interpret the size of these coefficients,
Table III computes the implied wage losses using specification (3). Looking at the effect
of current mismatch, we see that the 90th percentile worst-matched workers face 8.1%
lower wages after 10 years of occupational tenure compared with a perfectly matched
worker. The difference between the 90th percentile and the 10th percentile of mismatch
is about 4.1% after 5 years of occupational tenure and widens to 6.8% after 10 years.
Comparing the 90th percentile to the 10th percentile of cumulative mismatch, we see a
wage difference of 9.4%.

    For comparison purposes, the last three columns of Table II reports the GLS esti-
mates of the same specifications in the first three columns. Notice that the coefficient
on the mismatch and tenure interaction is quite different between IV-GLS and GLS.
As we discussed in Section 4.2, the return to tenure is biased because it is correlated
with unobservable match quality. The instruments reduce the return to occupational
tenure itself by a factor of about 3 (see Table B.2 in Appendix B), precisely because
the OLS estimate on tenure takes some variation from the mismatch-tenure interaction
term. When we instrument tenure, we purge its correlation with match quality so it is
instead ascribed to the interaction between mismatch and occupational tenure, making
its coefficient larger.


                                                   28
           Table III – Wage Losses from Mismatch & Cumulative Mismatch

       Mismatch Degree                 Mismatch Effect               Cumul. Mismatch Effect
        (High to Low)        5 years      10 years       15 years
             90%              -0.049        -0.081        -0.114                -0.123
                             (0.011)       (0.018)       (0.030)               (0.014)
             50%              -0.021        -0.036        -0.050                -0.065
                             (0.005)       (0.008)       (0.013)               (0.007)
             10%              -0.008        -0.013        -0.018                -0.029
                             (0.002)       (0.003)       (0.005)               (0.003)
Note: Wage losses (relative to the mean wage) are computed for each percentile of each measure in the
above table. Standard errors are in parentheses.


Cost of Mismatch

    Finally, we estimate the overall cost of mismatch. For this purpose, we compute
the predicted wages in our full regression and the counter-factual predicted wages if all
mismatch terms were set to zero and we compute the average wages for each case. We
find that the overall cost of mismatch is substantial: the average wages would have been
11% higher if mismatch could be eliminated.30 We would like to emphasize here that this
estimate does not reveal why mismatch exists but it provides evidence for the lingering
effects of mismatch through human capital accumulation.

    Table IV illustrates the cost of mismatch at different percentiles of the predicted and
counterfactual wage distributions. The first two columns are in 2002 dollars and the
3rd is the percent difference. Overall, the cost of mismatch is typically higher at higher
percentiles of the wage distribution.

    We could also try to summarize the overall contribution of mismatch to wage growth
in a calculation akin to Topel and Ward (1992), who ascribe 40% of cumulative wage
growth during the first ten years to job-to-job transitions. We could further break these
transitions into those that improve occupational mismatch and those that do not. We
  30
     We can provide a back-of-the-envelope calculation to illustrate this point. From Column 3 of Table
II, we have the following coefficients: Mismatch: -0.0054; Mismatch×Occ. Tenure: -0.0022; and Cum.
Mismatch: -0.0374. The average value of Mismatch is 1.56 in Table B.1. The average Cumulative
Mismatch is 1.9 and the average of Mismatch×Occ. Tenure is 10. Based on these, we can compute
the wage loss due to each component: Mismatch = -0.0054×1.56 = -0.0084; Mismatch×Occ. Tenure =
-0.0022×10 = -0.0220; and Cum. Mismatch = -0.0374×1.9 = -0.0711. And the total effects is -0.1015.
The most important effect comes from cumulative mismatch, which reduces wages by 7.11%, followed
by Mismatch×Tenure interaction.

                                                  29
                Table IV – Cost of Mismatch Over the Wage Distribution

                                No Mismatch        Actual   Difference (%)
                         10%         10.43           9.63        8.3
                         50%         16.20          14.51        11.7
                         90%         26.97          24.61         9.7
Note: The table reports wages at different percentiles.


first replicated their exercise in the NLSY 79, using their definition of excess wage growth:

                   ∆wE = wt+1 − wt−2 − E[wt+1 − wt |·] − E[wt−1 − wt−2 |·]

where a job transition occurred between t and t − 1. The expectations terms, E[wt+1 −
wt ], E[wt−1 −wt−2 ], for wage growth are taken with the predicted values from our baseline
regression excluding mismatch, skill and occupational requirements terms. Essentially,
excess wage growth at time t is the residual wage growth above that predicted by the
trend.
    Overall, our data shows essentially the same total excess wage growth as Topel and
Ward (1992). Job changes bring an average of 8.5% excess wage growth and account for
35% of growth during the first 10 years. When we look only at job transitions that also
include an occupation switch and divide these switches that increase mismatch from those
that decrease mismatch, we find that occupational transitions that improve mismatch
have average excess wage growth of about 12%. These switches that reduce mismatch
account for 14% of the cumulative wage growth in the first 10 years of experience. To put
this another way, of the 35% of wage growth attributable to all job changes, improvements
in mismatch account for 40% of that growth.

Three Dimensions of Skill Mismatch
    When presenting the theoretical results of our model, we aggregated over skills, which
helped keep it tractable. However, we could create an analogous wage equation by
splitting dimensions apart and allowing them to enter Equation 7 separately. Here,
we consider this notion empirically, and look for wage implications dimension-wise. In
Table V, we report the results when we include each component mismatch measure in
our regressions. The component mismatch measure in skill j is defined as the difference
in the rank scores of ability and occupational requirement, mi,c,j ≡ q(Ãi,j ) − q(r̃c,j ) . As
before, we scale each dimension to have a standard deviation of one so that they are

                                                  30
               Table V – Wage Regressions with Mismatch by Components
                                     (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
                                  IV-GLS       IV-GSL       IV-GLS         GLS          GLS          GLS
  Mismatch Verbal                -0.0103∗∗∗    0.0082       0.0133      -0.0104∗∗∗    0.0032       0.0051
  Mismatch Math                  -0.0108∗∗∗   -0.0172∗∗    -0.0193∗∗    -0.0096∗∗    -0.0178∗∗∗   -0.0193∗∗∗
  Mismatch Social                -0.0027       0.0005       0.0055      -0.0021      -0.0012       0.0034
  Mismatch Verbal × Occ Tenure                -0.0031∗∗∗   -0.0043∗∗∗                -0.0022∗∗∗   -0.0028∗∗∗
  Mismatch Math × Occ Tenure                   0.0010       0.0020∗                   0.0013∗∗     0.0021∗∗
  Mismatch Social × Occ Tenure                -0.0005      -0.0007                   -0.0001      -0.0006
  Cumul Mismatch Verbal                                    -0.0148∗∗∗                             -0.0137∗∗
  Cumul Mismatch Math                                      -0.0241∗∗∗                             -0.0260∗∗∗
  Cumul Mismatch Social                                    -0.0088∗∗                              -0.0078∗
  Verbal Ability                 -0.0622∗     -0.0652∗      0.0029      -0.0132      -0.0181      -0.0006
  Math Ability                    0.3660∗∗∗    0.3711∗∗∗    0.4260∗∗∗    0.3209∗∗∗    0.3254∗∗∗    0.4027∗∗∗
  Social Ability                  0.0997∗∗∗    0.1003∗∗∗    0.1078∗∗∗    0.1046∗∗∗    0.1046∗∗∗    0.1230∗∗∗
  Verbal Ability × Occ Tenure     0.0128∗∗∗    0.0129∗∗∗    0.0083       0.0066∗∗     0.0070∗∗     0.0083∗∗
  Math Ability × Occ Tenure      -0.0051      -0.0060      -0.0066      -0.0016      -0.0024      -0.0045
  Social Ability × Occ Tenure     0.0061∗∗     0.0060∗∗     0.0071∗∗     0.0059∗∗∗    0.0060∗∗∗    0.0056∗∗
  Occ Reqs Verbal                 0.0190       0.0209      -0.0420       0.0761       0.0832       0.0211
  Occ Reqs Math                   0.1313∗      0.1244∗      0.1772∗∗     0.1176∗∗     0.1080∗      0.1731∗∗
  Occ Reqs Social                -0.1115∗∗∗   -0.1084∗∗∗   -0.1014∗∗∗   -0.1064∗∗∗   -0.1047∗∗∗   -0.0966∗∗∗
  Occ Reqs Verbal × Occ Tenure   -0.0055      -0.0061       0.0034      -0.0184∗∗∗   -0.0202∗∗∗   -0.0123
  Occ Reqs Math × Occ Tenure      0.0138       0.0153       0.0077       0.0189∗∗∗    0.0213∗∗∗    0.0120
  Occ Reqs Social × Occ Tenure    0.0095∗∗∗    0.0088∗∗∗    0.0115∗∗∗    0.0112∗∗∗    0.0108∗∗∗    0.0134∗∗∗
  Observations                     41596        41596        30599        41596        41596        30599

Note: ∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. All regressions include a constant, terms for demographics,
occupational tenure, employer tenure, work experience, and dummies for one-digit-level occupation
and industry. Standard errors are estimated via GLS assuming AR(1) autocorrelation. More detailed
regression results are in Appendix B.

comparable.
    Looking at math and verbal skills in Table V, we see a pattern emerge: mismatch in
either dimension has a negative effect on wages but math mismatch reduces the level of
wages without a significant growth rate effect, whereas the opposite is true for verbal,
which has a small level effect but a strong growth rate effect. The interaction term for
verbal mismatch implies a 13% wage gap after 10 years of tenure between the top and
bottom deciles of mismatch. Math mismatch implies a 5% initial wage difference between
90th and 10th percentiles that attenuates over time. Social mismatch has a weaker effect
overall, though still negative.
    Interestingly, the same difference between math and verbal skills is seen in the effects
of ability on wages (lower panel of Table V): in the first three columns, math ability has a
large level effect (ranging from 37% to 43% across specifications) but little tenure effect,

                                                   31
whereas verbal ability has a higher tenure effect (ranging from 0.8 to 1.3% per year) on
wages, though the effect of verbal ability on wages is insignificant in our most general
specification (column 3). Social ability has both significant level and tenure effects, with
the tenure effect exceeding the level effect in two years. One interpretation of these
results might be that math ability is easier to observe by employers and the market and
so are priced immediately, whereas verbal and social abilities capture some more subtle
traits that are revealed more slowly over time, leading to a growth rate effect.31
    The effect of cumulative mismatch is negative in all three dimensions and statistically
significant at 5% level or higher. The cumulative effect for verbal skills is equivalent to
about 7 years of mismatch in the current occupation, combining the immediate and
tenure effects; cumulative social mismatch is equivalent to about 20 years of mismatch
in the current occupation, mainly because the effects of current mismatch are small.

Positive and Negative Mismatch
    Next, we investigate the effects of positive and negative mismatch, as defined in
Section 4.1, on wages. Recall that, as we discussed in Section 2.4, in our model both
workers who are overqualifed and those who are underqualified experience lower skill
accumulation and lower wages. We also noted that this is not the case in the standard
Ben-Porath version of our model where a worker who is underqualified at his current
occupation (i.e., negative mismatch) worker earns a lower wage today but a higher wage
in the future since his human capital accumulation is still faster than what what would
be at this optimal occupation.
    To examine these different implications, we rerun our benchmark wage regressions but
now splitting the mismatch term into the positive and negative components. Column (1)
of Table VI presents the simplest version—the analogue of Column 1 in Table II: positive
and negative mismatch both reduce wages.32 However, the effect is not symmetric as
predicted by our model; the coefficient on negative mismatch is about 4 times larger than
that of positive mismatch. In Column (2), we add the interaction terms with tenure,
which are statistically significant for both types of mismatch.
   31
      This view is consistent with Altonji and Pierret (2001)’s interpretation of public learning about
unobserved abilities.
   32
      Recall that negative mismatch adds all skill dimensions for which the worker is underqualified (so by
definition it is a negative number), and the positive estimated coefficients imply that negative mismatch
reduces wages. Furthermore, we do not include terms for the level of worker abilities or occupational
requirements because in breaking apart the absolute value of the mismatch measure, we would encounter
problems of collinearity between the positive and negative mismatch measure and those terms.

                                                    32
          Table VI – Wage Regressions with Positive and Negative Mismatch
                                     (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
                                  IV-GLS       IV-GLS       IV-GLS         GLS          GLS          GLS
 Positive Mismatch               -0.0072∗      0.0087       0.0141∗     -0.0074∗∗    -0.0015       0.0010
 Negative Mismatch                0.0305∗∗∗    0.0172∗∗∗    0.0231∗∗∗    0.0276∗∗∗    0.0137∗∗∗    0.0195∗∗∗
 Pos. Mismatch × Occ Tenure                   -0.0028∗∗∗   -0.0032∗∗∗                -0.0011∗     -0.0005
 Negs. Mismatch × Occ Tenure                   0.0023∗∗∗    0.0014                    0.0024∗∗∗    0.0022∗∗∗
 Cumul Positive Mismatch                                   -0.0145∗∗∗                             -0.0220∗∗∗
 Cumul Negative Mismatch                                    0.0159∗∗∗                              0.0085∗
 Observations                      41596        41596        30599        41596        41596        30599
Note: ∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. All regressions include a constant, terms for demographics,
occupational tenure, employer tenure, work experience, and dummies for one-digit-level occupation
and industry. Standard errors are estimated via GLS assuming AR(1) autocorrelation. More detailed
regression results are in Appendix B.


    Finally, in Column (3), we add cumulative positive and negative mismatch, which
speaks more directly to the distinction between our model and the Ben-Porath specifi-
cation. Two points are worth noting. First, both types of cumulative mismatch reduce
wages as predicted by our model (and in contrast to the Ben-Porath version). Further,
the magnitudes of the two coefficients are quite close to each other (-0.0145 for posi-
tive and 0.0159 for negative), which is consistent with the symmetric loss assumed in
our model. Second, the effects of contemporaneous positive and negative mismatch are
consistent with the model: they both reduce wages when the level and tenure effects
are combined. The point estimate of the level of positive mismatch is positive but it is
barely significant (at 10% only). Even with that positive coefficient (0.0141), the neg-
ative estimated tenure effect (-0.0032) implies that after 5 years of tenure the overall
effect is turns negative. Overall, the signs and the statistical significance (4 out of 6 in
column 3) of the estimated coefficients are consistent with the predictions of our model
and provide empirical support for the technology for skill accumulation and wages at
different occupations as we specified in our model (see equation (1)).

    To summarize, the results in Tables II to VI collectively speak to the importance of
skill mismatch for current wages as well as for generating long-lasting scarring effects on
future wages. We now turn address various issues about the sensitivity of these results
to various assumptions we made in the benchmark analysis.




                                                    33
         Table VII – Wage Regressions with Different Assumptions on Errors
                                    (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)
                                 IV-GLS       IV-GLS       IV-GLS       IV-CLU       IV-CLU      IV-CLU
 Mismatch                       -0.0205∗∗∗   -0.0091∗     -0.0054      -0.0271∗∗∗   -0.0145∗    -0.0054
 Mismatch × Occ Tenure                       -0.0020∗∗∗   -0.0022∗∗                 -0.0020∗∗   -0.0024∗∗∗
 Cumul Mismatch                                           -0.0374∗∗∗                            -0.0355∗∗∗
 Worker Ability (Mean)           0.3015∗∗∗   0.3044∗∗∗     0.4095∗∗∗   0.2466∗∗∗    0.2475∗∗∗    0.3408∗∗∗
 Worker Ability × Occ Tenure     0.0115∗∗∗   0.0109∗∗∗     0.0072∗∗    0.0166∗∗∗    0.0161∗∗∗    0.0140∗∗∗
 Occ Reqs (Mean)                 0.0977∗∗∗   0.0962∗∗∗     0.0878∗∗∗   0.1529∗∗∗    0.1528∗∗∗    0.1576∗∗∗
 Occ Reqs × Occ Tenure           0.0144∗∗∗   0.0144∗∗∗     0.0182∗∗∗   0.0155∗∗∗    0.0154∗∗∗    0.0161∗∗∗
 Observations                     41596       41596         30599       44591        44591        33072
Note: ∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. Baseline regression with all of the regressors. IV-GLS
corresponds to our benchmark result in column (3) of Table II. IV-CLU uses standard errors clustered
at the individual level. All regressions include a constant, terms for demographics, occupational tenure,
employer tenure, work experience, and dummies for one-digit-level occupation and industry. Full results
are in Appendix Table D.1.


5.2     Robustness of the Wage Regression Results
    We begin with two potentially important technical assumptions—one about the error
structure and another one about including fixed effects—and investigate the effects of
relaxing each one. We then present several robustness checks and extensions to our
baseline wage regressions.

Serial Correlation. In panel data, wage regression errors are often serially correlated.
This may bias downward the standard errors on our estimates unless we correct for it.
Therefore our benchmark regressions use GLS to allow for the autoregressive structure
for the error term. While this method imposes some restrictions, it is more efficient than
the leading alternative, panel robust standard errors.33

    To allow the correlation structure on errors to be mostly unrestricted, we estimate
panel-robust standard errors, clustering at the individual level.34 All of our mismatch
coefficients remain still highly significant despite larger standard errors than if we assume
errors have an AR(1) structure as in GLS. The point estimates lend further credence
to our estimator: were we to misspecify the error structure, it would bias our point
estimates; instead, they they change little across the different methods. Appendix D
provides estimates for our other specifications, corresponding to Tables II and V. There,
  33
      Cameron and Miller (2015) make a powerful case for FGLS and conclude: “It is remarkable that
current econometric practice with clustered errors ignores the potential efficiency gains of [F]GLS.”
   34
      This estimator was introduced by Arellano (1987). See Cameron and Trivedi (2005) for the details.

                                                   34
                    Table VIII – Wage Regressions with Fixed Effects
                                   (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)
                                IV-GLS       IV-GLS       IV-GLS      IV-GLS-FE    IV-GLS-FE    IV-GLS-FE
 Mismatch                      -0.0205∗∗∗   -0.0091∗     -0.0054      -0.0097∗∗∗   -0.0030      -0.0038
 Mismatch × Occ Tenure                      -0.0020∗∗∗   -0.0022∗∗                 -0.0019∗∗∗   -0.0020∗∗
 Cumul Mismatch                                          -0.0374∗∗∗                             -0.0363∗∗∗
 Worker Ability × Occ Tenure 0.0115∗∗∗      0.0109∗∗∗    0.0072∗∗     0.0126∗∗∗    0.0121∗∗∗    0.0105∗∗∗
 Occ Reqs (Mean)             0.0977∗∗∗      0.0962∗∗∗    0.0878∗∗∗    0.0066       0.0056       -0.0131
 Occ Reqs × Occ Tenure       0.0144∗∗∗      0.0144∗∗∗    0.0182∗∗∗    0.0145∗∗∗    0.0144∗∗∗    0.0162∗∗∗
 Worker Ability (Mean)       0.3015∗∗∗      0.3044∗∗∗    0.4095∗∗∗
 Observations                41596          41596        30599        41596        41596        30599
Note: ∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. Baseline regression with all of the regressors. IV-GLS
corresponds to our benchmark result in column (3) of Table II. IV-GLS-FE includes fixed effects at the
individual level. Baseline regressions include a constant, terms for demographics, occupational tenure,
employer tenure, work experience, and dummies for one-digit-level occupation and industry. Fixed
effects regressions do not include time-invariant terms, demographics or mean worker ability.


the specification with individual components is affected the most, since we have larger
number of regressors and thus, the lost efficiency from this method is more consequential.

Fixed Effects. One might worry that our estimates merely reflect fixed differences
across people: perhaps low wage workers simply choose occupations haphazardly. To
address this, we include individual-level fixed effects and repeat all of our estimates.
The results for the baseline are in Table VIII. Appendix E contains detailed output. The
fixed effect specification, while it controls for individual level unobservables, significantly
restricts the amount of information available to our estimates: essentially we are only
using information from the occupations switches to identify the wage effect of the level of
mismatch. Nevertheless, the effects of our mismatch and cumulative mismatch measures
are quantitatively similar to the benchmark case without fixed effects.

Physical Skill. In addition to verbal, math, and social dimensions, we experimented
with a physical mismatch measure whose construction and results are presented in Ap-
pendix F. However, these results do not show a meaningful relationship between mis-
match in physical skills and wages. The physical dimension has a very small loading in
our mismatch composite measure. When it is included in the regression separately, the
coefficients are generally insignificant.

College Graduates. In Appendix G, we split the sample by education level (college
and noncollege) and reestimate our benchmark wage regression for each group. We
find that the negative effects of skill mismatch are larger for college graduates. This is
true especially of the cumulative mismatch measure, which nearly doubles in magnitude.

                                                    35
Among the dimensions, social and verbal have a particularly pronounced effect among
this subsample.

Younger versus Older Workers. Age is another dimension along which the effects
from mismatch may differ, though the direction is indeterminate. On one hand, our
model suggests that workers switch to better matches over time. Thus, a larger portion
of mismatch observed among the old may be noise and therefore attenuate the coeffi-
cient on current mismatch. On the other hand, our theory suggests that the longer a
worker experiences mismatch, the more it affects his human capital and earnings, which
would show up as a more negative coefficient on average cumulative mismatch among
the relatively old.

    In order to test these two conjectures, we interact our mismatch terms with a dummy
for workers less than 35 (see Table H.1 in Appendix H). We do not find any evidence
for smaller effect of current mismatch among older workers. On the other hand, we find
evidence for older workers being more affected by average cumulative mismatch. We also
computed the overall cost of mismatch for young and old workers. For young workers, the
average predicted wage is 8.5 log points lower than without mismatch. For old workers,
the average predicted wage is 12.5 log points lower than without mismatch. The higher
cost for old people comes mostly from the larger effect of cumulative mismatch for that
group.

Earnings. It is well understood that, in micro survey data, earnings are typically mea-
sured more precisely than wages, which often contain significant measurement error.35
With this in mind, we complement our benchmark analysis (that uses wages) with an
analogous analysis that uses earnings as the left-hand-side variable in a Mincer-style re-
gression. The results reported in Appendix I confirm the robustness of the benchmark
regression.

Log Specification. Because our mismatch measure does not have an inherent cardi-
nality, it’s possible that a transformation of its values would be suitable. Therefore, we
also tried regressions with the logarithm of the mismatch measure. We replaced mis-
match and cumulative terms in our benchmark framework (Equation (10)) with a log
transformation of the mismatch measure. The effects of mismatch on wages obtained
  35
     See Bound et al. (2001) for a thorough survey of the evidence. This finding is often attributed to
the fact that most workers are salaried rather than paid on an hourly basis, and actual hours are found
to be difficult to recall.

                                                  36
through these regressions are very similar to those in Table III. For these results, see
Table J.1 in Appendix J.

Higher-Order Terms for Ability and Skill Requirements. One potential concern
with our benchmark result is that our mismatch measure is capturing nonlinear effects
of worker’s mean ability or occupation’s mean skill requirements rather than mismatch
itself. In order to make sure these are not the case, we include quadratic terms of worker’s
mean ability and occupation’s mean skill requirements in the benchmark framework and
run regressions. Contrary to our doubt, the results of these regression are rarely different
from those in our benchmark regressions. The results from this exercise are in Table J.3
in Appendix J.

Ability-Experience Interaction Term. Our benchmark regression did not include
an interaction term between ability and experience, which is an commonly used explana-
tory variable in Mincerian regressions as it is predicted to matter in many versions of the
human capital model. To examine if this omission could be affecting our results, we rees-
timated the benchmark wage regression by including an ability-experience interaction,
in addition to the ability-occupation tenure interaction that was already present. The
results reported in Table J.5 of Appendix J) show that the ability-experience coefficient
is positive, large (about 1% per year of experience) and statistically significant at 1%
level at the expense of the coefficient on ability-occupational tenure interaction, which
is now small and statistically insignificant (whereas it was significant at 1% level in the
benchmark case; see Table II). However, this addition had has virtually no effect on the
main coefficients of interest, which change very little, both in terms of magnitude and
significance, from the benchmark case.

5.3    Mismatch and Occupational Switching
   So far we have focused on the impact of mismatch on wages. We now turn to the
second key question we raised in the introduction and implied by the model. What
is the effect of mismatch on the probability of occupational switching? In the model,
highly mismatched workers have larger errors in their beliefs. This also leads to a a
higher probability of an occupational switch because Bayesian learning implies a larger
expected correction to their beliefs. Proposition 2 formalized this logic, and we now look
for this potential effect in the data.

   We estimate a linear probability model for occupational switching on the same set of

                                            37
           Table IX – Regressions for the Probability of Occupational Switch

                                   (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)
                                 LPM-IV      LPM-IV       LPM-IV         LPM          LPM          LPM

  Mismatch                       0.0135∗∗∗                             0.0066∗∗∗
  Mismatch Verbal                            0.0076∗∗∗                               0.0053∗∗
  Mismatch Math                              0.0074∗∗∗                               0.0025
  Mismatch Social                            0.0007                                 -0.0012
  Positive Mismatch                                        0.0134∗∗∗                              0.0087∗∗∗
  Negative Mismatch                                       -0.0130∗∗∗                             -0.0028
  Worker Ability (Mean)         -0.0370∗∗∗   -0.0370∗∗∗       -        -0.0208∗     -0.0211∗         -
  Worker Ability × Occ Tenure   -0.0003      -0.0003          -         0.0019∗∗     0.0020∗∗        -
  Occ Reqs (Mean)               -0.0333∗∗    -0.0334∗∗        -        -0.1225∗∗∗   -0.1223∗∗∗       -
  Occ Reqs × Occ Tenure         -0.0052∗∗∗   -0.0052∗∗∗       -         0.0106∗∗∗    0.0106∗∗∗       -
  Observations                    41,596      41,596       41,596       41,596       41,596       41,596

Note: ∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. All regressions include a constant, terms for demographics,
occupational tenure, employer tenure, work experience, and dummies for one-digit-level occupation and
industry. Standard errors are estimated as robust Huber-White sandwich estimates. More detailed
regression results are in Appendix B.


regressors as in our wage regressions, again instrumenting for occupational tenure. We
are most interested in the coefficient on mismatch in the current occupation. Table IX
displays our baseline estimates.
    Notice that the effect of current mismatch on the probability of switching occupations
is always positive and significant at the 1% level, with the exception of social mismatch
in column (2). To give a better idea about the magnitudes implied by these coefficients,
in Table X we compute the occupational switching probabilities across the mismatch
distribution using the specifications in Columns (1) and (2). A worker who is in the 90th
percentile of the mismatch distribution is 3.4 percentage points more likely to switch
occupations than an otherwise comparable worker in the 10th percentile, a difference
corresponding to about 21% of the average switching rate.
    Splitting mismatch into components (last three columns of Table X), we see that
the gap in switching probability between 90th and 10th percentile is approximately 2
percentage points for verbal and math skills, but is close to zero for social skills. Thus,
consistent with what we found for wages, contemporaneous social mismatch seems to
only have a modest effect on outcomes once we account for math and verbal skills.
    In Column 3 of Table IX, we see that the effects are roughly symmetric, with increased
switching probability similarly associated with positive and negative mismatch. Workers

                                                   38
         Table X – Effect of Mismatch on Occupational Switching Probability

            Mismatch Degree         Mismatch Effect          Effect by Component
              (High to Low)                               Verbal      Math       Social
                   90%                    0.0407          0.0209      0.0203     0.0020
                                         (0.0069)        (0.0078)    (0.0076)   (0.0062)
                   50%                    0.0178          0.0082      0.0076     0.0008
                                         (0.0030)        (0.0030)    (0.0029)   (0.0024)
                   10%                    0.0065          0.0014      0.0013     0.0001
                                         (0.0011)        (0.0005)    (0.0005)   (0.0004)
Note: Each cell reports the change in the probability of switching occupations. Standard errors are in
parentheses.


whose skills are worse than their occupations or better are both more likely to switch
occupations. This is consistent with the “U-shape” of Groes et al. (2015) , that workers
either under- or overqualified for their occupation are more likely to switch.

5.4     Switch Direction
   Not only do mismatched workers switch occupations more frequently, but their switches
are also directional. They switch to improve their match quality and the magnitude of
their mismatch predicts the magnitude of the correction. Workers who are overquali-
fied tend to switch to occupations with higher skill requirements and the converse for
underqualified workers.

   As Lemma 4 lays out, our model of learning suggests that switches ought to be di-
rected because as they learn, their beliefs tend towards their true ability. Furthermore,
Proposition 3 shows that the magnitude of the change is related to the magnitude of mis-
match. This is a prediction of our model that contrasts with search models of mismatch.
If search frictions induced mismatch, workers will switch towards better matches, but
the size of the switch will be independent of the size of mismatch.

   Our parametric and nonparametric evidence shows that switches tend to correct past
mismatch and the magnitude of the correction depends on the magnitude of mismatch.
Nonparametrically, we see this in panels (a) through (c) of Figure 2. We plot on the
vertical axis the change in skill requirement for every worker who switches occupation and
on the horizontal we plot the last positive or negative mismatch in that skill. Specifically,
the vertical axis is the difference between the j th skill requirement in the last occupation

                                                 39
and that in the current one, i.e., q(r̃c(p),j ) − q(r̃c(p−1),j ). The horizontal axis, positive and
negative mismatch in skill j, is defined as in Section 4.1, but using only one dimension
at a time.36 To give the scatter plots some shape in Figure 2, we fit local polynomial
regressions for positive and negative mismatch.
    As shown in these panels, the upward-sloping curves on both sides of zero mean
that individuals who are overqualified in skill j (the right half of the axes) tend to
choose their next occupation with a higher skill requirement, whereas the opposite is true
for individuals who are underqualified. The positive relationship means that the more
mismatched the worker was in the last occupation, the larger the change in requirements
of that skill is in the next switch. Panel (d) plots the same relationship by aggregating
across all three skill types, which again shows the same patterns.37
    Figure 2 only documents a univariate relationship between changes in requirements
as a function of current mismatch in the same skill dimension. To investigate richer
dependencies, we regress the change (upon switching occupations) in skill requirement j
on positive and negative mismatch in all three skill dimensions for the worker’s last oc-
cupation.38 We also include all of the worker characteristics from our wage regression on
positive and negative mismatch, e.g. demographics, employer and occupational tenure.
    Columns (1) through (3) of Table XI report the coefficient estimates from this re-
gression. Column (4) reports the case where the average change in skills is regressed on
positive and negative mismatch.
    There are several takeaways from this table. Most importantly, the positive coef-
ficients on all regressors confirm the main message of Figure 2: the skill change upon
switching is an increasing function of current mismatch, so switching works to reduce
skill mismatch. This is true even when we control for mismatch along other dimensions.
For example, Column (1) tells us that a worker will choose his next occupation to have a
higher verbal skill requirement if he is currently overqualified in verbal dimension (first
row), but even more so if he is currently overqualified in math skills (coefficients of 0.0316
vs 0.0599). Mismatch in the social dimension has little impact (coefficient of 0.0061) on
verbal requirements, but a strong effect on changes in social skill requirements. These
                                                            −
       m+
   36
                                                                                                       
        i,c(p−1),j ≡ max q(Ãi,j ) − q(r̃c(p−1),j ), 0 and mi,c(p−1),j ≡ min q(Ãi,j ) − q(r̃c(p−1),j ), 0 .
    37
       Again, we restrict our observations to those who have strictly positive mismatch (to the right of the
axis) and those who have strictly negative mismatch (to the left of the axis). Unlike positive or negative
mismatch in skill j, observations don’t split into either the positive or negative side in this case. That
is, a number of observations show up on both sides.
    38
       As before, skill requirement is measured in terms of percentile rank.

                                                    40
                                               Figure 2 – Non-Parametric Plots of Direction of Switch

                                             (a) Direction of Switch, Verbal                                                         (b) Direction of Switch, Math
                           .6




                                                                                                                       .6
 Change in Skill, Verbal




                                                                                             Change in Skill, Math
                           .3




                                                                                                                       .3
                           0




                                                                                                                       0
                           −.3




                                                                                                                       −.3
                           −.6




                                                                                                                       −.6
                                      −4           −2          0      2         4                                            −4         −2         0             2           4
                                      Last Positive or Negative Mismatch in Verbal                                           Last Positive or Negative Mismatch in Math

                                             (c) Direction of Switch, Social                                                      (d) Direction of Switch, All Average
                           .6




                                                                                                                       .6
                                                                                             Average Change in Skill
 Change in Skill, Social
                           .3




                                                                                                                       .3
                           0




                                                                                                                       0
                           −.3




                                                                                                                       −.3
                           −.6




                                                                                                                       −.6




                                 −4           −2           0           2            4                                        −4         −2        0          2           4
                                      Last Positive or Negative Mismatch in Social                                                Last Positive or Negative Mismatch


Note: We run local polynomial regressions with a simple rule-of-thumb bandwidth (solid lines). On the
X-axis, we have the value of the last positive or negative mismatch measure. On the Y-axis, a change in
a skill is computed as the difference in the rank score of the skill in the current occupation and the one
in the last occupation. An average change is computed as the mean of the changes in the rank scores
in all skills.

results echoes the same theme as before that math and verbal skills are distinct, yet
closely connected, whereas social skills have their own dynamics. The coefficients also
show an asymmetry that was apparent in Figure 2: with the exception of math, workers
who are underqualified in a dimension reduce that skill requirement by more than an
overqualified worker increases his skill requirement.
                            To provide some interpretation of the estimated coefficients, we compute the effect
of positive and negative mismatch in skill j on the change in that skill for 90th, 50th,
and 10th percentile rank of each measure in Table XII using (diagonal entries from the)
regression results. For example, a worker with high positive verbal mismatch, in the 90th
percentile, will choose an occupation 9.95 percentiles higher in verbal skill requirements.
A similarly underqualified worker in the 10th percentile of negative mismatch reduces

                                                                                        41
                       Table XI – Regressions for Direction of Switch

                                                (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)
        Dependent variable →                   Verbal        Math          Social     All Average

        Last Pos. Mismatch, Verbal            0 .0316∗∗∗   0.0097∗∗      0.0143∗∗∗

        Last Neg. Mismatch, Verbal            0 .0838∗∗∗   0.0536∗∗∗     0.0216∗∗∗

        Last Pos. Mismatch, Math              0.0599∗∗∗    0 .0898∗∗∗    0.0021

        Last Neg. Mismatch, Math              0.0558∗∗∗    0 .0893∗∗∗    0.0076

        Last Pos. Mismatch, Social            0.0061∗      0.0046        0 .0774∗∗∗

        Last Neg. Mismatch, Social            0.0264∗∗∗    0.0166∗∗∗     0 .1043∗∗∗

        Last Positive Mismatch                                                          0.0751∗∗∗

        Last Negative Mismatch                                                          0.1143∗∗∗

        Observations                            6,594        6,594         6,594         6,594

Note: ∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. All regressions include a constant, terms for demographics,
occupational tenure before switch, employer tenure before switch, work experience before switch, and
dummies for one-digit-level occupation and industry for the last job held. Standard errors are estimated
as robust Huber-White sandwich estimates. More detailed regression results are in Appendix B.



                 Table XII – Effect of Last Mismatch on Change in Skills

              Last mismatch percentile          Predicted Percentile Change in Skill j
              in skill j                        Verbal         Math            Social
              Positive          90%               9.95          27.91          22.87
                                                 (1.36)         (1.47)         (1.04)
                                50%               4.03          10.70           9.71
                                                 (0.55)         (0.56)         (0.44)
                                10%               0.67           1.88           1.65
                                                 (0.09)         (0.10)         (0.07)
              Negative          90%              –1.59          –1.77          –1.82
                                                 (0.10)         (0.11)         (0.07)
                                50%              –9.07         –10.02         –10.31
                                                 (0.57)         (0.60)         (0.39)
                                10%             –24.25         –26.35         –29.59
                                                 (1.53)         (1.58)         (1.12)
Note: These values are changes in percentile rank scores in each skill dimension. Standard errors are in
parentheses.



                                                   42
his verbal skill requirements by 24.25 percentiles when switching.


6     Conclusion
    In this paper, we propose an empirical measure of multidimensional skill mismatch
that is implied by a dynamic model of skill acquisition and occupational choice. Mismatch
arises in our model due to workers’ imperfect information about their learning abilities,
which causes them to choose occupations that are either above or below their optimal
level. As workers discover their true abilities workers better allocate themselves toward
their optimal careers.

    Our empirical findings provide support to the notion of mismatch proposed in this
paper. In particular, we find that mismatch predicts wages even with a long list of
controls, including worker fixed effects and abilities and occupation requirements con-
structed from ASVAB and O*NET. Furthermore, mismatch has a long-lasting impact
on workers’ wages, depressing them even in subsequent occupations. This latter finding
is consistent with the human capital channel that is embedded in our theoretical model.

    A second set of findings shows workers choose to switch occupations so as to reduce
their skill mismatch. This is true even when we split mismatch into its components. The
magnitudes involved are also quite large, revealing large adjustments for workers in the
skill space upon switching. These findings are consistent with our model of learning.
Comparing skill dimensions, we find social skills behave somewhat differently from math
and verbal skills. Although social ability appears to matter for wages, mismatch between
a worker and an occupation along this dimension has a weaker relationship to wages than
math or verbal mismatch.

    These findings should only serve to motivate further work on the mechanisms in-
volved in learning, human capital accumulation, and occupational choice. The empirical
evidence we presented suggests a strong link between human capital accumulation and
lifetime earnings, but fully quantifying its effects will require a structural quantitative
model. Such a model will also allow us to conduct policy experiments and quantify their
impact on lifetime welfare.




                                            43
References
Altonji, Joseph G. and Charles R. Pierret, “Employer Learning and Statistical
  Discrimination,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116 (1), 313–350.

   and Nicolas Williams, “Do Wages Rise with Job Seniority? A Reassessment,”
  Industrial & Labor Relations Review, 2005, 58 (3), 370–397.

  and Robert A. Shakotko, “Do Wages Rise with Job Seniority?,” Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies, 1987, 54 (3), 437–459.

  , Prashant Bharadwaj, and Fabian Lange, “Changes in the Characteristics of
  American Youth: Implications for Adult Outcomes,” Journal of Labor Economics,
  2012, 30 (4), 783–828.

Antonovics, Kate and Limor Golan, “Experimentation and Job Choice,” Journal
  of Labor Economics, 2012, 30 (2), 333–366.

Arellano, Manuel, “Computing Robust Standard Errors for Within-Groups Estima-
  tors,” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 1987, 49 (4), 431–34.

Bacolod, Marigee P. and Bernardo S. Blum, “Two Sides of the Same Coin: U.S.
  “Residual" Inequality and the Gender Gap,” Journal of Human Resources, 2010, 45
  (1), 197–242.

Ben-Porath, Yoram, “The Production of Human Capital and the Life Cycle of Earn-
  ings,” Journal of Political Economy, 1967, 75 (4), 352–365.

Bound, John, Charles Brown, and Nancy Mathiowetz, “Measurement error in
  survey data,” in J.J. Heckman and E.E. Leamer, eds., Handbook of Econometrics,
  Elsevier, 2001, chapter 59, pp. 3705–3843.

Bowles, Samuel, Herbert Gintis, and Melissa Osborne, “The Determinants of
  Earnings: A Behavioral Approach,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2001, 39 (4),
  1137–1176.

Cameron, A Colin and Douglas L Miller, “A Practitioner’s Guide to Cluster-Robust
  Inference,” Journal of Human Resources, 2015, 50 (2), 317–372.



                                          44
  and Pravin K Trivedi, Microeconometrics: Methods and Applications, Cambridge
  university press, 2005.

Farber, Henry S. and Robert Gibbons, “Learning and Wage Dynamics,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 1996, 111 (4), 1007–1047.

Flinn, Christopher J., “Wages and Job Mobility of Young Workers,” Journal of Po-
  litical Economy, 1986, 94 (3), S88–S110.

Fredriksson, Peter, Lena Hensvik, and Oskar Nordström Skans, “Mismatch of
  Talents? Evidence on Match Quality, Job Mobility and Entry Wages,” mimeo, 2015.

Gardner, Howard, Frames of Mind: The Theory of Multiple Intelligences, 3rd ed.,
  Basic Books, 2011.

Gathmann, Christina and Uta Schönberg, “How General is Human Capital? A
  Task-Based Approach,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2010, 28 (1), 1–49.

Gervais, Martin, Nir Jaimovich, Henry E. Siu, and Yaniv Yedid-Levi, “What
  should I be when I grow up? Occupations and unemployment over the life cycle,”
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 2016, 83 (C), 54–70.

Gibbons, Robert, Lawrence F. Katz, Thomas Lemieux, and Daniel Parent,
  “Comparative Advantage, Learning, and Sectoral Wage Determination,” Journal of
  Labor Economics, 2005, 23 (4), 681–724.

Groes, Fane, Philipp Kircher, and Iourii Manovskii, “The U-Shapes of Occupa-
  tional Mobility,” Review of Economic Studies, 2015, 82 (2), 659–692.

Guvenen, Fatih, “Learning Your Earning: Are Labor Income Shocks Really Very
  Persistent?,” American Economic Review, June 2007, 97 (3), 687–712.

Heckman, James J., Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzua, “The Effects of Cognitive
  and Noncognitive Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior,” Journal
  of Labor Economics, 2006, 24 (3), 411–482.

Huggett, Mark, Gustavo Ventura, and Amir Yaron, “Sources of Lifetime Inequal-
  ity,” American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (7), 2923–2954.



                                             45
Ingram, Beth F. and George R. Neumann, “The Returns to Skill,” Labour Eco-
  nomics, 2006, 13 (1), 35–59.

Jovanovic, Boyan, “Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover,” Journal of Political
  Economy, 1979, 87 (5), 972–990.

  and Robert Moffitt, “An Estimate of a Sectoral Model of Labor Mobility,” Journal
  of Political Economy, 1990, 98 (4), 827–852.

Kambourov, Gueorgui and Iourii Manovskii, “Rising Occupational and Industry
  Mobility in the United States: 1968–97,” International Economic Review, 2008, 49
  (1), 41–79.

   and    , “Occupational Specificity of Human Capital,” International Economic Re-
  view, 2009b, 50 (1), 63–115.

Lazear, Edward P., “Firm-Specific Human Capital: A Skill-Weights Approach,” Jour-
  nal of Political Economy, 2009, 117 (5), 914–940.

Lise, Jeremy and Fabien Postel-Vinay, “Multidimensional Skills, Sorting, and Hu-
  man Capital Accumulation,” Working Paper, 2016. University College London.

Michaud, Amanda M. and David Wiczer, “Occupational Hazards and Social Dis-
  ability Insurance,” Working Paper, 2014. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.

Miller, Robert A., “Job Matching and Occupational Choice,” Journal of Political
  Economy, 1984, 92 (6), 1086–1120.

Mortensen, Dale T. and Christopher A. Pissarides, “Job Creation and Job De-
  struction in the Theory of Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies, 1994, 61 (3),
  397–415.

Moscarini, Giuseppe, “Excess Worker Reallocation,” Review of Economic Studies,
  2001, 68 (3), 593–612.

Nagypal, Eva, “Learning by Doing vs. Learning about Match Quality: Can We Tell
  Them Apart?,” Review of Economic Studies, 2007, 74 (2), 537–566.

Neal, Derek, “The Complexity of Job Mobility among Young Men,” Journal of Labor
  Economics, 1999, 17 (2), 237–261.

                                          46
Papageorgiou, Theodore, “Learning Your Comparative Advantages,” Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies, 2014, 81 (3), 1263–1295.

Parent, Daniel, “Industry-Specific Capital and the Wage Profile: Evidence from the
  National Longitudinal Survey of Youth and the Panel Study of Income Dynamics,”
  Journal of Labor Economics, 2000, 18 (2), 306–323.

Pavan, Ronni, “Career Choice and Wage Growth,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2011,
  29 (3), 549–587.

Perry, Anja, Simon Wiederhold, and Daniela Ackermann-Piek, “How Can Skill
  Mismatch be Measured? New Approaches with PIAAC,” Methods, Data, Analyses,
  2014, 8 (2), 137–174.

Poletaev, Maxim and Chris Robinson, “Human Capital Specificity: Evidence from
  the Dictionary of Occupational Titles and Displaced Worker Surveys, 1984–2000,”
  Journal of Labor Economics, 2008, 26 (3), 387–420.

Rogerson, Richard, Robert Shimer, and Randall Wright, “Search-Theoretic
  Models of the Labor Market: A Survey,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2005, 43
  (4), 959–988.

Rosen, Sherwin, “Learning and Experience in the Labor Market,” Journal of Human
  Resources, 1972, 7 (3), 326–342.

Sanders, Carl, “Skill Accumulation, Skill Uncertainty, and Occupational Choice,”
  mimeo, August 2016.

Speer, Jamin D., “Pre-Market Skills, Occupational Choice, and Career Progression,”
  Journal of Human Resources, 2017, 52 (1), 187–246.

Topel, Robert, “Specific Capital, Mobility, and Wages: Wages Rise with Job Seniority,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 1991, 99 (1), 145–176.

Topel, Robert H and Michael P Ward, “Job Mobility and the Careers of Young
  Men,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1992, 107 (2), 439–79.

Visschers, Ludo and Carlos Carrillo-Tudela, “Unemployment and endogenous re-
  allocation over the business cycle,” Working Paper, 2014. Universidad Carlos III de
  Madrid.

                                            47
Ware, John E., Mark Kosinski, and Susan D. Keller, SF-12: How to Score the
  SF-12 Physical and Mental Health Summary Scales, Health Institute, New England
  Medical Center, 1995.

Yamaguchi, Shintaro, “Tasks and Heterogeneous Human Capital,” Journal of Labor
  Economics, 2012, 30 (1), 1–53.




                                      48
Supplemental Online Appendix

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION




             49
Appendix
A       Proofs and Derivations
A.1     Baseline Model with Depreciation
Proof. Derivation of Human Capital Decision and Wage Equation
    Using                                                                                   
                                                                        2
                       hj,t = (1 − δ) hj,t−1 + (Aj + εj,t−1 ) rj,t−1 − rj,t−1 /2 ,
we obtain
                                           A2j   (Aj − rj,t−1 )2
                                                                                                     !
                hj,t    = (1 − δ) hj,t−1 +     −                 + rj,t−1 j,t−1
                                           2           2

and repeatedly substituting for human capital, we obtain
                                                 t−1
                                                                        A2j   (Aj − rj,s )2
                                                                                                         !
                               t−1                               t−s
                                                 X
            hj,t = (1 − δ)           hj,1 +            (1 − δ)              +               + rj,s j,s .
                                                 s=1
                                                                        2          2

Inserting this expression into the following wage equation

                                    X                 A2j   (Aj − rj,t )2  X
                        wt =                 hj,t +        −                +   rj,t εj,t ,
                                     j
                                                       2          2           j

gives

                  wt = (1 − δ)t−1
                                                 X
                                                       hj,1
                                                  j
                              t−1
                                                              A2j   (Aj − rj,s )2
                                                                                                !
                                                 t−s
                              X                        X
                         +          (1 − δ)                       −               + rj,s j,s
                              s=1                       j
                                                              2          2
                              X A2j             (Aj − rj,t )2  X
                         +                   −                  +   rj,t εj,t
                               j
                                         2            2           j
                                                                           
                                                                       t
                                                                                                 !
                                             t−1             1 X
                                                                          (1 − δ)t−s
                                                 X                    X
                         = (1 − δ)                     hj,1 +  A2j 
                                                  j
                                                             2 j      s=1
                                   t
                              1
                                    (1 − δ)t−s   (Aj − rj,s )2
                                   X           X
                         +
                              2 s=1            j
                              t
                                    (1 − δ)t−s
                              X                        X
                         +                                  rj,s j,s                                        (11)
                              s=1                       j




                                                               50
   Setting the depreciation rate to zero, we would obtain:
                                                             t−1                t−1
                                               A2j           X   (Aj − rj,s )2 X
                    hj,t = hj,1 +                  (t − 1) −                  +     rj,s j,s
                                               2             s=1
                                                                      2         s=1

and
                                                       
                                                    t X                   t X
                                  1 X            1X
                                                         (Aj − rj,s )2 +
                    X                                                    X
             wt =           hj,1 +  A2j  × t −                               rj,s εj,s .
                        j
                                  2 j
                                                 2 s=1 j                 s=1 j
                                      |            {z           }           |             {z                 }
                                       ability×experience                               mismatch


Proof. (Proposition 1) We solve the worker’s problem backwards:
                                                                      hX                                               2 
                                                                                                                         rj,t
                 Vt ht , Ât           = max{rj,t } Et                             hj,t + (Aj + j,t ) rj,t −
                                                                            j
                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                    i
                                                   +                    βVt+1 ht+1 , Ât+1

subject to
                                                        λj,t           λj
                                      Âj,t+1 =               Âj,t +        (Aj + j,t )
                                                       λj,t+1         λj,t+1
and
                                                                       2
                                                                                                     !
                                                                      rj,t
                        hj,t+1   = (1 − δ) hj,t + (Aj + j,t ) rj,t −                                        for all j.
                                                                       2
The worker’s problem in the last period of his life is
                                                                                 !
                                              X                             2
                                                                             rj,T
               VT hT , ÂT            = max ET   hj,T + (Aj + j,T ) rj,T −       ,
                                          {rj,T }               j
                                                                                                                         2

which, due to linearity of the objective in Aj ’s, can be written as
                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                 !
                                                              X                                      rj,T
                            VT hT , ÂT = max                                   hj,T + Âj,T rj,T    −               .
                                                        {rj }
                                                                    j
                                                                                                        2

The optimal solution is the same as in the previous section

                                                            rj,T = Âj,T .

Substituting the solution, we obtain
                                                                                                     !
                                                                      X                  Âj,T 2
                                       VT hT , ÂT =                              hj,T   +               .
                                                                        j
                                                                                              2




                                                                        51
Now look at the problem in period T − 1:
                                                 
                                                                                         2
                                                                                                !
                                                X                                     rj,T −1
      VT −1 hT −1 , ÂT −1       =     max ET −1   hj,T −1 + (Aj + j,T −1 ) rj,T −1 −
                                     {rj,T −1 }                 j
                                                                                                                   2
                                                          i
                                 +   βVT hT , ÂT

subject to
                                               λj,T −1           λ
                                 Âj,T =               Âj,T −1 + j (Aj + j,T −1 )
                                                λj,T             λj,T
and
                                                                       2
                                                                                                  !
                                                                      rj,T −1
                 hj,T   = (1 − δ) hj,T −1 + (Aj + j,T −1 ) rj,T −1 −                                 for all j.
                                                                         2
Substituting the law of motion for human capital, we can write as
                                                 
                                                                                         2
                                                                                                !
                                                X                                     rj,T −1
      VT −1 hT −1 , ÂT −1       =     max ET −1   hj,T −1 + (Aj + j,T −1 ) rj,T −1 −
                                     {rj,T −1 }                 j
                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                      2
                                                                                            !
                                       X                                             rj,T −1 
                                 +   β   (1 − δ) hj,T −1 + (Aj + j,T −1 ) rj,T −1 −
                                           j
                                                                                                              2
                                                                    
                                                     X
                                 + ET −1 β               Âj,T 2 /2
                                                      j


                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                         !
                                                                           X                                 rj,T −1
      VT −1 hT −1 , ÂT −1       =     max (1 + β (1 − δ))                        hj,T −1 + Âj,T −1 rj,T −1 −
                                     {rj,T −1 }                              j
                                                                                                                  2
                                                                    
                                                     X
                                 + ET −1 β               Â2j,T /2 .
                                                      j


The solution gives rj,T −1 = Âj,T −1 . And

                                                                                                Â2j,T −1
                                                                                                             !
                                                                               X
                  VT −1 hT −1 , ÂT −1              = (1 + β (1 − δ))                 hj,T −1 +
                                                                                 j
                                                                                                     2
                                                                                    
                                                                     X
                                                    + ET −1 β               Â2j,T /2
                                                                         j

Continuing backwards, we obtain
                                      T
                                     X                           J 
                                                                X                          
                  Vt (ht , Ât ) =         (β (1 − δ))s−t                    hj,t + Â2j,t /2     + Bt (Ât ),
                                     s=t                             j=1

Since Bt only involves beliefs and does not depend on rj this term does not affect the worker’s

                                                                52
decision rules.


Proof. (Lemma 1) Given the history (Aj + j,1 , Aj + j,2 , ..., Aj + j,t−1 ), the worker’s belief at
the beginning of period t is given as

                                    λj,1           λj
                    Âj,t =              Âj,1 +        (Aj + j,1 + Aj + j,2 + ... + Aj + j,t−1 )
                                    λj,t           λj,t
                                    λj,1           λj               λ
                            =            Âj,1 +        (t − 1) Aj + j (j,1 + j,2 + ... + j,t−1 ) ,
                                    λj,t           λj,t              λj,t

where
                                                   λj,t = λj,1 + (t − 1) λj .
                                                                           
Since Âj,1 is normally distributed with N Aj , ση2j + σA2 . Then, Âj,t will be normally dis-
                                                         j
tributed since
                            λj,1               λ                   λ
                Âj,t =          (Aj + ηj ) + j (t − 1) Aj + j (j,1 + j,2 + ... + j,t−1 )
                            λj,t              λj,t                 λj,t
                                  λj,1      λj
                          = Aj +       ηj +      (j,1 + j,2 + ... + j,t−1 )
                                  λj,t      λj,t

From this expression, we obtain

                                                    λj,1     λ
                             Âj,t − Aj      =           ηj + j (j,1 + j,2 + ... + j,t−1 )
                                                    λj,t     λj,t
                                h            i
which implies that E Âj,t − Aj = 0. Inserting Âj,t − Aj from expression above into Mj,t =
Pt      (Aj −rj,s )2
  s=1        2       ,   we obtain

                                           t
                                                                                               !2
                                           X       λj,1     λ
                            Mj,t =                      ηj + j (j,1 + j,2 + ... + j,s−1 )
                                          s=1
                                                   λj,s     λj,s

and
                                    t
                                                                                            !
                                    X          λj,1     λ
                         Ωj,t =           Aj +      ηj + j (j,1 + j,2 + ... + j,s−1 ) j,s .
                                    s=1
                                               λj,s     λj,s
Note that Cov (Mj,t , Ωj,t ) = E (Mj,t Ωj,t ) − E (Mj,t ) E (Ωj,t ). Furthermore, E (Ωj,t ) = 0 since
                                                          λ            λ
j,s is uncorrelated with all the terms in λj,1    j,s
                                                       ηj + λj,sj (j,1 + j,2 + ... + j,s−1 ) and E (j,s ) = 0.
Thus, Cov (Mj,t , Ωj,t ) = E (Mj,t Ωj,t ) . An important point to notice is that Mj,t Ωj,t includes
multiplication of j,s , 2j , ηj , and ηj2 , and j 3 . Note that both j and ηj are normal with mean
zero. And, for a normal random variable x with mean zero,               E (xn ) is zero if n is an odd number
and positive if n is an even number. Thus, we have E j,s m ηjn = 0 if either m or n is an odd
                                   
number and E j,s m ηjn > 0 if both m and n are even numbers. As a result, only terms that
remain are the positive ones. Thus, E (Mj,t Ωj,t ) > 0.


                                                                  53
                                                                        
Proof. (Lemma 2) Note that ∆˜j,t = A2j + νj2 + 2Aj νj t. Using

                                                        λj,1     λ
                  rj,s = Âj,s = Aj +                        ηj + j (j,1 + j,2 + ... + j,s−1 ) ,
                                                        λj,t     λj,t

we also obtain
                                 t
                                                                                                 !2
                                 X         λj,1     λ
                   M
                   fj,t =                       ηj + j (j,1 + j,2 + ... + j,s−1 ) − νj
                                 s=1
                                           λj,s     λj,s

and
                        t
                                                                                        !
                        X             λj,1     λ
              Ω
              e j,t =            Aj +      ηj + j (j,1 + j,2 + ... + j,s−1 ) (εj,s − νj ) .
                        s=1
                                      λj,s     λj,s
                                                     h         i           h   i
                     e ,Ω  e j,t = E ∆
First, note that Cov ∆                  j,t j,t since E Ωj,t = 0. Using the fact that odd
                                      e Ω
                       j,t
                                           e            e
moments of the normal distribution are zero, we obtain
                                                   
                                  e ,Ω
                              Cov ∆ j,t
                                        e j,t              = −A3j νj t2 − 2 (Aj νj t)2 < 0.
                                                     h          i
Second, similarly Cov M
                      fj,t , Ω
                             e j,t = E M
                                       fj,t Ω
                                            e j,t . Rewrite

                                   t
                                                                                                 !2
                                   X           λj,1     λ
                  M
                  fj,t       =                      ηj + j (j,1 + j,2 + ... + j,s−1 ) − νj
                                   s=1
                                               λj,s     λj,s
                                    t
                                                                                          !2
                                   X           λj,1     λ
                             =                      ηj + j (j,1 + j,2 + ... + j,s−1 )
                                   s=1
                                               λj,s     λj,s
                                           t
                                                                                                 !
                                           X       λj,1     λ
                             − 2νj                      ηj + j (j,1 + j,2 + ... + j,s−1 )
                                           s=1
                                                   λj,s     λj,s
                             +     νj2 t

and
                                 t
                                                                                                 !
                                 X              λj,1     λ
                 Ω
                 e j,t =                   Aj +      ηj + j (j,1 + j,2 + ... + j,s−1 ) εj,s
                                 s=1
                                                λj,s     λj,s
                                    t
                                                                                                      !
                                    X               λj,1     λ
                         − νj                  Aj +      ηj + j (j,1 + j,2 + ... + j,s−1 ) .
                                    s=1
                                                    λj,s     λj,s

Noting that
                                       t
                                                                                            !2
                                       X         λj,1     λ
                         Mj,t =                       ηj + j (j,1 + ... + j,s−1 ) − νj
                                       s=1
                                                 λj,s     λj,s
and
                                  t
                                                                                         !
                                  X              λj,1     λ
                        Ωj,t =              Aj +      ηj + j (j,1 + ... + j,s−1 ) εj,s ,
                                  s=1
                                                 λj,s     λj,s



                                                                54
we can write

M    e j,t = Mj,t Ωj,t
fj,t Ω
                                                                                !2 
                            t                                                         t
                                                                                                                                  !!
                            X          λj,1     λ                                    X      λ j,1      λj
                − νj                       ηj + j (j,1 + ... + j,s−1 )              Aj +       ηj +     (j,1 + ... + j,s−1 )
                            s=1
                                       λj,s     λj,s                                     s=1
                                                                                                         λj,s          λj,s
                                t                                                        t
                                                                                  !!                                                               !    !
                                X       λj,1     λ                                      X          λj,1     λ
                − 2νj                        ηj + j (j,1 + ... + j,s−1 )                     Aj +      ηj + j (j,1 + ... + j,s−1 ) εj,s
                             s=1
                                        λj,s     λj,s                                    s=1
                                                                                                    λj,s     λj,s
                              t                                                           t
                                                                                  !!                                                               !!
                             X          λj,1     λ                                      X           λj,1     λ
                + 2νj2                       ηj + j (j,1 + ... + j,s−1 )                      Aj +      ηj + j (j,1 + ... + j,s−1 )
                                s=1
                                        λj,s     λj,s                                    s=1
                                                                                                     λj,s     λj,s
                            t
                                                                                               !
                            X              λj,1     λ
                =   νj2 t             Aj +      ηj + j (j,1 + j,2 + ... + j,s−1 ) εj,s
                            s=1
                                           λj,s     λj,s
                             t
                                                                                               !
                            X              λj,1     λ
                −   νj3 t             Aj +      ηj + j (j,1 + j,2 + ... + j,s−1 ) .
                            s=1
                                           λj,s     λj,s

Notice that in the expressions above, νjn is multiplied by other random variables which are not
correlated with νjn . Thus, the expectations of all these expressions are zero. Then we are left
with                                h           i
                                  E M      e j,t = E [Mj,t Ωj,t ] .
                                      fj,t Ω

We already know from the proof of Lemma 1 that E [Mj,t Ωj,t ] > 0.


Proof. (Lemma 3)
                                           h                i         λ2j,1 2        λ2j
                                       V ar Âj,t − Aj          =            σ +          (t − 1) σ2j
                                                                      λj,t 2 ηj λj,t 2
                                                                      λj,1     λj
                                                                =          2
                                                                             +        (t − 1)
                                                                      λj,t     λj,t 2
                                                                       1
                                                                =          ,
                                                                      λj,t
            h               i                             2            h           i      h                i2             h              i
Since E Âj,t − Aj = 0, E                      Âj,t − Aj          = V ar Âj,t − Aj + E Âj,t − Aj                   = V ar Âj,t − Aj =
                                                                                                                                      2 
  1
λj (t) .   Note that λj,t = λj,1 + (t − 1) λj increases with experience. Thus, E                                          Âj,t − Aj      ,
                                h                 i
which is equal to E (rj,t − Aj )2 , declines with age.


Proof. (Proposition 2) Note that the probability of switching occupation in period t is given
by                                     Y
                Pr (rt 6= rt−1 ) = 1 −   Prob (rj,t−1 − κj ≤ rj,t < rj,t−1 + κj )
                                                            j




                                                                      55
                                          Y                                                              
                                 =1−              Prob Âj,t−1 − κj ≤ Âj,t < Âj,t−1 + κj .
                                              j
                                                                                            
Now look at the term Prob Âj,t−1 − κj ≤ Âj,t < Âj,t−1 + κj . Inserting

                                                        λj,t−1          λ
                                          Âj,t =              Âj,t−1 + j (Aj + j,t−1 )
                                                         λj,t           λj,t

and
                                                           λj,t = λj,t−1 + λj ,
we obtain
                                                                                
                     Prob Âj,t−1 − κj ≤ Âj,t < Âj,t−1 + κj
                                                                                                  !
                            λj,t                           λj,t
                 = Prob −κj     ≤ Aj − Âj,t−1 + j,t−1 < κj
                            λj                              λj
                                                                                                                          !
                            λj,t                           λj,t             
                 = Prob −κj     − Aj − Âj,t−1 ≤ j,t−1 < κj     − Aj − Âj,t−1 .
                            λj                              λj

Letting F be the cumulative distribution function of a normal variable with mean zero, and not-
ing that normal distribution with mean zero is symmetric around zero, F (M + x)−F (−M + x)
declines with |x|. Since x2 and |x| move in the same direction, probability of staying in an oc-
                                                                   2
cupation declines with mismatch Aj − Âj,t−1                             .
   Now evaluate the unconditional probability of staying in an occupation:
                                                                                    
                         Prob Âj,t−1 − κj ≤ Âj,t < Âj,t−1 + κj
                                                                                                      !
                               λj,t                           λj,t
                    = Prob −κj     ≤ Aj − Âj,t−1 + j,t−1 < κj
                               λj                              λj
                                                                                                                       
                                              s                                                           s
                                                 λj,t−1 λj,t   Aj − Âj,t−1 + j,t−1                         λj,t−1 λj,t 
                           −κj
                    = Prob                                   ≤                       < κj
                                                                    r                                                     
                                                      λj                 λj,t                                    λj     
                                                                             λj,t−1 λ


Remember that Aj − Âj,t−1is normally distributed
                                                with mean zero and variance 1/λj,t−1 (see
proof of Lemma 3). Thus, Aj − Âj,t−1 + j,t−1 is normally distributed with mean zero and
                                                                                           r
             1          1          λj,t                                                          λj,t−1 λ
variance   λj,t−1   +   λ   =   λj,t−1 λ .      Thus, Aj − Âj,t−1 + j,t−1 ×                    λj,t       is normally distributed
with mean zero and variance one. Since both λj,t and λj,t−1 increases with age, probability of
staying in the last period’s occupation increases and probability of switching decreases with
age.




                                                                    56
Proof. (Lemma 4) Probability of switching to an occupation with higher skill-j intensity is
                                                                        
                                   up
                                  πj,t = Prob Âj,t > Âj,t−1 + κj
                                                                                      !
                                                               λj,t              
                                        = Prob j,t       > κj     − Aj − Âj,t−1
                                                               λj
                                                                                    !
                                                               λj,t
                                        = Prob j,t       > κj      − (Aj − rj,t−1 ) .
                                                               λj

Note that probability of switching to an occupation with higher skill-j intensity increases with
(Aj − rj,t−1 ). Thus, to the extent that the worker is overqualified, he will switch to a higher
skill occupation. The probability of switching to a lower skill occupation is given by
                                down
                               πj,t  = Prob (Aj,t < Aj,t−1 − κj )
                                                                                           !
                                                                λj,t              
                                         = Prob j,t      < −κj     − Aj − Âj,t−1
                                                                λj
                                                                                        !
                                                                λj,t
                                         = Prob j,t      < −κj      − (Aj − rj,t−1 ) .
                                                                λj
                                                             up      down when A − r
Using these two equations above, it is easy to observe that πj,t > πj,t            j    j,t−1 > 0.
Similar proof can be made for the case rj,t−1 −Aj > 0. But we skip it for the sake of brevity.




Proof. (Proposition 3) Using equation 8, we obtain

                                                         λj                       
                                    Âj,t − Âj,t−1 =          Aj − Âj,t−1 + j,t−1 .
                                                         λj,t

Using rj,t = Âj,t implies

                                                        λj                  λ
                                   rj,t − rj,t−1 =           (Aj − rj,t−1 ) + j j,t−1 .
                                                        λj,t                 λj,t
                                                                                               λj
Thus, conditional on Aj − rj,t−1 , rj,t − rj,t−1 is normally distributed with mean             λj,t   (Aj − rj,t−1 )
                         2
                   λj
and variance       λj,t        σ2j .


A.2      Baseline Model vs. Ben-Porath Version
    In the baseline model of Section 2, the occupation/human capital choice problem is a static
one. To see this most clearly, we consider a simplified version of the model with a single skill and
where ability is observed. In this model, the lifetime problem not only reduces to a static one,
but the decision rule does not change over time. Next we show that the Ben-Porath version
of the same model features an occupation/human capital choice that changes every period,

                                                             57
underscoring the dynamic nature of the decision. The following derivations establish these
results. These results extend straightforwardly to the case with multiple skills and Bayesian
learning at the expense of much more complicated algebra. (These results are available upon
request).

Baseline Model with No Learning
       Let us write the problem of the individual sequentially, starting from the last period of life.
                                                                       !
                                                           r2
                                  VT (hT ) = max hT + ArT − T              .
                                              rT            2
Now insert this into the following problem
                                                               !                               !
                                                   r2                            r2
              VT −1 (hT −1 ) = max hT −1 + ArT −1 − T −1           + β hT + ArT − T
                               rT −1                 2                            2

s.t.
                                                                               !
                                                                 r2
                              hj,T   = (1 − δ) hj,T −1 + ArT −1 − T −1             .
                                                                   2
Inserting the law of motion into the objective function, we obtain
                                                                                   !                 !
                                                              r2                                r2
          VT −1 (hT −1 ) = max (1 + β(1 − δ)) hT −1 + ArT −1 − T −1                    + β ArT − T
                           rT −1                                2                                2

The problem in period T − 1 does not depend on any period-T variables or affect any decision
in period T . This is because the occupation choice/human capital accumulation decision does
not depend on the stock of human capital—it only depends on the workers’ ability level, which
does not change over time. Consequently, the decision rule in period T − 1 would be the same
if we just ignored period T and just solved
                                                                   !
                                                         r2
                                     max hT −1 + ArT −1 − T −1         .
                                     rT −1                 2

       It can be shown that the solution is the same in all periods and given by

                                              rt = A    ∀t.                                              (12)




                                                   58
Ben-Porath with No Learning
   In Ben-Porath the wage equation is the same as in our baseline model (with a single skill):
          r2
wt = ht − 2t . The lifetime maximization problem is

                                                   T
                                               "                           #
                                                                        r2
                                                                   (ht − t )
                                                   X
                                                             t−1
                                   max E0                β
                                  {rt }T
                                       t=1         t=1
                                                                         2
                                     s.t.
                                    ht+1 = (1 − δ) (ht + Art )

   This model corresponds to the standard Ben-Porath formulation with a quadratic cost
function. Following the same steps as above, the solution can be shown to be:

                                              T −t
                                                     (β(1 − δ))s A,
                                              X
                                      rt =
                                              s=1

which unlike the solution in (12) is not constant and changes every period. This is due to the
intertemporal trade-off noted above inherent in the Ben-Porath model.

Mismatch in the Ben-Porath Model
    Note that both positive and negative past mismatch reduces current wage in our model.
Ben-Porath model on the other hand has different implications for positive and negative past
mismatch. In particular, it implies that positive past mismatch (worker being over-qualified in
past occupations) reduces the current wage and negative past mismatch (worker being under-
qualified in past occupations) increases the current wage. Abstracting from multi-dimensions
for simplicity, note that the optimal occupational choice of a worker in period t under perfect
information, denoted by rt∗ , is given by
                                              T −t
                                      rt∗ =          (β(1 − δ))s A.
                                              X

                                              s=1

Under Bayesian Learning, assuming the same information structure as in our model, the
worker’s optimal choice is given by
                                              T −t
                                                     (β(1 − δ))s Ât ,
                                              X
                                     rt =
                                              s=1

where Ât is the mean belief of worker’s ability in period t.
                                                                                     rt2
    Substituting ht = (1 − δ) (ht−1 + (A + t−1 ) rt−1 ) repeatedly into wt = ht −    2    and assuming
zero depreciation gives
                                           t−1       t−1
                                                                 r2
                                                          s rs − t .
                                           X         X
                               wt = h1 + A     rs +
                                           s=1       s=1
                                                                  2




                                                       59
                               Pt−1    ∗
By adding and subtracting A       s=1 rs ,   we obtain the following wage equation
                                    t−1              t−1                     t−1
                                                                                             rt2
                                          rs∗              (rs∗
                                    X                X                       X
                      wt = h1 + A               −A                − rs ) +         s rs −       .
                                    s=1              s=1                     s=1
                                                                                             2

Note here that a worker would be overqualified (underqualified) in his occupation in period s if
rs∗ > rs (rs∗ < rs ), i.e. his occupation’s skill requirement is below (above) his ideal occupation’s
skill requirement. Thus, if a worker is overqualified in the past, he earns lower wages today as
in our model. Key difference comes when a worker is underqualified in the past. In our model,
he still earns less wages today. But in the Ben-Porath model, he earns more wages since he
would be accumulating more human capital than he would in his ideal occupation.




                                                      60
B     Additional Tables
B.1   Descriptive Statistics for Mismatch Measure

          Table B.1 – Descriptive Statistics for Mismatch Measure

                                                      Mismatch
         Group Name                                Mean Std. Dev.
         All Observations                          1.56      1
         By Educational Group
           Less than High School                   1.50    1.13
           High School                             1.63    1.00
           Some College                            1.52    0.96
         By Race
           Hispanic                                1.61    1.05
           Black                                   1.52    1.02
           Non-Black, Non-Hispanic                 1.56    0.99
         By Industry
           Agriculture, Forestry, Fisheries        1.59    1.15
           Mining                                  1.63    1.02
           Construction                            1.70    1.13
           Manufacturing                           1.57    1.00
           Transportation, Communications, Util.   1.47    0.90
           Wholesale and Retail Trade              1.57    0.93
           Finance, Insurance and Real Estate      1.37    0.86
           Business and Repair Services            1.63    0.99
           Personal Services                       1.68    1.08
           Entertainment and Recreation Services   1.92    1.20
           Professional and Related Services       1.46    0.94
           Public Administration                   1.49    0.97




                                    61
B.2     Regression Tables
                 Table B.2 – Wage Regressions with Mismatch (Full Results)
                                  (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
                               IV-GLS       IV-GLS       IV-GLS         GLS          GLS          GLS
Mismatch                      -0.0205∗∗∗   -0.0091∗     -0.0054      -0.0196∗∗∗   -0.0136∗∗∗   -0.0128∗∗
                              (0.0031)     (0.0052)     (0.0062)     (0.0030)     (0.0042)     (0.0050)
Mismatch × Occ Tenure                      -0.0020∗∗∗   -0.0022∗∗                 -0.0010∗∗    -0.0007
                                           (0.0007)     (0.0009)                  (0.0005)     (0.0007)
Cumul Mismatch                                          -0.0374∗∗∗                             -0.0383∗∗∗
                                                        (0.0043)                               (0.0042)
Worker Ability (Mean)          0.3015∗∗∗    0.3044∗∗∗    0.4095∗∗∗    0.3094∗∗∗    0.3101∗∗∗    0.3987∗∗∗
                              (0.0252)     (0.0253)     (0.0303)     (0.0208)     (0.0208)     (0.0252)
Worker Ability × Occ Tenure    0.0115∗∗∗    0.0109∗∗∗    0.0072∗∗     0.0090∗∗∗    0.0088∗∗∗    0.0081∗∗∗
                              (0.0028)     (0.0028)     (0.0036)     (0.0019)     (0.0019)     (0.0026)
Occ Reqs (Mean)                0.0977∗∗∗    0.0962∗∗∗    0.0878∗∗∗    0.1383∗∗∗    0.1374∗∗∗    0.1426∗∗∗
                              (0.0217)     (0.0217)     (0.0254)     (0.0188)     (0.0188)     (0.0221)
Occ Reqs × Occ Tenure          0.0144∗∗∗    0.0144∗∗∗    0.0182∗∗∗    0.0084∗∗∗    0.0084∗∗∗    0.0092∗∗∗
                              (0.0027)     (0.0027)     (0.0034)     (0.0019)     (0.0019)     (0.0024)
Emp Tenure                    -0.0107∗∗∗   -0.0106∗∗    -0.0081       0.0034       0.0034       0.0062
                              (0.0041)     (0.0041)     (0.0054)     (0.0033)     (0.0033)     (0.0044)
Emp Tenure2 × 100              0.0572∗∗∗    0.0571∗∗∗    0.0538∗     -0.0138      -0.0136      -0.0255
                              (0.0219)     (0.0219)     (0.0322)     (0.0184)     (0.0184)     (0.0274)
Occ Tenure                     0.0014       0.0050       0.0052       0.0288∗∗∗    0.0307∗∗∗    0.0299∗∗∗
                              (0.0049)     (0.0051)     (0.0065)     (0.0039)     (0.0040)     (0.0051)
Occ Tenure2 × 100             -0.0812∗∗    -0.0841∗∗    -0.0963∗     -0.1388∗∗∗   -0.1416∗∗∗   -0.1302∗∗∗
                              (0.0414)     (0.0414)     (0.0566)     (0.0353)     (0.0353)     (0.0486)
Occ Tenure3 × 100              0.0012       0.0013       0.0021       0.0018∗∗     0.0019∗∗     0.0017
                              (0.0010)     (0.0010)     (0.0015)     (0.0009)     (0.0009)     (0.0013)
Experience                     0.0550∗∗∗    0.0551∗∗∗    0.0431∗∗∗    0.0402∗∗∗    0.0402∗∗∗    0.0308∗∗∗
                              (0.0055)     (0.0055)     (0.0094)     (0.0052)     (0.0052)     (0.0085)
Experience2 × 100             -0.1427∗∗∗   -0.1434∗∗∗   -0.0707      -0.0917∗∗    -0.0921∗∗    -0.0380
                              (0.0375)     (0.0375)     (0.0574)     (0.0358)     (0.0358)     (0.0529)
Experience3 × 100              0.0013∗      0.0013∗      0.0001       0.0006       0.0006      -0.0003
                              (0.0008)     (0.0008)     (0.0011)     (0.0007)     (0.0007)     (0.0010)
Old Job                       -0.0328∗∗∗   -0.0328∗∗∗   -0.0319∗∗∗   -0.0326∗∗∗   -0.0326∗∗∗   -0.0308∗∗∗
                              (0.0064)     (0.0064)     (0.0076)     (0.0060)     (0.0060)     (0.0071)
< High School                 -0.0744∗∗∗   -0.0752∗∗∗   -0.0678∗∗∗   -0.0643∗∗∗   -0.0648∗∗∗   -0.0571∗∗∗
                              (0.0123)     (0.0123)     (0.0148)     (0.0121)     (0.0121)     (0.0145)
4-Year College                 0.2642∗∗∗    0.2639∗∗∗    0.2321∗∗∗    0.2519∗∗∗    0.2518∗∗∗    0.2220∗∗∗
                              (0.0097)     (0.0097)     (0.0117)     (0.0096)     (0.0096)     (0.0115)
Hispanic                       0.0060       0.0059      -0.0033       0.0060       0.0059      -0.0009
                              (0.0141)     (0.0141)     (0.0168)     (0.0139)     (0.0139)     (0.0166)
Black                         -0.0700∗∗∗   -0.0697∗∗∗   -0.0815∗∗∗   -0.0674∗∗∗   -0.0673∗∗∗   -0.0788∗∗∗
                              (0.0120)     (0.0120)     (0.0141)     (0.0118)     (0.0118)     (0.0139)

                                              62
Constant                           4.0074∗∗∗  3.9945∗∗∗   4.0332∗∗∗  4.0050∗∗∗    3.9988∗∗∗    4.0429∗∗∗
                                  (0.0255)   (0.0259)    (0.0375)   (0.0246)     (0.0248)     (0.0348)
Observations                        41596      41596       30599      41596        41596        30599
All regressions include occupation and industry dummies.
∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1.
Standard errors in parentheses are estimated via GLS assuming AR(1) autocorrelation.




                                              63
         Table B.3 – Wage Regressions with Mismatch by Components (Full Results)
                                   (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
                                 IV-GLS       IV-GLS       IV-GLS        GLS          GLS          GLS
Mismatch Verbal                -0.0103***    0.0082       0.0133      -0.0104***    0.0032       0.0051
                               (0.0040)     (0.0069)     (0.0081)     (0.0039)     (0.0056)     (0.0067)
Mismatch Math                  -0.0108***   -0.0172**    -0.0193**    -0.0096**    -0.0178***   -0.0193***
                               (0.0040)     (0.0068)     (0.0081)     (0.0039)     (0.0055)     (0.0066)
Mismatch Social                -0.0027       0.0005       0.0055      -0.0021      -0.0012       0.0034
                               (0.0031)     (0.0054)     (0.0064)     (0.0031)     (0.0043)     (0.0052)
Mismatch Verbal × Occ Tenure                -0.0031***   -0.0043***                -0.0022***   -0.0028***
                                            (0.0009)     (0.0012)                  (0.0006)     (0.0008)
Mismatch Math × Occ Tenure                   0.0010       0.0020*                   0.0013**     0.0021**
                                            (0.0009)     (0.0012)                  (0.0007)     (0.0008)
Mismatch Social × Occ Tenure                -0.0005      -0.0007                   -0.0001      -0.0006
                                            (0.0007)     (0.0009)                  (0.0005)     (0.0006)
Cumul Mismatch Verbal                                    -0.0148***                             -0.0137**
                                                         (0.0057)                               (0.0056)
Cumul Mismatch Math                                      -0.0241***                             -0.0260***
                                                         (0.0055)                               (0.0054)
Cumul Mismatch Social                                    -0.0088**                              -0.0078*
                                                         (0.0043)                               (0.0042)
Verbal Ability                 -0.0622*     -0.0652*      0.0029      -0.0132      -0.0181      -0.0006
                               (0.0367)     (0.0367)     (0.0439)     (0.0298)     (0.0298)     (0.0361)
Math Ability                    0.3660***    0.3711***    0.4260***    0.3209***    0.3254***    0.4027***
                               (0.0371)     (0.0371)     (0.0443)     (0.0303)     (0.0303)     (0.0363)
Social Ability                  0.0997***    0.1003***    0.1078***    0.1046***    0.1046***    0.1230***
                               (0.0224)     (0.0224)     (0.0268)     (0.0181)     (0.0181)     (0.0218)
Verbal Ability × Occ Tenure     0.0128***    0.0129***    0.0083       0.0066**     0.0070**     0.0083**
                               (0.0043)     (0.0044)     (0.0055)     (0.0031)     (0.0031)     (0.0040)
Math Ability × Occ Tenure      -0.0051      -0.0060      -0.0066      -0.0016      -0.0024      -0.0045
                               (0.0044)     (0.0044)     (0.0054)     (0.0032)     (0.0032)     (0.0039)
Social Ability × Occ Tenure     0.0061**     0.0060**     0.0071**     0.0059***    0.0060***    0.0056**
                               (0.0027)     (0.0027)     (0.0034)     (0.0019)     (0.0019)     (0.0025)
Occ Reqs Verbal                 0.0190       0.0209      -0.0420       0.0761       0.0832       0.0211
                               (0.0742)     (0.0747)     (0.0910)     (0.0608)     (0.0610)     (0.0747)
Occ Reqs Math                   0.1313*      0.1244*      0.1772**     0.1176**     0.1080*      0.1731**
                               (0.0681)     (0.0686)     (0.0837)     (0.0557)     (0.0560)     (0.0685)
Occ Reqs Social                -0.1115***   -0.1084***   -0.1014***   -0.1064***   -0.1047***   -0.0966***
                               (0.0248)     (0.0248)     (0.0295)     (0.0208)     (0.0208)     (0.0248)
Occ Reqs Verbal × Occ Tenure   -0.0055      -0.0061       0.0034      -0.0184***   -0.0202***   -0.0123
                               (0.0101)     (0.0103)     (0.0138)     (0.0070)     (0.0071)     (0.0096)
Occ Reqs Math × Occ Tenure      0.0138       0.0153       0.0077       0.0189***    0.0213***    0.0120
                               (0.0092)     (0.0094)     (0.0125)     (0.0064)     (0.0065)     (0.0087)
Occ Reqs Social × Occ Tenure    0.0095***    0.0088***    0.0115***    0.0112***    0.0108***    0.0134***
                               (0.0032)     (0.0032)     (0.0042)     (0.0022)     (0.0022)     (0.0030)


                                            64
Emp Tenure                          -0.0108*** -0.0108*** -0.0075       0.0036          0.0035       0.0065
                                    (0.0041)    (0.0041)   (0.0054)    (0.0033)        (0.0033)     (0.0044)
Emp Tenure2 × 100                    0.0576***   0.0580***  0.0497     -0.0166         -0.0157      -0.0264
                                    (0.0219)    (0.0219)   (0.0322)    (0.0184)        (0.0184)     (0.0274)
Occ Tenure                          -0.0024      0.0015     0.0014      0.0244***       0.0262***    0.0265***
                                    (0.0051)    (0.0053)   (0.0067)    (0.0040)        (0.0041)     (0.0053)
Occ Tenure2 × 100                   -0.0761*    -0.0798*   -0.0861     -0.1244***      -0.1277***   -0.1209**
                                    (0.0413)    (0.0414)   (0.0567)    (0.0353)        (0.0353)     (0.0487)
Occ Tenure3 × 100                    0.0012      0.0013     0.0019      0.0015*         0.0016*      0.0016
                                    (0.0010)    (0.0010)   (0.0015)    (0.0009)        (0.0009)     (0.0013)
Experience                           0.0568***   0.0568***  0.0439***   0.0420***       0.0420***    0.0323***
                                    (0.0055)    (0.0055)   (0.0094)    (0.0052)        (0.0052)     (0.0085)
Experience2 × 100                   -0.1516*** -0.1518*** -0.0749      -0.1019***      -0.1021***   -0.0481
                                    (0.0374)    (0.0374)   (0.0572)    (0.0357)        (0.0357)     (0.0528)
Experience3 × 100                    0.0015**    0.0015**   0.0001      0.0008          0.0008      -0.0001
                                    (0.0007)    (0.0007)   (0.0011)    (0.0007)        (0.0007)     (0.0010)
Old Job                             -0.0326*** -0.0326*** -0.0325*** -0.0324***        -0.0324***   -0.0313***
                                    (0.0064)    (0.0064)   (0.0076)    (0.0059)        (0.0059)     (0.0070)
< High School                       -0.0615*** -0.0620*** -0.0506*** -0.0524***        -0.0525***   -0.0418***
                                    (0.0125)    (0.0125)   (0.0150)    (0.0123)        (0.0123)     (0.0147)
4-Year College                       0.2578***   0.2580***  0.2239***   0.2466***       0.2469***    0.2146***
                                    (0.0098)    (0.0098)   (0.0119)    (0.0097)        (0.0097)     (0.0117)
Hispanic                             0.0078      0.0088     0.0039      0.0072          0.0082       0.0050
                                    (0.0142)    (0.0142)   (0.0169)    (0.0139)        (0.0139)     (0.0166)
Black                               -0.0626*** -0.0619*** -0.0690*** -0.0616***        -0.0611***   -0.0686***
                                    (0.0123)    (0.0123)   (0.0145)    (0.0121)        (0.0121)     (0.0143)
Constant                             4.0006***   3.9868***  4.0175***   3.9958***       3.9907***    4.0237***
                                    (0.0266)    (0.0272)   (0.0388)    (0.0256)        (0.0258)     (0.0358)
Observations                           41596       41596      30599       41596           41596        30599
All regressions include occupation and industry dummies.
∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1.
Standard errors in parentheses are estimated via GLS assuming AR(1) autocorrelation.


     Table B.4 – Wage Regressions with Positive and Negative Mismatch (Full Results)
                                       (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
                                    IV-GLS       IV-GLS       IV-GLS         GLS          GLS          GLS
Positive Mismatch                  -0.0072∗      0.0087       0.0141∗     -0.0074∗∗    -0.0015       0.0010
                                   (0.0038)     (0.0063)     (0.0077)     (0.0037)     (0.0051)     (0.0063)
Negative Negative                   0.0305∗∗∗    0.0172∗∗∗    0.0231∗∗∗    0.0276∗∗∗    0.0137∗∗∗    0.0195∗∗∗
                                   (0.0037)     (0.0061)     (0.0071)     (0.0037)     (0.0050)     (0.0059)
Positive Mismatch × Occ Tenure                  -0.0028∗∗∗   -0.0032∗∗∗                -0.0011∗     -0.0005
                                                (0.0009)     (0.0011)                  (0.0006)     (0.0008)
Negative Mismatch × Occ Tenure                   0.0023∗∗∗    0.0014                    0.0024∗∗∗    0.0022∗∗∗
                                                (0.0008)     (0.0011)                  (0.0006)     (0.0008)


                                                65
Cumul Positive Mismatch                                     -0.0145∗∗∗                              -0.0220∗∗∗
                                                            (0.0054)                                (0.0053)
Cumul Negative Mismatch                                      0.0159∗∗∗                               0.0085∗
                                                            (0.0051)                                (0.0050)
Emp Tenure                            -0.0106∗∗    -0.0105∗∗-0.0081      0.0034         0.0032       0.0054
                                      (0.0042)     (0.0042) (0.0055)    (0.0034)       (0.0034)     (0.0045)
Emp Tenure2 × 100                       0.0556∗∗    0.0554∗∗ 0.0521     -0.0131        -0.0110      -0.0146
                                      (0.0221)     (0.0221) (0.0325)    (0.0186)       (0.0186)     (0.0277)
Occ Tenure                              0.0123∗∗    0.0165∗∗∗0.0156∗∗    0.0350∗∗∗      0.0384∗∗∗    0.0391∗∗∗
                                      (0.0048)     (0.0050) (0.0063)    (0.0039)       (0.0040)     (0.0051)
Occ Tenure2 × 100                     -0.0513      -0.0552  -0.0695     -0.1115∗∗∗     -0.1188∗∗∗   -0.1288∗∗∗
                                      (0.0417)     (0.0417) (0.0573)    (0.0356)       (0.0356)     (0.0492)
            3
Occ Tenure × 100                        0.0006      0.0007   0.0014      0.0013         0.0014       0.0019
                                      (0.0010)     (0.0010) (0.0015)    (0.0009)       (0.0009)     (0.0013)
Experience                              0.0527∗∗∗   0.0529∗∗∗0.0422∗∗∗   0.0394∗∗∗      0.0393∗∗∗    0.0312∗∗∗
                                      (0.0056)     (0.0056) (0.0096)    (0.0053)       (0.0053)     (0.0087)
Experience2 × 100                     -0.1321∗∗∗ -0.1333∗∗∗ -0.0669     -0.0910∗∗      -0.0911∗∗    -0.0463
                                      (0.0381)     (0.0381) (0.0585)    (0.0364)       (0.0364)     (0.0539)
Experience3 × 100                       0.0011      0.0012   0.0000      0.0006         0.0007      -0.0001
                                      (0.0008)     (0.0008) (0.0011)    (0.0007)       (0.0007)     (0.0010)
Old Job                               -0.0336∗∗∗ -0.0337∗∗∗ -0.0327∗∗∗  -0.0331∗∗∗     -0.0332∗∗∗   -0.0314∗∗∗
                                      (0.0065)     (0.0065) (0.0077)    (0.0060)       (0.0060)     (0.0071)
                                               ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
< High School                         -0.1390      -0.1397  -0.1424∗∗∗  -0.1303∗∗∗     -0.1311∗∗∗   -0.1380∗∗∗
                                      (0.0122)     (0.0122) (0.0148)    (0.0121)       (0.0121)     (0.0146)
                                               ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
4-Year College                          0.3421      0.3413   0.3183∗∗∗   0.3285∗∗∗      0.3273∗∗∗    0.3067∗∗∗
                                      (0.0095)     (0.0095) (0.0115)    (0.0094)       (0.0094)     (0.0113)
Hispanic                              -0.0321∗∗    -0.0319∗∗-0.0414∗∗   -0.0313∗∗      -0.0314∗∗    -0.0417∗∗
                                      (0.0143)     (0.0143) (0.0171)    (0.0141)       (0.0141)     (0.0169)
Black                                 -0.1389∗∗∗ -0.1382∗∗∗ -0.1591∗∗∗  -0.1365∗∗∗     -0.1359∗∗∗   -0.1609∗∗∗
                                      (0.0119)     (0.0119) (0.0143)    (0.0118)       (0.0118)     (0.0141)
                                               ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
Constant                                4.1698      4.1533   4.1903∗∗∗   4.1751∗∗∗      4.1653∗∗∗    4.2080∗∗∗
                                      (0.0233)     (0.0237) (0.0362)    (0.0227)       (0.0229)     (0.0336)
Observations                             41596       41596    30599       41596          41596        30599
All regressions include occupation and industry dummies.
∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1.
Standard errors in parentheses are estimated via GLS assuming AR(1) autocorrelation.




                                              66
      Table B.5 – Regressions for Probability of Occupational Switch (Full Results)
                                  (1)        (2)          (3)            (4)         (5)          (6)
                               LPM-IV      LPM-IV       LPM-IV          LPM         LPM          LPM
Mismatch                       0.0135∗∗∗                              0.0066∗∗∗
                              (0.0023)                               (0.0018)
Mismatch Verbal                             0.0076∗∗∗                              0.0053∗∗
                                           (0.0028)                               (0.0022)
Mismatch Math                               0.0074∗∗∗                              0.0025
                                           (0.0028)                               (0.0022)
Mismatch Social                             0.0007                                -0.0012
                                           (0.0022)                               (0.0017)
Positive Mismatch                                        0.0134∗∗∗                              0.0087∗∗∗
                                                        (0.0027)                               (0.0022)
Negative Mismatch                                       -0.0130∗∗∗                             -0.0028
                                                        (0.0027)                               (0.0021)
Worker Ability (Mean)         -0.0370∗∗∗   -0.0370∗∗∗                -0.0208∗     -0.0211∗
                              (0.0134)     (0.0134)                  (0.0116)     (0.0116)
Worker Ability × Occ Tenure   -0.0003      -0.0003                    0.0019∗∗     0.0020∗∗
                              (0.0018)     (0.0018)                  (0.0009)     (0.0009)
Occ Reqs (Mean)               -0.0333∗∗    -0.0334∗∗                 -0.1225∗∗∗   -0.1223∗∗∗
                              (0.0146)     (0.0146)                  (0.0125)     (0.0125)
Occ Reqs × Occ Tenure         -0.0052∗∗∗   -0.0052∗∗∗                 0.0106∗∗∗    0.0106∗∗∗
                              (0.0018)     (0.0018)                  (0.0009)     (0.0009)
Emp Tenure                     0.0039       0.0039       0.0040      -0.0064∗∗∗   -0.0063∗∗∗   -0.0071∗∗∗
                              (0.0029)     (0.0029)     (0.0029)     (0.0017)     (0.0017)     (0.0017)
Emp Tenure2 × 100             -0.0189      -0.0189      -0.0192       0.0301∗∗∗    0.0300∗∗∗    0.0327∗∗∗
                              (0.0161)     (0.0161)     (0.0161)     (0.0090)     (0.0090)     (0.0090)
Occ Tenure                     0.0996∗∗∗    0.0996∗∗∗    0.0966∗∗∗   -0.0547∗∗∗   -0.0547∗∗∗   -0.0495∗∗∗
                              (0.0038)     (0.0038)     (0.0037)     (0.0023)     (0.0023)     (0.0022)
Occ Tenure2 × 100             -0.5452∗∗∗   -0.5453∗∗∗   -0.5474∗∗∗    0.3248∗∗∗    0.3248∗∗∗    0.3406∗∗∗
                              (0.0365)     (0.0365)     (0.0363)     (0.0185)     (0.0185)     (0.0184)
Occ Tenure3 × 100              0.0122∗∗∗    0.0122∗∗∗    0.0122∗∗∗   -0.0066∗∗∗   -0.0066∗∗∗   -0.0070∗∗∗
                              (0.0010)     (0.0010)     (0.0010)     (0.0004)     (0.0004)     (0.0004)
Experience                    -0.0626∗∗∗   -0.0625∗∗∗   -0.0619∗∗∗    0.0132∗∗∗    0.0133∗∗∗    0.0134∗∗∗
                              (0.0028)     (0.0028)     (0.0028)     (0.0024)     (0.0024)     (0.0024)
Experience2 × 100              0.2355∗∗∗    0.2355∗∗∗    0.2312∗∗∗   -0.1297∗∗∗   -0.1299∗∗∗   -0.1312∗∗∗
                              (0.0212)     (0.0212)     (0.0211)     (0.0171)     (0.0171)     (0.0172)
Experience3 × 100             -0.0036∗∗∗   -0.0036∗∗∗   -0.0035∗∗∗    0.0027∗∗∗    0.0027∗∗∗    0.0027∗∗∗
                              (0.0005)     (0.0005)     (0.0005)     (0.0004)     (0.0004)     (0.0004)
Old Job                        0.1506∗∗∗    0.1506∗∗∗    0.1508∗∗∗    0.0069       0.0069       0.0063
                              (0.0056)     (0.0056)     (0.0056)     (0.0051)     (0.0051)     (0.0051)
< High School                  0.0413∗∗∗    0.0414∗∗∗    0.0505∗∗∗    0.0090       0.0091       0.0180∗∗∗
                              (0.0087)     (0.0087)     (0.0085)     (0.0070)     (0.0070)     (0.0069)
4-Year College                -0.0433∗∗∗   -0.0435∗∗∗   -0.0551∗∗∗   -0.0040      -0.0042      -0.0093∗∗
                              (0.0060)     (0.0060)     (0.0059)     (0.0047)     (0.0047)     (0.0046)


                                              67
Hispanic                          0.0044      0.0044        0.0104       0.0068       0.0067       0.0092
                                 (0.0095)    (0.0095)      (0.0094)     (0.0074)     (0.0075)     (0.0074)
Black                             0.0108      0.0107        0.0207∗∗∗    0.0029       0.0027       0.0104∗
                                 (0.0080)    (0.0080)      (0.0079)     (0.0064)     (0.0064)     (0.0063)
Constant                          0.1474∗∗∗   0.1486∗∗∗     0.0871∗∗∗    0.3702∗∗∗    0.3727∗∗∗    0.2918∗∗∗
                                 (0.0250)    (0.0252)      (0.0221)     (0.0206)     (0.0208)     (0.0182)
Observations                       41,596      41,596        41,596       41,596       41,596       41,596
All regressions include occupation and industry dummies.
Robust standard errors in parentheses. ∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1.




                                                 68
Table B.6 – Regressions for Direction of Occupational Switch (Full Results)
                                     (1)        (2)           (3)          (4)
                                  Average      Verbal        Math         Social
    Last Mismatch Positive        0.0751∗∗∗
                                 (0.0028)
    Last Mismatch Negative        0.1143∗∗∗
                                 (0.0030)
    Last Pos. Mismatch, Verbal                 0.0316∗∗∗    0.0097∗∗     0.0143∗∗∗
                                              (0.0043)     (0.0046)     (0.0046)
    Last Neg. Mismatch, Verbal                 0.0838∗∗∗    0.0536∗∗∗    0.0216∗∗∗
                                              (0.0053)     (0.0056)     (0.0057)
    Last Pos. Mismatch, Math                   0.0599∗∗∗    0.0898∗∗∗    0.0021
                                              (0.0044)     (0.0047)     (0.0048)
    Last Neg. Mismatch, Math                   0.0558∗∗∗    0.0893∗∗∗    0.0076
                                              (0.0050)     (0.0053)     (0.0054)
    Last Pos. Mismatch, Social                 0.0061∗      0.0046       0.0774∗∗∗
                                              (0.0033)     (0.0035)     (0.0035)
    Last Neg. Mismatch, Social                 0.0264∗∗∗    0.0166∗∗∗    0.1043∗∗∗
                                              (0.0037)     (0.0039)     (0.0039)
    Employer Tenure              -0.0044      -0.0034      -0.0099∗     -0.0055
                                 (0.0053)     (0.0056)     (0.0057)     (0.0046)
    Employer Tenure2 × 100        0.0127       0.0052       0.0603∗      0.0278
                                 (0.0319)     (0.0339)     (0.0343)     (0.0278)
    Occupational Tenure           0.0011       0.0007      -0.0043       0.0005
                                 (0.0065)     (0.0069)     (0.0070)     (0.0057)
    Occupational Tenure2 × 100   -0.0226      -0.0310       0.0924      -0.0067
                                 (0.0727)     (0.0772)     (0.0780)     (0.0633)
    Occupational Tenure3 × 100    0.0008       0.0012      -0.0030       0.0003
                                 (0.0022)     (0.0023)     (0.0023)     (0.0019)
    Experience                    0.0025       0.0038       0.0041       0.0045
                                 (0.0037)     (0.0039)     (0.0039)     (0.0032)
    Experience2 × 100            -0.0010      -0.0001      -0.0212      -0.0175
                                 (0.0321)     (0.0341)     (0.0344)     (0.0279)
    Experience3 × 100            -0.0001      -0.0003       0.0003       0.0002
                                 (0.0008)     (0.0008)     (0.0008)     (0.0007)
    Old Job                      -0.0065      -0.0071       0.0063      -0.0057
                                 (0.0095)     (0.0101)     (0.0102)     (0.0083)
    < High School                 0.1256∗∗∗    0.1290∗∗∗    0.0764∗∗∗    0.1163∗∗∗
                                 (0.0091)     (0.0096)     (0.0097)     (0.0079)
    4-Year College               -0.1607∗∗∗   -0.1508∗∗∗   -0.1142∗∗∗   -0.1498∗∗∗
                                 (0.0087)     (0.0092)     (0.0093)     (0.0075)
    Hispanic                      0.0651∗∗∗    0.0694∗∗∗    0.0096       0.0538∗∗∗
                                 (0.0115)     (0.0122)     (0.0124)     (0.0100)
    Black                         0.1283∗∗∗    0.1340∗∗∗    0.0397∗∗∗    0.1136∗∗∗
                                 (0.0094)     (0.0100)     (0.0101)     (0.0082)


                                        69
           Constant                        0.2849∗∗∗   0.2395∗∗∗     0.3001∗∗∗    0.2754∗∗∗
                                          (0.0262)    (0.0278)      (0.0281)     (0.0227)
           Observations                      6,594       6,594         6,594        6,594
           All regressions include occupation and industry dummies.
           Robust standard errors in parentheses. † p < 0.10, ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01.



C      Data
C.1      Panel Construction and Sample Selection
    To construct annual panel data for our main analysis, we use NLSY79’s Work History Data
File, which records individuals’ employment histories up to five jobs on a weekly basis from
1978 to 2010. Following the approach by Neal (1999) and Pavan (2011), we calculate total
hours worked for each job within a year from the information of usual hours worked per week
and the number of weeks worked for each job. Then, we define primary jobs for each individual
for each year as the one for which an individual spent the most hours worked within the year.
We construct panel data with annual frequency (from 1978 to 2010) from a series of observa-
tions of primary jobs and out-of-labor-force status for each individual. The annually reported
demographic information and detailed information of employment (occupation, industry, and
hourly wage) are merged with the panels.39
Occupational Codes Before we merge the occupation information with the panel data, we
clean occupational titles. In NLSY79, every year individuals report their occupations for up to
five jobs that they had since their last interviews. Also, NLSY79 provides a mapping between
five jobs reported in the current interview and those reported in the last interview if any of them
are the same. Using the mapping of jobs across interviews, we first create an employment spell
for each job. We then assign, to each employment spell, an occupation code that is most often
observed during the spell. This approach is similar to the one by Kambourov and Manovskii
(2009b), in which an occupational switch is considered as genuine only when it is accompanied
with a job switch. Since the classifications of occupations are not consistent across years, we
converted all the occupational codes into the Census 1990 Three-Digit Occupation Code before
the cleaning.40
Industry Codes To clean the industry codes, we take the similar approach as the one for
occupation codes. Since industry codes are also reported in the different classifications across
years, we use our own crosswalk to convert them into the Census 1970 One-Digit Industry
Code.41 After the conversion into the Census 1970 Code, we clean the industry titles by using
  39
      More precisely, in NLSY79, the information except weekly employment status is reported annually
from 1979 to 1994, and biannually, from 1996 to 2010.
   40
      NLSY79 reports workers’ occupational titles in the Census 1970 Three-Digit Occupation Code until
2000. After 2000, they are reported in the Census 2000 Three-Digit Occupation Code. All of those codes
are converted to the Census 1990 Three-Digit Occupation Code using the crosswalks provided by the
Minnesota Population Center (http://usa.ipums.org/usa/volii/occ_ind.shtml).
   41
      Industry codes are reported in the Census 1970 Industry Classification Code before 1994, in the
Census 1980 Industry Classification Code for the year 1994, and in the Census 2000 Industry Classifi-
cation Code after 2000. The crosswalk is presented in Appendix C.3.

                                                 70
job spells. We use those one-digit level industry codes to create industry dummies used in our
regression analysis.
Employer and Occupational Switches We identify an employer switch when the pri-
mary job for an individual is different from the one in the last year. We identify occupational
switches when the occupation in his primary job is different from the one in last year’s primary
job.
Labor Market Experience, Employer and Occupational Tenure As we will dis-
cuss below, we drop the individuals who have already been in labor markets when the survey
started. We then set individuals’ experience equal to zero when a worker is entering labor
markets, and increase it by one every year when the worker reports a job. Employer and occu-
pational tenure increase by one every year when the individual reports a job and are reset to
zero when switches happen.
Wages Worker’s wages are measured by the usual rate of pay for the primary job at the
time of interview. These wages include tips, overtime and bonuses before deductions and are
converted to an hourly rate using usual hours worked when not reported as such. All the wages
are deflated by the price index for personal consumption expenditures into real term in the
2000 dollars. We drop the observations if their wages are missing. We also drop the top 0.1%
and the bottom 0.1% of observations in the wage distribution in each round of the interview.
This trimming strategy doesn’t affect the regression result.42
Sample Selection We follow the approach by Farber and Gibbons (1996) for the sample
selection. We first limit our sample to the individuals who make their initial long-term transition
from school to labor markets during the survey period: that is, we drop those who work more
than 1,200 hours in the initial year of the survey. We also focus on the individuals who
work more than 1,200 hours at least for two consecutive years during the survey period. The
individuals who are in the military service more than two years during the period are also
eliminated from our sample. For the individuals who go back to school from the labor force
during the survey period, we assume they start their career from the point they reenter labor
markets, and drop the observations before that time. Also, the observations after the last time
an individual report a job are eliminated. Furthermore, we drop individuals who are weakly
attached to the labor force: those who are out of the labor force more than once before they
work at least 10 years after they started their career. If an individual is out of the labor force
only for one year after he started his career, or if he has worked more than 10 years before he
first dropped from the labor force, we only drop those observations. Finally, we restrict our
sample to those who have a valid occupation and industry code, who have valid demographics
information, who are equal to or above age 16 and not currently enrolled in a school, and who
have valid ASVAB scores and valid wage information. The number of the remaining individuals
and observations after applying each sample selection criterion are summarized in Table C.1.
    Descriptive statistics for the sample are reported in Table C.2. Because of the nature of
the survey, which starts with workers when they are young in the workforce, the sample skews
younger. As a result, the mean length of employer tenure in our sample is relatively short,
although this is a well-understood point about the NLSY79 in the literature.43
  42
       Similarly, Pavan (2011) drops the top ten and the bottom ten observations in the entire sample.
  43
       Both Parent (2000) and Pavan (2011) report mean employer tenure in the NLSY79 that ranges

                                                  71
                 Table C.1 – Sample Selection, NLSY79, 1978 - 2010

                                                                Remaining      Remaining
  Criterion for Sample Selection                                Individuals   Observations
  Male Cross-Sectional Sample                                     3,003          99,099
  Started career after the survey started                         2,408          79,242
  Work more than 1,200 hours for two consecutive periods          2,311          65,041
  Not in the military service more than or equal to two years     2,261          63,529
  Drop the observations before they go back to school             2,261          63,477
  Drop the observations after the last time they worked           2,261          55,406
  Drop those who are weakly attached to labor force               2,095          49,154
  Valid occupation and industry code                              2,094          48,352
  Valid demographics information                                  2,093          48,328
  Drop those below age 16 and not enrolled in school              2,093          48,314
  Valid ASVAB scores                                              1,996          46,253
  Valid wage information                                          1,992          44,721
  Drop top 0.1% and bottom 0.1% in the wage distribution          1,992          44,591


        Table C.2 – Descriptive Statistics of the Sample, NLSY79, 1978–2010

    Statistics                             All Sample   ≤ High School     > High School
    Total number of observations               44,591           21,618            22,973
    Total number of individuals                 1,992              954             1,038

    Average age at the time of interview        33.79             32.85            34.67
    Highest education < high school            7.01%            14.45%                 -
    Highest education = high school           41.48%            85.55%                 -
    Highest education > high school           51.51%                  -         100.00%
    Highest education ≥ 4-year college        31.74%                  -          61.62%
    Percentage African-American               10.46%            13.81%            7.31%
    Percentage Hispanic                        6.53%             6.92%            6.16%

    Occupational mobility                     15.94%            18.10%           13.90%
    Occupational tenure (mean)                   6.50              6.17             6.81
    Occupational tenure (median)                 4.00              4.00             5.00
    Employer (job) mobility                   30.39%            31.97%           28.90%
    Employer (job) tenure (mean)                 3.61              3.56             3.65
    Employer (job) tenure (median)               2.00              2.00             2.00
    Average hours worked within a year         1983.8            1958.8           2007.2
Note: Occupational mobility is defined as the fraction of individuals who switch occupations
in a year. The same definition for employer mobility.


                                             72
                             Table C.3 – List of Skills in O*NET

                                      Verbal and Math Skills
            1.   Oral Comprehension                      2.   Written Comprehension
            3.   Deductive Reasoning                     4.   Inductive Reasoning
            5.   Information Ordering                    6.   Mathematical Reasoning
            7.   Number Facility                         8.   Reading Comprehension
            9.   Mathematics Skill                      10.   Science
           11.   Technology Design                      12.   Equipment Selection
           13.   Installation                           14.   Operation and Control
           15.   Equipment Maintenance                  16.   Troubleshooting
           17.   Repairing                              18.   Computers and Electronics
           19.   Engineering and Technology             20.   Building and Construction
           21.   Mechanical                             22.   Mathematics Knowledge
           23.   Physics                                24.   Chemistry
           25.   Biology                                26.   English Language
                                             Social Skills
            1.   Social Perceptiveness                   2. Coordination
            3.   Persuasion                              4. Negotiation
            5.   Instructing                             6. Service Orientation


C.2      O*NET skills
   The complete list of skills is in Table C.3.44 O*NET’s occupational classification is more
detailed than the codes in the NLSY79, which are based on the Three-Digit Census Occupation
Codes. We average scores over O*NET occupation codes that map to the same code in the
Census Three-Digit Level Occupation Classification.

C.3      The Crosswalk of Census Industry Codes
     We used the crosswalk in Table C.4 to convert the Census 1970, 1980, and 1990 Three-Digit
Industry Code to the Census 1970 One-Digit Industry Code. We use one-digit level industry
titles to create industry dummies used in our regression analysis. From the Census 1980 Three-
Digit Code to the Census 1970 One-Digit Code, we first aggregate the Census 1980 Three-Digit
level into the Census 1980 One-Digit level. Then, we combine Wholesale (500-571) and Retail
Trade (580-691) in the Census 1980 One-Digit Code to create the category 6, “Whole Sale and
Retail Trade”, in the Census 1970 One-Digit Code. For other one-digit-level industry titles,
the Census 1970 and 1980 have the same classification.
    Unlike the one between the Census 1970 and the Census 1980, the mapping is not straight-
forward from the Census 2000 to the Census 1970. Sometimes, the same industry titles in three-

from 3 to 3.3 years. The corresponding figure in our sample is 3.6 years, which is close.
   44
      For each descriptor, there is both a “level” and an “intensity” score. The ASVAB Career Exploration
Program, which we describe below, uses only intensity and so do we.

                                                   73
digit-level are put in different one-digit-level categories. For example, “Newspaper Publishers”
(code number 647 in the Census 2000) is in “Information and Communication” category in
the Census 2000, but is put in “Manufacturing” in the Census 1970. Therefore, we check all
the three-digit industry titles both in the Census 1970 and 2000 Industry Code, and made
necessary changes to create our own mapping. The obtained crosswalk is reported in Table
C.4.

Table C.4 – The Crosswalk across the Census 1970, 1980, and 1990 One-Digit Industry
Classification Code

  1970 One-Digit Classification                         1970      1980                        2000

  1.    Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing, and Hunting   017-029   010-031                     017-029
  2.    Mining                                        047-058   040-050                     037-049
  3.    Construction                                  067-078        60                         077
  4.    Manufacturing                                 107-398   100-392   107-399, 647-659, 678-679
  5.    Transportation, Communications,               407-499   400-472     57-69, 607-639, 667-669
        and Other Public Utilities
  6.    Wholesale and Retail Trade                    507-699   500-691            407-579, 868-869
  7.    Finance, Insurance and Real Estate            707-719   700-712                     687-719
  8.    Business and Repair Services                  727-767   721-760                877-879, 887
  9.    Personal Services                             769-799   761-791            866-867, 888-829
  10.   Entertainment and Recreation Services         807-817   800-802                     856-859
  11.   Professional and Related Services             828-899   812-892       677, 727-779, 786-847
  12.   Public Administration                         907-947   900-932                     937-959



D       Clustering
    For the benchmark results in Table II, we use the feasible generalized least square method
to compute standard errors allowing for possibilities of heteroskedasticity. However, Cameron
and Miller (2015) point out, the standard errors can be underestimated by the Huber-White
method if the error term and/or the explanatory variables are serially correlated. Therefore, in
this section, we compute the cluster-robust standard errors considering the errors uncorrelated
across individuals but correlated within individuals. The results with clustered standard errors
are shown in Table D.1. The significance of mismatch and cumulative mismatch are preserved
even when we use clustered standard errors.




                                                 74
       Table D.1 – Wage Regressions with Mismatch, Clustered Standard Errors

                                   (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)
                                 IV-CLU       IV-CLU      IV-CLU      OLS-CLU      OLS-CLU      OLS-CLU

  Mismatch                      -0.0271∗∗∗   -0.0145∗    -0.0054      -0.0254∗∗∗   -0.0214∗∗∗   -0.0147∗
  Mismatch × Occ Tenure                      -0.0020∗∗   -0.0024∗∗∗                -0.0006      -0.0006
  Cumul Mismatch                                         -0.0355∗∗∗                             -0.0364∗∗∗
  Worker Ability (Mean)          0.2466∗∗∗   0.2475∗∗∗    0.3408∗∗∗   0.2588∗∗∗    0.2585∗∗∗     0.3426∗∗∗
  Worker Ability × Occ Tenure    0.0166∗∗∗   0.0161∗∗∗    0.0140∗∗∗   0.0130∗∗∗    0.0129∗∗∗     0.0127∗∗
  Occ Reqs (Mean)                0.1529∗∗∗   0.1528∗∗∗    0.1576∗∗∗   0.2096∗∗∗    0.2095∗∗∗     0.2224∗∗∗
  Occ Reqs × Occ Tenure          0.0155∗∗∗   0.0154∗∗∗    0.0161∗∗∗   0.0070∗      0.0069∗∗∗     0.0061

  Observations                    44,591      44,591      33,072       44,591       44,591       33,072
  R2                             0.355       0.355       0.313        0.371        0.371        0.332

Note: ∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. All regressions include a constant, terms for demographics,
occupational tenure, employer tenure, work experience, and dummies for one-digit-level occupation and
industry. Standard errors are computed as panel-robust estimates clustered within individuals but not
across individuals. We follow Arellano (1987) for the calculation cluster-robust of standard errors.




                                                   75
Table D.2 – Wage Regressions with Mismatch by Components, Clustered Standard
Errors

                                    (1)            (2)            (3)          (4)            (5)            (6)
                                  IV-CLU         IV-CLU         IV-CLU       OLS-CLU        OLS-CLU        OLS-CLU

  Mismatch Verbal                -0.0147∗       0.0030         0.0139        -0.0150∗       -0.0053        0.0027

  Mismatch Math                  -0.0130        -0.0171∗       -0.0203∗      -0.0109        -0.0172∗       -0.0182∗

  Mismatch Social                -0.0049        -0.0034        0.0067        -0.0041        -0.0046        0.0017

  Mismatch Verbal × Occ Tenure                  -0.0028∗∗      -0.0045∗∗∗                   -0.0015        -0.0026∗

  Mismatch Math × Occ Tenure                    0.0006         0.0021∗                      0.0010         0.0020

  Mismatch Social × Occ Tenure                  -0.0002        -0.0010                      0.0001         -0.0005

  Cumul Mismatch Verbal                                        -0.0123                                     -0.0107

  Cumul Mismatch Math                                          -0.0252∗∗                                   -0.0274∗∗

  Cumul Mismatch Social                                        -0.0083                                     -0.0073

  Verbal Ability                 -0.0440        -0.0486        0.0081        0.0112         0.0066         0.0158

  Math Ability                    0.2949∗∗∗     0.3001∗∗∗      0.3405∗∗∗     0.2510∗∗∗      0.2547∗∗∗      0.3238∗∗∗

  Social Ability                  0.0837∗∗∗     0.0836∗∗∗      0.1017∗∗∗     0.0855∗∗∗      0.0853∗∗∗      0.1137∗∗∗

  Verbal Ability × Occ Tenure     0.0125∗∗      0.0126∗∗       0.0088        0.0047         0.0051         0.0066

  Math Ability × Occ Tenure       0.0006        -0.0003        0.0011        0.0037         0.0031         0.0023
                                           ∗∗             ∗∗            ∗∗             ∗∗             ∗∗
  Social Ability × Occ Tenure     0.0072        0.0073         0.0075        0.0076         0.0076         0.0063

  Occ Reqs Verbal                 0.0771        0.0757         0.0913        0.1414         0.1482         0.1214

  Occ Reqs Math                   0.1112        0.1075         0.1065        0.1004         0.0917         0.1361

  Occ Reqs Social                -0.0932∗∗      -0.0894∗∗      -0.0978∗∗     -0.0817∗∗      -0.0803∗∗      -0.0827∗∗

  Occ Reqs Verbal × Occ Tenure   -0.0071        -0.0070        -0.0098       -0.0229        -0.0245        -0.0205

  Occ Reqs Math × Occ Tenure      0.0164        0.0172         0.0175        0.0228         0.0249         0.0175

  Occ Reqs Social × Occ Tenure    0.0100∗∗      0.0092∗∗       0.0131∗∗∗     0.0109∗∗       0.0106∗∗       0.0135∗∗

  Observations                     44,591        44,591         33,072        44,591         44,591         33,072
  R2                              0.358         0.358          0.317         0.374          0.375          0.335

Note: ∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. All regressions include a constant, terms for demographics,
occupational tenure, employer tenure, work experience, and dummies for one-digit-level occupation and
industry. Standard errors are computed as panel-robust estimates clustered within individuals but not
across individuals. We follow Cameron and Trivedi (2005) for the calculation of standard errors.


E       Fixed Effect Regression
    Given that NLSY79 is a panel data set, we are able to use the fixed-effect model. As dis-
cussed in the robustness Section 5.2, omitting worker fixed-effect may bias the estimates for

                                                     76
the effects of mismatch in unknown direction. Therefore, we run wage regressions with fixed
effects to check whether our main results are robust even when we control for unobserved het-
erogeneity by fixed effects. The full regression results are shown in Table E.1, which compares
the baseline regression to that with fixed effects. The key results were presented in Table in
Section 5.2. Note that, in these regressions, we do not include worker’s mean ability term or
demographic characteristics, which are time-invariant.
    In Table E.1, columns 1-3 present our baseline specification with fixed effects, these are
the estimates using instrumental variables and fixed effects and correspond to columns 4-6 in
Table VIII of the main text. For comparison, we include the estimates without instrumenting
tenure variables as we have in our other tables. Table E.2 uses the baseline specification with
fixed effects, column 6 of Table VIII, and computes the implied wage effects.

             Table E.1 – Wage Regressions with Mismatch and Fixed Effects

                                    (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)
                                IV-GLS-FE    IV-GLS-FE    IV-GLS-FE      GLS-FE       GLS-FE      GLS-FE

  Mismatch                      -0.0117∗∗∗   -0.0051      -0.0044       -0.0105∗∗∗    -0.0057     -0.0052
  Mismatch × Occ Tenure                      -0.0019∗∗∗   -0.0020∗∗                   -0.0014∗∗   -0.0018∗∗
  Cumul Mismatch                                          -0.0373∗∗∗                              -0.0362∗∗∗
  Worker Ability × Occ Tenure   0.0129∗∗∗    0.0124∗∗∗     0.0107∗∗∗     0.0170∗∗∗    0.0168∗∗∗    0.0146∗∗∗
  Occ Reqs (Mean)               0.0074       0.0064       -0.0133        0.0313       0.0307       0.0170
  Occ Reqs × Occ Tenure         0.0147∗∗∗    0.0146∗∗∗     0.0163∗∗∗     0.0091∗∗∗    0.0090∗∗∗    0.0094∗∗∗

  Observations                    41596        41596        30599         41596        41596       30599
  R2                                                                     0.166        0.166       0.114

Note: ∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. All regressions include a constant, terms for occupational
tenure, employer tenure, work experience, and dummies for one-digit-level occupation and industry.
Standard errors are computed via GLS assuming AR(1) autocorrelation.



       Table E.2 – Wage Losses Predicted by the Regression with Fixed Effects

    Mismatch Degree                   Mismatch Effect                  Cumul. Log Mismatch Effect
     (High to Low)         5 years       10 years     15 years
          90%               -0.043         -0.073       -0.103                        -0.122
                           (0.014)        (0.021)      (0.031)                       (0.026)
           50%              -0.019         -0.032       -0.045                        -0.065
                           (0.006)        (0.009)      (0.014)                       (0.014)
           10%              -0.007         -0.012       -0.016                        -0.029
                           (0.002)        (0.003)      (0.005)                       (0.006)
Note: Wage losses (relative to the mean wage) are computed for each percentile of each measure, using
the result of the specification (3) in Table E.1. Standard errors are in parentheses.




                                                    77
F        Physical Skills Dimension
     In addition to verbal, math, and social dimensions, one might expect that match quality
is affected by the physical requirements of an occupation and a worker’s physical abilities. In
this appendix we try to incorporate a physical dimension into our measure. Conceptually, it is
difficult to measure a worker’s physical abilities, as these are going to change quite a bit over
his working life and often as a result of the occupations he chooses. This endogeneity makes
it quite difficult to identify an underlying ability for physically demanding work, as we had
identified in the other ability dimensions. Beyond this direct reverse causality, there is a strong
correlation between healthy behaviors and income, whereas most high income jobs have only
mild physical requirements.
    When we introduce our proxy for worker’s physical ability and the occupational physical
requirements, as described below, it seems to have little to do with wages. When we use
principal components to aggregate dimensions of mismatch, physical gets a very low weight,
suggesting its variation is not well related to the rest of the variation in the dataset. While this
independence from the other dimensions may have actually been useful, we found that physical
mismatch also has little relationship to wages. Generally physical mismatch is insignificant
when we include it into a Mincer regression, as we did with the others. All this is not to
say that physical match quality is unimportant, but given the measurement hurdles, we were
unable to find a solid relationship. Details of the process and findings are given below.

Health/Physical Scores in NLSY79
    Participants in the NLSY79 were asked to take a survey when they turned age 40 to evaluate
their health status. In particular, the survey includes questions about how much health limited
the respondents’ (i) moderate activities; (ii) ability to climb a flight of stairs; and (iii) types of
work they can perform; as well as (iv) how participants rated their own health status (often
referred to as EVGFP) and (v) whether pain interfered with their daily activities.45 Each
participant was then assigned a composite health score, called PCS-12, by combining their
scores on each question. One difficulty in using this health composite score in our analysis is
that it is measured after a significant period of working life, so differences across individuals
may simply reflect the effects of occupations on workers (see Michaud and Wiczer (2014)).




    45
     The survey is conducted by health care survey firm Quality Metric; see Ware et al. (1995) for
details.

                                                 78
Physical Skills in O*NET

                        Table F.1 – List of Physical Skills in O*NET

                                             Physical Skills
              1.     Arm-Hand Steadiness              2.      Manual Dexterity
              3.     Finger Dexterity                 4.      Control Precision
              5.     Multi-limb Coordination          6.      Response Orientation
              7.     Rate Control                     8.      Reaction Time
              9.     Wrist-Finger Speed               10.     Speed of Limb Movement
              11.    Static Strength                  12.     Explosive Strength
              13.    Dynamic Strength                 14.     Trunk Strength
              15.    Stamina                          16.     Extent Flexibility
              17.    Dynamic Flexibility              18.     Gross Body Coordination
              19.    Gross Body Equilibrium


    To create a physical measure of an occupation, we again turn to the O*NET, which contains
19 descriptors related to the physical demands of an occupation (e.g., whether it requires
strength, coordination, and stamina). To reduce the 19 descriptors to a single index measure
of physical skills, we take the first principal component over the 19 descriptors. For the worker’s
physical ability measure, we use the NLSY’s PCS-12 score. Both physical ability and skill scores
again are converted into rank scores among individuals or among occupations. Notice that the
coefficients to mismatch change relatively little from our previous specification. This is because
the loading on physical mismatch is relatively small. Principal components assigns loadings
(0.42, 0.42, 0.12, 0.4) when constructing mismatch measure.
Wage Regression Results with Physical Component

                Table F.2 – Four Skills: Wage Regressions with Mismatch
                                    (1)          (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
                                 IV-GLS       IV-GLS         IV-GLS         GLS          GLS          GLS
 Mismatch                       -0.0215∗∗∗   -0.0094∗       -0.0055      -0.0214∗∗∗   -0.0147∗∗∗   -0.0146∗∗∗
 Mismatch × Occ Tenure                       -0.0020∗∗∗     -0.0020∗∗                 -0.0011∗∗    -0.0004
 Cumul Mismatch                                             -0.0398∗∗∗                             -0.0398∗∗∗
 Worker Ability (Mean)           0.2936∗∗∗    0.2982∗∗∗      0.4108∗∗∗   0.3201∗∗∗    0.3218∗∗∗     0.4009∗∗∗
 Worker Ability × Occ Tenure     0.0133∗∗∗    0.0124∗∗∗      0.0117∗∗∗   0.0078∗∗∗    0.0074∗∗∗     0.0108∗∗∗
 Occ Reqs (Mean)                 0.1242∗∗∗    0.1212∗∗∗      0.1121∗∗∗   0.1553∗∗∗    0.1534∗∗∗     0.1606∗∗∗
 Occ Reqs × Occ Tenure           0.0117∗∗∗    0.0119∗∗∗      0.0139∗∗∗   0.0070∗∗∗    0.0072∗∗∗     0.0065∗∗∗
 Observations                     35405        35405          26168       35405        35405         26168
 R2                              0.241        0.241          0.217       0.256        0.256         0.232
Note: ∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. All regressions include a constant, terms for demographics,
occupational tenure, employer tenure, work experience, and dummies for one-digit-level occupation and
industry. Standard errors are computed via GLS assuming AR(1) autocorrelation.


                                                   79
      Table F.3 – Four Skills: Wage Regressions with Mismatch by Components
                                     (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
                                  IV-GLS       IV-GLS       IV-GLS         GLS          GLS          GLS
 Mismatch Verbal                 -0.0130∗∗∗    0.0070       0.0132      -0.0125∗∗∗    0.0039       0.0070
 Mismatch Math                   -0.0075∗     -0.0134∗     -0.0166∗     -0.0081∗     -0.0166∗∗∗   -0.0207∗∗∗
 Mismatch Social                 -0.0060∗     -0.0055      -0.0015      -0.0056∗     -0.0068      -0.0020
 Mismatch Phys                   -0.0017      -0.0049      -0.0024       0.0007      -0.0027      -0.0022
 Mismatch Verbal × Occ Tenure                 -0.0032∗∗∗   -0.0042∗∗∗                -0.0026∗∗∗   -0.0031∗∗∗
 Mismatch Math × Occ Tenure                    0.0008       0.0019                    0.0013∗      0.0025∗∗∗
 Mismatch Social × Occ Tenure                 -0.0000      -0.0002                    0.0002      -0.0003
 Mismatch Phys × Occ Tenure                    0.0005       0.0011                    0.0005       0.0013∗∗
 Cumul Mismatch Verbal                                     -0.0188∗∗∗                             -0.0172∗∗∗
 Cumul Mismatch Math                                       -0.0232∗∗∗                             -0.0253∗∗∗
 Cumul Mismatch Social                                     -0.0117∗∗                              -0.0105∗∗
 Cumul Mismatch Phys
 Verbal Ability                  -0.0947∗∗    -0.0981∗∗    -0.0146      -0.0511      -0.0565∗     -0.0296
 Math Ability                     0.3757∗∗∗    0.3843∗∗∗    0.4271∗∗∗    0.3381∗∗∗    0.3451∗∗∗    0.4162∗∗∗
 Social Ability                   0.0894∗∗∗    0.0891∗∗∗    0.0945∗∗∗    0.1067∗∗∗    0.1060∗∗∗    0.1240∗∗∗
 Phys Ability                     0.1074∗∗∗    0.1088∗∗∗    0.1503∗∗∗    0.1316∗∗∗    0.1313∗∗∗    0.1340∗∗∗
 Verbal Ability × Occ Tenure      0.0128∗∗∗    0.0131∗∗∗    0.0087       0.0078∗∗     0.0084∗∗     0.0101∗∗
 Math Ability × Occ Tenure       -0.0043      -0.0059      -0.0058      -0.0027      -0.0040      -0.0057
 Social Ability × Occ Tenure      0.0073∗∗∗    0.0075∗∗∗    0.0079∗∗     0.0053∗∗∗    0.0055∗∗∗    0.0038
 Phys Ability × Occ Tenure        0.0001      -0.0001       0.0029      -0.0043∗∗    -0.0043∗∗     0.0032
 Occ Reqs Verbal                 -0.0258      -0.0223      -0.0974       0.0101       0.0184      -0.0405
 Occ Reqs Math                    0.1859∗∗     0.1756∗∗     0.2553∗∗∗    0.1911∗∗∗    0.1787∗∗∗    0.2551∗∗∗
 Occ Reqs Social                 -0.1106∗∗∗   -0.1085∗∗∗   -0.1089∗∗∗   -0.1092∗∗∗   -0.1089∗∗∗   -0.1129∗∗∗
 Occ Reqs Phys                    0.0140       0.0121      -0.0231      -0.0012      -0.0033      -0.0378
 Occ Reqs Verbal × Occ Tenure    -0.0034      -0.0038       0.0065      -0.0136∗     -0.0153∗∗    -0.0099
 Occ Reqs Math × Occ Tenure       0.0109       0.0126       0.0037       0.0140∗∗     0.0166∗∗     0.0093
 Occ Reqs Social × Occ Tenure     0.0122∗∗∗    0.0116∗∗∗    0.0122∗∗     0.0138∗∗∗    0.0136∗∗∗    0.0153∗∗∗
 Occ Reqs Phys × Occ Tenure       0.0040       0.0044       0.0012       0.0027       0.0032       0.0015
 Observations                      35405        35405        26168        35405        35405        26168
 R2                               0.245        0.245        0.222        0.259        0.260        0.237
Note: ∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. All regressions include a constant, terms for demographics,
occupational tenure, employer tenure, work experience, and dummies for one-digit-level occupation and
industry. Standard errors are computed via GLS assuming AR(1) autocorrelation.




                                                   80
G       College Graduates
    Given that our mismatch measure is based on higher-order cognitive, and social abilities, it
is natural that this measure is more relevant to individuals with a higher level of education doing
occupations that place greater emphasis on higher-order skills. In this appendix, we restrict
our sample to college graduates, and run wage regressions as we did in the main analysis. The
results are presented in Table G.1. Most of the coefficients of mismatch, mismatch times tenure,
and cumulative mismatch increased in their effect on wages compared to those in Table II. In
particular, the coefficient on the cumulative mismatch in Column (3) almost doubled for the
college sample compared to the baseline result.
    It is also interesting to see where the increase of the effect is coming from. By breaking
down the measures into components in Column (3) of Table G.2, we learn that it is verbal
and social components which are particularly strong effects and contribute to the differences in
wages among college graduates. In particular, the coefficient on cumulative social mismatch is
four times larger than the one in our benchmark result. The results here show that mismatch
is a more important wage determinant among college graduates, and that verbal and social
components have especially large effects compared to the benchmark case.

            Table G.1 – College Graduate: Wage Regressions with Mismatch
                                    (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
                                 IV-GLS       IV-GLS      IV-GLS         GLS          GLS          GLS
 Mismatch                       -0.0273∗∗∗   -0.0170∗    -0.0083      -0.0267∗∗∗   -0.0130∗     -0.0112
 Mismatch × Occ Tenure                       -0.0018     -0.0012                   -0.0023∗∗∗   -0.0002
 Cumul Mismatch                                          -0.0693∗∗∗                             -0.0766∗∗∗
 Worker Ability (Mean)           0.2758∗∗∗   0.2808∗∗∗    0.3913∗∗∗   0.2964∗∗∗    0.2995∗∗∗     0.3684∗∗∗
 Worker Ability × Occ Tenure     0.0121∗∗    0.0108∗∗     0.0086      0.0086∗∗     0.0073∗∗      0.0157∗∗∗
 Occ Reqs (Mean)                 0.1602∗∗∗   0.1715∗∗∗    0.1866∗∗∗   0.2021∗∗∗    0.2186∗∗∗     0.2350∗∗∗
 Occ Reqs × Occ Tenure           0.0188∗∗∗   0.0170∗∗∗    0.0184∗∗∗   0.0109∗∗∗    0.0083∗∗      0.0089∗∗
 Observations                     21461       21461        15093       21461        21461         15093
 R2                              0.198       0.198        0.177       0.210        0.210         0.188
Note: ∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. All regressions include a constant, terms for demographics,
occupational tenure, employer tenure, work experience, and dummies for one-digit-level occupation and
industry. Standard errors are computed via GLS assuming AR(1) autocorrelation.




                                                   81
  Table G.2 – College Graduate: Wage Regressions with Mismatch by Components
                                     (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
                                  IV-GLS       IV-GLS       IV-GLS         GLS          GLS          GLS
 Mismatch Verbal                 -0.0269∗∗∗   -0.0089      -0.0035      -0.0249∗∗∗   -0.0089      -0.0106
 Mismatch Math                    0.0015      -0.0057      -0.0061      -0.0002      -0.0009      -0.0010
 Mismatch Social                 -0.0074      -0.0127       0.0021      -0.0061      -0.0112       0.0009
 Mismatch Verbal × Occ Tenure                 -0.0030∗∗    -0.0031                   -0.0027∗∗    -0.0014
 Mismatch Math × Occ Tenure                    0.0011       0.0020                    0.0000       0.0013
 Mismatch Social × Occ Tenure                  0.0009      -0.0008                    0.0009      -0.0008
 Cumul Mismatch Verbal                                     -0.0335∗∗∗                             -0.0351∗∗∗
 Cumul Mismatch Math                                       -0.0347∗∗∗                             -0.0422∗∗∗
 Cumul Mismatch Social                                     -0.0339∗∗∗                             -0.0301∗∗∗
 Verbal Ability                  -0.1041∗     -0.0934       0.0390      -0.0213      -0.0136       0.0261
 Math Ability                     0.3850∗∗∗    0.3835∗∗∗    0.4309∗∗∗    0.3244∗∗∗    0.3224∗∗∗    0.3975∗∗∗
 Social Ability                   0.0738∗∗     0.0678∗      0.0421       0.0810∗∗∗    0.0750∗∗     0.0548
 Verbal Ability × Occ Tenure      0.0180∗∗∗    0.0156∗∗     0.0089       0.0079       0.0058       0.0124∗
 Math Ability × Occ Tenure       -0.0130∗     -0.0131∗     -0.0121      -0.0083      -0.0084∗     -0.0059
 Social Ability × Occ Tenure      0.0108∗∗∗    0.0118∗∗∗    0.0131∗∗     0.0110∗∗∗    0.0121∗∗∗    0.0134∗∗∗
 Occ Reqs Verbal                 -0.0100       0.0047      -0.1501      -0.0204      -0.0163      -0.1165
 Occ Reqs Math                    0.2023∗∗     0.1867∗      0.3327∗∗∗    0.2516∗∗∗    0.2537∗∗∗    0.3674∗∗∗
 Occ Reqs Social                 -0.1011∗∗    -0.0960∗∗    -0.0797      -0.0879∗∗∗   -0.0809∗∗    -0.0813∗
 Occ Reqs Verbal × Occ Tenure    -0.0106      -0.0121      -0.0000      -0.0133      -0.0127      -0.0134
 Occ Reqs Math × Occ Tenure       0.0213∗      0.0238∗      0.0112       0.0157∗      0.0148       0.0104
 Occ Reqs Social × Occ Tenure     0.0147∗∗∗    0.0135∗∗∗    0.0180∗∗     0.0141∗∗∗    0.0125∗∗∗    0.0195∗∗∗
 Observations                      21461        21461        15093        21461        21461        15093
 R2                               0.201        0.201        0.181        0.213        0.214        0.193
Note: ∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. All regressions include a constant, terms for demographics,
occupational tenure, employer tenure, work experience, and dummies for one-digit-level occupation and
industry. Standard errors are computed via GLS assuming AR(1) autocorrelation.




                                                   82
H      Young Workers
    There are several reasons one might be concerned with the effect of mismatch separately on
young and old workers. While age is not directly in the model, it is an interesting variable to
consider in the data and closely related to work experience, which does appear in our theory.
On one hand, learning suggests that mismatch observed among the old is more likely to be due
to the noise in our measure and attenuate these coefficients. On the other hand, given that our
measure of mismatch is not necessarily cardinal, its interactions with experience and tenure
may be non-linear and thus may effect differently the high experience groups, whom we know
have lost more human capital due to mismatch.
    In this appendix, we create a dummy for workers less than 35 years old, though the results
are broadly the same if we were to use a cutoff at 30. We interact this dummy with each of
our mismatch terms. The results are presented in Table H.1. In the specification with only
mismatch, Column 1, the coefficients imply that the overall effect of mismatch is almost 30%
more severe for younger workers.
    The effect of cumulative past mismatch is stronger for the older group among whom mis-
match has had longer to have an effect, as shown in the coefficients on cumulative mismatch
and the interaction with < 35 in Column 3. As the theory suggests, mismatch is cumulative
over time, and this accumulation is partly going to be picked up in the coefficient on average
mismatch, a quantity that should not be affected by experience. We validate this conjecture
by including total mismatch instead of average cumulative mismatch, only the numerator from
our measure for CMM. The new measure strictly increasing in labor market experience. In this
regression, the coefficient on total cumulative mismatch is -0.129 and -0.009 on the coefficient
for the < 35 interaction (both 99% significant). This means that the additional cost of cumu-
lative mismatch among the old stems from their additional years accumulating these effects.
For the same amount of experience, the effect among young is slightly stronger.
    To summarize the difference between young and old in the effect of mismatch we can create
counter-factual wage distributions setting the mismatch terms to zero for both young and old.
For young workers, the average predicted wage is 8.5 log points lower than without mismatch.
For old workers, the average predicted wage is 12.5 log points lower than without mismatch.
As in our baseline result in Section 5.1, cumulative mismatch is most important to this result.
Average cumulative mismatch is about the same in the two groups, 1.90 among old and 1.91
among young, but the implied coefficients are quite different, -0.0437 for old and -0.0297 for
young. The larger effect of mismatch on old than young is in line with the findings in Fredriksson
et al. (2015), albeit measured in Sweden with a different definition of mismatch.




                                               83
             Table H.1 – Young Workers: Wage Regressions with Mismatch
                                     (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)           (5)         (6)
                                  IV-GLS        IV-GLS       IV-GLS        GLS           GLS         GLS
 Mismatch                        -0.0178∗∗∗   -0.0581∗∗∗   -0.0395∗∗∗   -0.0184∗∗∗    -0.0109∗    -0.0119∗
 Mismatch, < 35                   -0.0049     0.1527∗∗∗     0.1359∗∗∗    -0.0020       -0.0022     -0.0018
 Mismatch × Occ Tenure                         0.0022∗∗∗     0.0016                  -0.0011∗∗     -0.0009
 Mismatch × Occ Ten, < 35                     -0.0323∗∗∗   -0.0354∗∗∗                  -0.0006      0.0003
 Cumul Mismatch                                            -0.0437∗∗∗                            -0.0348∗∗∗
 Cumul Mismatch, < 35                                       0.0146∗∗                               -0.0074
 Worker Ability (Mean)           0.3018∗∗∗    0.2948∗∗∗     0.4001∗∗∗   0.3098∗∗∗    0.3111∗∗∗    0.4032∗∗∗
 Worker Ability × Occ Tenure     0.0116∗∗∗    0.0119∗∗∗     0.0084∗∗    0.0090∗∗∗    0.0087∗∗∗    0.0076∗∗∗
 Occ Reqs (Mean)                 0.0974∗∗∗    0.1021∗∗∗     0.0853∗∗∗   0.1381∗∗∗    0.1368∗∗∗    0.1419∗∗∗
 Occ Reqs × Occ Tenure           0.0144∗∗∗    0.0121∗∗∗     0.0162∗∗∗   0.0084∗∗∗    0.0084∗∗∗    0.0094∗∗∗
 Observations                     41596        41596          30599      41596        41596         30599
 R2                                0.243        0.215         0.188       0.258        0.258        0.229
Note: ∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. All regressions include a constant, terms for demographics,
occupational tenure, employer tenure, work experience, and dummies for one-digit-level occupation and
industry. Standard errors are computed via GLS assuming AR(1) autocorrelation.




                                                    84
I    Effects of Mismatch on Earnings
    In the model we presented in Section 2, wages and earnings are identical because we assume
worker’s labor supply is constant (fixed to 1) over lifecycle. However, in reality, wages and
earnings could be significantly different as there is large heterogeneity in individuals’ working
hours. Therefore, it is worth to see whether our model’s implications still hold when we use
individuals’ earnings data rather than the wage data in regressions. Looking at earnings rather
than wages is advantageous in the light of measurement error due to misreporting. As is
common in many survey-based datasets, because most workers do not earn an hourly wage,
and actual hours are often difficult to recall, earnings are much more precisely reported than
hourly wages. Therefore, in this appendix, we check the robustness of our results by using the
earnings in place of wages.
    In order to create an annual earnings measure, we use two income variables from NLSY79:
total income from wage and salary and total income from farm or business. One shortcoming
of using these variables is that, after 1994, the information is only available every 2 years.
Therefore, we have to reduce the number of observations significantly when we run a regression
using the earnings measure. Another important issue to take into account is that these variables
pool income from different jobs. Thus, when an individual works for more than one occupation
in a year, income from different occupations are pooled in one earnings measure. Therefore,
when a worker reports more than one job, we relate a worker’s annual earnings to the job in
which the worker earned the largest amount of money in the year, which is calculated by the
hourly rate of pay of that job times the number of hours the worker spent in that job in the
year. Obtained annual earnings measure is deflated by the price index for personal consumption
expenditures into real term in the 2000 dollars. Finally, obtained, real annual earnings are put
as the left-hand-side variable in a Mincer regression after taking a natural logarithm.
     Table I.1 reports results of earnings regressions with mismatch. It is worth to emphasize
that those results are very similar to those in previous wage regressions (compare the results
with Table II). In our most preferred specification, (3), the coefficient for mismatch times tenure
is slightly larger than the one in the wage regression, and the one for cumulative mismatch is
slightly smaller. However, in general, the results are almost same as those in wage regression.
     Turning to regressions by components reported in Table I.2, again, the results didn’t change
from Table V in general. In the specification (3), the coefficient for cumulative social mismatch
obtain a slightly larger value when we use earnings, while that for cumulative verbal mismatch
loses its significance. However, over all, the results are in line with those in wage regressions.
This fact confirms the robustness of our results even when we use annual earnings as the
left-hand-side variable of a Mincer regression.




                                                85
                      Table I.1 – Earnings Regressions with Mismatch
                                    (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
                                 IV-GLS       IV-GLS      IV-GLS         GLS          GLS          GLS
 Mismatch                       -0.0315∗∗∗   -0.0332      0.0351      -0.0286∗∗∗   -0.0370∗∗∗   -0.0407∗∗∗
 Mismatch × Occ Tenure                        0.0005     -0.0320∗∗                  0.0024       0.0033
 Cumul Mismatch                                          -0.0383∗∗                              -0.0170∗∗
 Worker Ability (Mean)           0.2747∗∗     0.2745∗∗    0.5062∗∗∗    0.2417∗∗∗    0.2414∗∗∗    0.3344∗∗∗
 Worker Ability × Occ Tenure    -0.0167      -0.0166     -0.0471       0.0000       0.0004      -0.0063
 Occ Reqs (Mean)                 0.2028∗∗     0.2027∗∗    0.2872∗      0.3248∗∗∗    0.3253∗∗∗    0.3434∗∗∗
 Occ Reqs × Occ Tenure           0.0105       0.0106     -0.0287      -0.0017      -0.0018      -0.0034
 Observations                     18473        18473       10766        18473        18473        10766
 R2                                                                    0.241        0.241        0.215
Note: ∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. All regressions include a constant, terms for demographics,
occupational tenure, employer tenure, work experience, and dummies for one-digit-level occupation and
industry. Standard errors are computed via GLS assuming AR(1) autocorrelation.




                                                   86
            Table I.2 – Earnings Regressions with Mismatch by Components
                                     (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
                                  IV-GLS      IV-GLS       IV-GLS         GLS          GLS          GLS
 Mismatch Verbal                 -0.0235∗∗    0.0446       0.1583∗∗∗   -0.0071      -0.0070      -0.0027
 Mismatch Math                   -0.0122     -0.0867∗∗∗   -0.1233∗∗    -0.0269∗∗∗   -0.0364∗∗∗   -0.0449∗∗∗
 Mismatch Social                  0.0022      0.0195       0.0330       0.0058       0.0063       0.0077
 Mismatch Verbal × Occ Tenure                -0.0207∗∗    -0.0713∗∗∗                -0.0000      -0.0027
 Mismatch Math × Occ Tenure                   0.0233∗∗     0.0412∗∗                  0.0028       0.0065∗
 Mismatch Social × Occ Tenure                -0.0053      -0.0144                   -0.0002      -0.0004
 Cumul Mismatch Verbal                                     0.0314                                -0.0048
 Cumul Mismatch Math                                      -0.0543∗∗                              -0.0091
 Cumul Mismatch Social                                     0.0032                                -0.0063
 Verbal Ability                   0.0963      0.1193      -0.0490      -0.0019      -0.0014      -0.0569
 Math Ability                     0.2861∗     0.2653       0.9055∗∗∗    0.1834∗∗∗    0.1827∗∗∗    0.2874∗∗∗
 Social Ability                  -0.0460     -0.0601      -0.4286∗      0.1493∗∗∗    0.1484∗∗∗    0.2143∗∗∗
 Verbal Ability × Occ Tenure     -0.0662∗    -0.0764∗     -0.0243      -0.0084      -0.0086       0.0197
 Math Ability × Occ Tenure        0.0109      0.0172      -0.1885∗∗     0.0110       0.0114      -0.0233
 Social Ability × Occ Tenure      0.0406∗     0.0445∗∗     0.1925∗∗∗   -0.0042      -0.0039      -0.0078
 Occ Reqs Verbal                  0.0787      0.0370       0.9529       0.2790∗∗     0.2898∗∗∗    0.5410∗∗∗
 Occ Reqs Math                    0.0070      0.0312      -1.1516∗     -0.0207      -0.0294      -0.2729∗∗
 Occ Reqs Social                  0.1081      0.1090       0.4641∗∗     0.0995∗∗∗    0.0966∗∗     0.1153∗∗
 Occ Reqs Verbal × Occ Tenure     0.0039      0.0197      -0.3995∗     -0.0192      -0.0230      -0.0801∗∗
 Occ Reqs Math × Occ Tenure       0.0219      0.0172       0.5446∗∗     0.0177       0.0212       0.0742∗∗
 Occ Reqs Social × Occ Tenure    -0.0129     -0.0139      -0.1672∗∗    -0.0005       0.0002       0.0076
 Observations                      18473       18473        10766        18473        18473        10766
 R2                                                                     0.242        0.243        0.217
Note: ∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. All regressions include a constant, terms for demographics,
occupational tenure, employer tenure, work experience, and dummies for one-digit-level occupation and
industry. Standard errors are estimated via GLS assuming AR(1) autocorrelation.




                                                   87
J     Additional Regression Tables for Robustness

                     Table J.1 – Wage Regressions with Log Mismatch
                                    (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
                                 IV-GLS       IV-GLS        IV-GLS         GLS          GLS          GLS
 Mismatch                       -0.0252∗∗∗   -0.0051       -0.0015      -0.0236∗∗∗   -0.0171∗∗∗   -0.0185∗∗
 Mismatch × Occ Tenure                       -0.0033∗∗∗    -0.0032∗∗                 -0.0011      -0.0002
 Cumul Mismatch                                            -0.0354∗∗∗                             -0.0351∗∗∗
 Worker Ability (Mean)           0.3017∗∗∗   0.3045∗∗∗      0.4026∗∗∗    0.3084∗∗∗    0.3088∗∗∗    0.3924∗∗∗
 Worker Ability × Occ Tenure     0.0114∗∗∗   0.0107∗∗∗      0.0072∗∗     0.0090∗∗∗    0.0089∗∗∗    0.0078∗∗∗
 Occ Reqs (Mean)                 0.0973∗∗∗   0.0953∗∗∗      0.0858∗∗∗    0.1382∗∗∗    0.1375∗∗∗    0.1420∗∗∗
 Occ Reqs × Occ Tenure           0.0144∗∗∗   0.0144∗∗∗      0.0184∗∗∗    0.0083∗∗∗    0.0083∗∗∗    0.0093∗∗∗
 Observations                     41596       41596          30599        41596        41596        30599
 R2                              0.243       0.242          0.213        0.257        0.257        0.229
Note: ∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. All regressions include a constant, terms for demographics,
occupational tenure, employer tenure, work experience, and dummies for one-digit-level occupation and
industry. Standard errors are estimated via GLS assuming AR(1) autocorrelation.




      Table J.2 – Wage Losses from Log Mismatch & Cumulative Log Mismatch

    Mismatch Degree               Log Mismatch Effect                   Cumul. Log Mismatch Effect
     (High to Low)         5 years      10 years          15 years
           90%              -0.020        -0.037           -0.055                     -0.061
                           (0.006)       (0.009)          (0.016)                    (0.007)
           50%              -0.005        -0.010           -0.015                     -0.020
                           (0.002)       (0.003)          (0.004)                    (0.002)
           10%               0.011         0.022           0.032                       0.028
                           (0.000)       (0.000)          (0.004)                    (0.003)
Note: Wage losses (relative to the mean wage) are computed for each percentile of each measure, using
the result of the specification (3) in Table J.1. Standard errors are in parentheses.




                                                   88
                 Table J.3 – Wage Regressions with Higher-Order Terms
                                     (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
                                  IV-GLS        IV-GLS       IV-GLS         GLS          GLS          GLS
 Mismatch                        -0.0219∗∗∗    -0.0108∗∗    -0.0067      -0.0210∗∗∗   -0.0159∗∗∗   -0.0148∗∗∗
 Mismatch × Occ Tenure                         -0.0019∗∗∗   -0.0021∗∗                 -0.0009∗     -0.0005
 Cumul Mismatch                                             -0.0386∗∗∗                             -0.0396∗∗∗
 Worker Ability (Mean)            0.1876∗∗∗     0.1979∗∗∗    0.2471∗∗∗    0.2148∗∗∗    0.2190∗∗∗    0.2247∗∗∗
 Worker Ability2                  0.1105∗∗      0.1030∗∗     0.1610∗∗∗    0.0869∗      0.0834∗      0.1691∗∗∗
 Worker Ability × Occ Tenure      0.0117∗∗∗     0.0111∗∗∗    0.0073∗∗     0.0099∗∗∗    0.0097∗∗∗    0.0087∗∗∗
 Occ Reqs (Mean)                 -0.3529∗∗∗    -0.3517∗∗∗   -0.3075∗∗∗   -0.3070∗∗∗   -0.3065∗∗∗   -0.2544∗∗∗
 Occ Reqs2                        0.4498∗∗∗     0.4471∗∗∗    0.3978∗∗∗    0.4549∗∗∗    0.4536∗∗∗    0.4075∗∗∗
 Occ Reqs × Occ Tenure            0.0144∗∗∗     0.0143∗∗∗    0.0182∗∗∗    0.0064∗∗∗    0.0064∗∗∗    0.0077∗∗∗
 Observations                      41596         41596        30599        41596        41596        30599
 R2                               0.245         0.245        0.216        0.260        0.260        0.231
Note: ∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. All regressions include a constant, terms for demographics,
occupational tenure, employer tenure, work experience, and dummies for one-digit-level occupation and
industry. Standard errors are estimated via GLS assuming AR(1) autocorrelation.




   Table J.4 – Wage Losses Predicted by the Regression with Higher Order Terms

      Mismatch Degree                    Mismatch Effect                  Cumul. Mismatch Effect
        (High to Low)          5 years        10 years      15 years
             90%                -0.052         -0.083         -0.115                   -0.127
                               (0.011)        (0.018)        (0.030)                  (0.014)
             50%                -0.023         -0.036         -0.050                   -0.067
                               (0.005)        (0.008)        (0.013)                  (0.007)
             10%                -0.008         -0.013         -0.018                   -0.030
                               (0.002)        (0.003)        (0.005)                  (0.003)
Note: Wage losses (relative to the mean wage) are computed for each percentile of each measure, using
the result of the specification (3) in Table J.3. Standard errors are in parentheses.




                                                     89
     Table J.5 – Wage Regressions with Worker’s Ability Times Experience Term
                                     (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
                                  IV-GLS        IV-GLS       IV-GLS         GLS          GLS          GLS
 Mismatch                        -0.0197∗∗∗    -0.0082      -0.0049      -0.0185∗∗∗   -0.0120∗∗∗   -0.0122∗∗
 Mismatch × Occ Tenure                         -0.0020∗∗∗   -0.0022∗∗                 -0.0011∗∗    -0.0008
 Cumul Mismatch                                             -0.0347∗∗∗                             -0.0365∗∗∗
 Worker Ability (Mean)           0.2064∗∗∗     0.2061∗∗∗     0.2994∗∗∗   0.1947∗∗∗     0.1943∗∗∗    0.3079∗∗∗
 Worker Ability × Experience     0.0113∗∗∗     0.0117∗∗∗     0.0100∗∗∗   0.0116∗∗∗     0.0117∗∗∗    0.0074∗∗∗
 Worker Ability × Occ Tenure     0.0021        0.0011       -0.0012      0.0017        0.0014       0.0034
 Occ Reqs (Mean)                 0.0978∗∗∗     0.0962∗∗∗     0.0878∗∗∗   0.1374∗∗∗     0.1363∗∗∗    0.1421∗∗∗
 Occ Reqs × Occ Tenure           0.0145∗∗∗     0.0144∗∗∗     0.0182∗∗∗   0.0085∗∗∗     0.0085∗∗∗    0.0093∗∗∗
 Observations                     41596         41596         30599       41596         41596        30599
 R2                              0.244         0.244         0.214       0.258         0.258        0.230
Note: ∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. All regressions include a constant, terms for demographics,
occupational tenure, employer tenure, work experience, and dummies for one-digit-level occupation and
industry. Standard errors are estimated via GLS assuming AR(1) autocorrelation.




Table J.6 – Wage Losses Predicted by the Regression with Worker’s Ability Times
Experience Term

      Mismatch Degree                    Mismatch Effect                  Cumul. Mismatch Effect
        (High to Low)          5 years        10 years      15 years
             90%                -0.048         -0.080         -0.113                   -0.114
                               (0.011)        (0.018)        (0.030)                  (0.014)
             50%                -0.021         -0.035         -0.050                   -0.060
                               (0.005)        (0.008)        (0.013)                  (0.008)
             10%                -0.008         -0.013         -0.018                   -0.027
                               (0.002)        (0.003)        (0.005)                  (0.003)
Note: Wage losses (relative to the mean wage) are computed for each percentile of each measure, using
the result of the specification (3) in Table J.5. Standard errors are in parentheses.




                                                     90
