                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AND
                    THE DIVISION OF THE VALUE
                        OF THE ENTERPRISE




                          John M. Abowd




                      Working Paper No. 2137




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                            January 1987




This paper was made possible through the suport of the Bureau of
National Affairs, Inc., which supplied the collective bargaining
data from Collective Bargaining Negotiations and Contracts. I am
particularly grateful to Harriet Berlin, who provided substantial
help in using the BNA information. The Univeristy of Chicago
Graduate School of Business supported the development and implement-
ation of the research version of these data. I have also benefited
from the comments of David Card, Eugene Fama, Henry Farber, Daniel
Hamermesh, George Johnson, Patricia O'Brien and Joseph Tracy.
Janice McCallum and Cassandra Swartz provided the research
assistance. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                 NBER Working Paper #2137
                                                 January 1987




    Collective Bargaining and the Division of the Value of the Enterprise




                                   ABSTRACT



     The enterprise (firm) is modeled as a collection of formal and

informal contracts providing various factors of production with claims

on the income stream in consideration of assets or services supplied to

the enterprise. The strongly efficient bargaining model implies that

the division of the quasi-rents will result in dollar for dollar

exchanges of wealth between the union members and the shareholders. The

leading inefficient bargaining models do not imply such tradeoffs in

general. The model is tested by considering contract settlements during

the years 1976 to 1982 as recorded by the Bureau of National Affairs in

Collective Bargaining Negotiations and Contracts. Security price data

for the firms were merged with these bargaining unit level settlement

data. The tests provide substantial confirmation of the dollar for

dollar wealth tradeoff between union members and shareholders.


                                       John M. Abowd
                                       Industrial Relations Section
                                       Princeton University
                                       Firestone Library
                                       Princeton, NJ 08544
                                       (609) 452-4042
                    COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AND THE DIVISION
                       OP THE VALUE OP THE ENTERPRISE




      In   this paper I view the enterprise as a collection of formal and

informal contracts that connects suppliers of labor services, equipment,

materials, managerial services, and capital into an organization.1

The organization produces and distributes a product in exchange for

income. This income is then divided among the contracting parties. All

of the contracting parties have some claim on the income of the

enterprise. It is instructive to distinguish two basic forms of this

claim:     (a) the right to a specific sum based on the purchase by the

enterprise of an asset of the party and (b) the right to claim the resi-

dual income.

     In enterprises with unionized work forces both union members and

shareholders may have specific purchase and residual claims on the

income of the organization. The value of the enterprise is the amount

that could be obtained from the current sale of a complete residual

claim. The claim of the shareholders is measured directly by the

current value of all securities issued by the enterprise. The claim of

the union members is measured indirectly by the amount the union could

obtain from selling the right to work in the enterprise.

     Although there is no organized market for the union members' claim,

its value represents the capitalized difference between what a worker

earns in the enterprise and what he could earn in the next best alter-

native. Union wealth exists because the managers of a unionized firm



    1i have substituted "enterprise" for "firm" to avoid the close
identification of the value of the firm with the value of the share-
holders' equity. The collection of contracts view of the enterprise is
used by Michael Jensen and William Meckling (1976, 1979) and by Eugene
Fama and Jensen (1983a, 1983b) to distinguish factors of production by
                                  —2—

cannot replace workers at wi1l due to the protection of collective action

by employees provided by the National Labor Relations Act.2 Employees

may contest dismissals related to union organizing activity. Union mem-

bers may contest other dismissals by challenging the employer's "just

cause". Union members may also enjoy the right to preferential treat-

ment during recalls from layoff. Consequently, a bargaining unit cannot

be replaced at zero incremental cost by nonunion workers whenever the

union attempts to extract some of the value of the enterprise above the

opportunity cost of the labor supplied by its members.

     The protection of collective action extends only to employees of an

ongoing establishment. Workers, in general, are not protected.

Consequently, American labor law promotes a contest between the union

members and shareholders in which the shareholders must commit invest-

ments before the union engages in organizing activity. Only successful

establishments will ever be organized. The set of all organized

establishments, therefore, is not representative of all investments

undertaken by shareholders. Organized establishments will, in general,




the service they sell to the enterprise. Ownership and control are two
separate services and, therefore, need not reside in the same factor.
In the present model union members supply some ownership by
appropriation of quasi—rents produced by the enterprise. These rents
are made appropriable through the protection of employee collective
action under the National Labor Relations Act. See Benjamin Klein, et.
al. (1979) for a discussion of rent appropriation. See Richard Posner
(1984) for a detailed treatment of the relation between economics and
labor law.  I will assume the managers' agency problems are fully
solved. Therefore the interests of the managers are perfectly aligned
with the interests of the shareholders.

    2See Bernard Meltzer (1977 pp. 195—229) for an overview of the legal
framework surrounding this protection.
                                  —3—

be more successful than the average establishment. This implies that

 the value of a complete residual claim in an organized establishment

exceeds the value of a complete residual claim on average. The expected

quasi-rents accruing to an enterprise, conditional on being organized,

are positive and greater than the ex ante return on new investment

opportunities available at the time the shareholders committed resources

to the enterprise. However, the shareholders are aware that successful

investments may become unionized with some probability. The shareholders

will only undertake investments in which their ex ante expected return

exceeds the opportunity cost of the funds being committed. As long as

new investment opportunities differ in their ex ante probabilities of

being organized, the structure of American labor law can be expected to

distort all investment decisions, perhaps substantially.3

     rn an ongoing enterprise shareholders claim their part of the value

by purchasing securities that may appreciate in value and pay dividends.

Union members claim their share of the value through periodic

negotiations leading to a new collective bargaining agreement. The

terms of this agreement specify the determination of bargaining unit

compensation and limitations on managers' ability to redirect work away




    3Sumner Slichter (1941) made this point when arguing that highly
unionized industries will tend to shrink in size owing to the abandon-
ment of the industry by investment. The modern form of the argument is
Carliss Baldwin's (1983) argument that investors will choose different
technologies in order to reduce the probability of ex post appropriation
of the quasi—rents. The question of whether the best shareholder stra—
tegy is to use inefficient technology or direct payments to workers to
discourage unionization is unsettled. Stephen Bronars and Donald Deere
(1986), and Robert Connolly et. al. (1986) discuss the analysis of such
models for investment policy.
                                     —4—

 from bargaining unit members. Although the union equity claim is not

 alienable, seniority rules serve to allocate this claim among

 members .

      Prior   to the negotiation of a new collective bargain public infor-

 mation about the state of the bargaining pair, economy, industry,

enterprise, and labor market may be used to form an expectation

 regarding the outcome of the negotiation. As information accumulates,

suggesting that the value of the enterprise has changed or that the

 claim of the union members on this value has changed, the current value

of shareholder claims will change. When a new collective bargaining

agreement that deviates substantially from expectations is announced,

an informational event occurs. There are two nonexclusjve interpreta-

tions of this event. First, the parties to the negotiation may have

some private information about the value of the enterprise; then, the

new agreement partially reveals that information and the value of both

the shareholders' and union members' claims may change in the same




     4Al1 major collective bargaining agreements contain wage provisions.
Ninety-four percent of all major contracts contain provisions for
changing the wage scales over the life of the agreement. Ninety percent
 regulate the manner in which workers may be laid off (59% of major
contracts designate seniority as the sole factor determining layoffs).
Fifty-one percent of all major contracts have income maintenance provi-
sions specifying work guarantees, severance pay, or supplemental
unemployment benefits. Ninety percent of major agreements restrict
management rights by limiting subcontracting (50%), restricting super-
visors from performing bargaining unit work (54%), restricting the adop-
tion of technology (21%), or restricting plant closing (18%) (Bureau of
National Affairs 1983). Eighty-nine percent of major contracts regulate
the manner in which workers acquire seniority, which is a factor in
layoff rules (89%) promotions (72%) and transfers (50%). Eighty-two
percent of major contracts provide for one of the major forms of union
security and 89% require dues check-off (Bureau of National Affairs
1983).
                                  —5--


direction.5 Second, the parties to the negotiation may have changed

the division of the value of the enterprise for some unexpected reason;

then, the value of the shareholders' and union members' claims change in

opposing directions.

     The goals of this paper are (a) to model the process by which out—

siders form an expectation of the bargaining outcome and (b) to quantify

the extent to which collective bargaining agreements redistribute the

value of the enterprise between union members and shareholders. The

theoretical framework developed in Section 1 shows how new information

about external factors affecting the bargaining outcome and internal

factors affecting the bargaining game is transmitted through the settle-

ment announcement into a transfer of wealth between the shareholders and

the union members. Section 2 develops an empirical method for measuring

the expected change in union members' wealth using information that is

current as of three months prior to the settlement date. The method is

applied to a sample of 7,700 collective bargains negotiated between

January 1976 and December 1982. In Section 3 I estimate the effect of

the unanticipated union wealth changes on the value of the shareholders'

equity around the month of settlement. Finally, Section 4 shows that

on average new settlements involve changes in the division of the value

of the enterprise and not the release of substantial amounts of private

information about the enterprise value. My conclusions follow.




    his is the essential feature of asymmetric information strike
models. See Drew Fudenberg et. al. (1983), Beth Hayes (1984), and
Joseph Tracy (1984, l986a, l986b).
                                   —6—

 1. Models of the Division of the Value

      In a collective bargaining relationship in which the parties have

 symmetric information, the strongly efficient outcome maximizes the

 value of the enterprise conditional on the common information.6 To

 highlight the precommitment of the shareholders' investment, I consider

 models in which employment and wages are the primary objects of nego—

 tiation and the capital stock is fixed. To characterize the bargaining

 situation, the information environment and product market conditions must

 be specified. Given this specification, one can determine the maximal

value of the enterprise. The division of this value between the union

and shareholder claimants, then, is the result of the negotiating

process.

     The union members' wealth Consists of the value of their labor ser-

vices at the enterprise. Each member of' the union has Identical labor

market opportunities outside the bargaining unit. The preferences of

the union are modeled using the following definitions:




     6James Brown and Orley Ashenfelter (1986) use the term strongly
efficient to refer to the rent maximization model of John Dunlop (1944).
Other theoretical analyses based on strong efficiency include Sherwin
Rosen (1969), Robert Hall and David Lilien (1979), and Edward Lazear
 (1983). Weak efficiency refers to the model in which the outcome lies
on the contract curve but the union's objective may be any function of
wages and employment. Analyses based on weak efficiency include George
DeMenil (1971), Ian McDonald and Robert Solow (1981), Andrew Oswald
(1984), David Card (l986a, b).    Thomas MaCurdy and John Pencavel (1986),
and Randall Eberts and Joe Stone (1986). In the models of Henry Farber
(l978a), James Dertouzous and Pencavel (1981), Pencavel (1984) the union
chooses the wage rate and the firm chooses employment. Finally, in the
models of Farber (1978b) and Ashenfelter and George Johnson (1969) the
firms acts optimally given arbitrary union behavior. See Farber
(forthcoming) for a review.
                                  —7—

                L m employed union work force,

                 w   any negotiated wage rate,

                x z alternative wage rate, and

        (w -   x)L   period return to the union members.

All variables are measured over an arbitrary time period (taken to be

one month in the empirica1 analysis). Since the alternative wage rate

depends on conditions in the economy as a whole, new information about

this wage rate is produced continuously. For the moment, assume that

information about the alternative wage rate is available to both union

members and shareholders.

     The shareholders wealth consists of the difference between the

revenues of the enterprise and the wealth of the union members. The

enterprise faces product market conditions that are influenced by

external economic factors. The preferences of the shareholders, then,

can be modeled as:

                y    factors affecting revenue,

          R(L,y)     period revenue of the enterprise, and

     R(L,y) — wL     period return to the shareholders.7

The factors affecting the enterprise's revenue change constantly as a

result of changes in economic conditions. For the moment, assume that




    7th this formulation, I assume that non—union workers, materials,
physical capital, and other inputs are obtained by means of specific
purchase contracts only. For technical clarity only the union workers
and the shareholders have residual claims. See Rosen (1969) for an
early analysis of the equity claims that non-union workers may have in
this scenario (threat effects). Lazear (1983) and William Dickens
(1985) consider union membership and threat effects in an equilibrium
context.
                                              —8—


information about these factors is also common to both union members and

 shareholders.

        The relevant present value of wealth functions may be defined as:

                    yE       maximum value of the enterprise,

                    V1       maximum union members' wealth, and

                             maximum shareholders' wealth.

As is well-known the efficient outcomes of bargaining over wages and

employment maximize any convex combination of                 and     .   The opti-

mal employment choice and the value of the enterprise may be determined

without reference to the negotiated wage rate. This value is given by:


               yE(Q)         max E[ $R(L. ,y) —              xL   1
where

                         m set of all information known at the
                            beginning of period t

                             nominal, risk adjusted discount factor, and

              Ela I bJ       conditional expectation of a given b


For any strongly efficient outcome, then, the union and shareholder

values are given by:


        (2)
               v'3(cz)
                         =
                             jt    .J_tEI(w
                                               —
                                                   x)L   I




and


        (3)   vs(c2) =       vE(clt)
                                       -



where
                                  —9—

             w.   m wage rate negotiated in an efficient bargain and


             L.      employment in an efficient bargain.


An important implication of the strongly efficient bargain is that the

optimum size of union employment depends on current external information

and does not depend on the negotiated wage rate.8

     In order to derive the expected consequences of changes in the

bargaining information on outcomes of the negotiation, it is necessary

to model the solution to the efficient bargain. The strongly efficient

bargaining game with infinite horizon and common information satisfies

the assumptions of Ariel Rubenstein's (1982) model. Each bargaining round

the union and the shareholders know     ;    therefore,   the expected size of

the "total pie" is common information. Assume that no production can

occur unless there is an agreement on wage rates. Then, because of the

absence of informational asymmetries, there will always be such an

agreement.9 The negotiated outcome w        will split V E   between the

union and the shareholders with shares determined by the bargaining pro—

tocol used by the pair.1° Model the division of the value by:



    8Card (1986b) makes the important point that if the empirical speci-
fication of the information set is incomplete, employment may appear to
depend upon the negotiated wage rate because that rate is a leading
indicator of the missing external information.

    9As specified, the theoretical model does not permit strikes because
there are no informational asymmetries. Introduction of these asym-
metries produces rational strikes. See John Kennan (forthcoming) for a
review of the structure of these models.

   10Melvin Reder and George Neumann (1980) use the term "bargaining
protocol" to refer to the implicit negotiation rules the union and
shareholders use. In the language of game theory the exact division is
determined by the timing of offers and cost of delaying an offer during
bargaining. See Sheena McConnell (1986) for a good exposition.
                                             -10—

         (4) w° = T wU + (1 -   i) w
 where
                  T       the parameter controlling the division of
                          the value of determined by bargaining,11

                          wage of the efficient bargain with the
                          same value to the union as the best
                          inefficient bargain, and

                          wage of the efficient bargain with the same
                          value to the shareholders as the best
                          inefficient bargain.

     Before relaxing the assumptions of the strongly efficient model,

consider its implications for the relation between negotiation activity

and the value of common stock. In the strongly efficient model, we may

hold information constant from any date t forward. In period t              ,   the
information set           is known by both the union and the shareholders.

Therefore, the market value of the shareholders' wealth as of date t

completely reflects current information about collective bargains that

will occur at all future dates. Suppose a negotiation is concluded at
                                                        0
date t + s with the announcement of settlement w
                                                        t+s
                                                                .   This
settlement will depart from the expectation at date t by the forecast

error:

                      0         0
     (5) et+s    =w t+s —E[w        t4-s   fc2
                                             t


Since the forecast error has mean zero as of date t         ,   the announcement
of a settlement at date t + s has no informational content, on average.

In labor negotiations the actual date of settlement is unknown prior to




   11This is the parameterization of the bargaining outcome used by
Svejnar (1986) in his analysis of the relative bargaining power in U.S.
wage settlements.
                                   —11—

 the conclusion of the negotiation. Since the information content of the

 settlement is contained in the sign and magnitude of the forecast error

       on average, market adjusted security returns for enterprises that

 announce a collective bargaining agreement on a particular date should

not systematically differ from zero.'2 The sign and magnitude of the

change in shareholders' value should depend on the change in union mem-

bers' wealth. When the settlement forecast error     et÷ is realized, it
conveys Information about the realized value of T and changes in the

external information as revealed in t+s      Since       is not affected

by the value of T , we have the strong prediction:


     (6)
                  ar

     To determine the effects of new information about product market

conditions and the opportunity cost of labor, a model of the effect of

these variables on the distribution parameter T is required. In

general, the effects of these variables On T will be ambiguous.

Therefore, the predictions of the strong efficiency model with respect

to the arrival of new external information will be stated as functions

of the effect of this information on the settlement.l3 The effects of



   121n the language of Eugene Fama et. al. (1969) the announcement of a
collective bargaining agreement is not new information, therefore, there
is no event to which the security price can react. Accountants will
recognize this argument as essentially the same reasoning underlying the
claim by Ray Ball and P. Brown (1968) that the release of a firm's
annual earnings should not, by itself, produce any stock market reac—
tion. Susan Liberty and Jerold Zimmerman (1986) elaborate on the rela-
tion between labor negotiations, accounting earnings and stock returns.

   13me sign and magnitude of the effect of opportunity cost and reve-
nue shifter information on actual settlements may be determined empiri-
cally. The present model will make no predictions about these
relations.
                                                        —12—

 a change in the revenue shifter y are:

                                        o                                          0
       U
      3V
                             .        aW.                                  aL.
           =            j—t—s El
                                       ay           j
                                                        + (w°
                                                             j
                                                                 —
                                                                     x.)
                                                                      3        ay
                                                                                           I       tI

                                                        0

           = .!+S       j—t—s E[—- —                         L   -
                                                                     (w
                                                                           —
                                                                                x3)


If the new information about revenues increases the negotiated settle-

ment, the effect on union wealth is positive (provided the revenue

shifter also increases L°) and the effect on shareholder wealth is

ambiguous. If the new revenue information decreases the settlement

wage, the effect on union wealth is ambiguous and the effect on share-

holder wealth depends on the direct effect of the revenue shifter on

revenue.

     The effects of a change in the opportunity cost of labor are:

                                            0                                                  0
           =            j—tS EI(—'              —
                                                    l)L      ÷   (w    —
                                                                           x.)
               jt+s

      VS =

               .j=t+s
                         .
                                 El
                                        o
                                      aw.
                                       a L-                 (w   —
                                                                     x.)
                                                                           3L.
                                                                               0

                                                                                       I       I
If the new information about opportunity wages increases the wage

settlement, the effect on union wealth is ambiguous. If the new infor-

mation decreases the wage settlement, then the direction of the effect

on union wealth depends on the direct effect of the opportunity cost on

L° (usually negative). If the new information decreases the settlement
                                   -13—

 wage and employment, then the effect on shareholder wealth is positive.

 Otherwise, the effect is ambiguous.

      In order to compare the predictions of the strongly efficient

 bargaining model with those of alternative models, it is necessary to

 specify the value of shareholders' and union members' wealth under the

 alternative. The most commonly used alternative model for the outcome

of collective bargains assumes that the contract negotiations determine

 the wage rate and that the managers determine the level of employment

unilaterally.14 I will refer to this particular form of inefficient

outcome as "inefficient bargaining."

     It is not in the shareholders' interest to permit management to

bargain inefficiently. The value of the enterprise and the value of the

shareholders' wealth are both lower under inefficient bargaining than

under the strongly efficient solution. Nevertheless, it may not be

possible to achieve the strongly efficient solution. Then, the loss in

shareholders' wealth given inefficient bargaining may be capitalized

once and for all when the bargaining unit is formed.15 Anticipated

changes in the negotiated wage rate under Inefficient bargaining do not

exchange wealth dollar for dollar between the union and the share-

holders. This result is similar to the effect of changes in the infor—




   14This is the model called the labor demand curve model by
Dertouzos and Pencavel (1981). It is most closely related to a
model proposed by Dunlop (1944).

    '5This is the interpretation Richard Ruback and Martin Zimmerman
(1984) give to their finding that the value of shareholders' wealth
declines when a union is successful in forming a new bargaining unit.
                                              —14—

mation set on the values under strong efficiency.

        Unanticipated changes in the negotiated wage rate are more dif-

ficult to model with inefficient bargaining. To illustrate the com-

parison between the two types of bargaining consider a single period

division of the enterprise wealth under strongly efficient and inef-

ficient bargaining. A strongly efficient bargain maximizes the value of

the enterprise and divides the quasi-rents among the union members and

shareholders. An inefficient bargain allows the union members and

shareholders to negotiate over wage rates but allows the shareholders

unilaterally to determine employment.

        Suppose the enterprise revenue function is:


        (7) R(L,y) = yL     —


where

                  L and y are defined above, and

                  e       nonrandom revenue parameter.


     This revenue function implies that marginal revenue is linear in

both y and L .           Suppose that the union objective function is:


        (8) V =   (w —   x)L

The shareholder objective function is then:


        (9) V = yL -            -wL


A strongly efficient bargain solves:


        (10)   = max (yL —      L2
                                2
                                      - xL)
                  L
                                                  —15—

        In the strongly efficient solution any wage rate that divides the

 quasi-rent among the union members and the shareholders is efficient. A

 solution to the bargaining problem has the form:


                           = Y        x
        (11) L°(x,y)


        (12) w°(x,y,T) =
                             T(y       +
                                           x)    + (1 —
                                                          T)(y   +
                                                                     x)
        (13)           +



and

        (14) wS =      +

                                                             0
In    this solution to the bargaining problem w                      is a T weighted

average of the union members' reservation wage wU and the share-

holders' reservation wage wS .                   These reservation wages are deter-

mined by finding the division of the value of the enterprise that leaves

the union members and shareholders, respectively, indifferent between

the strongly efficient and Inefficient bargains. The resulting values

are:



       (15)    =
                    9( — I)      (Y        X)2



       (16) Vs =       + I)      (Y        X)2


and


       (17) yE = Q(Y_—_X)2
                 2   0


       The fundamental proposition of equal tradeoffs between union and

shareholder wealth can be simply stated in this model as:
                                                                   -16-

       (18) L =        -              - X)2

and

                                      —
      (19)
                     - +
                           (Y
                           8          o
                                           X)2


Clearly   the reactions are equal in magnitude and opposite in direction.

      For the analysis of market valuations of shareholders' wealth we

need to evaluate the conditional expectation of the union members' and

shareholders' values, given x and y                                        and the conditional expectation

of the shareholders' value, given the innovation in union wealth. These

expected values are:



      (20) E[VU y, x] = (w°                            —
                                                            x)L°

      (21) VU — E[VU] = (w°                        —



                                               ÷ X—
      (22)   E[VS 1    y,x]       =
                                          (Y


      (23) V8 - E[V8]             = — (wO               -

      (24)   E[V8 - EIV8J             IV - EIVU]]                   = — (VU —
                                                                                EIVUJ)


      (25)       =   _(l      +
                                  x)           +       (1   —   )   (y ÷   x)
and

      (26) f =       E[T   y, x]


      Equation (24) is the regression relation that connects unexpected

changes in shareholder wealth to unexpected changes in union wealth.
                                                        —17—

 According to this model the theoretical regression coefficient is —l

 Because equations (21) and (23) are linear in the unexpected change in

 the negotiated wage rate, the regression equation in (24) has a theore-

 tical coefficient of -l regardless of the sign or magnitude of the

 unexpected change in union wealth. Specifically,


        (27) E[VS - EIVSJ        I    VU - EIVUI          and w° _O = - (VU       -
                                                                                      EIVU])

and


        (28) E[VS -       EV5]       VU   -               and w .O =       — (VU - EIVU])
                                 j            EIVU]


        Now consider the inefficient bargain in which the negotiated wage

outcome is denoted simply by w .                        After   the negotiation the share-

holders may optimize employment. The resulting shareholders' value is:


        (29) Z = max (yL -           L2       -
                                                  wL) =   (Y_-_w)2
                      L              2                    2   0


The employment outcome is

                       —
        (30) L = (Y        W)



The unexpected change in the value of union wealth, evaluated at the

expected level of employment, is:


        (31)   Z — E[ZU]        = (w —        j)L
where

               Z =   (w -   x)L

Finally, the required expectations are:

                                                    2
                S
      (32) E[Z y, x)              —2L +——
                                 =—
                                       ea
                                                   -18—


                                 9                       —2
        (33) Z E[ZS] =                [Y W)2 -


        (34) E[ZS — E[ZSI        I
                                          — EIZU}I   =    (— — 1)            (ZU —   EIZU])
                                                              2wa2

where


              a         ,   minus the elasticity of average demand for labor;
                   L9


              L    (Y       W)       , average    demand for labor;


                   E1w I    y,       x]   ,   the expected settlement;


              a     Var[w y, xJ                 the variance of the settlement;

and

                   Skew[w y, x]                 E[(w -    )3         y, xJ      the skewness of the
                   wage settlement.

      Equation (34) is the inefficient bargaining analogue of equation

(24). Although equation (31) seems to imply that the union ignores the

possibility that the shareholders may change L after w is nego-

tiated, the model does not assume that either the union or the share-

holders ignore this possibility. The expression for Z correctly

allows for ex p changes to L based on w .                                    The quantity

ZU - E1IZUJ is the empirical analogue of V —                          E{V'J     from the efficient

bargain; it is not the unexpected change in union wealth given inef-

ficient bargaining. Holding employment at the pre-agreement level per-

mits comparison of the theoretical regression coefficients in the two

bargaining models. This comparison requires an expression for the
                                                     -19—

 covariance between innovations in union wealth, holding employment

 constant, and innovations in shareholder wealth given the shareholders'

 reaction to the inefficient contract. That is, equation (34) measures

 the conditional expectation of unexpected shareholder wealth changes

 under inefficient bargaining given measured unexpected union wealth

 changes, under the assumption of no employment adjustment, in order to

compare the expected coefficient in equation (34) with the one in

 equation (24).

       Equation (34) shows that maintaining linear marginal revenue

 implies that either zero elasticity of demand (a =                              0)   or symmetric

wage expectation errors (p = 0)                     are sufficient to make the expected

regression coefficient, assuming inefficient bargaining, -l                               .
                                                                                                  However,
because of the nonlinearity of equation (33), if one conditions on only

positive or negative unexpected union wealth changes, substantially dif-

ferent regression coefficients result.

       The expression for the covariance between                             -
                                                                                 EZS]    and
   -
       E[ZUI   ,   conditional on y and x , is:

       (35) Cov[ZS — EIZSI        ,            — EIZ"I       f   x]   =



                   Er(Y
                        -             -                  -            -
               2    L
                        9 W)3(W           W)       2(Y
                                                         e W)2   (W       W)2 + (Y - W) (W - W)3]
                                      e                               o            e       e

       Since the mean forecast error for the wage change is 0                                 ,   if we
consider only positive union wealth changes then:


       (36) E[('')3 (w_w)w>] >0,


       (37) E[( W) (W        1)3               >         >0
                                                 —20—

and

                                                            _2
        (38) E[( W)2 (W            W)2       >         >


The expression in equation (38) is also the conditional variance of
   -
        E[ZU]   ,   given that w is greater than its mean. Therefore, the
conditional regression coefficient considering only positive unexpected

changes in union wealth is:


        (39) E[ZS — E[ZS]     ZU         E[ZUJ        w >        =   (4)
                                                                           —
                                                                               I)   (ZU —   E[Z9)

where     4) > 0 because of (36) and (37). When only positive unexpected

changes are considered, the regression of the unexpected change in

shareholder wealth on the unexpected change in union wealth should yield

a coefficient larger than -l (between -l and ) under inefficient

bargaining. If we consider only negative unexpected changes in union

wealth, then the regression coefficient is:


        (40) E[z8 — E{ZS]      ZU — E[ZU]         ,   w < w] =       (I'   —
                                                                               1) (Z —      E{Z9)

where r < 0 due to the sign reversals in equations (36) and (37) when

the conditioning is reversed. In this case, then, inefficient

bargaining implies that the regression coefficient should be less than

-l (between - and            -1).

       Equations (24), (27) and (28) imply that the expected regression

coefficient is always —l in the efficient case even if we restrict our

attention to positive or negative unexpected changes in union wealth.

Unless the distribution of negotiated wages is degenerate (a2 = 0)                                  ,   it
                                           —21—

is impossible for equations (34), (39), and (40) simultaneously to imp1y

 that the regression coefficient under study is -1 with inefficient

bargaining. That is, i       ,       , and F cannot be zero simultaneously.
 In general, a     0 or .L       0   ,   hence, decomposing the unexpected union
              1'

wealth change into positive and negative outcomes produces a regression

with equal expected coefficients on both positive and negative outcomes

only under efficient bargaining, tinder inefficient bargaining if the

marginal revenue function is linear in employment, then, positive unan-

ticipated changes in the negotiated wage rate decrease shareholder

wealth by less than a dollar for every dollar increase in union wealth.

Under the same conditions, negative unanticipated changes in the nego-

tiated wage rate increase shareholder wealth by more than a dollar for

every dollar decrease in union wealth. Linear marginal revenue and sym-

metric expectation errors imply that the average effect of unanticipated

changes in union wealth on shareholder wealth is -l regardless of

bargaining regime. This is a very special result. Any curvature in the

marginal revenue function or asymmetry in the forecast error distribu-

tion will eliminate the exact dollar for dollar tradeoff, on average,

for unanticipated changes in shareholder wealth under inefficient

bargaining.

     A third interpretation of the wealth tradeoffs between union mem-

bers and shareholders arises from considering a nonstochastic version of

the one period inefficient bargaining model.16 Let $             (w -   x)/x



   161 am grateful to George Johnson for pointing out this interpreta-
tion. See his 1986 paper for other elaborations of efficient and inef-
ficient contracting models.
                                                             —22—

the union-nonunion wage differential. Then, using standard envelope

theorem results:


        (41)         =
                         L[l   —       t       a]

                 S
        (42)         = —L


and

        (43)
               aVS —
                   —     —         i       +
                             1 +       $(l          —   a)

The expression in equation (43) approaches -i as either the union—

nonunion wage differential or the elasticity of labor demand approach

zero. This interpretation presumes that most statistical variation in

w, L,     and VS arises from factors that are fundamentally observable to

the union members and shareholders but not observable to the statistical

analyst. To the extent the observed variation in these quantities is

the result of new information to the union members and shareholders,

this nonstochastic model must be interpreted using the regression

equations (24), and (34).

        In summary, under efficient bargaining unanticipated changes in the

settlement that do not involve changes in the external economic

information used by the bargainers exchange wealth between the share-

holders and union members dollar for dollar. This result holds for all

forms of the revenue function and all solutions to the efficient

bargain. The tradeoff is linear regardless of the sign, magnitude, or

distribution of the unanticipated change in union members' wealth.

Under inefficient bargaining, the average effect of unanticipated

changes in union members' wealth on shareholders' wealth is negative.
                                    —23-

 However, the tradeoff is only dollar for dollar, on average, in the spe—

 cial case of linear marginal revenue and symmetric unanticipated wealth

 changes for the union. Otherwise, the average effect depends upon the

 curvature of the marginal revenue function. Under inefficient

 bargaining, the magnitude of the unanticipated wealth change for the

 shareholders depends upon both the sign and magnitude of the unan-

 ticipated change in union members' wealth.

      The final specification question considered is the effect of

various types of measurement errors on the regression equations (24),

 (27), (28) and (34), (39), (40).   I consider two types of measurement

error. The first type arises if the scale of VU - E[VU]     is incorrect;

that is, if the present value of union members' wealth is systematically

overstated or understated in percentage terms. In this case the

regression coefficients in equations (24) and (34) will be biased:

towards zero if VU — E[VU] is overstated and toward infinity if

VU — E[VU]   is understated. In either case, the regression coefficients

in equations (27) and (28) will reproduce the bias and the regresion

coefficients in equations (39) and (40) will bracket the biased coef-

ficient (instead of bracketing -l .)    The implications of efficient and

inefficient contracting are, therefore, exactly the same as in the

unbiased case.

     The second type of measurement error occurs if VU - E[VU]      must be

decomposed into a true forecasting error an error arising from

incomplete information in the forecasting equation. In these cases the

regression coefficients in all equations are biased towards zero;
                                   —24—

however, the implications of efficiency and inefficiency are preserved.

The coefficients in equations (27) and (28) remain identical to the

coefficient in (24) while the coefficients in equations (39) and (40)

bracket the coefficient in equation (34).


2. Weasuring the Expected Change in Union We.bers' Wealth

     In this section I discuss the development of bargaining unit level

data that measure the wage settlement, bargaining unit size, and value

of the shareholders' claim. These data come from a variety of sources.

Each source, and the computations performed on the data from that

source, is documented in the Data Appendix that accompanies this paper.

The data were merged using manual and computer assisted methods. The

resulting merged file was checked against the original published sources

for a sample of the bargaining pairs.

     The basic data on the collective bargaining outcomes were derived

from an archival copy of the information published in Collective

Bargaining Negotiations and Contracts   between January 1976 and June
1984. There are 10,771 negotiations reported for the seven year period

from January 1976 to December 1982. For each contract the BNA reported

the company name, company division, union, local, type of bargaining

unit(s), number of employees covered, location of the bargaining unit(s),

industry, settlement date, contract term, whether there was a strike

before settlement, and a variety of measures of the negotiation

outcome.17 The union was identified by the standard BLS iden-



   17These data are more extensive than other bargaining unit level
data. However, they cover a shorter time span. Harold Grubert (1968)
and Daniel Hameriuesh (1970) appear to have been the first to make exten-
sive use of bargaining pair data. Farber (1978b) extended the
bargaining pair data of Hamermesh. Wayne Vroman (1982, 1984, 1986) has
                                   —25-

 tification number. The industry was identified by the four digit

 Standard Industrial Classification. No standard identifier was provided

for the firm.

     I merged CUSIP identifiers for up to four different employer firms

 into every contract for which either the company or division name

matched a name on the master CUSIP list maintained by the Center for

Research on Security Prices at the University of Chicago. The master

CUSIP list identifies any company that had a security traded on the New

York Stock Exchange (NYSE) since 1925, traded on the American Stock

Exchange (AMEX) since 1962, or had financial information listed in the

Compustat data base since 1945. The CIJSIP identifier provides the link

to security and financial data. The matching process was partially

automated so that a research assistant could try many different forms

of the name before concluding that no match was possible.

     There were 4,212 contracts that could be linked to either NYSE or

AMEX security data. There were 3,833 contracts that could be linked to

Compustat financial data. The major reason for failure to link was that

the contract was negotiated by a multiple employer bargaining unit in




developed bargaining pair data from the Current Wage Develop.ents.
These data were also used by Beverly Hirtle (1985, 1986), who merged
security price data, to model strike activity. Tracy (1984, l986a,
1986b) makes extensive use of bargaining pair data from the Collective
Bargaining Calendar merged with financial data from CRSP to study asym-
metric information strike models. Tracy does not have settlement infor-
mation. Wallace Hendricks and Lawrence Kahn (1984, 1985) have
settlement data for the bargaining pairs but do not have links to finan-
cial and security data. Cynthia Gramm (1983) has made use of the
Hendricks and Kahn data to study the relation between wage settlements
and strikes.
                                  —26—

the construction industry. All construction industry contracts have

been removed from the analysis discussed in this paper. The second

major reason for failure to link was that the employer was not a

publicly held corporation. The third major reason for failure to link a

CUSIP identifier was that the company and/or division name could not be

found on the master list. Such employers may have financial data but

these data are not available at present.

     Closely held firms do not release financial data. Public sector

employers and not—for-profit organizations do not have financial data

that can be meaningfully compared to the stock market valuation and

annual reports of publicly held firms. However, there are many simi-

larities in the collective bargaining agreements negotiated in all of

these settings. All non—construction non—government contracts remain in

the analyses discussed in this paper except when financial data for the

firm are used.18

     The information on the wage settlement was used to construct the

expected hourly wage rate for a representative member of the bargaining

unit during each month of the contract up to a maximum of 48 months,

given information available as of the date of settlement. This sequence

of expected contract wage rates included all scheduled deferred payments

and an estimate of the amount due to contingent COLA payments. The

estimated COLA amounts were based on the previous 12 month change in the

Consumer Price Index for Wage and Salary Workers on the date of settle-




   1851C's 10—14, 20—89 are all included. SIC's 15—17 (Construction)
and 90-99 (Governmental Services) are excluded.
                                   —27—

 ment and the table of typical COLA formulas in Hendricks and Kahn (1985,

 p. 102). In constructing the expected COLA payment, I used the actual

 payment interval and first payment date in the data. The formulas in

 Hendricks and Kahn were then used to estimate the expected size of the

 payment. See the Data Appendix for details.

      Approximately 40% of the contracts had missing information on the

number of workers covered. These contracts appear to encompass pri-

marily small bargaining units with less than 1,000 workers.   I developed

an imputation formula for the missing number of workers based on the

conditional expected bargaining unit size given that the unit was less

than 1,000 workers and given the industry of the employer. The results

reported here make use of this imputation but do not adjust measures of

precision to reflect imputation uncertainty.

     Table 1 contains a summary of the number of workers covered in the

BNA collective bargaining agreements by major industry group and year of

settlement. Summary data are provided for manufacturing, non—

manufacturing and all contracts. For comparison purposes I also report

the number of workers covered by contracts that the BLS lists as

expiring in the same year as the BNA settlements.19 The number of

workers covered by BNA settlements follows the general pattern of

bargaining found in BLS statistics for large bargaining units. The only

major discrepancy occurs in 1982, when settlement was delayed into 1983

for several significant manufacturing agreements that expired in 1982.




   '9These data are derived froM the BLS Bargainliig Calendar, published
annually from 1976 to 1982.
                                               Table I

   Number of Workers Covered by Settlements in the BNA's Collective Bargaining Negotiations
   and Contracts Compared to the Number of Workers Covered in the BLS's Bargaining Calendar
                           by Major Industry Group by Year (in thousands)



Industry                1976      1977      1978         979       1980         1981      982      All


Manufactur ng
   BNA                 1,726     1.417      530      1.564        1.095         487       866    7.684
   BLS                 1,838     1.636      466      1,720        1,282         550     2,002    9,495

Nonmanufactur i   ng
   BNA                   959     1,225     1,572         941      1,356     1,100       1,012    8,165
   BLS                 1,673     2,352      900      1,578        1,559     1,365       1,163   10,589

All Industries
   BNA                 2,684     2,641    2,101      2,505        2,451     1,587       1,878   15.849
   BLS                 3,510     3.988    1,366      3,298        2,842     1.915       3,165   20,084

Notes:
     a. Nonmanufacturing and All Industries exclude construction and governmental services.

Sources:
     I. BNA data from Collective Bargaining Negotiations       and Contracts,   1976 to 1982.
     2. BLS data from Bargaining Calendar, 1976 to 1982.
                                         -28—

 The BNA agreements cover between 1.5 million workers (1981) and 2.7

 million workers (1976).

        Table 2 shows that number of collective bargaining agreements by

 major industry group and year of settlement. The overall sample is

 approximately 60% manufacturing agreements and 40% nonmanufacturing

 agreements. The manufacturing agreements represent all sectors. The

nonmanufacturing agreements are concentrated in the transport, com-

munication, utility, grocery store, and certain service industries.

Unions of municipal, state, and postal service employees are not

included. The largest number of contracts settle in 1977, the smallest

in 1979. Comparable numbers are also reported for the BLS Bargaining

Calendar.
        On the basis of the wage settlement data in the BNA agreements it

is possible to calculate the compound annual growth of the wage rate

(inclusive of expected COLA payments) over the life of the contract.

The formula for this growth rate is given by


        (44)     =
                     t+l2c         - 1



where           the compound annual growth of the wage rate over the life
                of the contract beginning in month t

         w_i the wage prevailing in month t -     1

         c      the number of years the contract runs.


Table 3 presents a summary of the compound annual growth rate of

expected wages for manufacturing, nonmanufacturing and all industries.

For comparison purposes the table also presents published BLS summaries
                                               Table 2

    Number of Collective Bargaining Agreements Reported in the BNA's Collective Bargaining
       Negotiations and Contracts Compared to the Number of Expirations Reported in the
                     BLSs Bargaining Calendar by Major Industry Group by Year



Industry                 976      1977      1978         1979    1980        1981      982      All


Manufacturing
   BNA                   754     1,019      637          586     690         642       560    4,888
   BLS                   341       458      221          292     387         259       351    2.309

Nonmanufactur I ng
   BNA                  429       502        365         312     444         363       380    2.795
   BLS                   372      401       236          318     320         266       261    2.174

All Industries
   BNA                 1,183     1,521     1.002         898    1.134    1,005         940    7,683
   BLS                   713      859       457          610      707        525       612    4.483

Notes:
     a. Nonmanufacturing and All Industries exclude construction and governmental services.

Sources:
      I. BNA data from Collective Bargaining Negotiations and   Contracts,   1976 to 1982.
     2. BLS data from Bargaining Calendar, 1976 to 1982.
                                        —29—


of the average annual growth rate of wages for contracts settled during

the indicated year. The BLS numbers, which I cannot reproduce because

the Bureau will not release the microdata for research purposes, are not

strictly comparable. The BLS makes no estimate of expected COLA

payments and computes a simple, not a compound, annual average growth

rate. Table 3 shows that there are substantial differences in the wage

adjustments calculated by my method as compared to the BLS method. In

general, taking account of the expected COLA payments results in higher

compound growth rates.'      For manufacturing the annual growth rate of

negotiated wage rates, using information available in the month of

settlement is 3.4 percentage points higher than the BLS estimate over

the 1976-1982 period. In nonmanufacturing the COLA adjusted estimate is

1.6 percentage points higher, on average.


3. Weasuring   the   Relation Between   Union and Shareholder Wealth
     There are four steps in my analysis of the relation between union

and shareholder wealth. First, I convert the information on wage rates,

settlement date, unit size and industry from the collective bargaining

agreement into an estimate of total labor cost. Second, I develop a

forecasting model for the present value of labor cost that decomposes

the cost of realized collective bargains into expected and unexpected

components. Third, I develop an estimate of the unexpected change in




     20Th 1981 my procedure results in a lower estimate for nonmanufac-
turing agreements than the BLS estimate. This appears to be due to dif-
ferences in the coverage between CBC and the Current Wage Developsents
sources.
                                              Table 3

   Expected Compound Annual Growth Rate Calculated f or 8NA Wage Settlements Compared with
   Simple Annual Rate of Adjustment over the Life of the Agreement As Reported by the BLS
                       by Major Industry Group by Year (percentage per year)



                        1976      1977      978         1979     1980      1981      1982         All
Industry

Manufacturing
   BNA                   8.2      8.0       8.5         10.2     10.3      10.1       6.1         8.8
   BLS                   6.0      5.5       6.6         5.4      5.4        6.1       2.6         5.4

Nonmanufactur   ing
   BNA                   8.4      7.7       8.6         iO.2     I i.4      6.9       5.2         8.4
   BLS                   6.8      6.0       6.4          6.8      8.3       8.8       4.7         6.8

All Industries
   BNA                   8.4      7.7       8.6         0.2      10.9       7.9       5.6         8.6
   BLS                   6.4      5.7       6.5         6.1      6.7        7.5       3.5         6.1

Notes:
     a. Nonmanufacturing and All Industries exclude     construction and governmental services.

Sources:
     I. BNA data are employment weighted average compound annual growth rates over the life
         of the new agreement, including expected COLA payments (Collective Bargaining
         Negotiations and Contracts, January 1976 to December 1982. archival data files).
     2. BLS data are average percent adjustments in wages in major collective bargaining
         settlements over the life of the contract at an annual rate of change (Crrent Wage
           Developments, December 1983. page 36). BLS figures exclude expected COLA payments
           but are employment weighted.
                                   -30-

shareholder wealth from security price movements around the time of

settlement. Fourth, I relate the unexpected changes in shareholder

wealth to the unexpected changes in union wealth using the regression

equations developed in the first Section. This Section discusses each

step in turn. The Data Appendix contains detailed examples of the

calculations.

     Table 4 illustrates the process of estimating the present value of

labor cost based on the information in the collective bargain and

ancillary information from public data sources. The Table shows the

average values of the components of the present value of labor cost for

a11 settlements in each year. The hourly wage rates are taken from my

projection of the contract wage rates, including both scheduled deferred

increases and expected COLA payments. Annual hours of work is 52.1424

times the BLS estimate of weekly hours and weekly overtime.21 Annual

wage cost per worker is the product of the first year contract wage rate

and annual hours of work. Annual fringe benefit cost per worker is the

percentage of gross pay represented by legally required payments,

insurance, pensions and other items (excluding pay for time not worked

and overtime) times annual wage cost per worker.22 The first year

cost per worker is the sum of annual wage cost per worker and annual

fringe benefit cost per worker based on the first year wage rate. Second




   21Eap1oynt and earnings, Table C—2, annual averages for the previous
year by two—digit SIC industry groups, March, 1977—83.

  22p1oy Benefits, Table 6, annual averages for major industry
groups (essentially two—digit SIC based), 1975, 1977-82.
              F,
       Sflg                                                     ii
        Its                                                     I
       SW                                                            ii
       oWa
       anus
        •sk
            i                                                        Ii
                   in
                   isa.tee inis usa
                     — susw-ia      aa usa
                                 ia-ic in use iiius
                                            us—  weeisa sue
                                                        in —
                                                                     RI
                                    -                    -is
                                                                     F'
                                                         55
                        WfliS5afl5flflS9St
                   S_   t-fl Sfla4                       us-i




       lIt;                                                     I    ii
                   %    a
                   wieasee—i     us—
                   incin woeinis—a    susun
                                   steinis—a — —eus
       Is!                                          -           a    a

u—c,                                                                 d
13n
I. .
                   a    a    -- -
                                  —31—

and third year cost per worker are based on the second and third year

wage rates, respectively. The first, second, and third year wage rates

are the ones effective on the last month of the contract year.

     I converted these annual labor cost estimates into present values.

As the 'Length of New Contract" row of Table 4 shows, most workers are

covered by three year contracts; however, present values were calculated

using the actual contract length and using fixed horizons of one, three,

and nine years for all contracts. The projected annual labor costs were

reduced to present value using the Moody's BAA rate that prevailed

during the settlement month. The "Annual Interest Rate" row of the

Table summarizes these rates. The "Present Value per Worker" row shows

the present value of labor Cost per worker over the life of the new

contract. This is multiplied by the size of the bargaining unit to

obtain an estimate of the present value of labor cost for the bargaining

unit. The "Old PV per Bargaining Unit" row shows the present value of

labor cost assuming that the wage rate on the last month of the old

contract remains effective over the life of the new contract. The "New

PV per Bargaining Unit" row shows the projected present value of labor

cost associated with the new agreement.

     Consider next the related problems of forecasting the present value

of labor cost for the bargaining unit and measuring the unexpected

change in labor cost that is realized when the settlement is announced.

It is necessary to specify the horizon over which any unexpected change

in labor cost is likely to persist and to estimate a forecasting

equation for the relation between external information and the present
                                   —32—

 value of labor cost. Since the size of the unexpected change in union

 wealth depends substantially on both of these assumptions, I have syste-

 matically examined the effects of different present value horizons and

 different forecasting equations on the resulting measure of unexpected

 union wealth change.

     The only useful forecasts of labor cost must be based on infor-

 mation that is available prior to the day the collective bargaining

agreement is settled.   I consider two types of legitimate forecasting

 information: indicators of the state of the economy three months

before the date of settlement and indicators of the state of the

bargaining unit near the end of the previous contract. I also consider

two types of illegitimate forecasting information: estimates of the

industry-specific and year-specific differences among agreements. The

legitimate forecasting information can be known in advance of settle-

ment. The illegitimate information can only be known ex post.

Therefore, forecasts based on the industry and year effects are more

accurate than any true ex ante forecast.

     I forecast two different measures of the change in labor cost: the

compound annual growth rate of the contract wage ()     and the percen-
tage change in the present value of labor cost per worker between the

old and new contract (f1) •23 Table 5 presents the summary sta—




   23 terms of the items summarized in Table 4 this variable is
defined as 100 x ("New PV per Bargaining Unit"/"Old PV per Bargaining
Unit" - 1). The size of the bargaining unit cancels from the numerator
and denominator of the ratio since it was measured on the date of
settlement of the new contract.
                                  —33—

tistics and least squares regression results (weighted by the size of

the bargaining unit) for equations using three different information

sets and both measures of labor cost change.

     Table 5, Columns A-D present the results for equations predicting

the compound growth rate of wages. These results are most comparable to

other studies of the determinants of negotiated wage changes that use

bargaining unit level data.24 Column A presents means and standard

deviations for all of the major variables used in Columns B-D. Column B

presents the estimated regression coefficients and standard errors from

an equation that uses only major economy-wide predictors, all measured

three months prior to settlement. Column C includes two bargaining

unit-specific predictors, measured as of the end of the old contract.

Column D includes two-digit SIC industry effects and year—effects.

Columns B and C are very similar and quite consistent with other studies.

In particular, the inflation elasticity of about one-half is consistent

with other evidence. The unemployment elasticity of about -.6 is also

consistent with other evidence.25 As Column C shows, over this period

high wage bargaining units received lower wage increases and larger

units received higher increases. Column D shows that the inclusion of

industry and year effects substantially improves the goodness-of-fit of




         particular see W. Craig Riddell (1979) and Louis Christofides et
al. (1980) for Canada and Hamermesh (1970), Farber (1978b), Vroman
(1982, 1984, 1986), Svenjar (1986) and Hurtle (1986) for the United
States.

   25These equations are often called "micro—Phillips curves."
Hamermesh (1970), Riddell (1979), and Vroman (1982) interpret their
results for similar equations in this manner.
                                                                                  Table 5

   Estimates of the Effects of Economy—wide, Bargaining Unit-specific, and Industry—specific Information on Annual Expected Wage
       Growth and Present Value of Labor Cost Growth for Wage Settlements Negotiated between January 1976 and December 982



           Wage Settlement Measure:                    Compound Annual Growth Rate                       Percentage Change   in   Present Value

                                                (A)           (B)          (C)             (0)            (E)         (F)              (G)         (H)
                                               Mean        Coeff.       Coeff.          Coeff.           Mean      Coeff.           Coeff.     Coeff.
Variable Name                              (S.Dev.)      (S.Err.)     (S.Err.)        (S.Err.)       (S.Dev.)    (S.Err.)         (S.Err.)   (S .Err.)

Percent Change in                                8.6         Dep.          Dep.             Dep.          8.2        Dep.             Dep.         Dep.
Wage Settlement Measure                         (3.2)                                                    (7.4)

Annual Percent Change in Consumer                8.8          0.52         0.55              0.45         8.8        0.93            0.95          0.22
Price Index for Wage & Salary                   (3.0)        (0.02)       (0.02)            (0.04)       (3.0)      (0.05)          (0.05)        (0.10)
Workers (lagged 3 months)

Annual Percent Change in Real                    3.0          0.22         0.13          —0.04            3.0        0.48            0.40          0.12
Gross National Product                          (2.7)        (0.02)       (0.02)         (0.03)          (2.7)      (0.06)          (0.06)        (0.08)
(lagged 3 months)

Annual Percent Change in Average                 7.9        -0.81         —0.66          —0.47            7.9       —1.81           —1.79         —1.13
Hourly Earnings of Nonagricul-                  (0.8)       (0.05)        (0.05)         (0.08)          (0.8)      (0.12)          (0.12)        (0.18)
tural Workers (lagged 3 months)

Civilian Unemployment Rate                       7.2        —0.64         —0.55              0.43         7.2       —2.08           —2.07         —0.03
(lagged three months)                           (1.0)       (0.06)         0.05             (0.12)       (1.0)      (0.13)          (0.13)        (0.28)

Log of the final wage rate in                   2.0                       —2.62          —4.02
the previous (expiring) contract               (0.3)                      (0.12)         (0.17)

Log of one year of labor cost                                                                             5.7                       —1.86     Note a
under old contract                                                                                       (2.3)                      (0.22)

Log of the size of the                          2.8                        0.05              0.07        2.8                         2.03          0.05
bargaining unit                                (2.2)                      (0.02)            (0.02)       (2.2)                      (0.23)        (0.04)

Intercept                                                   14.36         17.56             10.37                   37.74           42.57         21.55
                                                            (0.74)        (0.73)            (1.38)                  (1.72)          (1.82)        (3.22)

industry Effects                                               No            No              Yes                       No               No          Yes

Year Effects                                                   No            No              Yes                       No               No          Yes

tinweighted sample size                       7683                                                     7,683

Standard Error of Equation                                   2.87          2.78             2.50                     6.69            6.66          5.94

Adjusted R—squared                                           0.20          0.25             0.39                     0.19            0.20          0.36

Notes:
     a.    The equation   is   too coil inear to include this variable.

Sources:
     I. Wage Settlements from CollectiveBargaining Negotiations and Contracts January 1976 to December 1982.
     2. Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage & Salary Workers, not seasonally adjusted, Official BLS data.
     3. Real Gross National Product, not seasonally adjusted, Official Department of Conmerce data.
     4. Average Hourly Earnings for Nonagricultural Production Workers, not seasonally adjusted. Official BLS data.
     5. Civilian Unemployment Rate, not seasonally adjusted, Official BLS data.
                                    -34—

the equation; however, the effects of the economy and bargaining unit

information are substantially changed. The equation in Column D could

not have been used by an informed observed to predict wage settlements.

     Table 5, Columns E-H present the results for equations predicting

the percentage change in the present value of labor cost. Column E

presents summary statistics. Column F presents the regression coef-

ficients and standard errors for an equation that uses only economy-wide

information. Column G includes the bargaining unit-specific infor-

mation. Column H includes the industry and year effects. All results

for these equations are qualitatively similar to the results for the

wage rate growth equations.

     I used two meihods for decomposing the present value of labor Cost

into expected and unexpected components. The first method is based on

the wage rate growth forecast. Let E[V} represent the expected

present value of labor cost, C represent the annual labor cost based

on the old hourly wage rate,        represent the predicted compound

annual growth rate (from Table 5, Columns B—D) divided by 100,

represent the residual from the growth rate forecasting equation divided

by 100, and t represent the annual discount factor. Then, the present

value of expected labor cost over T years is


     E[V] =        (1   +
             j=l
The unexpected change in labor cost is (to a first order approximation):


     VU   - E[V]            t(1 +       C

The average values of expected union wealth and the unexpected change in
                                   —35—

 union wealth from these formulas are summarized in Table 4 in the Rows

 "Expected PV (Growth Method)" and "Unexpected PV (Growth Method)." The

 standard deviation of the unexpected change is summarized in the

 following row.26

      The second method for decomposing the present value of labor cost

 into expected and unexpected components is based on the forecasting

 equation for the percentage in change in present value. Let

 represent the present value over a horizon of T years of labor cost

 using the hourly wage rate at the end of the old contract, V repre-

 sent the present value over a horizon T years of labor cost using the

hourly wage rates in the new contract,      represent the predicted per-

 centage change in the present value over a horizon of T years (from

Table 5, Columns F—H) divided by 100, and 't represent the residual

from the percentage change in present value forecasting equation divided

by 100. Then, the present value of expected labor cost over T years

is


     EIVU] = (1 +
        t
                    f t,   VUt—l


The unexpected change in labor cost is:


                           I7




The average values of expected union wealth and the unexpected change in

union wealth from these formulas are summarized in Table 4 in the Rows

"Expected PV (Direct Method)" and "Unexpected PV (Direct Method)." The




   26The growth method summary statistics in Table 4 use the equation in
Table 5, Column C.
                                                    -36-

standard deviation is summarized in the following row.27

     Consider next the calculation of the expected shareholder wealth

and the unexpected change in shareholder wealth. The expected share-

holder wealth is given by the value of common stock on the last day of

the month three months prior to the settlement month. Call this E[VSJ

Let rt_2 ,    rt_l       ,   and       r represent the difference between the divi-

dend inclusive return on common stock in month t and the value weighted

return on the New York Stock Exchange during the same month. Then the

unexpected change in shareholder wealth is:


        —
            E[V']
                     =       ((1   +
                                       r2)   (1 +   ti     (1 +   rt)   — 1)
                                                                             E{V1

See the Data Appeniix for details of this calculation.

     Consider, finally, the effect of the new collective bargaining

agreement, and the resulting unexpected change in union wealth, on

shareholder wealth. Because of the way in which the information sets

were chosen, my measure of the unexpected change in union members'

wealth captures the effects of changes in a three month period beginning

two months prior to the settlement month and ending with the settlement

month. My measure of the unexpected change in shareholders' wealth cap-

tures the effects of changes over the same period of months.

Therefore, these two quantities correspond to the unexpected wealth

changes whose regression relation is modeled, under strong efficiency

assumptions, in equations (24), (27), and (28), and, under inefficiency




   27The direct method summary statistics in Table 4 use the equation in
Table 5, Column G.
                                  -37-

assumptions, in equations (34), (39), and (40). That is, they

correspond to unexpected wealth changes that are realized over the same

real time period.

     During the negotiation of the new collective bargaining agreement,

rational investors will adjust the value of shareholders' wealth to

reflect all the information about future labor cost contained in the

forecasting equations for union members' wealth. On the date of settle—

ment, the stock market will react to the new information; however, the

expected value of the new information is zero.   Stock prices should not

move systematically in either direction, on average. In a conventional

security price event study, then, one would not expect any substantial

excess return in the months surrounding the settlement of a new collec-

tive bargain.28 Analysis of the excess returns for the employers

involved in my collective bargains confirms this prediction. The

average excess return in the month of settlemnt is 0.17% (with a

standard error of 0.16). The cumulative excess return in the three

month period beginning two months before settlement and ending on the

settlement month is 0.83% (with a standard error of 0.27). Evidently,

there is some favorable information in the fact of settlement alone;

however, the magnitude is trivial.29




   28See Fama et al. (1969) for a description of the event study metho-
dology, See Steven Brown and Jerold Warner (1980) and G. William
Schwert (1981) for a summary of the statistical properties of these
tests.

   29This result should be compared to the —1.38% average excess return
on the announcement of a Certification drive and the -2.41% excess
return if the union is successful in winning the subsequent election
found by Richard Ruback and Martin Zimmerman (1984).
                                  -38-

     Regression analysis reveals substantial evidence that the sign and

magnitude of the unexpected change in union wealth affect the change in

shareholder wealth. Tables 6 and 7 summarize this evidence. Table 6

reports the summary statistics, regression coefficients, and standard

errors for an analysis of the effect of unexpected union wealth changes

on unexpected shareholder wealth changes when the union wealth change is

measured using the wage rate growth method. Table 7 reports similar

results when the unexpected union wealth change is measured using the

direct present value method. The Panels, Rows and Columns of both

Tables have identical interpretations. Panel A shows the results when

the horizon used to calculate the present value of the unexpected change

in union wealth is the length of the new contract. Panel B shows the

results when the horizon used to calculate the present value of the

unexpected change in union wealth is varied systematically from one year

to nine years for all contracts. Columns A—D report results for unex-

pected changes based on economy-wide forecasting information only (from

Table 5, Columns B and F). Columns E—H report results for unexpected

changes in union wealth based on all information including industry and

year effects (from Table 5, Columns D and H).

     The estimated effects in Tables 6 and 7 are very consistent with

the strong efficiency model. As Panel A of both tables shows, when the

length of the new contract is used as the horizon for unexpected union

wealth changes, the estimated effect of these changes on shareholder

wealth varies between -0.64 and -0.93 (from the Row "Unexpected Change

in Union Wealth over the life of the New Contract" and Columns B, F, and
                                                                                        Table 6

                        Estimates of the Effect of the Unexpected Change in Union Wealth on the
                                                                                                Unexpected Change in Shareholder Wealth
                               Using the Wage Rate Growth Forecasting Equations with Alternative Types of Forecasting Information

            Forecast Equation Type:       Excludes BU-specific    Information           Includes BU—specif ic Information                    Year and Industry Effects

                                            (A)         (B)        (C)         (0)        (E)          (F)        (6)           (H)         (I)         (J)        (K)        (L)
                                           Mean      Coeff.     Coeff.      Coeff.       Mean      Coeff.      Coeff.        Coeff.        Mean      Coeff.     Coeff.     Coeff.
Variable Name                          (S.Dev.)    (S.Err.)   (S.[rr.)    (S.Err.)   (S.Dev.)    (S.Err.)    (S.Err.)      (S.Err.)    (S.Dev.)    (S.Err.)   (S.Err.)   (S.Err.)
                                                                                                             ——       —
A.   Horizon Determined by the
     Length of the New Contract

Unexpected Change in Shareholder          —11.0       Dep.                              —11.0
                                                                  Dep.        Dep.                   Dep.          Dep.       Dep.        —11.0       Dep.        Dep.       Dep.
Wealth within 3 Months of Settle—        (340.3)                                       (340.3)                                           (340.3)
ment (millions of dollars)

Unexpected Change in Union Wealth         —0.2       —0.64       -0.65                    0.9       —0.63         -0.67                     0.1      —0.77      —0.77
over the Life of the New Contract         (50.5)     (0.18)      (0.18)                 (47.0)      (0.19)        (0.20)                  (34.5)     (0.36)     (0.36)
(millions of dollars)

Expected Bargaining Unit Wealth           215.4                   0.00                  2)4.3                      0.00                   215.2                 -0.00
over the Life of the New Contract      (1,405.7)                 (0.01)              (1,400.0)                    (0.01)               (1.411.4)                (0.01)
(millions of dollars)

Unexpected Change in Union Wealth           3.4                             —1.29        3.9                                  0.88          3.1                             0.50
Positive over the Life of the New         (30.4)                            (0.30)     (34.4)                                (CI.26)      (24.0)                           (0.51)
Contract (millions of dollars)

Unexpected Change in Union Wealth         —3.6                              —0.26       —3.0                                 —0.33         —3.1                             1.03
Negative over the Life of the New        (40.0)                             (0.23)     (31.6)                                (0.28)       (24.3)                           (0.50)
Contract (millions of dollars)

Intercept                                           -17.36     —17.70      -15.39                  —8.22          —8.81      —7.22                   -5.46      —5.39      —6.34
                                                     (6.83)     (6.88)      (6.86)                 (6.60)         (6.65)     (6.64)                  (9.06)     (9.13)
B. Various Fixed Horizons for the                                                                                                                                          (9.14)

   Change in Union Wealth

I                                          0.1       —5.57
    Year Horizon Unexpected Change                                                       0.3       —4.77                                   0.)        4.97
                 in Union Wealth          (7.2)      (1,28)                             (7.2)      (1.26)                                 (5.7)      (2.14)
                 Positive Unexpected       0.5                              —7.49        0.6                                 —4.98         0.4                             -2.56
                 Union Wealth Change      (5.2)                             (1.75)      (6.0)                                (1.50)       (4.3)                            (2.86)
                 Negative Unexpected      —0.4                              —3.52       —0.4                                 —4.40        —0.4                             —8.14
                 Union Wealth Change      (4.8)                             (1.92)      (3.8)                                (2.35)       (3.7)                            (3.32)
3 Year Horizon UnexpectedChange            0.5       —0.93                               1.5       -0.80                                   0.5       —0.84
                  in Union Wealth        (41.9)      (0.22)                            (41.9)      (0.22)                                (33.6)      (0.37)
                 Positive Unexpected       3.7                              —1.23        4.2                                 —0.84         3.5                              0.47
                 Union Wealth Change     (31.0)                             (0.30)     (35.2)                                (0.25)      (25.2)                            (0.48)
                 Negative Unexpected      —3.2                              —0.56       —2.7                                 —0.69        —2.9                             —1.33
                 Union Wealth Change     (27.8)                             (0.33)     (22.1)                                (0.41)      (21.6)                            (0.57)
9   Year Horizon Unexpected Change         3.0       —0.12                              10.0       —0.11                                   2.9       —0.12
                 in Union Wealth        (294.4)      (0.03)                           (294.3)      (0.03)                                237.6       (0.05)
                 Positive Unexpected      26.7                              —0.16       29.9                                 —0.12        24.8                             -0.07
                 Union Wealth Change    (221.8)                             (0.05)    (251.4)                                (0.04)     (180.4)                            (0.07)
                 Negative Unexpected     —23.7                              —0.16      -19.9                                 —0.09       —21.9                             —0.18
                 Union Wealth Change    (190.3)                             (0.04)    (149.1)                                (0.06)     (151.1)                            (0.08)
Notes:
     a. Unweighted sample size is 2,228.
     b. All standard errors are corrected for heteroscedasticity in the
                                                                          underlying wealth change regression.
     c. Positive and negative unexpected union wealth
                                                       changes exclude amounts less than $3 million in absolute value.
Sources:
      I. Unexpected changes in union wealth are based on estimated wealth
                                                                           change equations in Table 5.
     2. Wage settlement data from Collective
                                              Bargaining Negotiations and Contracts, January 1976 to December 1982.
     3. Security price and return data from Center for Research in
                                                                    Security Prices, January 1975 to December 1983.
                                                                                          Table 7
                           Estimates of the Effect of the Unexpected Change in Union Wealth on the
                                                                                                   Unexpected Change in Shareholder Wealth
                                   Using the Present Value Forecasting Equations with Alternative Types of Forecasting Information
                                                                                   —
             forecast Equation Type:       Excludes BU-specific    Information            Includes BU-spec        Information             Year and Industry Effects
                                             (A)         (B)        (C)          (D)        (E)         (F)        (0)        (H)        (I)         (J)        (K)        (L)
                                            Mean      Coeff.     Coeff.      Coeff.        Mean      Coeff.     Coeff.     Coeff.       Mean      Coeff.     Coeff.     Coeff.
Variable Name                           (3.Dev.)    (S.[rr.)   (S.Err.)    (S.Err.)    (S.Dev.)    (S.Err.)   (S.Err.)   (S.Err.)   (S.Dev.)    (S.Err.)   (S.Err.)   (S.Err.)
A.   Horizon Determinedby the
     Length of the New Contract
Unexpected Change in Shareholder           —11.0       Dep.        Dep.        Dep.       -11.0                                       —11.0
                                                                                                       Dep.      Dep.       Dep.                   Dep.       Dep.       Dep.
Wealth within 3 Months of Settle-         (340.3)                                        (340.3)                                     (340.3)
ment (millions of dollars)
Unexpected Change in Union Wealth             .2      —0.83       —0.95                     1.9      —0.79      —0.96                    0.1      —0.93      —0.93
over the Life of the New Contract          (39.8)     (0.26)      (0.28)                  (39.5)     (0.28)     (0.32)                 (33.0)     (0.32)     (0.32)
(millions of dollars)
Expected Bargaining Unit Wealth            216.3          ,        0.01                   215.7                  0.01                  217.5                 —0.00
over the Life of the New Contract       (1,410.7)                 (0.01)               (1.409.8)                (0.01)              (1,423.7)                (0.01)
(millions of dollars)
Unexpected Change in Union Wealth            4.2                             -0.88         4.5                             -0.74         3.2                            -0.71
Positive over the Life of the New          (34.2)                            (0.30)       (34.9)                           (0.32)      (23.7)                           (0.44)
Contract (millions of dollars)
Unexpected Change in Union Wealth           —2.8                             —0.69         —2.5                            —1.01       —3.1                             —1.17
Negative over the Life of the New          (19.7)                            (0.51)       (17.9)                           (0.62)     (22.5)                            (0.46)
Contract (mi II ions of dollars)
Intercept                                              3.78        3.01                              —8.54      —9.47                              1.47       1.47       0.91
                                                      (6.69)      (6.74)                             (7.15)     (7.19)                            (6.85)     (6.90)     (6.91)
B. Various Fixed Horizons for the
   Change in Union Wealth
I   Year Horizon Unexpected Change          0.5       -0.62                                0.5       -0.32                              0.0       -0.90
                 in Union Wealth          (12.1)      (0.85)                             (13.8)      (0.80)                            (9.8)      (1.08)
                 Positive Unexpected        1.0                              -0.36          1.1                             0.01        0.8                              0.23
                 Union Wealth Change      (11.0)                             (0.93)      (13.1)                            (0.85)      (7.9)                            (1.32)
                 Negative Unexpected       -l).5                             -2.05        -0.5                              3.33       -0.7                             -2.07
                 Union Wealth Change       (4.9)                             (2.08)       (4.3)                            (2.58)      (5.5)                            (1.89)
3 Year Horizon Unexpected Change            l).9      -0.71                                1.7       -0.62                             —0.2       -0.79
                  in   Union Wealth       (42.7)      (0.24)                             (43,7)      (0.25)                           (34.6)      (0.30)
                  Positive Unexpected       4.2                              -0.78         4.6                             -0.60        3.3                             -0.56
                  Union Wealth Change     (36.4)                             (028)       (39.0)                            (0.28)     (25.3)                            (0.41)
                  Negative Unexpected      —3.2                              -0.53        -2.9                             —0.71       —3.4                             —1.06
                  Union Wealth Change     (21.6)                             (0.47)      (19.0)                            (0.58)     (23.1)                            (0.45)
9 Year Horizon Unexpected Change            3.3       -0.23                                5.6       -0.26                             —1.1       -0.35
               in Union Wealth           (184.3)      (0.06)                            (172.1)      (0.06)                          (132.5)      (0.08)
               Positive Unexpected          5.0                              -0.24        15.8                             -0.27       11.3                             -0.30
               Union Wealth Change       (171.5)                             (0.06)     (159.6)                            (0.18)    (102.5)                            (0.10)
               Negative Unexpected        —11.6                              —0.15       —10.1                             —0.26      —12.3                             -0.44
               Union Wealth Change        (64.9)                             (0.16)      (61.8)                            (0.07)     (82.3)                            (0.13)
Notes:
     a.                   size is
        Unweighted sample         2,228.
      b.Alt standard errors are corrected for heteroscedasticity in the
                                                                        underlying wealth
        Positive and negative unexpected union wealth changes exclude amounts less than $3change regression.
      c.                                                                                   million in absolute value.
Sources:
      I.   Unexpected changes in union wealth are based on estimated wealth change equations in Table S.
      2.   Wage settlement data from Collective Bargaining Negotiations and Contracts, January 1976 to December             1982.
      3.   Security price and return data from Center for Research in Security Prices, January 1975 to December             1983.
                                   -39—

J) and is never statistically different from —1. As the amount of

measurement error in the forecast decreases (going from Column B to J)

the estimates get closer to -1. There is no information in the expected

present value of union wealth (Columns C, G, and K) that is not already

reflected in the expected shareholders wealth measured at the beginning

of the three month period. The effect of positive and negative unex-

pected changes is either statistically identical (Column J) or shows a

somewhat larger absolute effect for positive changes than for negative

changes (Columns D and H). These results are consistent with the effi-

cient bargaining equations (27) and (28) and are inconsistent with the

inefficient equations (39) and (40).

     Because the ize of the unexpected change in union wealth is very

sensitive to the horizon over which the error is hypothesized to con-

tinue (see the standard deviations in Panel B. Columns A, E, and I for

the row "Unexpected Change in Union Wealth"), I have repeated the

regression analyses for fixed horizons of one, three, and nine years in

Panel B of Tables 6 and 7. The results for the three year horizon are

essentially identical to the results in Panel A for both types of fore-

casting methods. They are consistent with the efficient bargaining

equations and inconsistent with the inefficient bargaining equations.

The results for one year and nine year horizons are also consistent with

the strong efficiency model. The magnitude of the estimated effect,

especially for the one year horizon, is sensitive to the forecasting

method used. The symmetric effect of positive and negative wealth

changes, however, is evident for all horizons.
                                   -40—

     Although Tables 6 and 7 show statistical evidence that is con-

sistent with the strong efficiency model, there is some evidence that

unexpected union wealth increases result in larger shareholder wealth

loses than unexpected union wealth decreases produce in shareholder

gains. This would be inconsistent with both of the bargaining models

discussed in Section 1. Table 8 shows the reason for this result. The

Table lists the ten bargaining units associated with the largest unex-

pected union wealth Increases and the ten units associated with the

largest unexpected union wealth decreases. The units associated with the

ten largest union wealth increases are very consistent with the strong

efficiency model. On the other hand, six of the ten largest decreases

in union wealth are associated with the May 1980 basic steel agreement.

The shareholder wealth changes for this agreement are inconsistent with

either bargaining model. However, this is the only major example of

such inconsistency in these data. Although, these agreements are

influential in the statistical analysis of the symmetry of shareholder

wealth responses, the anomaly is not troublesome enough to justify

excluding these settlements.


4. InterpretatIon and Conclusion

     My analysis of the relation between union wealth changes and share-

holder wealth changes provides empirical support for the use of strongly

efficient bargaining models as a basis for analyzing collective

bargaining agreements. The sample of agreements analyzed is broadly
                                                          Table 8

         List of the 10 Largest Positive and Negative Unexpected Changes in Union Wealth and the Associated
      Unexpected Change in Shareholders' Wealth from Agreements Settled between January 1976 and December 1982




                                                                       Unexpected                     Unexpected   Expected
                                                                            Union   Expected              Share.     Share—
                                                                           Wealth      Union   BIJ        Wealth     holder
                                                          Settlement      Change      Wealth   Size      Change      Wealth
Company Name                        Union Name(s)         Date            (S mil)    (S mil) (thou)     (S mu)      (S mu)

Ten Largest Increases   In UnIon Wealth

General Motors                  Auto Workers           October 79           1,320    41,131    490        —223       6,583
Ford Motor                      Auto Workers          October 79              540    16,527     197       —379       4,417
American Telephone & Telegraph Coimnunication Workers August 80               530    22.430    363      -3,672      37,930
Eastern Airlines                Airiine Pilots         April 77               i69     i,7i5      4         —23          164
United Airlines                 Machinists             June 79                152      1,591     18        —71          781
Boeing                          Machinists            October 80              47      3,376     41        —430       3.684
Cessna Aircraft                 Machinists            September 81            145       736      10       —145         610
United Technologies             Machinists            December 80             144      1.047    22         254       2181
U.S. Steel                      Steelworkers          April 77                119     8.909    118         137       3.683
Trans World Airlines            Machinists            November 78             108      1,175    14         —83         424

Ten Largest Decreases   In (In I oi Wealth

General Electric                   IUE. UE(lnd)           July 79           —137      5.475     90         237       11,202
Wheeling Steel                     Steelworkers           May 80            —148      1,771     13           3          77
Armco Steel                        Steelworkers           May80             —153      1,825     13        —117        1,353
National Steel                     Steelworkers           May 80            —156      1.866     14         —43          554
Westinghouse                        BEW, nd. Salaried     September 79      -Ill      2.342     44        -104       1.697
Inland Steel                       Steelworkers           May 80            -236      2.807     21         —13         666
Chrysler                           Auto Workers, Salaried November 79       -330     10.283    124        —130         559
Ford Motor                         Auto Workers           February 82       -358      9.788     05         607       1.798
Bethlehem Steel                    Steelworkers           May 80            —599      7.025     52         -16       1,023
U.S. Steel                         Steelworkers           May 80          -I. 163    13.597    100          —l       1,659


Sources:   I. Wage settlements from the BNA's Collective Bargaining Negotiations and Contracts 1976-1982.
           2. Security values from the University of Chicago Center for Research on Security Prices, monthly master
              file and monthly returns file, 1975 to 1983.
                                   -41—

representative and not restricted to a single industry.30 The empiri-

 cal finding that shareholders' wealth moves in the opposite direction of

union members' wealth is consistent with other studies of the relation

between unions and profitability that are based on broadly represen-

tative samples.31 This finding is also consistent with the emerging

literature on unions as rent-seeking organizations.32 However, the

finding is inconsistent with any continuing productivity enhancing acti-

vity by the union. Shareholders do not expect to recoup additional

union wage cost in the form of extra productivity since they expect to

bear the full financial burden of any unexpected increases.33 Finally,

my finding that share prices move in response to significant labor cost

changes expands the growing literature that directly measures the




   30The analysis of Dertouzous and Pencavel (1981), Dertouzous and
Timothy Quinn (1985), Brown and Ashenfelter (1986), and MaCurdy and
Pencavel (1986) all deal with the newspaper industry. Eberts and Stone
(1986) consider public school teachers. Card (1986b) studies the
airline industry. Carruth and Oswald (1984) work with the British coal
mining industry. Nancy Rose (l985a, b, and C) considers the trucking
industry.

   31Kim Clark (1984), Ruback and Zimmerman (1984), Richard Freeman and
James Medoff (1984, Chapter 12).

   32See Barry T. Hirsch and John T. Addison (1986, Chapter 7), Michael
Salinger (1984), Rose (l985a, b, and c), Bronars and Deere (1986), and
Connolly et al. (1986).

   33m1s is Consistent with Clark's (1984) finding of negligible pro-
ductivity effects in a sample of establishments similar to my sample.
My results are inconsistent with the Charles Brown and Medoff (1978)
finding of substantial productivity-enhancing union effects.
                                  -42--

effects of industrial re1ations activity on shareholders wealth.34

     My quantitative results suggest that information that is current as

of two months prior to the conclusion of a new collective bargain may be

used to calculate an unbiased prediction of the value of the enterprise

and the expected value of the claims of union members and shareholders.

The information that becomes available at the settlement date appears to

relate primarily to the division of the total value between shareholders

and union members and not to the size of the total value of the

enterprise. Unexpected changes in union wealth are offset by opposite

changes in shareholder wealth of the same magnitude, on average. This

result holds, on average, for both positive and negative changes in

union wealth, conidered separately. Thus, the major prediction of the

strong efficiency model is confirmed. Although the result of dollar for

dollar tradeoffs in wealth, on average, is consistent with a special

form of the labor demand inefficient bargaining model, the result that

the effect is the same for positive and negative unexpected changes in

union wealth is not Consistent with this inefficient bargaining model.

On the whole, the security market evidence appears more consistent with

the strong efficiency hypothesis than is the evidence from any other

collective bargaining model test that has been conducted to date.




   34Neumann (1980) finds no shareholder wealth effects from
strikes. However, Brian Becker and Craig Olsen (1986) use methods simi-
lar to the one used here to find such effects. Susan Liberty and Jerold
Zimmerman (1986) find no effect of impending renegotiation of collective
bargains on shareholder wealth, which is consistent with my finding that
it is the sign and magnitude of the unexpected change in union wealth
that matters. Ruback and Zimmerman (1984) find moderate effects on
shareholder wealth from the formation of bargaining units.
                                  -43—

     Long term bargaining relationships may be modeled as if the parties

 try jointly to maximize the value of the enterprise, once a bargaining

unit has been formed. Divergence of interest between the shareholders

and the union members, which is consistent with my empirical results,

may result exclusively from bargaining over the division of this value.

My result should not be interpreted to mean that there are no

(potential) efficiency losses from unionization. The value being

divided by the union members and the shareholders is an ex post quasi-

rent. Ex ante investors seeking new projects must adjust the expected

returns from potential projects to reflect the probability that some of

the quasi—rents from successful outcomes will be appropriated by union

organizing. Thus investors may systematically choose projects that

have lower probabilities of rent appropriation even though, in the

absence of unions, those projects have lower net present values than

some projects with high rent appropriation probabilities. Capital

investment decisions, then, may be distorted by the possibility of rent

appropriation by the union. Once an enterprise has been established and

a bargaining unit formed, it benefits both the shareholders and the

union members to reach strongly efficient bargains. The evidence pre-

sented in this paper supports the conclusion that such bargains may

occur on average.
                                   —44—

                                References



 Ashenfelter, Orley and George Johnson. "Bargaining Theory, Trade
      Unions, and Industrial Strike Activity,' Aerlcan EconoRic Review
      59 (March 1969): 35—49.

 Baldwin, Carliss Y. "Productivity and Labor Unions, An Application of
      Self-Enforcing Contracts," Journal of Business 55 (April 1982):
      155—85.

Ball, Raymond and P. Brown.  'An Empirical Evaluation of Accounting
     Numbers," Journal of Accounting Research (1968): 159-178.

Becker, Brian and Craig Olson. "The Consequences of Strikes for
     Shareholder Equity," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 39
     (April 1986): 425—38.

Bronars, Stephen G. and Donald R. Deere. "The Real and Financial
     Decisions of Unionized Firms in a Dynamic Setting," mimeo. Yale
     University 1986.

Brown, Charles and James L. Medoff. "Trade Unions in the Production
     Process," Journal of Political EconoRy (June 1978): 355—78.

Brown, James N. and Orley Ashenfelter. "Testing the Efficiency of
     Employment Contracts," Journal of Political Econoay 94 (June
     1986): 540—587.

Brown, Steven J. and Jerold B. Warner. "Measuring Security Price
     Performance," Journal of Financial Econoaics (1980): 205-258.

Bureau of Labor Statistics. "Statistics or Compensation Changes,"
     Current Wage Develop.ents (December 1983): 38-56.

Bureau of National Affairs. Basic Patterns in Union Contracts
     (Washington, D.C.: The Bureau of National Affairs, Inc.) 1983.

Bureau of National Affairs. Collective Bargaining Negotiations and
     Contracts (Washington, D.C.: The Bureau of National Affairs,
     Inc.) Biweekly 1976—1982.

Card, David.  (a) "Indexation and Long Term Labor Contracts: A
     Theoretical and Empirical Analysis," Journal of Political
     Econo.y, 94 (June 1986): S144—175,

Card, David.  (b) "Efficient Contracts and Costs of Adjustments:
     Short—Run Employment Determination for Airline Mechanics,"
     Aerican Econoalc Review 76 (December 1986): 1045—1071.

Carruth, Alan A. and Andrew J. Oswald. "Miners' Wages in Post—War
     Britain: An Application of a Model of Trade Union Behavior,"
     University of Kent, mimeo., July 1984.
                                  -45—

 Center for Research in Security Prices. User's Guide to CRSP Data
      (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago CRSP) 1985.

Christofides, Louis N., Robert Swidensky and David A. Wilton, "A Micro—
     econometric Analysis of the Canadian Wage Determination Process,"
     Econo.ica 47 (May 1980): 1-14.

Clark, Kim B. "Unionization and Firm Performance: The Impact on
     Profits Growth, and Productivity," Awerican Econosic Review 74
     (December 1984): 893—919.

Connolly, Robert A., Barry T. Hirsch and Mark Hirschey. "Union Rent
     Seeking Intangible Capital and the Market Value of the Firm,"
     Review of Econosics and Statistics 68 (November 1986): 567-77.

DeMenil, George. Uargaining Jionopoly Power versus Union Power
     (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press) 1971.

Dertouzos, James N. and Timothy H. Quinn. "Bargaining Responses to the
     Technology Revolution: The Case of the Newspaper Industry."
     Santa Monica, CA: The Rand Corporation) Report R—3144-DOL
     January 1985.

Dertouzos, James N. and John H. Pencavel. "Wage and Employment
     Determination Under Trade Unionism: The Case of the International
     Typographical Union," Journal of Political Econowy 89 (December
     1981): 1162—1181.

Dickens, William 1. "Wages, Employment, and the Threat of Collective
     Action," University of California, Berkeley, mimeo. August 1985.

Dunlop, John T. Wage Deterwination Under Trade Unions (New York:
     Macmillan) 1944.

Eberts, Randall W. and Joe A. Stone. "On the Contract Curve: A Test of
     Alternative Models of Collective Bargaining," Journal of Labor
     Econowics (January 1986): 66-81.

Fania, Eugene F., Lawrence Fisher, Michael C. Jensen and Richard Roll.
     "The Adjustment of Stock Prices to New Information," International
      Econoaic Review (1969): 1-21.

Fama, Eugene F. and Michael C. Jensen (a). "Separation of Ownership and
     Control," Journal of Law and Econowics (June 1983): 301-25.

Fama, Eugene F. and Michael C. Jensen (b). "Agency Problems and
     Residual Claims," Journal of Law and Econowics (June 1983):
     327—49.

Farber, Henry S. (a) "Individual Preferences and Union Wage
     Determination: The Case of the United Mine Workers," Journal
     of Political Econowy (October 1978): 923-947.
                                     -46--


Farber, Henry S. (b) "Bargaining Theory, Wage Outcomes, and the
     Occurrence of Strikes: An Econometric Analysis," American
     Econonic Review (June 1978): 262—271.

Farber, Henry S. "The Analysis of Union Behavior," in Handbook of Labor
     EconowiCs, 0. Ashenfelter and H. Layard (eds.), forthcoming.

Freeman, Richard B. and James L. Medoff. What Do Unions Do? (New York:
     Basic Books) 1984.

Fudenberg, Drew, David Levine, and Paul Ruud. "Strike Activity and Wage
     Settlements," NBER Conference on Trade Unions, May 1983.

Gramm, Cynthia. "The Impact of Striking on Wage Changes: Illusion or
     Reality?" University of Iowa, mimeo. , October 1983.

Grubert, Harold. "An Empirical Study of the Economics of Bargaining,"
     Ph.D Dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1968.

Hall, Robert E. and David M. Lilien. "Efficient Wage Bargains Under
     Uncertain Supply and Demand," A.erican Econowic Review (December
     1979): 868—879.

Hamermesh, Daniel S. "Wage Bargains, Threshold Effects, and the Phillips
     Curve," Quarterly Journal of Econo.lcs (August 1970): 501-17.

Hayes, Beth. "Unions and Strikes with Asymmetric Information," Journal
     of Labor Econonics (January 1984).

Hendricks Wallace E. and Lawrence M. Kahn. Wage Indezation in the
     United States: COLA or UnCOLA (Cambridge, MA: Ballinger Publishing
     Co.) 1985.

Hendricks, Wallace E. and Lawrence M. Kahn. "Wage Indexation and
     Compensating Wage Differentials," University of Illinois, mimeo.,
     November 1984.

Hirsch, Barry T. and John T. Addison. The Econo.ic Analysis of Unions:
     New Approaches and Evidence (Boston: Allen & Unwin) 1986.

Hirtle, Beverly J.     "Wage Linkages in Union Bargaining Settlements.: MIT,
     mimeo. ,   March 1986.

Hirtle, Beverly J. "Interfirm Information, Strikes and Union Bargaining
     Behavior," MIT, niimeo., October 1985.

Jensen, Michael C. and William H. Meckling. "Theory of the Firm:
     Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership Structure,"
     Journal of Financial Econowics (October 1976): 305-60.

Jensen, Michael C. and William H. Meckling. "Rights and Production
     Functions: An Application to Labor—Managed and Codetermination,"
     Journal of Business (October 1979): 469-506.
                                    -47—

Johnson, George E. "Work Rules, Featherbedding, and Pareto-Optimal
     Union-Mangement Bargaining." NBER Working Paper No. 1820,
     January 1986.

Kennan, John. "The Economics of Strikes," in Handbook of Labor Economics,
     0. Ashenfelter and R. Layard (eds.), forthcoming.

Klein, Benjamin, Robert B. Crawford and Armen A. Aichian. "Vertical
     Integration, Appropriable Rents, and Competitive Contracting
     Process," Journal of Law and Economics (1979): 297-326.

Lazear, Edward P. "A Competitive Model of Monopoly Unionism," American
     Economic Review (September 1983): 631-643.

Liberty, Susan E. and Jerold L. Zimmerman. "Labor Union Contract
     Negotiations and Accounting Choices," The Accounting Review
     (October 1986): 692—712.

McConnell, Sheena. "Cyclical Fluctuations in Strike Activity."
     Princeton mimeo 1986.

MaCurdy, Thomas E. and John Pencavel. "Testing Between Competing Models
     of Wage and Employment Determination in Unionized Markets," Journal
     of Political Economy 94 (June 1986): 53—539.

McDonald, Ian M. and Robert M. Solow. "Wage Bargaining and Employment,"
     American Economic Review (December 1981): 968-80.

Meltzer, Bernard. Labor Law Cases, Materials, and Problems (Boston:
     Little, Brown and Co.) 1977.

Neumann, George R. "The Predictability of Strikes: Evidence from the
     Stock Market," Industrial and Labor Relations Review (July
     1980): 525—535.

Oswald, Andrew J. "Efficient Contracts Are On the Labour Demand Curve:
     Theory and Facts," Princeton University, mimeo., July 1984.

Pencavel, John H. "The Trade-off Between Wages and Employment in Trade
     Union Objective," Quarterly Journal of Economics (May 1984): 215-31.

Posner, Richard A. "Some Economics of Labor law," University of Chicago
     Review (Fall 1984): 988—1012.

Reder, Melvin and George Neumann. "Contract and Conflict: The Case of
     Strikes," Journal of Political Economy (October 1980): 867-86.

Riddell, W.Craig. "The Empirical Foundations of the Phillips Curve:
     Evidence from Canadian Wage Contract Data." Econometrica
     (January 1979): 1-24.

Rose, Nancy L.  (a) "Union Wage Gains Under Regulation: Evidence from
     the Trucking Industry," MIT Sloane School of Management, mimeo.,
     June 1985.
                                  -48—

Rose, Nancy L. (b) "Unionization and Regulation: The Division of Rents
     in the Trucking Industry," MIT Sloane School of Management, mimeo..,
     July 1985.

Rose, Nancy L.  (c) "The Incidence of Regulatory Rents in the Motor
     Carrier Industry," Rand Journal of Econowics 16 (Autumn 1985c):
     299—318.

Rosen, Sherwin. "Trade Union Power, Threat Effects and the Extent of
     Organization," Review of Econowic Studies (April 1969): 185-96.

Ruback, Richard S. and Martin B. Zimmerman. "Unionization and
     Profitability: Evidence from the Capital Market," Journal of
     Political Econoay (November 1984): 1134—1157.

Rubenstein, Ariel. "A Perfect Equilibrium in a Bargaining Model,"
     Econo.etrica (January 1982): 97-109.

Salinger, Michael A. "Tobin's q, Unionization, and the
     Concentration—Profits Relationship," The Rand Journal of Econowics
     (1984): 159-170.

Schwert, G.Willjam. "Using Financial Data to Measure Effects of
     Regulation," Journal of Law and Econowics (April 1981): 121-158.

Siegel, Sidney and Lawrence E. Fouraker. Bargaining and Group Decision
     Pinking: Experiments in Bilateral Monopoly (New York: McGraw-Hill)
     1960.

Slichter, Sumner H. Union Policies and Industrial Management.
     (Washington, D.C. : The Brookings Institute) 1941, pp. 345—69.

Standard and Poors. Compustat Annual Industrial Data (New York:
     Standard and Poorsy) 1983.

Svejnar, Jan. "Bargaining Power, Fear of Disagreement and Wage
     Settlements: Theory and Empirical Evidence from U.S. Industry,"
     Econometrica 54 (September 1986): 1055—78.

Tracy, Joseph S.  "A Theoretical and Empirical Investigation of Strike
     Activity," University of Chicago, Ph.D Dissertation, March 1984.

Tracy, Joseph S. (a) "An Empirical Test of an Asymmetic Information
     Model of Strikes," NBER Working Paper No. 1870 (January 1986).

Tracy, Joseph S.  (b) "An Investigation into the Determinants of U.S.
     Strike Activity." American Economic Review 76 (June 1986): 423-36.

U.S. Chamber of Commerce Survey Research Center. Employee Benefits
     (Washington, D.C.; U.S. Chamber of Commerce) 1975, 1977—82.

U.S. Department of Labor. Bargaining Calendar (Washington, D.C. GPO)
    1976—1982.
                                  —49—

Vroman, Wayne. "Union Contracts and Money Wage Changes in U.S.
     Manufacturing," Quarterly Journal of Econo.jcs (November 1982):
     57:1—594.


Vroman, Wayne. "Wage Contract Settlements in U.S. Manufacturing,"
     Review of Econoaics andStatistics  66 (November 1984): 661-5.

Vroman, Wayne. "Union Wage Settlements, Incomes Policy and Indexation,"
     Urban Institute Working Paper (October 1986).
                                      Data Appendix

     This appendix describes the data sources and methods
used to measure the change in the present value of bargaining
unit labor cost as estimated from the historical archive
of the Bureau of National Affair's Collective Bargaining
Negotiations and Contracts data file and the change in the
present value of shareholders' wealth around the date of
settlement as estimated from the Center for Research in
Security Price's Monthly Stock Returns data file. To
illustrate how the calculations were performed I have selected
a listing from the published data (the General Electric
settlement shown in Table 8 of the main text). The
calculations for that listing are performed in detail.
All calculations were performed in double precision in SPSS—X.
Examples in this Appendix have been rounded.
     The published listing for the July 1979 General Electric
contract with the International Union of Electronic,
Electrical, Technical, Salaried and Machine Workers (IUE)
and the United Electrical, Radio and Machine Workers of
America (UE-Ind) (reprinted from the Daily Labor Report,
July 27, 1979, No. 146, page B—3) follows:
                                            Multistate
    General Electric Co - IUE: 3—yr contract (3)
    ——INCREASE: l2 per hr retro to 7—2—70, l7.5 6—30—80, l5 6—29—81: revised c—c—I clause provides
         6 semiannual adjustments of l per hr each 0.2 percent increase in CPI with 1st adjustment
         of 38 retro to 7-2—79: covers approx 70000 employees
    ——OLD RATE: $6.74 per hour
    ——OTHER PROVISIONS: First dental plan. irnporved ins coverase: $15 per mo (was $10) pens per
         yr of serv; 3 wks vac after 7 yrs.
      General Electric Co — UE(ind): 3—yr contract (3)
       —INCREASE: Wages & fringes same as with 1UE (see above): covers approx 17.000 employees




The following is the information about the General Electric
and ItJE contract (with my annotations in parentheses) that
was recorded in the archival data file that summarizes the
published listing:
      Identification Record
     Record ID: 7915037 (published in 1979. number 5. listing 037)
     Record Date: 790726 (date settlement was recorded in data file)
     Company Name: Generai Electric Co.
     Union: 347 (BLS code for the IUE)
     Employees Covered: 90000 (combines UE—ind employees)
     ndustry: 3600 (EIectrical equipment)
     Beginning Date: 790702
     Ending Date: 820701
     Term of Contract: 36 (months)
     Source: 3 (direct report)
     Strike: N (no strike preceeded settlement)

     Settlement Records
     Settlement Date: missing
     Wage Rate: 6.74
     Source: 0 (old contract)
     Effective Date: 790702 Increase: 0.120
     EffectIve Date: 800630 Increase: 0.175
     EffectIve Date: 810629 Increase: 0.150
     COLA: Y (contract contains contingent COLA)
     Payment Period: S (semiannual)
     First Payment Date: 800102




     The archival dates were used to determine the earliest
date at which settlement information was available.                                              I defined
this date as the earliest of the settlement date (missing
in this example), the record date (July 26, 1979) and the
publication date (July 27, 1979). The settlement day is
never used. The settlement month and year for the example
are July 1979.
     On the basis of the archival information, I assigned
the COLA formula for manufacturing settlements in 1979 from
Hendricks and Kahn (1985, page 102). Of all manufacturing
collective bargains settled in 1979 that contained contingent
COLA provisions, 42.8% used one of the three major formulas.
Of those agreements, 51.9% used the 1 per .3 change in
the CPI formula, 39.0% used the 1 per .4 change in the
CPI formula, and 9.1% used the equal percentage formula.
In July 1979, the most recent twelve month change in the
CPI was 21.0 points (10.86%). In January 1980 the scheduled
wage rate would be $6.86 (= 6.74 +   0.12).   The three COLA
formulas imply changes of $0.700, $0.525, and $0.745,
respectively, in January 1980. The weighted average of
these expected COLA payments is $0.636 (using 0.519, 0.390,
and 0.428 as weights). Converted to a semiannual basis,
this implies an expected COLA payment of $0.318 for each
six month period. Although the correct COLA formula is
reported in the published listing, it is not recorded in
the archival data file. In addition, the $0.38 COLA payment
due on July 1, 1979 is not reflected in the archival listing.
     Using all the archival data information, the sequence
of wage rates, projected on the basis of information that
was available on the date of settlement, is summarized in
Table Al.
                                                       Table Al


                      Suninary of Projected Wage Rates for the General Electric Agreement with
                            the Electrical Workers Unions (tUE and UE—lnd) in July 1979

               Month:
        Year    Jul     Aug Sep      Oct   Nov   Dec    Jan       Feb   Mar               Jun
                                                                              Apr   May

         79    6.86 6.86 6.86 6.86 6.86 6.86 7.18 7.18 7.18 7.18 7.18 7.18
         80    7.67 7.67 7.67 7.67 7.67 7.67 7.99 7.99 7.99 7.99 7.99 7.99
         81    8.46 8.46 8.46 8.46 8.46 8.46 8.78 8.78 8.78 8.78 8.78 8.78



        These projected wage rates are used in the formulas
in the text for computing summary measures of the wage
settlement. The compound annual growth rate of the projected
wage rate in this contract is 100 x ((8.78/6.74)(11'3) —
1) =   9.2 1% per year. This is the dependent variable in
the growth rate forecasting equations (Table 5, Columns
A-D). To compute the present value of expected labor cost
during the life of the contract the following ancillary
information is required:

       Average regular hours per week 1979. industry 36: 40.3 (EIoent and Earnings. March 1980.
            Table C—2. page 95)
       Average overtime hours per week 979. industry 36: 2.7 (same as above)
       Fringe benefit rate for legally required payments; pension. Insurance and other agreed—upon
            payments (employer's share); and other items 979. electrical equipment industry: 23.2%
            (Ei,Iogee Benefits 1979. Table 6. page II. sum of lines I. 2 and 5.)
       Yield on Moody's Baa rated corporate bonds. July 1979: 10.29% per annum (Data Resources Inc..
            University data bank)
       Weeks per year: 52. 1424 (constant).



The estimated labor cost for the bargaining unit during
the first year of the contract, based on the wage rate for
June 1980, is (40.3 + 1.5 x 2.7) x 7.18 x 1.232 x 52.1424
x 90,000 = $1,841 million. If the old wage rate of $6.74

is used in this formula, then the estimated labor cost for
one year is $1,728 million. The estimated present value
of labor cost for the first year of the contract is
1,841/(1.1O29) = $1,753 million. The estimated present
value of labor cost over the life of the contract is
1,841/1.1029 + 2,048/1.10291.5                                 +   3,251/1.10292.5                     =   $5,284
million, where $2,048 and $3,251 are the estimated cost
in the second and third years of the contract based on the
June 1981 and June 1982 expected wage rates.
       The expected and unexpected parts of the present value
of the bargaining unit labor cost were calculated using
the predicted values and residuals from the wage growth
forecasting equations (Table 5, Columns A-D) and the present
value forecasting equations (Table 5, Columns E—H). The
ancillary information required to calculate these quantities
consists of the regressors used in the forecasting equation.
These values are listed below:
       Percentage change in the CPI April 1978 to April 979: 10.66% (Data Resources, Inc. university
            data base, not seasonally adjusted)
       Percentage change in real GNP first quarter 978 to first quarter 1979: 2.24% (same as above,
            not seasonal ly adjusted)
       Civilian unemployment rate April 1979: 5.8% (EnIoiient and Earnings, May 1979, not seasonally
            adjusted)
       Percentage change in average hourly earnings for nonagricultural production worker April 1978
            to April 1979: 7.67% (Data Resources, Inc., university data base, not seasonally adjusted)




       Consider first the projected growth rate method for
determining the expected present value of labor cost. The
expected compound annual growth rate for the wage rate,
based on the equation in Column C of Table 5, is 10.60%
and the unexpected change in the compound annual growth
rate revealed on the date of settlement is 9.21 - 10.60
=   -1.39%.       The present value of expected labor cost over
the three year contract is 1,728 x (1.106/1.1029 +
 1.1062/1.10291.5        +   1.1063/1.10292.5)        =   $5,475 million.
 (This number appears in the "Expected Union Wealth" column
of Table 8.) The present value of unexpected labor cost
over the three year period is 1,728 x -.0139 x (1/1.1o29
+ 2 x 1 .   106/1 10291
                 .
                             .   +3   x 1 .   1062/1 . 10292.5)   =   —$137 million.
(This number appears in the "Unexpected Union Wealth Change"
column of Table 8.) This unexpected change in union wealth
is the independent variable in Table 6, Panel A. In Table
6, Panel B the present value of the unexpected union wealth
change is calculated using one, three, and nine year horizons.
The three year horizon calculation is identical to the one
illustrated. The one year horizon uses only the first year
projected growth. The nine year horizon uses six additional
years of projected growth at 10.6% per year and discounts
at 10.29% per year.
       Consider next the direct method for forecasting the
present value. On the basis of the final wage rate in the
old contract, the present value of labor cost over the three
years of the new contract is $1,728 x (1/1.1O29 + 1/1.10291.5
+   1/1.10292.5)     =   $4,491 million. The percentage change
in present value revealed on the date of settlement is 100
x (5,284/4,491 — 1)          =   17.67%.      This is the dependent variable
in the present value forecasting equations (Table 5, Columns
E—H). The expected percentage change in present value based
on Table 5, Column G is 22.98% and the unexpected percentage
change in present value revealed on the date of settlement
is 17.67 — 22.98              =   -5.31%.           In dollars the expected present
value is 1.2298 x 4,491 = $5,522 million and the unexpected
change in present value is -.0531 x 4,491 = —$238 million.
This unexpected change is used as the independent variable
in Table 7, Panel A. The independent variable in Table
7, Panel B is based on unexpected percentage changes in
present values over one, three, and nine year horizons.
The one year horizon present value uses only first year
information in the contract. The three year horizon is
exactly as illustrated here. The nine year horizon uses
information on deferred and COLA increases up to the end
of the new contract. The projected wage rate on the last
month ($8.41 in the GE example) is used for the remaining
years. Separate forecasting equations were used for each
horizon length.
     To calculate data items based on the value of General
Electric's common stock, the following items from the Center
for Research on Security Price Monthly Stock Returns File
are required:
     General Electric Co. CUSIP: 36960410
     Stock price April 30, 1979: $49,125
     Number of outstanding shares on April 30, 1979: 228036 (thousands)
     Return, including dividends, during May. June, and July: 1.42%, 1.78%, 3.50%
     Return on the (value weighted) NYSE during the same months: —1.49%. 4.48%, 1.52%
     Adjusted GE return during May. June, and July: 2.91%, -2.70%, 1.98%




The adjusted return is defined as the difference between
the dividend inclusive stock return and the return on the
value weighted NYSE index. The expected shareholder wealth
at the end of the month three months before the settlement
date is 49.125 x 228.036 = $11,202 million. (This number
appears in Table 8 in the "Expected Shareholder Wealth"
column.) The unexpected change in shareholder wealth, adjusted
for market movements is 11,202 x ((1.0291 x .9730 x 1.0198)
-   1)   =   $237 million. (This number appears in Table 8 in
the "Unexpected Shareholder Wealth Change" column. )      The
unexpected change in shareholder wealth is the dependent
variable in Tables 6 and 7.
         The regression analysis in Table 5 is weighted using
the size of the bargaining unit as the weight. Means, standard
deviations, and regression statistics, therefore, represent
the typical worker who belongs to a bargaining unit.
         The regression analyses in Tables 6 and 7 are
heteroscedasticity corrected estimates on a bargaining unit
basis. The means, standard deviations and regression
statistics represent a typical bargaining unit. The
heteroscedasticity takes an unusual form in this
regression——the residual variance of shareholder wealth
is largest for small absolute values of the independent
variable. The weight used to correct the heteroscedasticity
is 1 + 8 exp(-unexpected change in union wealth). This

weighting factor induces homoscedasticty on the residual
variance but has an imperceptible effect on the regression
coefficients.
