                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE ELUSIVE PRO-COMPETITIVE EFFECTS OF TRADE

                                        Costas Arkolakis
                                         Arnaud Costinot
                                         Dave Donaldson
                                      Andrés Rodríguez-Clare

                                        Working Paper 21370
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21370


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2015




We thank numerous colleagues, discussants, and seminar participants for helpful comments. Federico
Esposito, Cory Smith, and Anthony Tokman provided superb research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21370.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Costas Arkolakis, Arnaud Costinot, Dave Donaldson, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Elusive Pro-Competitive Effects of Trade
Costas Arkolakis, Arnaud Costinot, Dave Donaldson, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare
NBER Working Paper No. 21370
July 2015
JEL No. F1,F12

                                           ABSTRACT

We study the gains from trade liberalization in models with monopolistic competition, firm-level
heterogeneity, and variable markups. For a large class of demand functions used in the international
macro and trade literature, we derive a parsimonious generalization of the welfare formula in
Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodríguez-Clare (2012). We then use micro-level trade data to quantify the
implications of this new formula. Our main finding is that gains from trade liberalization predicted
by models with variable markups are slightly lower than those predicted by models with constant
markups. In this sense, pro-competitive effects of trade are elusive.


Costas Arkolakis                                  Dave Donaldson
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
Yale University, 28 Hillhouse Avenue              Stanford University
P.O. Box 208268                                   579 Serra Mall
New Haven, CT 06520-8268                          Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER                                          and NBER
costas.arkolakis@yale.edu                         ddonald@stanford.edu

Arnaud Costinot                                   Andrés Rodríguez-Clare
Department of Economics, E17-232                  University of California at Berkeley
MIT                                               Department of Economics
77 Massachusetts Avenue                           Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
Cambridge MA 02139                                and NBER
and NBER                                          andres1000@gmail.com
costinot@mit.edu
1    Introduction
How large are the gains from trade liberalization? Does the fact that trade liberalization
affects firm-level markups, as documented in many micro-level studies, make these gains
larger or smaller?
     There are no simple answers to these questions. On the one hand, gains from trade
liberalization may be larger in the presence of variable markups if opening up to trade
reduces distortions on the domestic market. In the words of Helpman and Krugman
(1989): “The idea that international trade increases competition [...] goes back to Adam
Smith, and it has long been one of the reasons that economists give for believing that the
gains from trade and the costs from protection are larger than their own models seem to
suggest.” On the other hand, gains may be smaller if opening up to trade leads foreign
firms to increase their markups. Again in the words of Helpman and Krugman (1989):
“An occasionally popular argument about tariffs is that they will be largely absorbed
through a decline in foreign markups rather than passed onto consumers—the foreigner
pays the tariff.” If so, when trade costs go down, foreigners get their money back.
     To make progress on these questions, we propose the following experiment. We start
from a class of trade models that have been calibrated such that any model within that
class: (i ) is consistent with the same cross-section of bilateral trade flows and (ii ) predicts
the same change in bilateral trade flows for any change in trade costs. Broadly speaking,
all these models agree on the macro data. However, they disagree on the micro data: some
trade models within that class feature markups that vary across firms, whereas others do
not. We then ask whether a researcher with access to micro data that observes variable
markups at the firm-level would predict different welfare gains from trade liberalization
than a researcher without access to such data that wrongly assumes constant markups
across firms. The difference between the predictions of these two hypothetical researchers
is what we will refer to as the pro-competitive effects of trade.
     Our main finding is that gains from trade liberalization predicted by models with vari-
able markups are slightly lower than those predicted by models with constant markups.
Because a decline in trade costs indirectly lowers the residual demand for domestic goods,
the former class of models predicts that domestic markups go down after trade liberaliza-
tion, which reduces distortions and increases welfare. Yet, this indirect effect is dominated
by the direct effect of a change in trade costs on foreign markups, which leads to lower
welfare gains from trade liberalization overall. In short, pro-competitive effects of trade
are elusive.
     The scope of our analysis is restricted primarily by the nature of our experiment. Since


                                               1
we want to focus on trade models that agree on the macro data—e.g., we do not want dif-
ferent welfare conclusions to be driven by the fact that a model predicts more trade than
what we actually observe in commonly available datasets—we have chosen to analyze
models according to which bilateral trade flows satisfy a gravity equation, which we will
simply refer to as gravity models.
    The benefit of focusing on such models is twofold. First, gravity models are very suc-
cessful empirically and the workhorse models for quantitative work in the field; see e.g.
Head and Mayer (2013) and Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare (2014). Second, welfare gains
from trade liberalization in gravity models with CES utility and constant markups take a
very simple form. Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodríguez-Clare (2012), ACR hereafter, have
shown that these gains are pinned down by two statistics: (i ) the share of expenditure on
domestic goods, λ; and (ii ) an elasticity of imports with respect to variable trade costs,
ε, which we refer to as the trade elasticity. If a small change in variable trade costs raises
trade openness in some country, d ln λ < 0, then the associated welfare gain is given by

                                    d ln W =       d ln λ/ε,

where d ln W is the equivalent variation associated with the shock expressed as a percent-
age of the income of the representative agent.
    In this paper we introduce a new set of gravity models that features monopolistic
competition with firm-level heterogeneity—a standard market structure in the field—but
departs from CES utility to generate variable markups at the firm-level. Our main theoret-
ical finding is that for a general demand system that encompasses prominent alternatives
to CES, the welfare effect of a small trade shock is given by

                                d ln W =    (1      η ) d ln λ/ε,

where η is a constant that summarizes the effects of various structural parameters, in-
cluding the average elasticity of markups with respect to firm productivity. Thus the only
endogenous variable that one needs to keep track of for welfare analysis remains the share
of expenditure on domestic goods. The net welfare implications of changes in domestic
and foreign markups boils down to a single new statistic, η, the sign of which determines
whether or not there are pro-competitive effects of trade.
    While the value of η is ultimately an empirical matter, it is interesting to note that
under common alternatives to CES utility, such as those considered in Krugman (1979)
and Feenstra (2003), η is weakly positive. This implies that gains from trade liberalization
predicted by these new gravity models must be weakly lower than those predicted by

                                               2
models with CES utility. By how much depends both on the extent to which lower trade
costs get (incompletely) passed-through to domestic consumers and the extent to which
domestic misallocations get alleviated. When preferences are homothetic, we show that
these two forces exactly compensate each other so that gains from trade are identical
to those in ACR, and hence η = 0. When preferences are non-homothetic, however,
standard assumptions imply that the first (negative) force dominates the second (positive)
force, and hence η > 0.
    In the last part of our paper we develop a simple empirical strategy to estimate η. We
focus on a parsimonious generalization of CES utility under which the sign of η depends
only on one new demand parameter. Using micro-level U.S. trade data to estimate this
alternative demand system, we find that η ' 0.04. Since d ln λ and ε are the same in
these models as in gravity models with constant markups, this positive value for η im-
plies slightly lower gains from trade liberalization. This finding is robust to a number of
departures from our baseline assumptions.
    Our findings are related to, and have implications for, a large number of theoretical
and empirical papers in the international trade literature. Many authors have studied
the empirical relationship between international trade and firm-level markups; see e.g.
Levinsohn (1993), Harrison (1994), Krishna and Mitra (1998), Konings, Van Cayseele, and
Warzynski (2001), Chen, Imbs, and Scott (2009), Loecker and Warzynski (2012), and Gold-
berg, Loecker, Khandelwal, and Pavcnik (2012). Methodologies, data sources, and con-
clusions vary, but a common feature of the aforementioned papers is their exclusive focus
on domestic producers. A key message from our analysis is that focusing on domestic
producers may provide a misleading picture of the so-called pro-competitive effects of
trade. Here we find that a decrease in trade costs reduces the markups of domestic pro-
ducers. Yet, because it also increases the markups of foreign producers, gains from trade
liberalization are actually lower than those predicted by standard models with CES utility.
    A recent empirical paper by Feenstra and Weinstein (2010) is closely related to our
analysis. The authors estimate a translog demand system—which is one of the demand
systems covered by our analysis—to measure the contribution of new varieties and vari-
able markups on the change in the U.S. consumer price index between 1992 and 2005. Us-
ing the fact that markups should be proportional to sales under translog, they conclude
that the contribution of these two margins is of the same order of magnitude as the con-
tribution of new varieties estimated by Broda and Weinstein (2006) under the assumption
of CES utility. Our theoretical results show that in the translog case—like with any other
homothetic preferences—the overall gains from a hypothetical decline in trade costs are
exactly the same as under CES, which resonates well with Feenstra and Weinstein (2010)’s


                                            3
empirical findings. It should be clear, however, that the two exercises are very different.
Feenstra and Weinstein (2010) is a measurement exercise that uses a translog demand
system to infer changes in particular components of the U.S. price index from observed
changes in trade flows. This exercise is agnostic about the origins of changes in trade
flows—whether it is driven by U.S. or foreign shocks—as well as their overall welfare
implications. In contrast, the present paper is a counterfactual exercise that focuses on
the welfare effect of trade liberalization, which we model as a change in variable trade
costs. Our approach has both advantages and limitations: it allows us to take all general
equilibrium effects into account when computing the exact welfare changes caused by
trade liberalization, but it relies on the full structure of the model, not just the properties
of the demand system.
    The idea that gains from international trade may be higher or lower in the presence
of distortions, in general, and variable markups, in particular, is an old one in the field;
see e.g. Bhagwati (1971). A number of recent papers have revisited that idea, either
analytically or quantitatively, using variations and extensions of models with firm-level
heterogeneity and monopolistic competition, as in Epifani and Gancia (2011), Dhingra
and Morrow (2012), and Mrazova and Neary (2013a), Bertrand competition, as in de Blas
and Russ (2015) and Holmes, Hsu, and Lee (2015), and Cournot competition, as in Ed-
mond, Midrigan, and Xu (2015). Our approach differs from existing work in three impor-
tant ways. First, we focus on trade models with variable markups that satisfy the same
macro-level restrictions as trade models with constant markups. Besides the empirical ap-
peal of focusing on gravity models, this provides an ideal theoretical benchmark to study
how departures from CES utility may affect the welfare gains from trade liberalization.
Since the macro-level behavior of new trade models considered in this paper is exactly
controlled for, new gains may only reflect new micro-level considerations. Second, we
provide a theoretical framework in which the welfare implications of variable markups
can be signed and quantified using only one new statistic, η. Hence counterfactual analy-
sis can still be conducted in a parsimonious manner. Third, we develop a new empirical
strategy to estimate η and to compute the welfare gains from trade liberalization using
micro-level trade data.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our theoretical frame-
work. Section 3 characterizes the trade equilibrium. Section 4 derives our new welfare
formula. Section 5 presents our empirical estimates. Section 6 explores the robustness of
our results. Section 7 offers some concluding remarks.




                                              4
2     Theoretical Framework
Consider a world economy comprising i = 1, ..., n countries, one factor of production,
labor, and a continuum of differentiated goods ω 2 Ω. All individuals are endowed with
one unit of labor, are perfectly mobile across the production of different goods, and are
immobile across countries. Li denotes the population and wi denotes the wage in country
i. Under free entry, wi will also be equal to income per capita in country i.


2.1     Consumers
The goal of our paper is to study the implications of trade models with monopolistic
competition for the magnitude of the gains from trade in economies in which markups
are variable. This requires departing from the assumption of CES utility. Three promi-
nent alternatives in the international trade and international macro literature are: (i ) ad-
ditively separable, but non-CES utility functions, as in the pioneering work of Krugman
(1979) and the more recent work of Behrens and Murata (2009), Behrens, Mion, Murata,
and Sudekum (2009), Saure (2009), Simonovska (2009), Dhingra and Morrow (2012) and
Zhelobodko, Kokovin, Parenti, and Thisse (2011); (ii ) a symmetric translog expenditure
function, as in Feenstra (2003), Bergin and Feenstra (2009), Feenstra and Weinstein (2010),
Novy (2010), and Rodriguez-Lopez (2010), as well as its strict generalization to quadratic
mean of order r (QMOR) expenditure functions, as in Feenstra (2014); (iii ) Kimball pref-
erences, as in Kimball (1995) and Klenow and Willis (2006). In our baseline analysis, we
study a general demand system for differentiated goods that encompasses all of them.1
    All consumers have the same preferences. If a consumer with income w faces a sched-
ule of prices p f pω gω 2Ω , her Marshallian demand for any differentiated good ω is

                                 qω ( p, w) = Q ( p, w) D ( pω /P( p, w)) ,                                 (1)

where Q ( p, w) and P( p, w) are two aggregate demand shifters, which firms will take as
given in subsequent sections. Note that whereas Q ( p, w) only affects the level of demand,
P( p, w) affects both the level and elasticity of demand, which will have implications for
firm-level markups. As discussed in Burstein and Gopinath (2013), equation (1) is a com-
mon feature of many models in the macroeconomic literature on international pricing.
    1 A trivial generalization of this demand system also nests the case of quadratic, but non-separable utility

function, as in Ottaviano, Tabuchi, and Thisse (2002) and Melitz and Ottaviano (2008), when a homogenous
“outside good” is introduced.We have discussed the additional considerations associated with the existence
of an outside good in the earlier version of this paper. Details are available upon request.



                                                       5
    To complete the description of our demand system, we assume that Q ( p, w) and
P( p, w) are jointly determined as the solution of the following system of two equations,
                      Z
                                 [ H ( pω /P)] β [ pω QD ( pω /P)]1     β
                                                                            dω = w1       β
                                                                                              ,        (2)
                          ω 2Ω
                                              Z                              β
                                        1 β
                                    Q                    pω QD ( pω /P) dω       = wβ,                 (3)
                                                  ω 2Ω


with β 2 f0, 1g and H ( ) strictly increasing and strictly concave. As shown in Appendix
A.1, our demand system nests the case of additively separable utility functions when
β = 0 and the case of QMOR expenditure functions and Kimball preferences when β =
1. In the former case, equation (2) reduces to the consumer’s budget constraint with
P ( p, w) equal to the inverse of the Lagrange multiplier associated with that constraint,
whereas equation (3) merely implies that Q ( p, w) = 1. In the latter case, P( p, w) remains
                                                  R
determined by equation (2), which becomes ω 2Ω H ( pω /P) dω = 1, but the consumer’s
budget constraint is now captured by equation (3) with Q ( p, w) set such that budget
balance holds.
    Three properties of the general demand system introduced above are worth empha-
sizing. First, the own-price elasticity ∂ ln D ( pω /P( p, w)) /∂ ln pω is allowed to vary with
prices, which will generate variable markups under monopolistic competition. Second,
other prices only affect the demand for good ω through their effect on the aggregate de-
mand shifters, Q ( p, w) and P( p, w).2 Third, the demand parameter β controls whether
preferences are homothetic or not. If β = 1, equations (2) and (3) imply that P( p, w) is in-
dependent of w and that Q ( p, w) is proportional to w. Thus preferences are homothetic.
Conversely, if β = 0, one can show that preferences are non-homothetic unless D ( ) is
iso-elastic, i.e. utility functions are CES.3 The parameter β will influence the magnitude
of general equilibrium effects and play a crucial role in our welfare analysis.
    Compared to most papers in the existing trade literature, either theoretical or empir-
ical, we do not impose any functional form restriction on D ( ). The only restriction that
we impose on D ( ) in our theoretical analysis is that it features a choke price.
A1. [Choke Price] There exists a 2 R such that for all x                a, D ( x ) = 0.
   2 In this regard, our specification is more restrictive than the Almost Ideal Demand System (AIDS) of
Deaton and Muellbauer (1980). Compared to AIDS, however, our specification does not impose any func-
tional form restriction on Q ( p, w) and P( p, w).
   3 The formal argument can be found in the Appendix. Intuitively, CES utility functions correspond to the

knife-edge case in which β admits multiple values. CES utility functions can be thought either as a special
case of additively separable utility functions—and derived under the assumption β = 0—or as a special
case of QMOR expenditure functions or Kimball preferences—and derived under the assumption β = 1.



                                                             6
    Without loss of generality, we normalize a to one in the rest of our analysis so that the
aggregate demand shifter P( p, w) is also equal to the choke price. In the absence of fixed
costs of accessing domestic and foreign markets—which is the situation that we will focus
on—Assumption A1 implies that the creation and destruction of “cut-off” goods have
no first-order effects on welfare at the margin. Indeed, if there was some benefit from
consuming these goods, they would have been consumed in strictly positive amounts.
    Assumption A1 is appealing on both theoretical and empirical grounds. From a theo-
retical standpoint, Assumption A1 provides an instructive polar case. In models with CES
utility, such as those studied in Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodríguez-Clare (2012), there are
welfare gains from new goods, but markups are fixed. In our baseline analysis, firm-level
markups can vary, but there are no welfare gains from new goods. From an empirical
standpoint, Assumption A1 also appears more relevant in practice than the alternative
assumption under which consumers never stop consuming any good, regardless of how
expensive these goods may become. The two previous observations notwithstanding, we
explore the sensitivity of our results to Assumption A1 in Section 6.
    For future derivations, it is convenient to write the demand function in a way that
makes explicit the symmetry across goods as well as the way in which the aggregate
demand shifters, Q( p, w) and P( p, w), affect the demand for all goods. Thus, we write
qω ( p, w) q( pω , Q( p, w), P( p, w)), with

                                 q( pω , Q, P) = QD ( pω /P) .                                (4)

For future reference, it is also worth pointing out that under Assumption A1, CES utility
functions are ruled out. Based on our earlier discussion, the preferences that we consider
in this paper are therefore homothetic if and only if β = 1.


2.2   Firms
Firms compete under monopolistic competition with free entry. There is a large number of
ex ante identical firms in each country i that have the option of hiring Fi > 0 units of labor
to enter the industry. We denote by Ni the measure of firms incurring this fixed entry cost
in country i. After wi Fi has been paid, production of any differentiated good is subject to
constant returns to scale. For a firm with productivity z in country i, the constant cost of
delivering one unit of the variety associated with that firm to country j is given by wi τ ij /z,
where τ ij    1 is an iceberg trade cost. We assume that only international trade is subject
to frictions, τ ii = 1. As mentioned earlier, there are no fixed costs of accessing domestic
and foreign markets. Thus, the selection of firms across markets is driven entirely by the

                                               7
existence of a choke price, as in Melitz and Ottaviano (2008). Throughout our analysis,
we assume that good markets are perfectly segmented across countries and that parallel
trade is prohibited so that firms charge the optimal monopoly price in each market.
   As in Melitz (2003), firm-level productivity z is the realization of a random variable
Zi drawn independently across firms from a distribution Gi . We assume that Gi is Pareto
with the same shape parameter θ > 0 around the world.
A2. [Pareto] For all z   bi , Gi (z)   Pr( Zi   z) = 1   (bi /z)θ , with θ > 0.
     While by far the most common distributional assumption in models of monopolis-
tic competition with firm-level heterogeneity—even when utility functions are not CES,
see e.g. Melitz and Ottaviano (2008), Behrens, Mion, Murata, and Sudekum (2009), Si-
monovska (2009), and Rodriguez-Lopez (2010)—Assumption A2 is obviously a strong
restriction on the supply-side of our economy. So it is worth pausing to discuss its main
implications.
     As we will demonstrate below, the main benefit of Assumption A2 is that trade flows
will satisfy the same gravity equation as in models with CES utility. This will allow us to
calibrate our model and conduct counterfactual analysis in the exact same way as in ACR.
Accordingly, we will be able to ask and answer the following question: Conditional on
being consistent with the same macro data, do models featuring variable markups predict
different welfare gains from trade liberalization? In our view, this is a theoretically clean
way to compare the welfare predictions of different trade models.
     Given the generality of the demand system considered in Section 2.1, it should be clear
that Assumption A2 is no less appealing on empirical grounds than under the assump-
tion of CES utility. As documented by Axtell (2001) and Eaton, Kortum, and Kramarz
(2011), among others, Pareto distributions provide a reasonable approximation for the
right tail of the observed distribution of firm sales. Since Pareto distributions of firm sales
can be generated from a model of monopolistic competition with CES utility and Pareto
distributions of firm-level productivity, the previous facts are often given as evidence in
favor of Assumption A2. Although demand functions derived from CES utility do not
satisfy A1, it is easy to construct generalizations of CES demands that satisfy A1, behave
like CES demands for the right tail of the distribution of firm sales, and provide a better
fit for the left tail. We provide one such example in our empirical application.
     Perhaps the main concern regarding Assumption A2 is that it may be too much of
a straight jacket, i.e., that we may be assuming through functional form assumptions
whether gains from trade liberalization predicted by models with variable markups will
be larger, smaller, or the same. As Proposition 1 will formally demonstrate, this is not so.
Although Assumption A2 has strong implications for the univariate distribution of firm-

                                                8
level markups—as we will see, it is unaffected by changes in trade costs—this knife-edge
feature does not preclude the existence of variable markups to increase or decrease—in
theory—the welfare gains from trade liberalization. As we discuss in Section 4.2, what
matters for welfare is not the univariate distribution of markups, but the bivariate distri-
bution of markups and employment, which is free to vary in our model. In Section 6, we
further discuss the sensitivity of our results to departures from Assumption A2.


3     Trade Equilibrium
In this section we characterize the trade equilibrium for arbitrary values of trade costs.
We proceed in two steps. We first study how the demand system introduced in Section
2 shapes firm-level variables. We then describe how firm-level decisions aggregate up to
determine bilateral trade flows and the measure of firms active in each market.


3.1   Firm-level Variables
Consider the optimization problem of a firm producing good ω in country i and selling
it in a certain destination j. To simplify notation, and without risk of confusion, we drop
indices for now and denote by c          wi τ ij /z the constant marginal cost of serving the
market for a particular firm and by Q and P the two aggregate shifters of demand in the
destination country, respectively. Under monopolistic competition with segmented good
markets, the firm chooses its market-specific price p in order to maximize profits in each
market,
                           π (c, Q, P) = max f( p c) q( p, Q, P)g ,
                                          p

taking Q and P as given. The associated first-order condition is

                         (p   c)/p =     1/(∂ ln q( p, Q, P)/∂ ln p),

which states that monopoly markups are inversely related to the elasticity of demand.
Firm-level markups. We use m p/c as our measure of firm-level markups. Combining
the previous expression with equation (4), we can express m as the implicit solution of

                              m = ε D (m/v)/(ε D (m/v)      1),                           (5)

where ε D ( x )   ∂ ln D ( x )/∂ ln x measures the elasticity of demand and v     P/c can
be thought of as a market-specific measure of the efficiency of the firm relative to other

                                              9
firms participating in that market, as summarized by P. Equation (5) implies that the
aggregate demand shifter P is a sufficient statistic for all indirect effects that may lead a
firm to change its price in a particular market.
    We assume that for any v > 0, there exists a unique m          µ(v) that solves equation
                        0
(5). Assuming that ε D < 0 is a sufficient, but not necessary condition for existence and
uniqueness. The properties of the markup function µ (v) derive from the properties of
D ( ). Since limx!1 D ( x ) = 0 by Assumption A1, we must also have limx!1 ε D ( x ) = ∞,
which implies µ (1) = 1. Thus, the choke price in a market is equal to the marginal
cost of the least efficient firm active in that market. Whether markups are monotonically
increasing in productivity depends on the monotonicity of ε D . As is well-known and
demonstrated in Appendix A.2, if demand functions are log-concave in log-prices, ε0D < 0,
then µ0 > 0 so that more efficient firms charge higher markups.4
Firm-level sales and profits. In any given market, the price charged by a firm with mar-
ginal cost c and relative efficiency v is given by p (c, v) = cµ (v). Given this pricing rule,
the total sales faced by a firm with marginal cost c and relative efficiency v in a market
with aggregate demand shifter Q and population L, are equal to

                                x (c, v, Q, L)     LQcµ(v) D (µ(v)/v).                                   (6)

In turn, the profits of a firm with marginal cost c and relative efficiency v selling in a
market with aggregate shifter Q and population L are given by

                          π (c, v, Q, L)    ((µ(v)     1)/µ(v)) x (c, v, Q, L) .                         (7)

The relationship between profits and sales is the same as in models of monopolistic com-
petition with CES utility, except that markups are now allowed to vary across firms.


3.2    Aggregate Variables
Aggregate sales and profits. Let Xij denote the total sales by firms from country i in
country j. Only firms with marginal cost c          Pj sell in country j. Thus there exists a
productivity cut-off zij    wi τ ij /Pj such that a firm from country i sells in country j if
and only if its productivity z zij . Accordingly, we can express the bilateral trade flows
   4 Mrazova  and Neary (2013b) refer to this condition as “subconvexity.” Although Assumption A1 re-
quires demand functions to be log-concave in log-prices locally around 1, it should be clear that it does not
require them to be log-concave in log-prices globally.




                                                     10
between the two countries as
                                         R∞
                              Xij = Ni    zij x ( wi τ ij /z, z/zij , Q j , L j ) dGi ( z ).


Combining this expression with equation (6) and using our Pareto assumption A2, we
get, after simplifications,

                                                                θ                1+ θ
                                 Xij = χNi biθ wi τ ij              L j Q j Pj          .                   (8)
             R∞
where χ θ 1 (µ(v)/v) D (µ(v)/v)v θ 1 dv > 0 is a constant that affects overall sales.5
   Let Πij denote aggregate profits by firms from country i in country j gross of fixed
entry costs. This is given by
                                         R∞
                             Πij = Ni    zij π ( wi τ ij /z, z/zij , Q j , L j ) dGi ( z ).


Using equations (6) and (7), and again invoking our Pareto assumption A2, we get

                                                                                 1+ θ
                                 Πij = πNi biθ wi τ ij
                                                                θ
                                                                    L j Q j Pj          ,                   (9)
             R∞
where π θ 1 (µ(v) 1) D (µ(v)/v)v θ 2 dv > 0 is a constant that affect overall profits.
For future reference, note that Equations (8) and (9) imply that aggregate profits are a
constant share of aggregate sales,

                                              Πij = (π/χ) Xij .                                            (10)



Measure of Entrants. Free entry requires that the sum of expected profits across all mar-
kets be equal to the entry costs, which can be expressed as

                                              ∑ Πij = wi Fi Ni .                                           (11)
                                                j


Labor market clearing and free entry, in turn, require that total sales across all markets be
   5 Equation (8) implicitly assumes that the lower-bound of the Pareto distribution b is small enough so
                                                                                          i
that the firm with minimum productivity bi always prefers to stay out of the market, bi < zij . This implies
that the “extensive” margin of trade is active for all country pairs, which is the empirically relevant case. It
also implicitly assumes that the behavior of the distribution of firm-level productivity and demand in the
upper-tail is such that χ is finite.




                                                         11
equal to the total wage bill,
                                              ∑ Xij = wi Li .                                        (12)
                                               j

Equations (10), (11) and (12) imply that that the measure of entrants in each country is
fully determined by country size Li and the fixed cost of entry Fi ,

                                         Ni = (π/χ)( Li /Fi ).                                       (13)

This implies, in particular, that entry levels are invariant to changes in trade costs.6
Summary. A trade equilibrium corresponds to price schedules, ( p1 , ..., pn ), measures of
entrants, ( N1 , ..., Nn ), and wages, (w1 , ..., wn ), such that (i ) prices set in country j by firms
with productivity z located in country i maximize their profits:

                                 pij (z) = (wi τ ij /z)µ Pj z/(wi τ ij )                             (14)

if z   wi τ ij /Pj and pij (z) wi τ ij /z otherwise; (ii ) measures of entrants are consistent
with free entry, equation (13); and (iii ) wages are consistent with labor market clear-
ing, equation (12), with aggregate sales Xij determined by equation (8) and aggregate
demand shifters, Q j and Pj , determined by equations (2) and (3).7


3.3       Discussion
In spite of the fact that the pricing behavior of firms, as summarized by equation (14), is
very different in the present environment than in trade models with CES utility, bilateral
trade flows still satisfy a gravity equation. Indeed, by equation (8), we have

                                                                θ
                                               Ni biθ wi τ ij       Ej
                                      Xij =                          θ
                                                                         ,                           (15)
                                              ∑k Nk bkθ wk τ kj

where Ej      ∑k Xkj denotes total expenditure in country j. Together with the fact that
aggregate profits are a constant share of aggregate sales, the previous gravity equation
implies that the macro-level predictions of models considered in this paper, i.e., coun-
terfactual predictions about wages and bilateral trade flows, are exactly the same as in
   6 Inour baseline analysis, the assumption of free entry is therefore innocuous. Since aggregate profits
are a constant share of aggregate sales, our welfare and counterfactual analysis would be unchanged if
we were to assume that the measure of entrants, Ni , is exogenously given. As shown in ACR, a similar
property holds in models of monopolistic competition with CES utility and Pareto distributions of firm-
level productivity.
   7 Budget balance in all countries implies that one of these n labor market conditions is redundant.



                                                    12
gravity models with CES utility, such as Krugman (1980), Eaton and Kortum (2002), An-
derson and Van Wincoop (2003), and Eaton, Kortum, and Kramarz (2011). As shown
in Appendix A.3, once the models with variable markups considered in this paper are
calibrated to match the trade elasticity θ and the observed trade flows Xij , they must
predict the exact same changes in wages and trade flows for any change in variable trade
costs.8 Yet, as we will see, differences in the behavior of firms at the micro-level open up
the possibility of new welfare implications.
    Before we turn to our welfare analysis, it is worth emphasizing again that there will
be no gains from new varieties associated with trade liberalization in the present environ-
ment. Because Ni is unaffected by changes in trade costs, changes in the set of varieties
available in a given importing country j may only come from selection effects, i.e. changes
in the productivity cut-offs zij . But as mentioned before, in the absence of fixed costs of
accessing domestic and foreign markets, the creation or destruction of “cut-off” varieties
has no welfare consequences either. Thus our focus in this paper is squarely on the wel-
fare implications of variable markups at the firm-level.


4      Welfare Analysis
In this section we explore the pro-competitive effects of trade, or lack thereof, in the eco-
nomic environment described in Sections 2 and 3. We focus on a small change in trade
costs from τ     τ ij to τ 0  τ ij + dτ ij . ACR show that under monopolistic competition
with Pareto distributions of firm-level productivity and CES utility, the equivalent varia-
tion associated with such a change—namely, the percentage change in income that would
be equivalent to the change in trade costs in terms of its welfare impact—is given by

                                         d ln Wj =     d ln λ jj /θ,

where, like in the present paper, θ is the shape parameter of the Pareto distribution and
d ln λ jj is the change in the share of domestic expenditure on domestic goods caused by
the change from τ to τ 0 . Since θ > 0, the equivalent variation d ln Wj is positive if a change
in trade costs leads to more trade, d ln λ jj < 0. We now investigate how going from CES
utility to the demand system described in equation (1) affects the above formula.
    8 This
         derives from the fact that the three macro-level restrictions, R1, R2, and R3’, imposed in ACR still
hold in this environment.




                                                     13
4.1       A New Formula
Without loss of generality, we use labor in country j as our numeraire so that w j = 1
before and after the change in trade costs. Under free entry, income per capita in country
j is equal to the wage w j . Thus, the percentage change in income, d ln Wj , equivalent to
the change in trade costs from τ to τ 0 can be computed as the negative of the percentage
change in the expenditure function, d ln e j , of a representative consumer in country j. This
is what we focus on next.
    By Shephard’s lemma, we know that de j /dpω,j = q( pω,j , Q j , Pj )  qω,j for all ω 2 Ω.
                                                                   0
Since all price changes associated with a change from τ to τ are infinitesimal,9 we can
express the associated change in expenditure as
                                                       R
                                        de j = ∑i          ω 2Ωij qω,j dpω,j dω,


where Ωij is the set of goods produced in country i and exported to country j and dpω,j
is the change in the price of good ω in country j caused by the change from τ to τ 0 . The
previous expression can be rearranged in logs as
                                                       R
                                   d ln e j = ∑i           ω 2Ωij λω,j d ln   pω,j dω,                     (16)

where λω,j      pω,j qω,j /e j is the share of expenditure on good ω in country j in the ini-
tial equilibrium. Using equation (14) and the fact that firms from country i only sell in
country j if z zij , we obtain
                                        R∞
                        d ln e j = ∑i    zij λij   (z) d ln cij + d ln mij (z) dGi (z) ,                   (17)

where
                                                   Ni x (wi τ ij /z, z/zij , Q j , L j )
                         λij (z)         R∞
                                    ∑k     zkj Nk x ( wk τ kj /z, z/zkj , Q j , L j ) dGk ( z )

denotes the share of expenditure in country j on goods produced by firms from country
i with productivity z, cij  wi τ ij , and mij (z) µ(z/zij ). Equation (17) states that the
   9 In  principle, price changes may not be infinitesimal because of the creation of “new” goods or the
destruction of “old” ones. This may happen for two reasons: (i ) a change in the number of entrants N or
(ii ) a change in the productivity cut-off z . Since the number of entrants is independent of trade costs, as
argued above, (i ) is never an issue. Since the price of goods at the productivity cut-off is equal to the choke
price, (ii ) is never an issue either. This would not be true under CES utility functions and fixed exporting
costs. In this case, changes in productivity cut-offs are associated with non-infinitesimal changes in prices
since goods at the margin go from a finite (selling) price to an (infinite) reservation price, or vice versa. We
come back to this point in detail in Section 6.



                                                              14
percentage change in expenditure is equal to a weighted sum of the percentage change in
prices, with the percentage changes in prices themselves being the sum of the percentage
change in marginal costs, d ln cij , and markups, d ln mij (z).
    Let λij Xij /Ej denote the total share of expenditure on goods from country i in coun-
                   R∞            λij (z)
try j and let ρij   z ρ ( z/zij ) λ dGi ( z ) dz denote the weighted average of the markup
                         ij              ij

elasticities, ρ(v)      d ln µ(v)/d ln v. Using this notation, we can simplify equation (17)
into
                                  d ln e j = ∑i λij d ln cij      ρij d ln zij .

Using Assumption A2, as well as the definition of λij (z), one can show that the markup
elasticity, like the trade elasticity, must be common across countries (i.e., ρij = ρ for all i, j)
and given by the constant

                        R ∞ d ln µ (v)       (µ(v)/v) D (µ(v)/v)v θ                1
                ρ        1             R ∞                                         θ 1
                                                                                               dv.         (18)
                              d ln v       (µ(v0 )/v0 ) D (µ(v0 )/v0 ) (v0 )             dv0
                                              1

Finally, using the fact that the productivity cut-off satisfies zij = cij /Pj , we can rearrange
the expression above as

           d ln e j =         ∑i λij d ln cij      + ( ρ) ∑i λij d ln cij +            ρd ln Pj        .   (19)
                              |    {z      }         |     {z          }               | {z }
                        Change in marginal costs      Direct markup effect    Indirect markup effect


To fix ideas, consider a “good” trade shock, ∑i λij d ln cij < 0. If markups were constant,
ρ = 0, the only effect of such a shock would be given by the first term on the RHS of (19).
Here, the fact that firms adjust their markups in response to a trade shock leads to two
additional terms. The second term on the RHS of (19) is a direct effect. Ceteris paribus, a
decrease in trade costs makes exporting firms relatively more productive, which leads to
changes in markups, by equation (5). If ρ > 0, which, as we will argue, is the empirically
relevant case, we see that the direct effect of markups tends to lower gains from trade liber-
alization. The reason is simple. There is incomplete pass-through of changes in marginal
costs from foreign exporters to domestic consumers. Firms that become more productive
because of lower trade costs tend to raise their markups (ρ > 0), leading to lower welfare
gains (( ρ) ∑i λij d ln cij > 0). The third term on the RHS of (19) is an indirect effect. It
captures the change in markups caused by changes in the aggregate demand shifter, Pj . If
trade liberalization leads to a decline in Pj , reflecting a more intense level of competition,
then ρ > 0 implies a decline in domestic and foreign markups and higher gains from trade
liberalization.


                                                       15
   Based on the previous discussion, whether or not there are pro-competitive effects of
trade liberalization—in the sense of larger welfare gains than in models with constant
markups—depends on a horse race between the direct and indirect markup effects. In
order to compare these two effects, we need to compare the change in marginal costs,
∑i λij d ln cij , to the change in the aggregate demand shifter, d ln Pj . We can do so by using
equations (2) and (3). Given our choice of numeraire and Assumption A2, these two
equations imply

                                       1 β θ +1 β
                                κQ j      Pj            ∑i Ni biθ cij θ           = 1,                           (20)
                                          β (1+ θ )                       β
                                χ β Q j Pj             ∑i Ni biθ cij θ            = 1,                           (21)

               R∞
with κ     θ   1    [ H (µ(v)/v)] β [(µ (v) /v) D (µ(v)/v)]1                  β
                                                                                  v   1 θ dv.   For β 2 f0, 1g, equa-
                                                                 1/(θ +1 β)
tions (20) and (21) imply Pj = κ ∑i Ni biθ cij θ                              . Taking logs and totally differen-
tiating, we therefore have

                              d ln Pj = (θ/(θ + 1                 β)) ∑i λij d ln cij .                          (22)

Since θ > 0 and β    1, we see that a “good” trade shock, ∑i λij d ln cij < 0, is necessarily
accompanied by a decline in the aggregate demand shifter, d ln Pj < 0, as hinted to in
the previous paragraph. As we can also see from equation (22), the ranking of the direct
and indirect markup effects is pinned down by the preference parameter β. Namely, the
indirect markup effect is larger if preferences are homothetic (β = 1) than if they are not
(β = 0).
   Plugging equation (22) into equation (19), we finally get

                       d ln e j = (1     ρ ((1        β ) / (1      β + θ ))) ∑i λij d ln cij .                  (23)

As in ACR, by differentiating the gravity equation (15), one can show that ∑i λij d ln cij is
equal to d ln λ jj /θ. Combining this observation with equation (23), we obtain

                        d ln e j = (1     ρ ((1        β ) / (1      β + θ ))) d ln λ jj /θ.                     (24)

Given free entry and our choice of numeraire, we have already argued that d ln Wj =
 d ln e j . Thus, the main theoretical result of our paper can be stated as follows.

Proposition 1 Suppose that Assumptions A1 and A2 hold. Then the equivalent variation asso-



                                                          16
ciated with a small trade shock in country j is given by

              d ln Wj =    (1    η ) d ln λ jj /θ, with η   ρ ((1   β ) / (1   β + θ )) .

    Although markups are allowed to vary at the firm-level, we see that welfare analysis
can still be conducted using only a few sufficient statistics. In particular, like in ACR,
the share of expenditure on domestic goods, λ jj , is the only endogenous variable whose
changes need to be observed in order to evaluate the welfare consequences of changes in
trade costs.
    Compared to ACR, however, Proposition 1 highlights the potential importance of
micro-level data. In spite of the fact that the models analyzed in this paper satisfy the
same macro-level restrictions as in ACR, different predictions at the micro-level—namely
the variation in markups across firms—lead to different welfare conclusions. Since bi-
lateral trade flows satisfy the gravity equation (15) and the measure of entrants is inde-
pendent of trade costs, the value of d ln λ jj /θ caused by a given trade shock is exactly
the same as in ACR. Yet, welfare changes are no longer pinned down by d ln λ jj /θ, but
depend on an extra statistic, η. According to Proposition 1, if η < 0, then conditional on
matching the same macro data, models with variable markups will predict larger welfare
gains. Conversely, if η > 0, they will predict smaller welfare gains.
    The sign of η, in turn, depends on two considerations. First, is the preference para-
meter β equal to zero or one? This determines the relative importance of the direct and
indirect markup effects. Second, is the average markup elasticity ρ positive or negative?
This determines which of the direct and indirect markup effects is welfare-enhancing.
While the answer to these questions is ultimately an empirical matter, which we deal
with in Section 5, a number of theoretical issues are worth clarifying at this point.


4.2   Discussion
In Section 2, we have mentioned three special cases of our general demand system: (i )
additively separable utility functions, which imply β = 0; (ii ) QMOR expenditure func-
tions, which imply β = 1; and (iii ) Kimball preferences, which also imply β = 1. In
cases (ii ) and (iii ), Proposition 1 implies that gains from trade liberalization are exactly
the same as those predicted by the models with constant markups considered in ACR. In
case (i ), whether η > 0 or < 0 depends on the sign of the (average) markup elasticity,
ρ. Since the pioneering work of Krugman (1979), a common assumption in the literature
is that the demand elasticity is decreasing with the level consumption, ε0D < 0, which



                                                  17
implies ρ > 0.10 Under this assumption, η > 0, and the gains from trade liberalization
predicted by models with variable markups are lower than those predicted by models
with constant markups. In other words, under standard alternatives to CES utility, the
existence of variable markups at the firm-level (weakly) dampens rather than magnifies
the gains from trade liberalization.
What are the economic forces behind lower gains from trade liberalization? As we
formally establish in Appendix A.4, a strong implication of Assumption A2 is that if
markups are an increasing function of firm-level productivity—as they would be under
standard alternatives to CES utility—then the univariate distribution of markups is inde-
pendent of the level of trade costs. This reflects the countervailing effects of a change in
trade costs on markups. On the one hand, a decline in trade costs, τ ij , leads current ex-
porters from country i to increase their markups in country j. On the other hand, it leads
less efficient firms from country i to start exporting to j, and such firms charge lower
markups. When firm-level productivity is distributed Pareto, the second effect exactly
offsets the first one so that the markup distribution is not affected.11 Yet the entry of the
less efficient firms is irrelevant from a welfare standpoint, which explains why the invari-
ance of the markup distribution does not preclude trade liberalization to have different
welfare implications in models with constant and variable markups. Formally, η could be
positive or negative in Proposition 1.
    The economic forces behind our welfare results are deeper and echo the two quotes
from Helpman and Krugman (1989) given at the beginning of our Introduction. First, the
existence of variable markups affects a country’s terms-of-trade effects by changing how
trade cost shocks get passed through from foreign firms to domestic consumers. This is
reflected in ( ρ) ∑i6= j λij d ln cij d ln Pj in equation (19), which captures both the di-
rect and indirect effects on foreign markups. Second, the existence of variable markups
implies that changes in trade costs also affect the degree of misallocation in the economy.
This is reflected in ( ρ) λ jj d ln c jj d ln Pj in equation (19), which captures the indirect
(and only the indirect) effect on domestic markups. While domestic markups per se are a
transfer from consumers to producers, it is a matter of simple algebra to check that under
Assumption A2, changes in domestic markups, ρλ jj d ln Pj , are proportional to the nega-
tive of the covariance between firm-level markups on the domestic market and changes
in firm-level employment shares for that market; see Appendix A.4. Thus whenever do-
  10 As Mrazova and Neary (2013b) note, this condition is sometimes called “Marshall’s Second Law of
Demand,” as Marshall (1920) argued it was the normal case.
  11 A similar compositional effect is at play in Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum (2003). In their model,

Bertrand competition leads to variable markups at the firm-level, but distributional assumptions similar to
ours make the univariate distribution of markups invariant to changes in trade costs.


                                                    18
mestic markups go down on average, workers get reallocated towards firms with higher
markups. Since their goods are under-supplied in the initial equilibrium, this increases
welfare above and beyond what a model with constant markups would have predicted.12
     At this point, it should therefore be clear that our theoretical analysis is perfectly con-
sistent with a scenario in which after trade liberalization: (i ) the least efficient domestic
firms exit; (ii ) domestic firms that stay in the industry reduce their markups; and yet
(iii ) welfare gains from trade liberalization are lower than those predicted by a simple
trade model with constant markups and no firm heterogeneity like Krugman (1980). The
underlying economics are simple: the exit of the least efficient firms has no first-order
welfare effects; the decrease in domestic markups raises welfare by reducing distortions
on the domestic market; but the welfare consequences of trade liberalization also depend
on changes in foreign markups, which tend to push welfare in the opposite direction.
The Role of Non-Homotheticity in Preferences. A corollary of Proposition 1 is that if
preferences are homothetic, which corresponds to β = 1, then η = 0. In this case, the
direct and indirect markup effects exactly compensate one another, implying that wel-
fare changes are equal to those predicted by models with constant markups considered
in ACR. Intuitively, a good trade shock in an open economy is like a positive income
shock in a closed economy. If preferences are homothetic, such a shock does not affect
how domestic consumers allocate their expenditures across goods and, in turn, has no
additional welfare effects even if the economy is distorted. In contrast, if preferences are
non-homothetic, a positive income shock may additionally lower welfare in a distorted
economy if it triggers a reallocation towards goods that have lower markups. This is what
happens if ρ > 0 and β = 0.13
    Under the assumption that preferences are homothetic, it is worth noting that the
equivalence between models with variable and constant markups extends beyond small
changes in trade costs. Homotheticity in preferences implies that consumers that are sub-
ject to an income shock equivalent to the trade shock still consume goods in the exact
same proportions as consumers that are not. In order to compute the equivalent variation
associated with an arbitrary change in trade costs from τ to τ 0 , we can therefore integrate
the expression given in Proposition 1 between the initial and final equilibria. Formally, if
Assumptions A1 and A2 hold and β = 1, then the equivalent variation associated with
  12 The  fact that changes in the degree of misallocation should be picked up by the covariance between
markups and changes in factor share is not specific to the particular model that we consider; see Basu and
Fernald (2002) for a general discussion.
  13 In this case, one can show that d ln P /d ln w > 0. Thus, the covariance between firm-level markups
                                           j       j
and log-changes in firm-level employment shares caused by the positive income shock is negative.




                                                   19
any trade shock in country j is given by

                                                           1/θ
                                            Ŵj = λ̂ jj          ,

where λ̂ jj  λ0jj /λ jj denotes the proportional change in the share of expenditure on do-
mestic goods caused by the trade shock. This is the exact same expression for large wel-
fare changes as in ACR.
    Although the set of models with homothetic preferences considered in this paper is
rich enough to rationalize any cross-sectional distribution of markups—by appropriately
choosing the demand function D ( ) that enters equation (5)—any model within that set
would predict the same welfare gains from trade liberalization as in ACR, regardless of
whether trade shocks are small or not.
Relationship to Krugman (1979). To conclude this discussion, let us briefly come back to
the existing literature and clarify the relationship between our theoretical results and the
seminal work of Krugman (1979). While the demand system described in equation (1)
nests the case of additively separable utility functions considered in Krugman (1979), our
analysis differs from his in three dimensions. First, we impose the existence of a choke
price. Second, we assume that firms are heterogeneous in their productivity. Third, we
focus on changes in iceberg trade costs, whereas he focuses on changes in market size.
The last two differences have strong implications for the nature of distortions in the class
of models that we analyze compared to his.
    In models of monopolistic competition with homogeneous firms and no trade costs,
such as the one considered in Krugman (1979), the level of the markups may change with
the size of the market, but they are always common across goods in a given equilibrium.
Thus markups are not a source of inefficiency. The only distortion in the economy is
that there may be too many or too few goods produced in equilibrium, which changes
in country size may exacerbate or not. In contrast, because of Assumption A2, the mass
of entrants N is invariant to changes in trade costs in the models that we consider. The
only distortion here is that markups vary across goods from the same country.14 Thus,
our theoretical results have little to say about whether gains from changes in trade costs
in Krugman (1979) are bigger or smaller than those in Krugman (1980) in some well-
defined sense that would remain to be specified. Our focus is on the existence of variable
markups at the firm-level and whether, conditional on the same observed macro data,
models that feature such markups should lead us to conclude that welfare gains from
  14 Under   Assumption A2, the distribution of markups in a given destination is the same across all source
countries. Thus all markup distortions are “within” rather than “between” distortions; see Appendix A.4
for details.

                                                    20
trade liberalization are larger than previously thought. We are now ready to answer this
question empirically.


5      Empirical Estimates
We now describe a procedure to estimate η in Proposition 1. The basic idea is to estimate
a demand system that satisfies equations (1)-(3) and then to use the full structure of the
model to go from demand estimates to η.


5.1     From Theory to Data
Our choice of demand system is motivated by the two following considerations. First,
we want to nest the case of CES demand, which is by far the most common in the field.
Second, we want to allow the average elasticity of markups—and hence η—to be positive
or negative, so that data can speak to whether the existence of variable markups increases
or decreases the gains from trade liberalization. In order to achieve these two goals in a
parsimonious manner, we focus on the additively-separable case, β = 0, and impose the
following parametric restrictions on D ( ):

                                   D ( pω /P) = ( pω /P)1/γ      α,

where α and γ are the two structural parameters to be estimated.15 When α = 0, the
previous demand system reduces to the CES case, with elasticity of substitution given by
  1/γ. So trade liberalization has no effects on markups and η = 0. In contrast, when
α > 0, the the demand elasticity is decreasing with the level consumption, ε0D < 0, which
implies ρ > 0 and η = ρ/(1 + θ ) > 0. In this case, variable markups lower the welfare
gains from trade liberalization, as described in Proposition 1. The opposite happens if
α < 0.
   To estimate this demand system, we follow a large literature that uses detailed data
on bilateral U.S. imports within narrowly defined product codes to estimate the repre-
sentative U.S. consumer’s demand parameters; see e.g. Broda and Weinstein (2006) and
Feenstra and Weinstein (2010). The best available data is at the 10-digit HS level, annually
from 1989-2005.16 In mapping these data to our model we assume that a variety ω in the
    15 Mrazova and Neary (2013a) refer to this demand system as the “Pollak family”. Simonovska (2009)
uses the log-version to analyze the relationship between income and prices across countries.
  16 We download this data from Peter Schott’s homepage and use the concordances provided in Pierce and

Schott (2009) to adjust for changes in 10-digit HS codes over this time period.


                                                  21
model corresponds to a particular 10-digit HS product, indexed by g, from a particular
exporting country, indexed by i; that is, a “variety” ω in the model is a “product-country”
pair gi in the data. Because the demand system in equation (4) is intended to represent
demand for varieties within a differentiated industry, we assume that an “industry” in the
data is a level of product aggregation that is higher than the 10-digit level; our baseline es-
timates use 4-digit HS categories as industries, which we index by k. In what follows, we
let the price aggregator Ptk vary across industries and over time, but restrict the demand
parameters α and γ to be common across all industries.17
    In practice, we therefore focus on the following demand equation:

                                                               1/γ
                                    qkgit = εkgit pkgit /Ptk         α,                              (25)

where pkgit is the price paid by U.S. consumers when buying quantity qkgit for a narrowly
defined product g in industry k from an exporting country i in year t. The import data
contain measures of total expenditure, i.e., the empirical analogue of qkgit pkgit , and mea-
sures of total quantities purchased, which we take as our measure of qkgit . To construct a
measure of prices pkgit we therefore simply take the ratio of expenditure to quantity. The
variety-specific demand shifter, εkgit , captures the fact that physical units in the data may
differ from the choice of units in Section 2, under which all varieties are implicitly as-
sumed to enter utility in a symmetric fashion. Such differences in units of account can be
interpreted as unobserved quality differences; see e.g. Baldwin and Harrigan (2007).


5.2       Estimation Procedure
There are two key challenges involved in estimating equation (25): (i ) the price aggrega-
tor Ptk is unobserved and endogenous; and (ii ) the demand shifter εkgit is unobserved and
endogenous. We describe below, in turn, a procedure to estimate the demand parameters,
α and γ, that overcomes these challenges.
    First, consider the problem that the price aggregator Ptk is unobserved and endoge-
nous. The key restriction imposed in equation (25), however, is that the demand for all
varieties depends symmetrically on this aggregator; that is, the price aggregator does not
vary across products g and exporters i within an industry k. This suggests that iden-
  17 Inthe one-sector case, we have already pointed out that if β = 0, P corresponds to the inverse of
the lagrange multiplier on the budget constraint. In the multiple-sector case, if one assumes two-stage
budgeting, Pk can be interpreted
                          h       in a similar
                                          i manner as the inverse of the lagrange multiplier associated
                      R
with the constraint, ω 2Ωk pkωt D pkωt /P dω = wtk , where wtk denotes total expenditure on varieties from
industry k at date t.


                                                    22
tification of the demand parameters, α and γ, can be achieved through a differencing
procedure designed to eliminate the unobserved and endogenous Ptk term in equation
(25). Specifically, inverting our demand function and taking logs, we get

                             ln pkgit = γ ln(qkgit + α)       ln Ptk + ln εkgit .

Taking differences with respect to one reference good-country within the same industry
k, we then obtain
                       ∆ gi ln pkgit = γ∆ gi ln(qkgit + α) + ∆ gi ln εkgit ,      (26)

where ∆ gi denotes the corresponding difference operator. While in principle the dif-
ference ∆ gi could be taken across any two product-country gi observations within an
industry-year kt, we use the convention of mean differencing such that, for any vari-
able Y, ∆ gi Ygitk = Yk
                        git
                                1             k
                               Nkt ∑ gi 2Ikt Ygit where Ikt is the set of products g and countries i in
industry k and year t and Nkt is the number of observations in this set.
    Second, consider the problem posed by the endogeneity of the unobserved demand-
shifter, εkgit . We first follow the literature on demand system estimation using international
trade data—e.g. Broda and Weinstein (2006) and Feenstra and Weinstein (2010)—and
decompose this demand-shifter into two terms:

                                       ln εkgit = ln δkgi + ln ekgit .

In this decomposition, the first term, ln δkgi , reflects systematic differences in quality across
products from different countries within an industry, whereas the second term, ln ekgct ,
reflects idiosyncratic determinants of demand that are free to vary over time. To eliminate
systematic unobserved differences in quality, we take a second difference of equation
(26), now across time periods, to obtain

                       ∆t ∆ gi ln pkgit = γ∆t ∆ gi ln(qkgit + α) + ∆t ∆ gi ln ekgit ,             (27)

where ∆t denotes the corresponding difference operator. Again, while the difference ∆t
could be taken across any two time periods we use mean differencing, as in ∆ gi defined
above. While this double-differencing procedure may mitigate cross-sectional sources
of bias due to unobserved quality shifters, standard simultaneity bias concerns remain.
As in virtually any demand estimation context, available data on price and quantity are
obtained from an observed equilibrium between the supply and demand sides of a mar-
ket. This codetermination of prices and quantities means that OLS estimates of equa-
tion (27) would be biased. A natural solution is to use an instrumental variable (IV) ap-

                                                    23
proach, where here the instrument must be exogenous with respect to demand shifters,
i.e. ∆t ∆ gc ln ekgit , and must be correlated with the endogenous variable, i.e. the double-
demeaned quantity ∆t ∆ gi ln(qkgit + α), for any value of α. In our model a natural candidate
for such an instrument is trade costs. For this purpose we use the (log of one plus the)
value of tariff duties charged, expressed as a percentage of import value, as a measure of
trade costs; this variable is reported in the US 10-digit HS imports data. This procedure of
using trade costs as instruments to estimate demand-side parameters in an international
trade setting is commonly employed in the empirical gravity literature; see e.g. Head and
Mayer (2013).
    Since the estimating equation (27) is linear in γ, but non-linear in α, we separate our
estimation procedure into an inner-loop and an outer-loop. In the inner-loop, we take the
value of α as given and compute γ̂(α) as the IV estimator of γ with ∆t ∆ gi ln(tkgit + α) the
instrumental variable for ∆t ∆ gi ln(qkgit + α), where tkgit denotes the tariff rate charged by
the United States on imports of product g in industry k from country i in year t. In the
outer-loop, we then search for α̂ that minimizes the sum of the squared residuals across
all linear IV regressions. Our estimator of γ is finally given by γ̂ = γ̂(α̂).


5.3   Demand Estimates
We begin by estimating the demand system in equation (27) under the restriction that
α = 0. This reduces equation (27) to the CES case, in which the estimating equation is
                                                                           b = 0.221 with
linear. Our results are reported in Panel A of Table 1. Our IV estimate is γ
a standard error—clustered at the exporting country level to account for serial correlation
over time and across products within exporters—that suggests that γ is statistically signif-
icantly different from zero at the 95% confidence level. This finding implies an elasticity
of substitution equal to 1/bγ = 4.53, which is in line with typical estimates of the CES
demand parameter in international trade settings. This suggests that our particular in-
strumental variable, based on the reported value of tariff duties charged, is generating the
same exogenous variation in trade costs that is typically exploited by other researchers.
    We then estimate equation (27) without any restriction on α beyond the fact that qkgit +
α must be strictly positive for ln(qkgit + α) to be well-defined. Namely, we require α to
be greater than minus the lowest value of qkgit in our dataset, which is equal to 1 in all
years and industries. These results are reported in Panel B of Table 1. Our non-linear IV
estimate of equation (25) results in—with 95% confidence intervals, block-bootstrapped
at the exporting country level, with 200 bootstrap replications, shown in parentheses—
estimates of γb = 0.253 and b   α = 1.5. Notably, this estimate of α has a 95% confidence


                                              24
                                                                    γ                 α
              Panel A: CES demand
                                                                 0.221
                                                                 (0.051)

              Panel B: Generalized CES demand
                                                                 0.253             1.5
                                                             [0.095, 0.408]       [0.9, 2.1]

Table 1: Demand Estimates. Panel A reports IV estimates of equation (27) with α = 0 and standard
errors clustered at the exporter level. Panel B reports IV estimates of equation (27) without restrictions and
with 95 percent confidence intervals from a block-bootstrap procedure, with blocks at the exporter level.
*** indicates p<0.05.


interval that excludes zero, suggesting that the departure from CES that is modeled in
equation (25) is a real feature of these data. Furthermore, α̂ is positive. As argued above,
this implies that η must be positive as well. So, regardless of the value of other structural
parameters, Proposition 1 establishes that there cannot be any pro-competitive effect of
trade in the sense that welfare gains from trade liberalization must be lower than those
predicted by a model with constant markups. Next, we determine how much lower they
must be.


5.4    Welfare Implications
By definition, η = ρ ((1 β)/(1 β + θ )) with β 2 f0, 1g. The demand system intro-
duced in equation (25) imposes β = 0. So, in order to compute η, we only need estimates
of θ and ρ. In our model, θ is equal to the elasticity of trade flows with respect to trade
costs. We therefore use θ = 5, which is in line with recent estimates of this parameter—e.g.
Eaton, Kortum, and Kramarz (2011), Simonovska and Waugh (2011), and Costinot, Don-
aldson, and Komunjer (2012)—and is equal to the median estimate in the meta-analysis
of gravity-based estimates of trade elasticities in Head and Mayer (2013). Using our es-
timates of b  b , and θ, we can then use equations (5) and (18) to compute the average
           α, γ
markup elasticity, ρ̂ = 0.24 and in turn η̂ = ρ̂/(1 + θ ) = 0.04. Thus, micro-level trade
data lead us to conclude that gains from trade liberalization are 4% lower than what we
would have predicted by assuming (wrongly) that markups are constant across firms.
    One potential concern regarding the previous number is that we have let the data
speak, but not enough. For instance, we have assumed β = 0. We have not tried to esti-
mate whether β = 0 or 1 (or another value for some broader class of demand functions).
We note, however, that even in the case β = 1, there are no pro-competitive effects of


                                                     25
trade. Under homotheticity, gains from trade for all demand systems considered in this
paper are given by the welfare formula in ACR. More generally, one may want to explore
how departures from our baseline assumptions, like the absence of fixed costs or Pareto
distributions of productivity, affect the previous welfare estimates. This is what we will
turn to in the next section.
    Another potential concern is that the source of variation used to estimate ρ and hence
η relies too much on the particular structure of the model. Economically speaking, ρ mea-
sures how, on average, changes in marginal costs map into changes in markups. Under
monopolistic competition, ρ can be inferred by using information about the shape of de-
mand and the distribution of firm-level sales. But one may imagine instead measuring
this elasticity directly. Given the static nature of our model, this elasticity would have to
be long-run. One possibility would be to analyze how markups vary with productivity
in a cross-section of firms. The empirical work of Goldberg, Loecker, Khandelwal, and
Pavcnik (2012) in India provides a useful benchmark. When running a cross-sectional
regression of (log) prices on (log) marginal cost, they find a “pass-through” coefficient
of 0.35. For a given firm in our model, the pass-through coefficient is equal to one mi-
nus the markup elasticity. Ignoring heterogeneity in markup elasticities across firms, this
alternative estimation strategy would lead to ρ̂ = 0.65. Since ρ̂ > 0, gains from trade
liberalization are again strictly lower than in the CES benchmark. Using the same trade
elasticity (θ = 5), we now get η̂ = 0.11.18 Pro-competitive effects, in the sense of Proposi-
tion 1, remain elusive.


6      Sensitivity Analysis
We have designed our baseline analysis with two objectives in mind: (i ) generate the
same aggregate predictions across models with and without variable markups; and (ii )
abstract from welfare gains from new varieties. While this provides a clear benchmark to
study the welfare implications of variable markups, conditions (i ) and (ii ) rely on strong
assumptions. The goal of this final section is to relax these assumptions and explore the
robustness of our earlier conclusions. Namely, we allow for changes in trade costs that
are not infinitesimal, for distributions of productivity that are not Pareto, and for fixed
marketing costs that are not zero.
    18 Goldberg,Loecker, Khandelwal, and Pavcnik (2012) also run a regression of (log) price on (log) mar-
ginal cost with firm fixed effects, so that the identification comes from the variation over time in their panel.
This yields a lower pass-through coefficient of 0.2, which would imply ρ̂ = 0.8 and η̂ = 0.13.




                                                       26
6.1       Calibrated Economy
To analyze welfare changes in these more general environments, we rely on numerical
simulations. We focus on a world economy comprising two symmetric countries. We set
country size to L = 1 and fixed entry costs to F = 1. This affects welfare levels in the
initial equilibrium—by affecting the number of firms—but not the welfare changes that
we are interested in. In all simulations, we use the demand system estimated in Section
5 with α = 1.5 and γ = 0.253. Finally, we set trade costs and parameters of the firm-
level productivity distributions to match the U.S. imports to expenditure ratio, the trade
elasticity and, in the case of lognormal and bounded Pareto distributions, the share of
U.S. firms exporting. The values of all calibrated parameters can be found in Table 2. For
the baseline calibration with Pareto distribution this calibration implies a choice of the
Pareto elasticity of θ = 5.
     Before turning to our counterfactual exercises, we briefly discuss the positive implica-
tions of our calibrated model. In the previous literature, a number of models with CES
demand have been constructed to match salient features of firm-level data, including the
distribution of exporting sales and the difference in measured productivity between ex-
porters and non-exporters. Since our demand estimates have lead us to depart from CES,
it is natural to ask how well our calibrated model performs along these two dimensions.
     Figure 1 depicts the sales distribution of French firms—normalized by mean sales—
across markets for the 5th, 25th, 50th, 75th, and 95th percentiles. As first documented by
Eaton, Kortum, and Kramarz (2004), the data reveal a striking heterogeneity: compared
to the mean exporter, the exporters at the 5th, 50th and 95th percentiles sell less than
1/100th, around 1/10th, and 3 times as much, respectively.
     The predictions of our calibrated model are plotted on the same figure (black line). For
comparison, we also plot the predictions our model if we had assumed a CES demand
instead (red line).19 In both cases, we use the same Pareto elasticity (θ = 5). The two
models predict well the distribution of sales for the the largest exporters. Intuitively, our
estimated demand function asymptotically resembles a CES function. So, given Pareto
distributions of productivity, both models predict a Pareto distribution of sales in the
right tail. Interestingly, our calibrated model is also able to capture the heterogeneity
between the largest and smallest exporters, whereas the model with CES demand does
not. One can improve the fit of the CES model by introducing demand shocks and fixed
marketing costs, as in Eaton, Kortum, and Kramarz (2011) and Arkolakis (2010). The fit
of our model for the firm-level distribution of sales is as good as the fit of these richer
  19 In
      the CES case, we use the estimates of demand in Panel A of Table 1, α = 0 and γ =   0.221. This
implies an elasticity of substitution equal to 4.5.


                                                27
 Parameter      Value       Target/Choice Calibration

 Panel A: Demand (Sections 6.2-6.4)
     α           1.5 Baseline estimate (Table 1, Panel B)
     γ        0.253 Baseline estimate (Table 1, Panel B)

 Panel B: Pareto productivity distribution (Sections 6.2 and 6.4)
     θ              5 Trade elasticity (Head and Mayer (2013))
     τ           1.68 Imports/expenditure = 7% (OECD Input-Output Database, 2000)

 Panel C: Lognormal productivity distribution (Section 6.3)
     τ         1.82 Targets for all the three parameters:
    µl         1.52    (i) trade elasticity = 5, (ii) imports/expenditure = 7%,
    σl        0.475    and (iii) share of firms exporting = 18% (BJRS, 2007)

 Panel D: Bounded Pareto productivity distribution (Section 6.3)
     τ        1.845 Targets for all the three parameters:
     θ        2.475    (i) trade elasticity = 5, (ii) imports/expenditure = 7%,
      u
    z̄i        0.54    and (iii) share of firms exporting = 18% (BJRS, 2007)

Table 2: Calibration procedure. Procedure for model parameter calibration throughout Section 6.
BJRS (2007) refers to Bernard, Jensen, Redding, and Schott (2007).


models.
    Another striking feature of firm-level data is the difference between the measured
productivity of exporters and non-exporters. Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum (2003)
report that the relative advantage of US exporters to non-exporters in log-productivity is
33% overall and 15% within the same industry. Measured productivity in Bernard, Eaton,
Jensen, and Kortum (2003) corresponds to the sum of revenues divided by the sum of
labor payments, ∑ j rij (z) /(∑ j wi τ ij qij (z) /z). For domestic firms in our model, this ratio
is equal to their markups while for exports it is a weighted average of the domestic and the
foreign markups. At the calibrated parameters, we find that that the exporter’s advantage
is 16%, very close to the 15% observed within industries in the data. Absent any fixed cost
of production, of course, the same model with CES demand would predict no variation
in markups and hence no variation in measured productivity across firms.
    Having established the ability of our model to match key moments of firm-level data—
moments that we did not target in our baseline calibration—we now turn to the welfare
implications of our calibrated model.




                                                    28
                                        10




                                         1




                Sales/Mean Sales
                                     0.1




                                                                                                                       Baseline Demand Estimates (with Pareto)
                                    0.01                                                                               CES (with Pareto)
                                                                                                                       French Data (Mean Across Destinations)




                                   0.001
                                             0            10        20        30         40             50        60          70           80          90        100
                                                                                     Firm Export Sales Percentile




Figure 1: Distribution of Firm Export Sales. Source: Eaton, Kortum, and Kramarz (2011).



6.2 Large Changes in Trade Costs
For our first series of numerical exercises, we maintain the exact same assumptions as in
our baseline analysis, but consider large changes in trade costs. Namely, we let symmet-
ric iceberg trade costs, τ, vary from twenty percent below to twenty percent above the
calibrated value, τ = 1.68.
    To understand why large changes may affect our earlier conclusions, let us return to
the expenditure minimization problem in country j. Under the restrictions imposed on
demand in Section 5, one can check that the expenditure function is given by
                                                                                              Z
                                                          e j = min ∑ Ni                                pij (z) qij (z) dGi (z)                                                (28)
                                                               fqij (z)g i                        zij
                                                                         Z
                                                                ∑ Ni         zij
                                                                                   uij qij (z) dGi (z) dz                                 ū,
                                                                i


with uij (q) = (q + α)1+γ . The Envelope Theorem then implies that
                                                      R
                                                 Ni       zij   pij (z) qij (z, u)                      ζuij qij (z, u)                    λdGi (z) dz
        d ln e j =                 ∑                                                                    ej
                                                                                                                                                                   d ln Ni     (29)
                                     i
                                                   h                                                                                            i
                                                 Ni pij zij qij zij , u                                 ζuij qij zij , u                            gi qij zij
                                   ∑                                                                         ej
                                                                                                                                                                        dzij
                                    i
                                                      R
                                                 Ni       zij   pij (z) qij (z) d ln pij (z) dGi (z)
               +∑                                                                                                                   ,
                                    i
                                                                                    ej



                                                                                                  29
where ζ is the Lagrange multiplier associated with the utility constraint and qij (z, ū) is
the compensated (Hicksian) demand. The first term in equation (29) corresponds to the
total surplus associated with a change in the measure of varieties from country i; the
second term corresponds to the surplus associated with cut-off varieties; and the third
term measures the effects of changes in the prices of existing varieties, either through
changes in marginal costs or markups. This last term is the only one that is non-zero in
our baseline analysis.
    When productivity distributions are Pareto, the number of entrants is fixed by country
size. So, the first term must always be equal to zero, regardless of whether changes in
trade costs are large or small. Away from the initial equilibrium, however, the second
term may not be. Although the consumer in the decentralized equilibrium would never
consume the cut-off variety, the consumer whose utility has been held at some constant
level ū may very well choose to do so. Put differently, non-homotheticities imply that
gains and losses from cut-off varieties, which the formula in Proposition 1 ignores, may
no longer be zero as one goes from small to large changes in trade costs.
    To assess the importance of these considerations, we compute the equivalent variation
associated with an arbitrary change in trade costs given by the expenditure function in
(28). We refer to this number, expressed as a fraction of country’s initial income, as the
exact welfare change.20 We then compare this number to the welfare change that one
                                                                           0         1 η
would obtain by integrating the welfare formula in Proposition 1, i.e. (λ jj /λ jj ) θ    1,
       0
with λ jj the share of expenditure on domestic goods in the equilibrium with the new trade
costs, as computed in Appendix A.3. Figure 2 plots the exact welfare changes (bold line)
and the welfare changes obtained using our new formula with η = 0.04 (dotted line) as
a function of iceberg trade costs, τ. The two curves almost coincide. For completeness,
we also report the welfare changes one would obtain by using ACR’s welfare formula,
i.e. η = 0 (dashed line). We see that the formula in Proposition 1, which holds exactly
for small changes in trade costs, also provides an accurate approximation to the case of
large changes. In this numerical example, the impact of cut-off varieties on the welfare
implications of trade liberalization is minor.
  20 Formally,   the exact welfare changes in country j are computed as e p j , u0j /w j      1, with p j and w j the
schedule of good prices and the wage in the initial equilibrium, respectively, and     u0j   the utility level in the
counterfactual equilibrium.




                                                        30
                                            3
                                                                                                               Exact
                                                                                                               ACR
                                          2.5                                                                  ACDR


                                            2




                      Percentage Gains
                                          1.5


                                            1


                                          0.5


                                            0


                                         -0.5


                                          -1
                                          -0.25   -0.2   -0.15   -0.1   -0.05     0       0.05   0.1   0.15   0.2   0.25
                                                                                dln( τ)



              Figure 2: Welfare Gains Relative to Baseline (τ = 1.68), Pareto



6.3 Alternative Productivity Distributions
In our baseline analysis, we have assumed that the distribution of firm-level produc-
tivity was Pareto. This implies a gravity equation, which facilitates comparisons with
earlier work, but it also implies that the univariate distribution of markups is invariant
to changes in trade costs. The previous observation notwithstanding, it is not a priori
obvious how departing from Pareto should affect our welfare results. First, as already
discussed earlier, the fact that the univariate distribution of markups is fixed does not im-
ply that the level of distortions is. The latter depends on the joint distribution of markups
and expenditure shares. Second, since the number of entrants depends on the profitability
of firms, any increase in average markups—which would lower the third term in equa-
tion (29)—should be accompanied by a increase in the number of entrants—which would
increase the first term in the same equation.
    The CES case nicely illustrates the potential importance of offsetting effects when
studying aggregate welfare changes. Away from Pareto, we know that changes in trade
costs not only affect the share of expenditure on domestic goods, but also the number of
entrants in a given country. Yet, because the allocation is efficient under CES, we know
from the work of Atkeson and Burstein (2010) that

                                                          d ln e j = (1               λ jj )d ln τ.                        (30)

In a two-country symmetric economy, the formal definition of the trade elasticity in ACR
reduces to ε = d ln((1 λ jj )/λ jj )/d ln τ. Using this definition and changing variable in

                                                                                31
the previous equation, one therefore gets

                                            d ln e j = d ln λ jj /ε.

In this CES example, the local version of ACR formula always holds, regardless of distri-
butional assumptions and regardless of whether the number of entrants varies.
    Without CES, and hence without efficiency, the situation is more subtle. To explore
how our welfare results are affected by departures from Pareto under our estimated de-
mand system, we focus on the two alternatives that have recently received attention in
the literature: (i ) log-normal distributions with mean µl and standard deviation σl , as
in Head, Mayer, and Thoenig (2014); and (ii ) bounded Pareto distributions with shape
parameter θ and upper-bound z̄iu , as in Feenstra (2014). The calibrated values of these
parameters are reported in Table 2. As discussed earlier, we set these parameters, to-
gether with the baseline iceberg trade cost, to target the U.S. imports to expenditure ratio,
the trade elasticity and the share of U.S. firms exporting. Since the trade elasticity is no
longer constant, we target its value for a 1% change in trade costs around the calibration
point using the formal definition in ACR, applied to the case of two symmetric countries:
ε = d ln((1 λ jj )/λ jj )/d ln τ.21
    We then follow the same procedure as in Section 6.2. We compute the exact welfare
changes using the expenditure function in (28)—with the distribution Gi being either log-
normal or bounded Pareto—and we compare those to the welfare changes that one would
obtain by integrating our new welfare formula or the ACR formula. These results are
reported in Figures 3 and 4.22 In both cases, we see that our formulae over-estimate both
the gains from trade liberalization and the losses from trade protection.
    The interpretation of these numerical results is less straightforward than before. As we
go from Pareto distributions to other distributions, we not only change the extent of firm-
level distortions, but also the aggregate predictions of the model. Although we still target
the same trade elasticity in the initial equilibrium, it now varies with the level of the trade
of costs, a point emphasized by Head, Mayer, and Thoenig (2014) and Melitz and Redding
(2015) in the CES case. More precisely, the trade elasticity increases in absolute value
with the level of trade costs, as documented in Appendix A.5. The new welfare numbers
therefore reflect different behavior both at the macro and micro levels. For our purposes,
  21 Forthese alternative productivity distributions, we obtain predictions for the distribution of exporting
sales and for the productivity advantage of exporters that are similar to those in the Pareto case. Results are
available upon request.
  22 When integrating our new formula and the ACR formula, we let the trade elasticity and the average

markup elasticity vary as variable trade costs change from their initial to their counterfactual values.



                                                      32
                                              3
                                                                                                                       E xac t
                                                                                                                       ACR
                                            2.5                                                                        ACDR


                                              2




                        Percentage Gains
                                            1.5


                                              1


                                            0.5


                                              0


                                           -0.5


                                            -1
                                            -0.25   -0.2   -0.15   -0.1   -0.05      0       0.05   0.1   0.15   0.2     0.25
                                                                                  dln ( τ)



           Figure 3: Welfare Gains Relative to Baseline (τ = 1.82), Log-normal



the important take-away from Figures 3 and 4 is that they provide very little support to
the idea that welfare gains the Pareto case are special and unusually low, perhaps because
the univariate distribution of markups is fixed. Under these two alternative distributional
assumptions, gains from trade are lower, not larger.


6.4   Fixed Marketing Costs
For our last series of simulations, we introduce fixed marketing costs in our model. Such
costs are potentially interesting from a welfare standpoint since they imply that creation
and destruction of cut-off varieties may have first-order welfare effects, i.e. the second
term in equation (29) is no longer zero, even for small changes in trade costs.
    The economic environment is the same as in Section 2, except for the fact that after
receiving their random productivity draws, firms must incur a fixed marketing cost, w j f j ,
in order to sell in market j. Fixed costs do not affect firm-level markups, which remain
a function of relative efficiency alone, but they do affect firm-level profits. Without risk
of confusion, let us drop the country indices as we did in Section 3.1. For a firm with
marginal cost c and efficiency v, profits are now given by

                    π (c, v, Q, L)                           ((µ(v)               1)/µ(v)) x (c, v, Q, L)                        wf,

with firm-level sales, x (c, v, Q, L), still given by (6). Accordingly, a firm will enter a given




                                                                                  33
                                                 3
                                                                                                                         E xac t
                                                                                                                         ACR
                                                                                                                         ACDR
                                               2.5


                                                 2




                           Percentage Gains
                                               1.5


                                                 1


                                               0.5


                                                 0


                                              -0.5


                                               -1
                                               -0.25   -0.2   -0.15   -0.1   -0.05     0       0.05   0.1   0.15   0.2     0.25
                                                                                     dln( τ)



           Figure 4: Welfare Gains Relative to Baseline (τ = 1.845), Truncated Pareto



market if and only if v                              v , with v implicitly defined by

                                              (µ(v )          1) D (µ(v )/v ) = (w f v )/( QLP).                                   (31)

When f = 0, equation (31) implies v = 1. So, firms only enter a market if their marginal
cost, c, is below the reservation price, P. When f > 0, marginal costs must be strictly be-
low P for firms to break even. The gravity equation (15) and the free entry condition (11)
are the same as before. Only the labor market clearing condition (12) must be modified
in order to take into account the resources associated with the fixed marketing costs.
    To quantify the importance of fixed marketing costs, we focus on a 10% decrease in
trade costs from the calibrated value, τ = 1.68, to a counterfactual value, τ = 1.51. We
then vary the fixed marketing cost, without recalibrating other parameters, from f = 0
to f = 3. Figure 5 reports the exact welfare changes together with the predictions that
one would obtain by integrating our new welfare formula (η = 0.04) or the ACR formula
(η = 0). Exact welfare changes are always bounded from above by our two formulas.
As fixed costs increase, we see that both the exact welfare changes and our new formula
converge towards ACR formula. This is intuitive. As fixed marketing costs increase, only
the most productive firms select into a market. These firms operate in parts of the demand
curve that are very close to CES. Hence, markups are close to constant across firms and
welfare changes are well-approximated by the ACR formula.23
  23 Ourestimated demand system imposes β = 0. In the homothetic case, β = 1, one can check that al-
though the efficiency cut-off, v , is no longer equal to one, it remains unaffected by trade costs. Accordingly,


                                                                                     34
                                             0.905
                                                                                 Exac t
                                              0.95                               ACR
                                                                                 ACDR
                                             0.945

                                              0.94




                          Percentage Gains
                                             0.935

                                              0.93

                                             0.925

                                              0.92

                                             0.915

                                              0.91

                                             0.905
                                                  0   0.5   1    1.5   2   2.5            3
                                                                  f



                 Figure 5: Welfare Gains and Fixed Costs (τ = 1.68 to 1.51)



7 Concluding Remarks
We have studied the gains from trade liberalization in models with monopolistic com-
petition, firm-level heterogeneity, and variable markups. Under standard restrictions on
consumers’ demand and the distribution of firms’ productivity, we have developed a
generalized version of ACR formula that highlights how micro- and macro-level consid-
erations jointly shape the welfare gains from trade. We have then used micro-level trade
data to quantify their importance. Our main finding is that (rightly) taking into account
variable markups leads to gains from trade liberalization that are 4% lower than those
that one would have predicted by (wrongly) assuming constant markups.
   Our theoretical and empirical results, of course, only apply to a particular class of
models. Monopolistic competition plays a central role in the field of international trade,
but it is not the only market structure under which variable markups may arise. In a
recent paper, Edmond, Midrigan, and Xu (2015) have studied the gains from trade lib-
eralization in a model with Cournot competition. When calibrating their model to Tai-
wanese firm-level data, they find that aggregate welfare gains remain well-approximated
by ACR formula. Taken together, these results suggest that if pro-competitive effects are
to be found, they will require significant departures from standard assumptions about
market structure and preferences. For now, pro-competitive effects of trade are elusive.

the distribution of markups and the number of entrants remain constant. Thus, whether fixed marketing
costs are zero or not, gains from trade liberalization are given by the ACR formula.




                                                                35
A     Proofs

A.1   Section 2.1
Additively Separable Utility. We first establish that our demand system under β = 0
encompasses the case of additively separable utility functions considered in Krugman
(1979). Using our notation, his model corresponds
                                        R          to a situation in which preferences are
represented by a utility function, U = ω 2Ω u(qω )dω. The first-order conditions associ-
ated with utility maximization imply u0 (qω ) = λpω , where λ is the Lagrangian multiplier
associated with the budget constraint. Inverting the first-order conditions implies

                                    qω = u0        1
                                                       (λpω ) ,                       (32)

together with the budget constraint,
                                   Z
                                              pω qω dω = w.                           (33)
                                       ω 2Ω

Under β = 0, equations (2) and (3) are equivalent to equation (33) and Q = 1, respec-
tively. In turn, equations (1) and Q = 1 imply qω = D ( pω /P). Thus, setting P 1/λ and
D( )      u0 1 ( ), our demand system under β = 0 replicates the demand system under
additively separable utility.
Kimball Preferences. We now show that our demand system under β = 1 encompasses
the case of Kimball preferences. Under Kimball preferences, utility Q from consuming
fqω gω 2Ω is implicitly given by
                                   Z
                                              qω
                                        Υ              dω = 1,                        (34)
                                              Q

for some function Υ that satisfies Υ0 > 0 and Υ00 < 0. The utility maximization program of
the consumer is to maxQ,fqω g Q subject to equations (34) and (33). Let γ and λ denote the
Lagrange multipliers associated with these two constraints. Manipulating the first-order
conditions of this problem we get
                                0 R                    qω
                                                                    1
                                  λ qω Υ0              Q    dω
                             0 1@
                     qω = QΥ                                      pω A for all ω.     (35)
                                        Q

The demand system under Kimball preferences is characterized
                                                    R           by equations (33)-(35).
Under β = 1, equations (2) and (3) are equivalent to ω 2Ω H ( pω /P) dω = 1 and equa-
                                               R        q
tion (33), respectively. Thus, setting P Q/ λ qω Υ0 Qω dω , D ( )         Υ0 1 ( ), and
H( )    Υ( D ( )), our demand system with β = 1 replicates the demand system under
Kimball preferences.


                                                36
QMOR Expenditure. Finally, we show that our demand system under β = 1 also encom-
passes the demand system corresponding to QMOR expenditure functions in Feenstra
(2014). The QMOR demand system entails qω = QD ( pω /P) with
                                                (
                                                     αxr   1   1 x       r/2      if      x 1
                               D (x)                                                          ,                  (36)
                                                                0                 if      x>1

where P acts as a choke price defined implicitly by
                            00                                  1r/2                                  12/r
                                                                          Z
                           B                         N                                 1 r/2 C
                       P = @@                             A                             p dω A               ,   (37)
                                       N            e
                                                    N α/γ                     pω P     N ω


and where Q is determined such that the budget constraint
                                                     R          (33) is satisfied.24 In the
                      α and γ are parameters, N e
previous expressions,
             R                                         Ω dω is the measure of all possible
goods, N       pω P dω is the measure of the set of goods with prices equal or below the
choke price P. To proceed, note that equation (37) can be rearranged as
                                                                    Z                     r/2
                                                      1                           pω
                               1=                                                               dω.              (38)
                                           N         e α/γ
                                                     N                  pω P      P


To conclude, let us show that this is equivalent to equation (2) under β = 1 if one sets

                                   pω                      1             pω      1 r/2           pω
                           H                                                              D         .
                                   P                α α/γ      e
                                                               N         P                       P


Together with the definition of D ( ) in equation 36, the previous definition implies
                      Z                                             Z                      r/2
                              pω         1                                           pω
                            H    dω =                                                             1 dω.
                          Ω   P       α/γ Ne                            pω P         P
                               R               pω
Thus, as argued above,             Ω   H        P   dω = 1 is equivalent to equation (38).25
Homothetic Preferences. In Section 2.1 we have also argued that if D ( ) satisfies As-
  24 Equations   (36) and (37) are the counterparts of equations (7) and (2) in Feenstra (2014), respectively.
  25 Since  the translog expenditure system is a special case of QMOR expenditure functions, as shown in
Feenstra (2014), this establishes that our demand system encompasses the translog case. But it is useful to
show directly that our demand system leads to translog demand if we set D ( x )         ζx 1 ln x 1 for x      1
and D ( xR) = 0 otherwise, with ζ some positive constant, and H ( x ) xD ( x ). Equation (2) with β = 1 then
implies pω P ζ ln( pω /P) 1 dω = 1, which is equivalent to
                                                                   Z
                                                         1   1
                                               ln P =      +                  ln pω dω,
                                                        ζN   N         pω P



                                                               37
sumption A1, then consumers have homothetic preferences if and only if β = 1. We
now establish this result formally. Throughout this proof we will repeatedly use the fact
that preferences are homothetic if and only if the income elasticity, ∂ ln qω ( p, w)/∂ ln w, is
equal to one for all goods ω 2 Ω.                       R
    Suppose first that β = 1. Then equation (2) implies ω 2Ω H ( pω /P) dω = 1, so P( p, w)
is independent of w. Differentiating equation (1), we therefore get:

                                     ∂ ln qω ( p, w)   ∂ ln Q( p, w)
                                                     =               .
                                         ∂ ln w            ∂ ln w
                               ∂ ln Q( p,w)
But Equation (3) implies ∂ ln w = 1, hence the income elasticity is equal to one for all
goods ω 2 Ω, so preferences are homothetic.
   Now suppose that β = 0. In this case, equation (3) implies Q = 1. By equation (1),
we therefore have

                         ∂ ln qω ( p, w)                           ∂ ln P( p, w)
                                         = ε D ( pω /P( p, w))                   ,                    (39)
                             ∂ ln w                                    ∂ ln w

with
                                                     pω D 0 ( pω /P( p, w))
                          ε D ( pω /P( p, w))                                .
                                                  P( p, w) D ( pω /P( p, w))
Now take two goods, ω 1 and ω 2 , and a price schedule and wage, ( p, w), such that

                              ε D ( pω1 /P( p, w)) 6= ε D ( pω2 /P( p, w)) .                          (40)

Since Assumption A1 rules out CES preferences, we know that such ω 1 , ω 2 , and ( p, w)
must exist. By conditions (39) and (40), we cannot have

                                ∂ ln qω1 ( p, w)   ∂ ln qω2 ( p, w)
                                                 =                  = 1.
                                     ∂ ln w             ∂ ln w

Thus preferences cannot be homothetic.


A.2     Section 3.1
In Section 3.1 we have argued that if demand functions are log-concave in log-prices,
∂2 ln D/∂ ln p2 < 0, then ε00D > 0 and hence µ0 > 0 so that more efficient firms charge
                                                   ε (m/v)
higher markups. To see this, let f (m, v)    m ε D(m/v) 1 . Equation (5) then entails
                                                              D

which is the condition that determines P in the translog demand; see equation (8) in Feenstra (2014). Equa-
tion (3) with β = 1 is just the budget constraint, which given equation (2) immediately implies Q = w/P.




                                                    38
f (m, v) = 0. Differentiating with respect to m and v, we obtain

                           ∂ f (m, v)            ε0D (m/v)     1
                                      = 1+                   2
                                                                 > 0,
                               ∂m           (ε D (m/v) 1) v
                           ∂ f (m, v)         ε0D (m/v)      m
                                      =                         < 0,
                                ∂v       (ε D (m/v) 1) v2  2


where the two inequalities derive from ε00D > 0, which follows immediately from ∂2 ln D/∂ ln p2 <
0 and ε D ( x )   ∂ ln D ( x )/∂ ln x. By the Implicit Function Theorem, equation (5) there-
                0
fore implies µ (v) = (∂ f (m, v)/∂v) / (∂ f (m, v)/∂m) > 0.


A.3    Section 3.3
In Section 3.3, we have argued that once models with variable markups considered in this
paper are calibrated to match the trade elasticity θ and the observed trade flows Xij ,
they must predict the exact same changes in wages and trade flows for any change in
variable trade costs as gravity models with CES utility, such as Krugman (1980), Eaton
and Kortum (2002), Anderson and Van Wincoop (2003), and Eaton, Kortum, and Kra-
marz (2011). We now establish this result formally. Let λij    Xij /Ej denote the share of
expenditure on goods from country i in country j. By equations (15) and (12), we know
that
                                                                   θ
                                                  Ni biθ wi τ ij
                                    λij =                              θ
                                                                           ,
                                              ∑k Nk bkθ wk τ kj
                                  wi L i =   ∑ λij w j L j .
                                              j


Since these are the same equilibrium conditions as in gravity models with CES util-
ity (macro-level restrictions R1-R3’ in ACR), we only need to show that counterfactual
changes in wages and trade flows only depend on trade flows and expenditures in the
initial equilibrium as well as the value of the trade elasticity.
    We can use the same argument as in the proof of Proposition 2 n
                                                                  in ACR.
                                                                      o    Consider a
counterfactual change in variable trade costs from τ                 τ ij to τ 0 τ ij0 . Let x̂ x 0 /x
denote the change in any variable x between the initial and the counterfactual equilib-
rium. Since Ni is fixed for all i, one can show that fŵi gi6= j are implicitly given by the
solution of
                                                                       θ
                                          λij0 ŵ j0 Ej0 ŵi τ̂ ij0
                          ŵi = ∑nj0 =1                                   θ
                                                                            .                    (41)
                                            n
                                        Ei ∑i0 =1 λi0 j0 ŵi0 τ̂ i0 j0

where ŵ j = 1 by choice of numeraire. Given changes in wages, fŵi g, changes in expen-



                                                   39
diture shares are then given by

                                                                 θ
                                                    ŵi τ̂ ij
                                  λ̂ij =                                   θ
                                                                               .                 (42)
                                           ∑in0 =1 λi0 j   ŵi0 τ̂ i0 j

Equations (41) and (42) imply fŵi g and λ̂ij only depend on the value of trade flows
and expenditures in the initial equilibrium as well as the trade elasticity. Once changes in
expenditure shares, λ̂ij , are known, changes in bilateral trade flows can be computed
using the identity, X̂ij = λ̂ij ŵ j . Thus the same observation applies to changes in bilateral
trade flows, which concludes the argument.


A.4    Section 4.2
Invariance of Distribution of Markups. In Section 4.2, we have argued that if markups
are an increasing function of firm-level productivity, then the univariate distribution of
markups is independent of the level of trade costs. We now establish this result formally.
Let Mij (m; τ ) denote the distribution of markups set by firms from country i in country j
in a trade equilibrium if trade costs are equal to τ   τ ij . Since firm-level markups only
depend on the relative efficiency of firms, we can express

                             Mij (m; τ ) = Pr fµ (v)                 mjv           1g ,

where the distribution of v depends, in principle, on the identity of both the exporting
and the importing country. Recall that v        P/c and c = cij /z. Thus for a firm with
productivity z located in i and selling in j, we have v = Pj z/cij = z/zij . Combining this
observation with Bayes’ rule, we can rearrange the expression above as
                                           n                                             o
                                         Pr µ(z/zij ) m, zij                         z
                           Mij (µ; τ ) =         n      o                                    .
                                              Pr zij z

Using Assumption A2 and the fact that µ ( ) is monotone, we can rearrange the previous
expression as
                              R zij µ 1 (m)
                               zij          dGi (z)              θ
                 Mij (m; τ ) = R ∞                  =1 µ 1 (m)     .
                                     z  dG i ( z )
                                           ij

Since the function µ ( ) is identical across countries and independent of τ, by equation
(5), this establishes that for any exporter i and any importer j, the distribution of markups
Mij ( ; τ ) is independent of the identity of the exporter i, the identity of the importer j, and
the level of trade costs τ. As a result, the overall distribution of markups in any country
j is also invariant to changes in trade costs.


                                                    40
Domestic markups and Misallocation. In Section 4.2, we have argued that changes in
domestic markups, ρλ jj d ln Pj , are proportional to the opposite of the covariance between
firm-level markups on the domestic market and changes in firm-level employment shares
for that market. We now establish this result formally.
    Let us denote by L jj (z) the number of workers allocated by a firm with productivity z
in country j to production of goods for market j. We must have

                                                     L jj (z) = τ jj q jj (z) /z,

where q jj (z) is such that
                                         q jj (z) = Q j D z jj µ(z/z jj )/z .

Similarly, let us denote by σ jj (z) L jj (z) /L jj denote the employment share that goes to
a firm with productivity z. We have

                                                             D z jj µ(z/z jj )/z /z
                              σ jj (z) = R                                                                   .
                                           ∞
                                              z jj   Nj D z jj µ(z0 /z jj )/z0 /z0 dGj (z0 )

                                                                                    R∞
Let us now compute the average of markups, µ̄ jj                                     z jj µ     z/z jj σ jj (z) Nj dGj (z), for
firms from country j selling in country j weighted by employment. We have:

                              R∞                                D z jj µ(z/z jj )/z /z
                    µ̄ jj =   z jj µ z/z jj R ∞                                                              dGj (z) .
                                                     zij   D z jj µ(z0 /z jj )/z0 /z0 dGj (z0 )

Under Assumption A2, we can rearrange the previous expression as

                                         R∞                      D (µ (v) /v) v     θ 2 dv
                               µ̄ jj =   1    µ (v) R ∞                                  θ 2
                                                                                                         .
                                                            1   D (µ (v0 ) /v0 ) (v0 )           dv0

This implies

       dµ̄ jj       R ∞ dµ z/z jj                            R∞             dσ jj (z)
                =    z jj         σ jj ( z ) Nj dG j ( z ) +  z jj µ z/z jj           Nj dGj (z) = 0,
        dz jj              dz jj                                              dz jj


where we have used the fact that σ jj z jj = 0. The first term can be rearranged as


                                   R ∞ dµ z/z jj                                          ρµ̄ jj
                                    z jj         σ jj (z) Nj dGj (z) =                               .
                                          dz jj                                               z jj


                                                                    41
                       R∞
By construction, z σ jj (z) Nj dGj (z) = 1. Using again σ jj z jj = 0, we therefore have
                         jj
R ∞ dσ jj (z)
 z    z       Nj dGj (z) = 0. Thus the second term can be rearranged as
  jj    jj

                                                                                                                !
       R∞                  dσ jj (z)             R∞                                          dσ jj (z)
       z jj µ     z/z jj             Nj dGj (z) = z µ z/z jj                     µ̄ jj                      0       Nj dGj (z) ,
                             dz jj                 jj                                          dz jj

Combining the three previous expressions we therefore get
                                                                                             !
                           ρµ̄ jj       R∞                             dσ jj (z)
                                    =   z jj     µ z/z jj      µ̄ jj                     0       Nj dGj (z) .
                            z jj                                         dz jj

To conclude note that z jj = 1/Pj , by our choice of numeraire. Thus the previous expres-
sion implies
                                                 !
                                         λ jj        R∞
                ρλ jj d ln Pj =                      z jj   µ z/z jj     µ̄ jj     dσ jj (z)         0 Nj dGj (z) ,
                                         µ̄ jj

where the integral on the right-hand side is equal to the covariance between firm-level
markups on the domestic market and changes in firm-level employment shares for that
market.


A.5          Section 6
All models that we consider are calibrated so that the trade elasticity for a 1% change in
trade costs is equal to 5 in the initial equilibrium. Except when the distribution of pro-
ductivity is Pareto, however, this elasticity will vary with the level of trade costs. Figure
A.5 plots the trade elasticity as a function of trade costs in the case of Pareto, log-normal
and bounded Pareto distributions. In both the log-normal and bounded Pareto cases, we
see that the trade elasticity increases, in absolute value, with the level of trade costs.




                                                                  42
43
References
A NDERSON , J. E., AND E. VAN W INCOOP (2003): “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to
  the Border Puzzle,” The American Economic Review, 93(1), 170–192.

A RKOLAKIS , C. (2010): “Market Penetration Costs and the New Consumers Margin in
  International Trade,” Journal of Political Economy, 118(6), 1151–1199.

A RKOLAKIS , C., A. C OSTINOT, AND A. R ODRÍGUEZ -C LARE (2012): “New Trade Models,
  Same Old Gains?,” American Economic Review, 102(1), 94–130.

ATKESON , A., AND A. B URSTEIN (2010): “Innovation, Firm Dynamics, and International
 Trade,” Journal of Political Economy, 118(3), 433–489.

A XTELL , R. L. (2001): “Zipf Distribution of U.S. Firm Sizes,” Science, 293(5536), 1818–
  1820.

B ALDWIN , R., AND J. H ARRIGAN (2007): “Zeros, Quality and Space: Trade Theory and
  Trade Evidence,” NBER Working paper 13214.

B ASU , S., AND J. G. F ERNALD (2002): “Aggregate Productivity and Aggregate Technol-
  ogy,” European Economic Review, 46, 963–991.

B EHRENS , K., G. M ION , Y. M URATA , AND J. S UDEKUM (2009): “Trade, Wages, and Pro-
   ductivity,” CEP Discussion Papers, 0942.

B EHRENS , K., AND Y. M URATA (2009): “Globalization and Individual Gains from Trade,”
   CEPR discussion paper, 7438.

B ERGIN , P. R., AND R. F EENSTRA (2009): “Pass-Through of Exchange Rates and Compe-
   tition Between Floaters and Fixers,” Journal of Money Credit and Bankin, 41(1), 35–70.

B ERNARD , A., B. J ENSEN , S. R EDDING , AND P. J. S CHOTT (2007): “FIrms in International
   Trade,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(3), 105–130.

B ERNARD , A. B., J. E ATON , J. B. J ENSEN , AND S. K ORTUM (2003): “Plants and Produc-
   tivity in International Trade,” American Economic Review, 93(4), 1268–1290.

B HAGWATI , J. N. (1971): The Generalized Theory of Distortions and Welfare, vol. Trade, Bal-
  ance of Payments, and Growth: Papers in International Economics in Honor of Charles
  P. Kindleberger. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

B RODA , C., AND D. W EINSTEIN (2006): “Globalization and the Gains from Variety,” Quar-
   terly Journal of Economics, 121(2), 541–585.

B URSTEIN , A., AND G. G OPINATH (2013): “International prices and exchange rates,” Dis-
  cussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

C HEN , N., J. I MBS , AND A. S COTT (2009): “The Dynamics of Trade and Competition,”
  Journal of International Economics, 77(1), 50–62.

                                             44
C OSTINOT, A., D. D ONALDSON , AND I. K OMUNJER (2012): “What Goods Do Countries
  Trade? A Quantitative Exploration of Ricardo’s Ideas,” Review of Economic Studies, 79(2),
  581–608.
C OSTINOT, A., AND A. R ODRIGUEZ -C LARE (2014): “Trade Theory with Numbers: Quan-
  tifying the Consequences of Globalization,” in Handbook of International Economics, ed.
  by G. Gopinath, E. Helpman, and K. Rogoff, vol. 4, chap. 4.
DE B LAS , B., AND K. N. R USS (2015): “Understanding Markups in the Open Economy,”
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7(2), 157–180.
D EATON , A., AND J. M UELLBAUER (1980): “An Almost Ideal Demand System,” American
  Economic Review, 70(3), 312–326.
D HINGRA , S., AND J. M ORROW (2012): “The Impact of Integration on Productivity and
  Welfare Distortions Under Monopolistic Competition,” mimeo, LSE.
E ATON , J., AND S. K ORTUM (2002): “Technology, Geography and Trade,” Econometrica,
  70(5), 1741–1779.
E ATON , J., S. K ORTUM , AND F. K RAMARZ (2004): “Dissecting Trade: Firms, Industries,
  and Export Destinations,” The American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 94(2),
  150–154.
        (2011): “An Anatomy of International Trade: Evidence from French Firms,” Econo-
  metrica, 79(5), 1453–1498.
E DMOND , C., V. M IDRIGAN , AND D. X U (2015): “Competition, Markups and the Gains
  from Trade,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
E PIFANI , P., AND G. G ANCIA (2011): “Trade, Markup Heterogeneity and Misallocations,”
   Journal of Intermational Economics, 83(1), 1–13.
F EENSTRA , R. (2014): “Restoring the Product Variety and Pro-competitive Gains from
   Trade with Heterogeneous Firms and Bounded Productivity,” NBER working paper,
   19833.
F EENSTRA , R. C. (2003): “A Homothetic Utility Function for Monopolistic Competition
   Models, Without Constant Price Elasticity,” Economics Letters, 78(1), 79–86.
F EENSTRA , R. C., AND D. W EINSTEIN (2010): “Globalization, Markups, and the U.S. Price
   Level,” NBER working paper, 15749.
G OLDBERG , P., J. D. L OECKER , A. K HANDELWAL ,       AND   N. PAVCNIK (2012): “Prices,
  Markups and Trade Reform,” mimeo.
H ARRISON , A. E. (1994): “Productivity, Imperfect Competition and Trade Reform. The-
  ory and Evidence,” Journal of International Economics, 36(1-2), 53–73.
H EAD , K., AND T. M AYER (2013): Gravity Equations: Toolkit, Cookbook, Workhorse, vol. 4 of
  Handbook of International Economics. Elsevier.

                                            45
H EAD , K., T. M AYER ,   AND   M. T HOENIG (2014): “Welfare and Trade Without Pareto,”
  mimeo.
H ELPMAN , E., AND P. R. K RUGMAN (1989): Trade Policy and Market Structure. MIT Press,
  Cambridge, Massachussetts.
H OLMES , T. J., W.-T. H SU , AND S. L EE (2015): “Allocative Efficiency, Mark-ups, and the
  Welfare Gains from Trade,” Journal of International Economics, forthcoming.
K IMBALL , M. S. (1995): “The Quantitative Analytics of the Basic Neomonetarist Model,”
   Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, pp. 1241–1277.
K LENOW, P. J., AND J. L. W ILLIS (2006): “Real rigidities and nominal price changes,”
  Available at SSRN 896325.
K ONINGS , J., P. VAN C AYSEELE , AND F. WARZYNSKI (2001): “The Dynamics of Industrial
  Mark-Ups in Two Small Open Economies: Does National Competition Policy Matter?,”
  International Journal of Industrial Organization, 19(5), 841–859.
K RISHNA , P., AND D. M ITRA (1998): “Trade Liberalization, Market Discipline and Pro-
  ductivity Growth: New Evidence from India,” Journal of Development Economics, 56(2),
  447–462.
K RUGMAN , P. (1979): “Increasing Returns Monopolistic Competition and International
  Trade,” Journal of International Economics, 9(4), 469–479.
K RUGMAN , P. (1980): “Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of
  Trade,” The American Economic Review, 70(5), 950–959.
L EVINSOHN , J. (1993): “Testing the Imports-as-Market-Discipline Hypothesis,” Journal of
   International Economics, 35(1), 1–22.
L OECKER , J. D., AND F. WARZYNSKI (2012): “Markups and Firm-Level Export Status,”
  forthcoming American Economic Review.
M ARSHALL , A. (1920): Principles of Economics, An Introductory Volume. London: Mcmillan,
 eighth edition.
M ELITZ , M., AND S. R EDDING (2015): “New Trade models, New Welfare Implications,”
 American Economic Review, 105(3), 1105–1146.
M ELITZ , M. J. (2003): “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggre-
 gate Industry Productivity,” Econometrica, 71(6), 1695–1725.
M ELITZ , M. J., AND G. I. P. O TTAVIANO (2008): “Market Size, Trade, and Productivity,”
 The Review of Economic Studies, 75(1), 295–316.
M RAZOVA , M., AND P. N EARY (2013a): “Not so demanding: preference structure, firm
 behavior, and welfare,” mimeo Oxford University.
        (2013b): “Selection Effects with Heterogeneous Firms,” mimeo Oxford University.

                                             46
N OVY, D. (2010): “International Trade Without CES: Estimating Translog Gravity,” CEP
  Discussion paper, 1031.

O TTAVIANO , G. I., T. TABUCHI , AND J.-F. T HISSE (2002): “Agglomeration and Trade
  Revisited,” International Economic Review, 43(2), 409–436.

P IERCE , J. R., AND P. K. S CHOTT (2009): “Concording US harmonized system categories
   over time,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

R ODRIGUEZ -L OPEZ , J.-A. (2010): “Prices and Exchange Rates: A Theory of Disconnect,”
  Manuscript, University of California Irvine.

S AURE , P. (2009): “Bounded Love of Variety and Patterns of Trade,” mimeo, Swiss National
   Bank.

S IMONOVSKA , I. (2009): “Income Differences and Prices of Tradables,” Manuscript, Uni-
   versity of California, Davis.

S IMONOVSKA , I.,   AND   M. WAUGH (2011): “The Elasticity of Trade: Estimates and Evi-
   dence,” mimeo.

Z HELOBODKO , E., S. K OKOVIN , M. PARENTI , AND J.-F. T HISSE (2011): “Monopolistic
  Competition in General Equilibrium: Beyond the CES,” Econometrica, 80(6), 2765–2784.




                                            47
