                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            BROADENING STATE CAPACITY

                                       Traviss Cassidy
                                       Mark Dincecco
                                        Ugo Troiano

                                     Working Paper 21373
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w21373


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          July 2015, Revised November 2019




We thank Sutirtha Bagchi, Ivo Bischoff, Maggie Brehm, Paul Brehm, Alecia Cassidy, Wei Cui,
James Feigenbaum, Jim Hines, Larry Katz, Byung-Cheol Kim, Ken Kollman, Tidiane Ly, Rob
Mickey, Giacomo Ponzetto, Paul Rhode, Joel Slemrod, Brenden Timpe, and seminar participants
at the University of Essex, Free University of Bozen-Bolzano, Oberlin College, IEB VIII
Workshop on Public Economics, National Tax Association Annual Meeting, World Economic
History Congress, and International Institute of Public Finance Annual Congress for helpful
comments. We thank Xinzhu Chen, Maiko Heller, Niaoniao You, and Alex Wolfe for excellent
research assistance. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the MITRE Anonymous
Donor. A previous version of this paper was circulated as “Broadening the State: Policy
Responses to the Introduction of the Income Tax.” The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Traviss Cassidy, Mark Dincecco, and Ugo Troiano. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Broadening State Capacity
Traviss Cassidy, Mark Dincecco, and Ugo Troiano
NBER Working Paper No. 21373
July 2015, Revised November 2019
JEL No. D78,H11,H41,H75,N0,N21,N22,N41,N42

                                          ABSTRACT

We provide new evidence about the fiscal and mobility consequences of the introduction of the
income tax, a major investment in modern state capacity. Drawing on archival data, we introduce
a novel panel database that spans all 50 U.S. states between 1900 and 2008. Our research design
exploits the staggered introduction of the income tax across states, while accounting for the
potentially selective timing of adoption. We find that tax broadening significantly increased total
revenue and expenditure in the short run but not the long run, while revenue and expenditure per
capita significantly increased on a permanent basis. To explain these results, we show that the
introduction of the income tax led to significant outmigration to non-income-tax states,
particularly by high earners. Our findings demonstrate that the introduction of the income tax
allowed U.S. states to significantly increase their revenue-raising capacity on a per capita basis.
Nonetheless, population mobility provided a partial check on the absolute size of state
governments.

 Traviss Cassidy                                 Ugo Troiano
 University of Alabama                           Department of Economics
 361 Stadium Dr                                  University of Michigan
 Alston Hall 271                                 611 Tappan Street, Lorch Hall 219
Tuscaloosa, AL 35487                             Ann Arbor, MI 48109
tmcassidy@cba.ua.edu                             troiano@ugotroiano.org

Mark Dincecco
Department of Political Science
University of Michigan
5700 Haven Hall
505 S State Street
Ann Arbor MI
48109
dincecco@umich.edu
1    Introduction
The state’s capacity to extract revenue matters for economic development (Besley and Pers-
son, 2011). Well-funded states can provide the administrative infrastructure that supports
a well-functioning market economy: secure property rights, market regulations, and quick
and fair legal resolution (North, 1990). History suggests that broadening the tax base is key
to expanding the government’s extractive capacity. The elimination of traditional tax privi-
leges following the French Revolution, for example, was associated with a large increase in
the state’s ability to tax (Dincecco, 2011). Over the twentieth century, the establishment of
the income tax has been a crucial component of tax broadening (Wallis, 2000, Lindert, 2004,
Aidt and Jensen, 2009, Besley and Persson, 2013).
    Despite its historical importance, there is a dearth of systematic evidence about how the
introduction of the income tax affects the size of government. Broadening the tax base me-
chanically increases government revenue, holding other tax rates and bases fixed. However,
introducing a new tax may crowd out other revenue sources or cause taxpayers to move to
lower-tax jurisdictions, leaving the absolute size of government unchanged. If fleeing tax-
payers are disproportionately high-earning, tax broadening may even reduce revenue per
capita. Therefore, the extent to which introducing a new tax instrument actually expands
the government’s extractive capacity remains an important open question.
    To make progress on this front, this paper analyzes the consequences of the introduction
of the income tax – a major investment in modern state capacity – on revenue, expenditure,
population, and interstate migration across U.S. states over the entire twentieth century and
the start of the twenty-first century. To perform this analysis, we introduce a new panel
database, drawn in part from archival data. Crucially, individual states adopted the income
tax in a staggered fashion over a span of 65 years, allowing us to control for unobserved state
characteristics that influence the levels and long-run trends of our outcomes. Using a semi-
parametric difference-in-differences design, we find that tax broadening initially increased
total revenue and expenditure by 4-8 percent, but had no long-term impact on the absolute
size of state governments. By contrast, revenue and expenditure per capita permanently
increased by 7-8 percent. Tax-base erosion due to outmigration helps explain these results:
state population fell by 4 percent in the long run, as taxpayers fled to non-income-tax states.
High-income households exhibited the strongest outmigration responses.


                                              2
   The results show that adopting the income tax allowed U.S. states to significantly in-
crease their revenue-raising capacity on a per capita basis. The income tax thus emerges as
a key tool in expanding the extractive role of the state (Lindert, 2004, Besley and Persson,
2013). Nonetheless, population mobility provided a partial check on the size of govern-
ment, at least in absolute terms. Our results thus indicate that the return on fiscal-capacity
investments depends crucially on the elasticity of the tax base.
   Our empirical setting offers many advantages. First, our long panel – spanning 1900 to
2008 – allows us to trace out the long-term effects of tax broadening. Doing so is important,
because short-run and long-run effects can differ substantially. Citizens incur adjustment
costs when moving from one state to another. Accordingly, population responses to tax
policy unfold over many years. Because state population determines, in large part, the tax
base, fiscal outcomes also adjust over long periods of time. A short panel would miss the
rich dynamics we observe.
   Second, the shared language and culture of U.S. states support a geographically mobile
workforce. The location decisions of U.S. workers are sensitive to local economic shocks,
and overall mobility is high (Bartik, 1991). The United States therefore provides an ideal
setting to test whether and how tax broadening influences location decisions.
   Finally, our setting allows us to eliminate the influence of confounding variables that
would hinder a cross-country analysis. Expansions in fiscal capacity at the national level
often occurred during wartime (Tilly, 1992, Scheve and Stasavage, 2012, Gennaioli and Voth,
2015), when the value of common-interest public goods was high (Besley and Persson, 2009).
Given a national system of military defense, the external threat environment is held constant
across U.S. states. Furthermore, differences in state-level institutions and cultures are small
compared to such differences across countries.
   A standard difference-in-differences design that exploits the staggered adoption of the
state-level income tax thus eliminates many potential sources of bias. Such a design relies
on the assumption that outcomes in adopting states and non-adopting states would have fol-
lowed parallel trends, on average, in the absence of tax broadening. Clearly, this assumption
would be violated if the timing of adoption were correlated with other factors that influence
the outcomes. Penniman (1980, ch. 1) suggests that the exact timing of the introduction of
the state income tax was often a function of idiosyncratic political factors, and uncorrelated


                                              3
with other policy changes. For example, voters in both Wisconsin and Ohio approved refer-
enda allowing for an income tax around the same time in the early 1900s, yet only Wisconsin
enacted the tax at that time; the Ohio legislature failed to adopt the income tax until 1971.
   While idiosyncratic political factors often influenced the timing of adoption, some states
may have adopted the income tax in the face of adverse demographic trends or budgetary
stress, potentially violating the assumption of parallel trends. To guard against this possibil-
ity, we use a semiparametric difference-in-differences design that conditions on several lags
of population and fiscal outcomes. Our method imposes a weaker version of the parallel
trends assumption: adopting and non-adopting states with similar recent population and
fiscal dynamics would have followed parallel trends in the absence of tax broadening. Even
after accounting for selection into tax broadening based on recent shocks, adopting states
may have had a greater latent demand for spending, at the time of adoption, than non-
adopting states. Thus, the potential impact of tax broadening may be greater for adopting
states than non-adopting states. Our semiparametric estimator is robust to treatment-effect
heterogeneity and recovers the average effect of tax broadening for adopting states.
   After reweighting by each state’s propensity to adopt the income tax in a given year,
adopting and non-adopting states exhibited similar demographic and fiscal trends prior
to adoption, lending credence to our approach. In addition, we find that recent negative
changes in population, and not long-run shifts, predict selection into tax broadening, further
supporting the validity of our identification strategy. We also show that the introduction
of the sales tax does not confound our estimates, and that our results are not driven by
economic shocks or regional shocks to mobility. Finally, our results are not solely driven by
the introduction of tax withholding by individual states starting in 1948, though we show
that this instrument plays a complementary role in tax broadening.
   A rapidly growing literature examines both the determinants (Besley and Persson, 2013,
Casaburi and Troiano, 2015, Kleven et al., 2016, Gillitzer, 2017, Jensen, 2019) and economic
and policy consequences of state capacity (Gordon and Li, 2009, Dincecco and Prado, 2012,
Acemoglu et al., 2015). Historical accounts indicate that the development of the state’s ex-
tractive capacity was a hard-fought process (Dincecco, 2011, O’Brien, 2011, Hoffman, 2015).
Our study sheds new light on a key mechanism – the introduction of the income tax –
through which governments increase their capacity to extract revenue. To the best of our



                                               4
knowledge, ours is the first paper to empirically analyze the introduction of the state-level
income tax across the United States. Furthermore, we address a novel question in this litera-
ture: to what extent do population mobility and crowd-out limit the effects of fiscal-capacity
investments?
    In addition, our paper contributes to the literature on mobility responses to tax policy,
summarized by Kleven et al. (2019). Recent studies, mostly focused on top earners, show
how taxpayers migrate across countries (Kleven et al., 2013, 2014, Akcigit et al., 2016) as well
as within countries (Bakija and Slemrod, 2004, Liebig et al., 2007, Moretti and Wilson, 2017,
Schmidheiny and Slotwinski, 2018, Agrawal and Foremny, 2019) in response to a change
in tax rates, an intensive-margin reform. However, no such study examines the historical
introduction of the income tax, an extensive-margin reform.1 This distinction is crucial,
because reducing the net-of-tax rate by 1 percent starting from a zero tax rate may have
a larger effect on outmigration than an equivalent reduction in the net-of-tax rate starting
from a positive tax rate. The reason is that introducing a new tax not only reduces after-
tax income – it also creates a new administrative burden, and may thus be more salient to
taxpayers than an increase in the rate of an existing tax. Our results provide evidence for this
channel, showing a greater mobility response to tax changes starting from a rate of zero.2
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 analyzes the fiscal consequences of tax broaden-
ing. Section 3 then evaluates whether interstate mobility is an important mechanism behind
the fiscal results. Section 4 provides concluding remarks.

2     Fiscal Consequences of Tax Broadening
This section examines the fiscal consequences of the introduction of the state-level income
tax, both in the short run and the long run. We first motivate the empirical analysis with
a simple model of the government’s budget. We next estimate the dynamic effects of tax
broadening on fiscal outcomes.
1 Moretti  and Wilson (2019) analyze the mobility responses of billionaires to an extensive-margin change in
  estate tax liabilities at the U.S. state level caused by the elimination of a federal credit.
2 A theoretical literature shows how the threat of migration alters optimal tax formulas (e.g., Wilson, 1980,
  Mirrlees, 1982, Lehmann et al., 2014). This literature assumes the existence of an income tax.




                                                     5
2.1    Simple Model of the Government’s Budget
Suppose the government has access to two taxes with exogenous rates τ1 and τ2 and bases
B1 and B2 . For example, the first tax could be a sales or property tax, and the second tax
could be a flat income tax. We write Bk = Bk (τ1 , τ2 ) for k ∈ {1, 2} to express the fact that
each tax potentially affects both bases. Assume that each tax base is weakly decreasing in
both tax rates. Total revenue is R(τ1 , τ2 ) = τ1 B1 (τ1 , τ2 ) + τ2 B2 (τ1 , τ2 ).
     Suppose the government initially collects revenue using only the first tax. The fiscal
impact of introducing the second tax is

                  R(τ1 , τ2 ) − R(τ1 , 0) = τ1 [ B1 (τ1 , τ2 ) − B1 (τ1 , 0)] + τ2 B2 (τ1 , τ2 ).      (1)

The first term on the right-hand side of Equation (1) quantifies the “crowd-out” effect of the
new tax due to a reduction in the base of the first tax.3 For example, introducing an income
tax may reduce sales tax revenue through its effect on consumption. Crowd-out would also
occur if taxpayers leave the state in response to the income tax. The second term on the
right-hand side of Equation (1) represents the revenue from the new tax. For given tax rates,
the fiscal impact of the new tax depends on the degree of crowd-out and the size of the new
tax base, B2 .
     The fiscal impact of the new tax may vary over time, because tax bases may respond
gradually due to taxpayer learning and adjustment costs. For example, it may take several
years for taxpayers to learn how to effectively evade or avoid the new tax. In addition,
labor supply and location decisions may not respond immediately due to hours constraints
and moving costs. If taxpayers are sufficiently slow to respond, the short-run fiscal impact
will approximately equal the revenue from the new tax, τ2 B2 (τ1 , τ2 ), because B1 (τ1 , τ2 ) ≈
B1 (τ1 , 0) in the short run. Over time, B1 (τ1 , τ2 ) and B2 (τ1 , τ2 ) may fall as taxpayers adjust
their behavior, resulting in a long-run effect that is smaller than the short-run effect and may
even be negative. On the other hand, if tax enforcement is stricter than anticipated, then
taxpayer learning could result in the tax bases falling less in the long run than in the short
run.
3Asecond type of crowd-out effect occurs if the government reduces τ1 in response to the new tax. We assume
tax rates are fixed in order to keep the exposition simple, but we test for this type of crowd-out ahead.




                                                        6
   In per capita terms, the fiscal impact of the new tax is
                                            "                           #
               R(τ1 , τ2 ) R(τ1 , 0)          B1 (τ1 , τ2 ) B1 (τ1 , 0)       B (τ , τ )
                           −           = τ1                −              + τ2 2 1 2 ,          (2)
               P(τ1 , τ2 )   P(τ1 , 0)        P(τ1 , τ2 )    P(τ1 , 0)        P(τ1 , τ2 )

where P(τ1 , τ2 ) is state population as a function of tax rates. If all taxpayers are identical
and the only margin of adjustment is location choice, then the tax bases will be proportional
to population for any tax policy: Bk (τ1 , τ2 ) = αk P(τ1 , τ2 ) for k ∈ {1, 2}. In this case, the
per capita fiscal impact will equal the per capita revenue from the new tax, regardless of the
degree of outmigration.
   On the other hand, if taxpayers are heterogeneous or respond along dimensions other
than location choice, then the per capita fiscal impact can be smaller than the per capita
revenue from the new tax. For example, if taxpayers vary by income, and high-income indi-
viduals are more likely to leave the state in response to the new tax, then tax broadening will
cause the tax bases to fall in per capita terms. If B1 /P and B2 /P fall enough in response to
the new tax, per capita revenue can even decline. Similarly, if taxpayers engage in increased
levels of tax evasion and avoidance in response to the new tax, then the tax bases will fall in
per capita terms and the per capita fiscal impact can be negative.
   This simple framework underscores how tax broadening can have different effects over
different time horizons, and how the responses of revenue and revenue per capita can dif-
fer. It also provides two specific predictions that we can test given data availability: (1) if tax
broadening causes net outmigration, revenue will increase by more in the short run than in
the long run; and (2) if the outmigration response is sufficiently dominated by high-earners,
revenue per capita will not increase in the long run. In the remainder of this section, we
describe our fiscal data and estimate the fiscal impacts of the introduction of the income
tax. The following section then evaluates how the income tax influences the location choices
of taxpayers in order to see whether outmigration can help explain the observed fiscal re-
sponses.




                                                   7
2.2     Fiscal Data
2.2.1   Income Tax Introduction

Following Wallis (2000), we define the income tax to include individual or corporate income
taxes. For more than 60 percent of adopting states, this distinction is immaterial, because
individual and corporate income taxes were introduced in the same year. And, for 75 percent
of adopting states, the individual and corporate income taxes were introduced within three
years of each other. We define the baseline treatment using the year that the individual
income tax was introduced. However, our results are similar when we instead use the year
the corporate tax was introduced. (Results available upon request.)
   In principle, the introduction of the corporate income tax could indirectly affect popula-
tion mobility through its effect on firm mobility. Given that the income tax and corporate
tax are simultaneously introduced in most cases, we cannot cleanly test this channel. We do,
however, check the robustness of our results to alternative definitions of tax broadening. As
noted above, defining treatment as the introduction of the corporate income tax, or as the
introduction of either the individual or corporate income tax, produces results that are very
similar to the baseline results.4
   Appendix Table A.1 describes the introduction of the income tax by states over time
according to Penniman (1980). The first state to introduce the individual income tax was
Wisconsin in 1911. Seven more states introduced individual income tax laws over the 1910s,
followed by five states over the 1920s, and eighteen states over the 1930s. No states in-
troduced the individual income tax over the 1940s, while two states introduced it over the
1950s, eight states over the 1960s, and four states over the 1970s. Six states never introduced
an individual income tax.
   Figure 1 displays U.S. states shaded according to the year the state adopted the individ-
ual income tax, with darker shades indicating later years. The early adopting states, which
introduced the tax in the 1910s or 1920s, are scattered throughout the Northeast, South, and
Midwest. States that adopted the tax in the 1930s are found in every region of the United
States, though they are more prevalent west of the Mississippi River. Many late adopters
are located in the Rust Belt, though several late adoptions also occurred in the Northeast,
4 Penniman (1980) defines two types of corporate income tax: the net income tax and the excise or franchise
tax. We always date the corporate income tax that is introduced first, regardless of type.


                                                    8
Alaska, and Hawaii.
   Once states introduce the individual income tax, they typically retain it. There are only
two cases where states have repealed or fundamentally changed the income tax. Alaska had
an income tax when it became a state in 1959, but repealed it in 1980. Connecticut intro-
duced a progressive income tax in 1991; from 1969 to 1990, the state only taxed capital gains
and dividends. New Hampshire and Tennessee have individual income taxes that only tax
interest and dividends. We define these taxes as individual income taxes. However, coding
these two states, and Connecticut from 1969 to 1990, as not having individual income taxes
does not change the main results. Once introduced, the corporate income tax is also gen-
erally stable. Only two states have repealed or fundamentally changed this tax. Michigan
introduced a corporate income tax in 1967, but repealed it in 1975; this tax was re-introduced
in 2011. Similarly, Ohio introduced a corporate income tax in 1971, but repealed it in 2005.
   In robustness checks, we also use data on the presence of a state sales tax from Gillitzer
(2017) and Fox (2004), and the presence of state-level tax withholding from Penniman (1980,
pp. 154-5) and the Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations (1977, pp. 206-7).

2.2.2   Income Tax Rates and Bases

Data on state income tax rates and bases come from the University of Michigan’s World Tax
Database (Office of Tax Policy Research, 2003). This database provides the marginal tax rate
for the top and bottom income tax brackets in the years 1941-2003. We extend these data to
2010 using tax rate information published by the Tax Policy Center (Tax Policy Center, 2019).
We impute pre-1941 rates using the rate in 1941. Tax rates are always set to zero in years prior
to the state’s introduction of the income tax. State income tax rates tend to be persistent over
time, potentially lessening the extent to which imputation introduces measurement error.
Classical measurement error would lead to underestimates of tax elasticities, though non-
classical measurement error would introduce a bias of unknown sign. In the Appendix, we
show that the results are robust to alternative imputation schemes, including no imputa-
tion. Consistent with the classical measurement error story, the elasticity estimate under no
imputation is larger than the baseline estimate. We discuss these results ahead.
   We use the personal exemption, an amount deducted from gross income in computing
taxable income, as a proxy for the breadth of the tax base. The World Tax Database provides
the personal exemption for married couples and single filers for the years 1941-2002. We ex-


                                               9
tend these data to 2010 using data from the Tax Policy Center. The annual tax savings due to
a personal exemption of X is approximately τX, where τ ∈ [0, 1] is the individual’s marginal
tax rate. Four states (Arizona, Iowa, Minnesota, and Wisconsin) introduced the income tax
with a personal exemption in the form of a tax credit, which is an amount deducted from
the tax liability (Office of Tax Policy Research, 2003). We define the personal exemption for
these four states as the tax credit divided by the bottom marginal income tax rate, which is
the exemption threshold that would produce the same tax savings as the tax credit for an
individual in the bottom tax bracket. We obtain similar results when we redefine the per-
sonal exemption for these states using the top marginal tax rate and the average of the top
and bottom marginal tax rates. (Results available upon request). For states that introduced
the income tax prior to 1941, we impute the initial personal exemption using the nominal
personal exemption in 1941. We then convert this value into constant 2008 USD using the
value of the price index in the year of adoption.
   Appendix Table A.3 displays the summary statistics for our variables. The average bot-
tom marginal tax rate was 1.08 percent, with a minimum of 0 and a maximum of 6.35 per-
cent. The top marginal tax rate averaged 3.51 percent, ranging from 0 to 19.80 percent. The
average personal exemption for a single filer was about 6,900 USD, with a minimum of 0
USD and a maximum of over 41,000 USD.

2.2.3   Population and Fiscal Outcomes

We use census data on state-level population, revenue, and expenditure that span the en-
tire twentieth century and the start of the twenty-first century. State population is available
on an annual basis over the period 1900-2008. State-level fiscal data are available online
every two years from 1942 to 1948 and annually from 1950 to 2008 from the Census of Gov-
ernments (US Department of Commerce, 2010). These data employ consistent accounting
definitions and revenue and expenditure categories across years. While fiscal data are avail-
able from other sources for the years after 2008, these data do not use the same accounting
definitions as the Census of Governments data. Thus, adding more years of data introduces
accounting complications. In addition, we estimate fiscal impacts up to 30 years after the
adoption of the income tax. Because the last adoption occurred in 1976, we do not need data
after 2006 to estimate the effects of interest.
   For years prior to 1942, we handcoded state-level fiscal data from archival census reports.


                                                  10
The first census fiscal data are for 1902 (US Department of Commerce, 1907). The 1902 cen-
sus was the first to attempt to collect complete fiscal information (Wallis, 2000). Prior to this
census, the Bureau of the Census did not collect data on revenues (as opposed to taxes) or
expenditures. Follow-up census data are available for 1903 and 1913 (US Department of
Commerce, 1915). We cover the rest of the pre-1942 period using the Statistical Abstract of
the United States, which contains fiscal data for the years 1915, 1922, 1923, 1926-1932, 1937,
1938, and 1940 (US Department of Commerce, 1924-1942). Appendix Table A.2 provides de-
tailed information on fiscal data sources. To the best of our knowledge, our dataset includes
all available state-level fiscal data prior to 1942. The result is an unbalanced panel of fiscal
data that covers all 50 states between 1902 and 2008.
   Because the Census of Governments and the archival census reports use slightly different
accounting definitions, revenue and expenditure figures from the two sources differ in years
in which both sources are available, such as 1942. In particular, the revenue and expenditure
figures are larger in the Census of Governments data. The change in the data source thus
causes a larger-than-expected increase in revenue and expenditure from 1940 to 1942 for all
states. We expect this common shock to add noise to our outcomes, but we see no reason
why it would cause bias in our estimates. As a robustness check, we replicate our main
estimates controlling for a full set of year effects, which nets out additive effects of the change
in data source. (Results available upon request.)
   We focus on the main public finance outcomes in the census data, which we select accord-
ing to two criteria. First, to investigate the total effect of our treatment on state finances, we
use total revenue and expenditure. Second, we include individual fiscal outcomes that we
can match across different censuses, which do not always follow the same accounting pro-
cedures. On the revenue side, we focus on revenue from income tax and property taxation,
total tax revenue, and total revenue. On the expenditure side, we focus on total expenditure
and expenditure on education, health, and public safety. All fiscal variables are measured
in constant 2008 USD. We do not examine state debt or deficits, because balanced-budget
requirements significantly limited the ability of states to borrow to fund non-capital expen-
ditures.
   As shown in Table A.3, the average state population over the sample period is 3.5 mil-
lion, and total revenue and expenditure averaged 14 million USD and 13 million USD, re-



                                                11
spectively. State budgets were around 3,000 USD per capita on average.

2.3      Empirical Strategy for Fiscal Outcomes
2.3.1     Case Studies

Two case studies help motivate our empirical strategy. By the beginning of the twentieth
century, Americans increasingly saw the property tax as capricious and unfair, falling on
those with visible property, such as farmers, while exempting those who held their wealth
in intangible personal property. The Progressive Movement, which had grown strong in
many states by this time, supported a shift towards taxation based on one’s ability to pay –
i.e., an income tax (Mehrotra, 2013, ch. 4).
       Penniman (1980, ch. 1) describes the early attempts of two states, Wisconsin and Ohio,
to realize this Progressive goal. Voters in both states approved constitutional amendments
allowing for a state income tax – Wisconsin in 1908 and Ohio in 1912. Both referenda passed
with large majorities. However, while Wisconsin legislators established an income tax in
1911, opponents of the income tax in Ohio blocked its passage in the legislatures following
the referendum. It was not until 1971 that Ohio, facing budgetary problems, adopted an
income tax with bipartisan support (Penniman, 1980, ch. 1).
       The case studies illustrate two points. First, idiosyncratic political factors influenced the
timing of the adoption of the state income tax. Tax broadening was a contingent outcome.
Given the similar voter preferences in Ohio and Wisconsin, a small change in political dy-
namics may have led Ohio to adopt the income tax in 1915 instead of 1971.5 Outcomes
in Ohio therefore represent a high-quality counterfactual for outcomes in Wisconsin in the
early 1900s. Second, budgetary stress can also motivate a state to adopt an income tax.
We therefore use econometric methods that exploit idiosyncratic variation in the timing of
adoptions, while also allowing for non-random selection into tax broadening.

2.3.2     Semiparametric Difference-in-Differences

In this section we present a semiparametric difference-in-differences approach for estimat-
ing the fiscal impacts of tax broadening. A standard difference-in-differences design faces
two potential challenges in our setting.
5 Orvice versa: in Wisconsin, opponents of the income tax attempted to have the law overturned by the Wis-
 consin Supreme Court, to no avail (Mehrotra, 2013, ch. 4).



                                                   12
    One potential challenge is that the introduction of the income tax may be correlated with
other changes to state policies that affect fiscal outcomes, biasing our estimates. For instance,
the introduction of the sales tax – the other major form of tax broadening over the sample
period – may coincide with the introduction of the income tax. However, we will show
ahead that the correlation between the adoption years of the two taxes is zero, and our
results are unchanged when controlling for the introduction of the sales tax.6
    The second challenge is that the timing of the adoption of the income tax may be cor-
related with past fiscal and demographic trends which naturally predict future trends. For
example, a state may decide to introduce the income tax in the face of greater budgetary
stress, perhaps due to a recent slowdown in population growth. The standard identifying
assumption – that adopting and non-adopting states would have followed parallel trends in
the absence of adoption – may therefore be implausible. We overcome this problem by using
propensity-score weighting in order to relax the strong assumptions required for standard
difference-in-differences estimators (Abadie, 2005). We adapt the semiparametric approach
of Angrist and Kuersteiner (2011) to a panel context, following Acemoglu et al. (2019) and
Suárez Serrato and Wingender (2016). Our approach models the process of selection into
“treatment,” i.e., tax broadening, but leaves the model of the outcome process unspecified,
allowing for a rich analysis of dynamics.
    Using the notation of Acemoglu et al. (2019), let Yits (d) denote the potential fiscal outcome
in period t + s for state i whose tax status in year t is d ∈ {0, 1}, where d = 0 denotes no
income tax and d = 1 denotes an income tax. Let the random variable Dit equal one if state
i has an income tax in year t, and zero otherwise. The potential change in the outcome from
period t − 1 to period t + s for a state with no income tax in period t − 1 (Dit−1 = 0) and tax
status d in period t (Dit = d) is ∆Yits (d) = Yits (d) − Yit−1 , where Yit is the actual fiscal outcome
in state i and year t. We take the log of all fiscal variables.
    The average causal effect of introducing the income tax in period t on the fiscal outcome
s periods later for states that introduce the tax is

                              βs = E(∆Yits (1) − ∆Yits (0) | Dit = 1, Dit−1 = 0).

The causal effect βs corresponds to an “average treatment effect for the treated,” because
6 The   introduction of the income tax also has no impact on sales tax rates. (Results available upon request.)


                                                         13
it applies to states that introduced the income tax at some point. Estimating βs for several
values of s allows us to trace out the impact of tax broadening over time without making
parametric assumptions about dynamics. The econometric challenge is that states that in-
troduce the income tax in a particular year may have different potential outcome growth
than states that do not introduce the tax at that time. This may be because states select into
tax broadening based on demographic or fiscal trends. Let Zit denote the (log) population
of state i in year t. We state the key identifying assumption below.

Assumption 1. E(∆Yits (0) | Dit = 1, Dit−1 = 0, Xit ) = E(∆Yits (0) | Dit = 0, Dit−1 = 0, Xit ),
where Xit = (∆Yit−1 , . . . , ∆Yit− J , Zit−1 , . . . , Zit−K , t), for s ≥ 0.

    Assumption 1 states that, conditional on recent fiscal shocks, past population dynamics,
and year effects, the fiscal outcomes of states that introduced the tax in year t and states
that did not introduce the tax at that time would have followed parallel paths on average in
the absence of tax broadening. This assumption is weaker than the standard assumption in
difference-in-differences designs, because it only imposes parallel trends for states with the
same recent fiscal and population dynamics.
    The second assumption needed to identify βs is stated below.

Assumption 2. P( Dit = 1 | Dit−1 = 0) > 0 and P( Dit = 1 | Dit−1 = 0, Xit ) < 1 for every Xit as
defined in Assumption 1.

    This assumption has two parts. First, some fraction of the states eventually adopt the
income tax. Second, for every value of the covariates Xit , some states do not transition into
having an income tax.7
    Denote the realized changes in the outcome by ∆Yits = Yit+s − Yit−1 . Following Abadie
(2005), Assumptions 1 and 2 imply that βs can be identified using an inverse probability
weighting (IPW) scheme,
                                         βs = E(ωit ∆Yits | Dit−1 = 0),

where the weighting function is

                                     1            D − P( Dit = 1 | Dit−1 = 0, Xit )
                  ωit =                          · it                               .
                          P( Dit = 1 | Dit−1 = 0) 1 − P( Dit = 1 | Dit−1 = 0, Xit )
7 Note  that Assumption 2 is weaker than the overlap assumption required to identify the average treatment
 effect, which holds that 0 < P( Dit = 1 | Dit−1 = 0, Xit ) < 1 for every Xit .

                                                          14
Intuitively, the estimand assigns greater weight to “control” states (Dit = 0) that did not
adopt the income tax in year t but whose recent dynamics were similar to states that did
adopt the tax in that year (high P( Dit = 1 | Dit−1 = 0, Xit )).
   In order to estimate βs , we specify a probit model for the propensity score,
                                                                                         !
                                                                J               K
              P( Dit = 1 | Dit−1 = 0, Xit ) = Φ λt + ∑ δj ∆Yit− j +         ∑ πk Zit−k       ,   (3)
                                                             j =1           k =1


where Φ(·) is the standard normal distribution function. Following Acemoglu et al. (2019),
we rearrange the terms in Equation (3) to express the propensity score in terms of {∆Zit−k }kK=−11
and Zit−K . While this rearrangement does not change the predicted probabilities, it allows
us to separately estimate the effects of temporary and permanent changes in population on
the probability of tax broadening. In this formulation of the model, the partial effect of Zit−K
is equivalent to the marginal effect of a permanent increase in Z. Assumption 1 allows se-
lection into tax broadening based on temporary changes in population but not permanent
shifts. Thus if the assumption holds, Zit−K should have an insignificant effect in the probit
model. We test this implication ahead.
                                                                                b ( · | Dit−1 =
       b ( Xit ) denote the fitted values from estimating Equation (3), and let E
   Let P
0) denote the sample average over state-years for which Dit−1 = 0. The semiparametric
difference-in-differences estimator is given by

                                     β̂s = E  b it ∆Yits | Dit−1 = 0),
                                           b (ω                                                  (4)

with the estimated weights

                                               1            Dit − P
                                                                  b ( Xit )
                            b it =
                            ω                               ·               .
                                     b ( Dit | Dit−1
                                     E                 = 0) 1 − Pb ( Xit )

   Fiscal data are not available on a consistent annual basis in the period prior to 1950, when
most adoptions of the income tax occurred. This feature of the data creates two problems.
First, it is not possible to construct a consistent set of fiscal lags over much of the sample
period. If selection into tax broadening is modeled as a function of yearly fiscal lags, most of
the observations prior to 1950 will be dropped. Second, the estimates β̂s given by Equation


                                                    15
(4) will be based on different subsamples of states for different values of s. As a result,
variation in β̂s across values of s will reflect not only the treatment-effect dynamics for a
given set of states, but also the changing composition of states used for estimation.
    We overcome the problems caused by missing data in two ways. First, we redefine the
lagged and forward differences of fiscal variables in terms of two-year periods in order to
increase the number of observations that are available for our estimator. The base period
is one to zero years prior to the introduction of the income tax.8 Thus, the differenced out-
comes take the form, Y [s0 ,s1 ] − Y [−1,0] , where Y [s0 ,s1 ] is the average outcome s0 to s1 periods
after the introduction. Missing values are ignored in the calculation of the two-period av-
erages. Second, we only use observations for which the first two lagged first differences of
the outcome are non-missing. Doing so greatly reduces the problem of the composition of
states changing as we estimate treatment effects over different time horizons.9
    In practice, we model selection into tax broadening as a function of five lags of popula-
tion, two lagged differences of the fiscal outcome, and year effects.10

2.4     Results for Fiscal Outcomes
We begin by estimating the fiscal consequences of the income tax. Tax broadening need
not mechanically increase the size of government, for two reasons. First, the income tax
may crowd out other revenue sources, such as property taxes. Second, migration and other
taxpayer responses may completely offset the increase in the tax base, leaving revenue un-
changed in the long term. Even revenue per capita may not increase, if enough high-earning
taxpayers flee the state. In light of these possibilities, we estimate the effect of tax broadening
on the size of government in absolute as well as per capita terms. We also test for crowd-out
effects on property taxes.
8 The  income tax is implemented starting in the year after the introduction, which is the year the legislation
  was passed.
9 The fiscal estimates are thus based on all adoptions that occurred from 1930 onward, with the exception of
  the 1939 adoption in Washington, D.C. The estimates for population and mobility in Section 3 will make use
  of all adoptions.
10 The two lagged differences of the fiscal outcome correspond to the periods of 4-5 years prior to adoption and
   2-3 years prior to adoption. Thus we condition on both fiscal and demographic dynamics in the five years
   leading up to adoption.




                                                      16
2.4.1    Main Results

Figure 2 depicts the total revenue and expenditure responses to tax broadening using the
semiparametric difference-in-differences estimator.11 Revenue increases by 8 percent, and
expenditure increases by 4 percent, in absolute terms in the years immediately following
tax broadening. This effect is statistically significant at the 1 percent level for revenue and
insignificant for expenditure. The effect starts to die out five years after adoption, so that
revenue and expenditure return to their initial levels around 8 years after adoption. The
absolute size of state governments remain unchanged 30 years after tax broadening.
    By contrast, revenue per capita immediately increases by 9 percent, while expenditure
per capita increases by 6 percent, and these increases are persistent over time. Tax broaden-
ing increases the size of government on a per capita basis by about 7 percent after 30 years.
The long-run increase is significant at the 10 percent and 5 percent levels for revenue per
capita and expenditure per capita, respectively. The graphs show no evidence of differential
fiscal trends prior to the adoption of the income tax.
    Table 1 summarizes the effect of tax broadening on total revenue, total taxes, and prop-
erty taxes over time. The results confirm that total revenue and total taxes significantly
increase in the short run, while experiencing no change in the long run. The estimates for
property tax revenue are imprecise, but they do not indicate any crowd-out effect.
    Table 2 presents the corresponding results for revenue per capita. Revenue per capita and
tax revenue per capita increase by 9 percent and 13 percent, respectively, in the short-run,
and these responses are significant at the 1 percent level. Tax broadening increases revenue
per capita by around 7 percent, and taxes per capita by around 19 percent, after 30 years.
Tax broadening does not have a statistically significant effect on property taxes per capita.
    Table 3 summarizes the total expenditure responses over time. Total expenditure ini-
tially increases by about 4 percent, which is statistically insignificant. Tax broadening has
no impact on total expenditure 10, 20, or 30 years after adoption. Education expenditure ini-
tially increases by 7 percent before subsequently declining. The results for health and public
safety expenditure are too imprecise to be conclusive. Health and safety budgets each are
about one-tenth the size of the education budget on average.
11 The
     standard difference-in-differences estimator that controls for year effects produces very similar results.
 (Available upon request.)



                                                     17
   Table 4 reports the expenditure responses in per capita terms. Expenditure per capita
increases by 6 percent in the first six years and 8 percent 30 years later. Only the long-
run effect is significant at the 5 percent level. Education expenditure per capita initially
increases by nearly 9 percent, and the effect is significant at the 1 percent level. The increase
in education expenditure per capita after 30 years is 4 percent, and this long-run effect is
statistically insignificant. The estimated effects on health and safety expenditure per capita
are too imprecise to be conclusive.
   The fiscal results establish that the introduction of the income tax caused the absolute size
of government to increase in the short run but not the long run, while the size of government
increased in per capita terms in both the short run and the long run. The revenue and
expenditure responses track each other closely over time, which is unsurprising due to the
presence of balanced-budget requirements.

2.4.2   Robustness

We now examine several threats to the validity of the baseline fiscal results. Even after
controlling for recent fiscal and demographic dynamics, our estimates would be biased if
the adoption of the income tax were correlated with other policy changes at the state level,
or if economic shocks influenced both the timing of adoption and the fiscal outcomes. We
consider both of these threats in turn.

Introduction of Sales Tax

One leading potential confounder is the introduction of the sales tax – the other significant
form of state-level tax broadening that occurred during the sample period. Panel (a) of Ap-
pendix Figure A.2 plots the introduction year of the sales tax against the introduction year
of the income tax for the 40 states that introduced both taxes during the sample period.
The correlation between introduction years is essentially zero, suggesting that the sales tax
is not a confounder. Nonetheless, we examine whether our results change when we con-
trol for whether the sales tax was adopted within the current time window. We add to the
propensity score an indicator variable equal to 1 if the sales tax was introduced in the past
10 years or will be introduced within the next 10 years. Appendix Figure A.3 displays the
fiscal estimates that control for the adoption of the sales tax, marked with blue circles. The
results are extremely similar to the baseline estimates.



                                               18
Economic Shocks

Next we examine whether economic shocks confound our estimates by directly controlling
for recent economic shocks, which we measure as lagged first differences of log state per-
sonal income per capita.12 Appendix Figure A.3 displays the fiscal results controlling for
one, two, or three lagged economic shocks, marked by diamonds, triangles, and squares,
respectively. Because we measure state income starting in 1929, controlling for two or more
economic shocks causes the sample size to fall relative to the baseline sample size, resulting
in slightly wider confidence intervals. The point estimates are generally similar to the base-
line estimates for both short-run and long-run effects. The only exception is that controlling
for three lagged economic shocks causes the estimated short-run expenditure responses to
double, bringing them more in line with the short-run revenue responses.

The Great Depression

Another way to evaluate whether economic conditions confound our estimates is to directly
examine the role of the Great Depression. Twenty states adopted the income tax between
1929 and 1940, raising the possibility that states that were hit the hardest by the Depression
were more likely to adopt the income tax. These states would have experienced smaller
long-run revenue increases due to adverse demographic and economic shocks compared
to states that did not adopt during the Great Depression. To evaluate this hypothesis, we
separately estimate the impact of tax broadening before and after 1940. This is equivalent
to estimating separate effects for adoptions during the Great Depression and after the Great
Depression; states that adopted prior to 1930 are not in the sample because there is not
enough fiscal data to construct the lagged fiscal shocks for this period.
    Appendix Figure A.4 plots separate fiscal responses for the years 1940 and earlier and
the years 1941 and later. Three findings emerge from this figure. First, late adopters expe-
rienced sharp increases in absolute revenue and expenditure immediately after adoption,
while early adopters experienced a delayed increase in revenue. This result could be due to
improved tax administration in later years. Second, late adopters saw persistent decreases
in absolute revenue and expenditure starting around 8 years after adoption, whereas early
adopters did not. This result is the opposite of what one would expect if the Great De-
12 Personal
          income by state is available from the Bureau of Economic Analysis for the years 1929-2018. We use
 this measure of economic activity rather than GDP, because the state-level GDP series starts in 1963.



                                                   19
pression were a major confounder for our estimates. Finally, early and late adopters saw
similar long-run increases in revenue and expenditure per capita, though the estimates are
less precise for early adopters. This result, too, suggests that the Great Depression is not an
important confounder.

Tax Withholding

To take a closer look at the role of tax administration, we estimate separate treatment effects
according to whether the state introduced the income tax concurrently with tax withholding.
States introduced tax withholding in a staggered fashion over the period 1948-1987 (Dusek
and Bagchi, 2018). States that introduced the income tax after 1940 typically introduced
withholding at the same time (see Panel (b) of Appendix Figure A.2.) Unsurprisingly, the
results, displayed in Appendix Figure A.5, are very similar to the results broken down by
time period. Introductions of the income tax concurrently with state-level withholding are
associated with larger short-run increases, but similar long-run increases, in revenue and
expenditure per capita compared to introductions that occurred without withholding.

Income Tax Adoption by Neighbors

Motivated by prior research finding fiscal policy interdependence among U.S. states (e.g.,
Case et al., 1993, Baicker, 2005), we examine whether the adoption of the income tax by
neighboring states affects the probability that a state introduces the income tax in a given
year. We estimate the propensity score, which is just the conditional probability of adopting
the income tax in year t given that the state has not already adopted it, as a function of
both past demographic shocks and the adoption of the tax by neighboring states. Appendix
Table A.8 reports the marginal effects for four different measures of neighbor adoption: an
indicator variable equal to 1 if any neighbor has the income tax, an indicator variable equal
to 1 if all neighbors have the tax, the number of neighbors that have the tax, and the fraction
of neighbors that have the tax. For all four measures, neighbor adoption is associated with
a lower probability of introducing the income tax, though the effect is always statistically
insignificant. We therefore do not find evidence that tax broadening is driven by mimicking
behavior across states.




                                              20
3       Mobility Consequences of Tax Broadening
The fact that tax broadening leads to a long-run increase in the size of government in per
capita terms, but not absolute terms, suggests that some taxpayers leave the state in response
to the introduction of the income tax. Interstate mobility may therefore be a key mechanism
that helps drive the fiscal results. To test this hypothesis, we first estimate the effect of tax
broadening on state population. We then use detailed data on interstate migration flows to
examine the movement of households from states with the income tax to non-income-tax
states, as well as the composition of these flows by income.

3.1     Results for State Population
We begin by estimating population responses to the income tax using the semiparametric
difference-in-differences approach. The propensity score includes year effects and five lags
of population to account for selective adoption of the income tax based on past demographic
trends.

3.1.1    Main Results

Appendix Figure A.6 depicts the semiparametric difference-in-differences estimates. The
estimates are close to zero and statistically insignificant for s < 0, suggesting no differential
trends prior to tax broadening. Population gradually adjusts to the introduction of the in-
come tax, declining by 4 percent after 11 years and then flattening out. Appendix Table A.4
summarizes the average effect of tax broadening over several four-year periods, confirming
the absence of differential pre-trends as well as a 4-percent population decline 12-19 years
later. This effect is significant at the 10 percent level.
    Appendix Table A.7 reports the coefficient estimates for the propensity score, confirming
that temporary declines in population increase the probability of tax broadening, but per-
manent declines do not. Appendix Figure A.1 also plots the distribution of the propensity
score separately for state-years in which the income tax is adopted and not adopted. The
two distributions have similar support. Importantly, the propensity score is bounded away
from 1, as required by Assumption 2.




                                                 21
3.1.2   Robustness

The Appendix presents several robustness checks for the population results. Appendix Fig-
ure A.7 shows that when we control for the adoption of the sales tax or recent economic
shocks, the results are similar to the baseline results. Appendix Figure A.8 shows that adop-
tions of the income tax prior to 1940 had little impact on state population, but population
declined significantly in response to adoptions that occurred after 1940. These results are
inconsistent with the Great Depression being a major confounder for our estimates. Instead,
state population may have been more responsive to later adoptions due to the increase in
geographic mobility from 1940 to 1990 in the United States (Rosenbloom and Sundstrom,
2004, Molloy et al., 2011).13 The results are very similar when we divide adoptions accord-
ing to whether the income tax was adopted simultaneously with state-level tax withholding.
(Results available upon request.)

3.2     Mobility Data
The previous section established that the introduction of the income tax caused state pop-
ulation to fall in adopting states relative to non-adopting states. The result could be due to
changes in fertility, mortality, or interstate migration. We find no evidence that tax broaden-
ing affected fertility or mortality rates. (Results available upon request.) We therefore turn
our attention to interstate migration.
    To measure interstate migration flows, we use data from the Integrated Public Use Mi-
crodata Series of the U.S. Census, or IPUMS (Ruggles et al., 2019), for every decade from
1900 to 2010. The data consist of 5 percent random samples of the U.S. population for the
years 1900, 1930, 1960, 1980, 1990, and 2000; and 1 percent random samples for 1910, 1920,
1940, 1950, and 1970. The 2010 data are from the American Community Survey, which is a 1
percent random sample. Combining the data yields a repeated cross section of households.
For the years 1940 and 1960-2000 only, the census asked individuals to record the state where
they resided five years prior to the census date. We can therefore calculate five-year gross
migration rates at the state-pair level for these years using the entire sample of households.14
13 Kaplan  and Schulhofer-Wohl (2017) show that interstate mobility declined from 1991 to 2011. Because we
   consider population responses within 20 years of adoption, excluding observations from after 1991 only
   causes us to exclude New Jersey’s adoption in 1976. The results using this subsample are very similar to the
   baseline results. (Results available upon request.)
14 The 2010 American Community Survey did not ask this question. The 10 percent sample from the census is




                                                      22
   Because our study period begins in 1900, we focus on an alternative measure that can be
constructed for every decade. Following Rosenbloom and Sundstrom (2004), we limit the
sample to households with a child aged four or five. The average birth date of the child
will be close to five years before the census date. Using this subsample of households, we
construct five-year migration rates under the assumption that the child’s birth state was the
household’s state of residence five years prior to the census date.
   An advantage of the child-based measure is that it is available for every decade of the
study period. A disadvantage is that households with small children may be less mobile
than other types of households, so our estimates may not be externally valid for the entire
United States. In the empirical analysis ahead, we compare the results using the child-based
measure and the report-based measure for census years 1940 and later. The two measures
yield estimates that are broadly similar; the estimated impact of taxes is slightly larger for
the report-based measure. Furthermore, the two measures yield the same qualitative con-
clusions. We provide more detail ahead.
   In 1940 and following decades, IPUMS reports the wage and salary income of individu-
als, which we aggregate to the household level. In defining high- and lower-earning house-
holds, we face a trade-off between isolating the richest households and maintaining a rel-
atively representative sample. This is because, for example, we observe fewer moves by
families above the 99th percentile of the income distribution than families above the 90th
percentile. In the baseline results, we define high-earning households as those with income
above the 95th percentile of the observed income distribution in the current year. Appendix
Table A.6 shows that the results are qualitatively similar when the cutoff is the 90th or 99th
percentile.

3.3   Theory and Empirical Strategy for Mobility Outcomes
To guide the empirical analysis, we adapt the model of location choice in Moretti and Wilson
(2017) to a context in which the taxpayer’s outmigration response may be different starting
from a zero tax rate than starting from a positive tax rate. We then use this model to derive
our estimating equation.

 also missing this question.




                                              23
3.3.1   Model of Location Choice

Let the utility of individual i who lived in state o (origin) in year t − 1 and moves to state d
(destination) in year t be

                  Uiodt = −ψDdt + α log(1 − τdt ) + α log wdt + Zd − Cod + eidt ,              (5)

where Ddt is an indicator variable equal to one if the state of residence has an income tax, τdt
is the personal income tax rate in the state of residence, wdt is the before-tax wage in the state
of residence, Zd measures the effect of amenities and cost of living on utility, and Cod is the
utility cost of moving from state o to state d, where Coo = 0. The individual’s idiosyncratic
preferences for state d in time t are represented by eidt .
   The utility function in Equation (5) is the same as the one used in Moretti and Wilson
(2017), except for the additional term −ψDdt . If the introduction of a new tax creates an
additional administrative burden for the taxpayer, then ψ is strictly positive and represents
the utility cost of tax compliance. The parameter ψ could also, in part, reflect salience effects.
The introduction of a new tax may be more salient to taxpayers than changes in the rates of
existing taxes. Consequently, tax introductions may influence behavior through channels
that are not fully captured by the net-of-tax rate. Both the compliance-costs channel and
the salience channel imply that decreasing the net-of-tax rate by one percent starting from
a zero tax rate will have a different impact on behavior than a one-percent reduction in the
net-of-tax rate starting from a positive tax rate.
   An individual currently living in state o moves to state d if and only if she receives higher
utility in state d than in state o or any other state, i.e.,

                                        Uiodt > max{Uiod0 t }.
                                                 d0 6=d


Our goal is to estimate how changes in taxes affect migration flows between states. If id-
iosyncratic preferences, eidt , are i.i.d. with an Extreme Value Type I distribution, then the log
odds ratio equals the difference in utility levels in the origin and destination states (McFad-




                                                  24
den, 1974),

       log( Podt /Poot ) = ψ( Dot − Ddt ) + α[log(1 − τdt ) − log(1 − τot )] + α log(wdt /wot )   (6)

                           + ( Zd − Zo ) − Cod ,

where Podt is the probability that a household living in state o moves to state d, and Poot is
the probability that a household living in state o stays in state o.
   As noted by Moretti and Wilson (2017), Equation (6) characterizes the supply of labor to
state d. Individuals with strong preferences for the origin state (high eiot − eidt ) are unlikely
to move in response to a change in tax differentials between states o and d. However, indi-
viduals that are less attached to their home state (low eiot − eidt ) may be induced to move
if, say, state o introduces an income tax and state d does not. Because this is a model of
migration flows, and not population stocks, the model allows for long-run differences in
migration across state pairs even in the absence of tax differentials, due to differences in
amenities and moving costs.
   For many individuals, the migration decision will depend on firm location, which deter-
mines labor demand. Assume that every firm hires the same number of workers. Further
suppose, for convenience, that the profits of firm j that moves from state o to state d take the
form

                                 0               0
                 log π jodt = −ρDdt + β log(1 − τdt ) − log wdt + Zd0 − Cod
                                                                         0
                                                                            + νjdt

       0 is an indicator variable equal to one if state d has a corporate income tax, τ 0 is
where Ddt                                                                              dt
the corporate income tax rate, Zd0 is productivity-enhancing amenities, and Cod
                                                                             0 is the firm’s

cost of moving from state o to state d, where Coo = 0. The firm’s idiosyncratic productivity
in state d is νjdt , which reflect the quality of the match between the firm and the state. The
parameter ρ captures the costs of complying with the corporate tax.
   A firm relocates from state o to state d if and only if it earns higher profits in state d than
in state o or any other state, i.e.,

                                        π jodt > max{π jod0 t }.
                                                   d0 6=d



                                                    25
If the νjdt are i.i.d. with an Extreme Value Type I distribution, then the log odds ratio equals
the difference in profit levels in the origin and destination states,

                 0     0           0     0                 0
           log( Podt /Poot ) = ρ( Dot − Ddt ) + β[log(1 − τdt ) − log(1 − τot0 )] − log(wdt /wot )           (7)

                               + ( Zd0 − Zo0 ) − Cod
                                                  0
                                                     ,

       0 is the probability that a firm located in state o moves to state d, and P0 is the
where Podt                                                                        oot
probability that a firm located in state o stays in state o. Because each firm hires the same
number of workers, the ratio of moving firms to staying firms equals the ratio of moving
individuals to staying individuals. Therefore, Equation (7) characterizes the demand for
labor in state d.

3.3.2     Econometric Model

Relative wages are determined in equilibrium according to Equations (6) and (7). Setting
                                                              0 /P0 ), and solving for relative
labor supply equal to labor demand, log( Podt /Poot ) = log( Podt oot
wages yields the regression equation

        log( Podt /Poot ) = θ ( Dot − Ddt ) + η [log(1 − τdt ) − log(1 − τot )]                              (8)

                            + θ 0 ( Dot
                                     0     0
                                        − Ddt ) + η 0 [log(1 − τdt
                                                                0
                                                                   ) − log(1 − τot0 )] + γod + φt + uodt ,

where θ = ψ/(1 + α) is the effect of the individual income tax introductions, η = α/(1 + α)
is the effect of the individual income tax rates, θ 0 = ρα/(1 + α) is the effect of the corporate
tax introductions, η 0 = βα/(1 + α) is the effect of the corporate tax rates, and γod absorbs
origin and destination amenities and state-pair moving costs.15 We add φt to capture the
common effect of national economic conditions, transportation infrastructure, or technology
levels on mobility nationwide.
    As already mentioned, our data allow us to calculate five-year migration rates every
decade. We measure Podt /Poot as the number of households that move from state o to state d
over the five-year period, divided by the number of households that stay in state o.16 The tax
15 Note
      that the fixed effects are specific to the direction of migration, so that αod 6= αdo for o 6= d.
16 We
    calculate sums using household weights provided by IPUMS. Our results are very similar when we use
 unweighted sums. (Results available upon request.)


                                                         26
variables are measured in the middle of the five-year period. For example, migration over
the period 1935-40 is matched to tax policy in 1937. Using the tax values in earlier or later
parts of the period does not significantly alter the results. We measure τot and τdt using the
top marginal tax rates on personal income in the origin and destination states, respectively.
   We focus on estimating θ and η in Equation (8). As noted in Section 2.2.1, the individual
and corporate income taxes were usually introduced around the same time. We therefore
focus on a parsimonious specification that only includes the individual income tax variables,
keeping in mind that θ largely reflects the compound effect of introducing the individual and
corporate income taxes. Controlling for the corporate tax variables does not significantly
alter our results.17
   To interpret the parameters, consider a pair of states, o and d, that initially both lack an
income tax. If state o introduces the income tax at a rate of 1 percent, and state d does not
introduce the income tax, then the outmigration rate (Podt /Poot ) is expected to increase by
roughly 100θ + η percent. If instead state d introduces the income tax at a rate of 1 percent
and state o does not introduce the tax, then the outmigration rate is expected to decrease
by roughly 100θ + η percent. Thus the model assumes that increases and decreases in tax
differentials have symmetric effects.
   Now suppose state o already has an income tax and decides to raise the tax rate such that
the net-of-tax rate falls by 1 percent. Holding the tax policy of state d fixed, the outmigration
rate is expected to fall by η percent. Thus, the outmigration response to a tax increase is
larger by 100θ when the initial tax rate was zero compared to when the initial tax rate was
positive. If only the net-of-tax rate matters for location choices, then η > 0 and θ = 0.
However, tax introductions may affect outmigration through compliance-costs or salience
channels, rather than simply though the net-of-tax rate. If this is the case, then θ will be
positive, even when controlling for the net-of-tax rate.

3.3.3   Deriving Mobility Responses

Besides characterizing bilateral migration flows, the parameters θ and η determine total
migration responses to tax policy. First consider a small change to one state’s individual
17 Though our simple model assumes that firms only respond to the corporate tax, in reality many firms are
 not C corporations and thus do not pay the corporate tax. For these firms, profits are taxed at the individual
 rate. As a result, the individual income tax influences labor demand, not just labor supply.




                                                     27
income tax rate, starting from a positive rate. The inmigration elasticity for state d is

                                                        dlogMdt
                                             ε dt ≡                  ,
                                                      dlog(1 − τdt )

where Mdt is the total number of migrants to state d in period t. Define the overall inmigra-
tion elasticity ε to be the weighted average of ε dt , weighting by Mdt . In the Appendix, we
show that

                                               ε = η · (1 − P ),                             (9)

where P is the weighted average of Podt , weighting by the number of migrants from o to d
in period t. In our setting, P equals 0.016 using the child-based measure of migration and
0.007 using the report-based measure, so the inmigration elasticity is very close to η. The
Appendix also shows that the outmigration elasticity is close to −ε.
   Next consider the introduction of the income tax at rate τ1 . As shown in the Appendix,
the inmigration and outmigration responses, in percentage terms, are approximately

                              ∆0,τ1 ≡ exp(−θ + η log(1 − τ1 )) − 1,                         (10)
                              Ω0,τ1 ≡ exp(θ − η log(1 − τ )) − 1.

By comparison, the percentage change in inmigration due to a large tax rate increase, from
τ1 to τ2 , is approximately

                                                         1 − τ2
                                                                    
                                ∆   τ1 ,τ2
                                             ≡ exp η log                 − 1.               (11)
                                                         1 − τ1

In the results section ahead, we use the expressions in Equations (10) and (11) to compare
tax introductions with large tax reforms.
   When a state increases taxes, it is able to provide more public goods on a per capita
basis, as the previous section established. The above mobility responses therefore reflect
the composite effect of taxes and their associated levels of public goods. If the benefits of
additional public goods exactly equal the increase in tax liability, then households would
not move in response to a tax increase. However, the benefits and costs of taxation are


                                                          28
unlikely to be equal for all, or even most, households, for three reasons. First, public sector
inefficiency drives a wedge between tax revenue and non-wasteful spending. Second, most
state income taxes are progressive, so high-income households bear a greater share of the
tax burden than low-income households. Finally, some households value public goods less
than others. For example, high earners are more likely to send their children to private
school (Moretti and Wilson, 2017).

3.3.4   Inference

We follow standard practice and calculate standard errors that are robust to heteroskedastic-
ity and three-way clustering by origin-destination pair, origin × year, and destination × year
(Moretti and Wilson, 2017, Agrawal and Foremny, 2019). Clustering by origin-destination
pair accounts for serial correlation in the tax variables and errors within the same pair of
states. Clustering by origin × year accounts for the potential correlation between obser-
vations of state pairs sharing an origin state in the same year. This correlation could be
generated by the fact that the origin state’s tax variables take the same value for these obser-
vations. Similar logic justifies clustering by destination × year.
   Intuitively, the standard errors allow for correlation of an unknown form between, say,
California-Oregon migration flows in 1900 and California-Oregon migration flows in 2010.
They also allow California-Oregon observations to be correlated with California-Texas or
Idaho-Oregon observations in the same year. Note that the standard clustering scheme as-
sumes a zero correlation between observations in different years that share either an origin
or a destination, but not both. That is, the California-Oregon observation in 1950 is assumed
to be uncorrelated with the California-Texas observation in 1960. To probe robustness to vi-
olations of this assumption, we also calculated standard errors that allow for two-way clus-
tering by origin and destination. These standard errors rely on strictly weaker assumptions
than the standard approach and would allow, for example, a nonzero correlation between
California-Oregon in 1950 and California-Texas in 1960. The two-way clustered standard
errors are somewhat larger than the baseline standard errors, but the results are still statisti-
cally significant – sometimes highly so. (Results available upon request.)

3.3.5   Identifying Assumption and Threats to Validity

The key identifying assumption needed to estimate Equation (8) is that migration flows be-
tween state pairs for which tax differentials changed would have, in the absence of a change,


                                               29
experienced similar trends as migrations flows between pairs for which tax differentials did
not change. While this assumption is not testable, it would be more plausible if trends were
similar in the two groups prior to the change in tax differentials. We test for pre-trends
ahead.
   One source of potential bias in estimating θ is measurement error in tax rates, which
could be correlated with Dot − Ddt . This measurement error comes from two sources. First,
as already mentioned, we impute pre-1941 tax rates using the rate in 1941. In Appendix
Table A.5, we show that the magnitude and statistical significance of the estimated θ is very
similar across an array of imputation schemes, including no imputation.
   The second source of measurement error is due to the fact that rational taxpayers will
choose location based on average tax rates (ATR), not marginal tax rates (MTR). Unfortu-
nately, calculating average tax rates is infeasible in our context, as the NBER’s TAXSIM cal-
culator does not cover state laws prior to 1977, and no state introduced the income tax after
1977. The top marginal tax rate may be a reasonable proxy for the average tax rate in cer-
tain circumstances, since it approximates the average tax rate of top earners well, correlates
strongly with the average tax rate of top earners within a state over time, and yields simi-
lar mobility elasticities as the average tax rate in prior research (Moretti and Wilson, 2017).
However, it is possible that the difference between marginal and average tax rates will bias
our estimates of θ away from zero. The top MTR is closer to the ATR for high-income house-
holds than for low-income households. Therefore, measurement error is smaller in absolute
terms for high earners. If our estimates of θ are biased away from zero due to this source
of measurement error, then the bias would be larger for low-income households than for
high-income households. In fact, we estimate θ to be twice as large for high-income house-
holds than for low-income households, suggesting that our finding of a nonzero θ is not
spuriously due to this second source of measurement error.
   Finally, the estimates may suffer from selection bias due to the fact that we use migration
flows. Because our dataset is based on 1 and 5 percent samples of the U.S. population, we
do not observe moves for some origin-destination pairs in some years. These observations
are excluded from the analysis, because their log odds ratio is undefined. Out of 30,060
potential observations (51 states × 50 states × 12 periods), our child-based analysis uses
18,269 observations, or 61 percent of the potential sample size. Sample selection is less of a



                                              30
concern for the report-based analysis, which uses 13,617 out of 15,300 potential observations
(51 states × 50 states × 6 periods), or 89 percent. We are more likely to observe positive
migration flows between states that are populous or similar to each other geographically or
along other dimensions. Nonrandom selection of state pairs may cause either an upward or
downward bias in our estimates (Moretti and Wilson, 2017). Compared to previous studies
focused on top earners, the amount of missing data in our analysis is relatively small. For
example, the sample in Moretti and Wilson (2017) represents 18 percent of potential state-
pair-year observations. Another advantage is that we use multiple measures of migration
that are subject to selection issues to differing degrees, allowing us to probe the robustness
of our estimates by comparing results based on the two measures.

3.4     Results for Mobility Outcomes
3.4.1   Timing of Responses

We first examine the timing of migration responses around the introduction of the income
tax. We estimate the local projections (Jordà, 2005, Moretti and Wilson, 2017)

                   log( Podt+h /Poot+h ) − log( Podt /Poot ) = βh Eodt + φth + νodt
                                                                                h
                                                                                               (12)

for different values of h. The outcome is the change in the outmigration log odds ratio
between periods t + h and t, and Eodt indicates a tax event that occurs between periods t
and t + 1. We focus on destination-origin differentials in the presence of an income tax,
Dot − Ddt , and for simplicity assume that increases and decreases in this differential have
symmetric effects. Specifically, Eodt equals 1 if the differential increases, −1 if the differential
decreases, and 0 if the differential does not change, between t and t + 1.
   Each βh can be interpreted as a difference-in-differences parameter over a different time
horizon. Plotting the estimates of βh allows us to visualize how migration evolves over time
in state pairs that experience a tax differential change, relative to state pairs that do not.
Finding that βh 6= 0 for some h < 0 would imply that the two groups were on different
migration trends prior to the tax change, casting doubt on the identifying assumption.
   Besides testing for differential pre-trends, Equation (12) sheds light on the dynamic re-
sponse of migration to a change in the tax differential. In particular, it allows us to test
another assumption implicit in Equation (8): that migration flows respond immediately to


                                                 31
changes in tax differentials.
    Figure 3 displays the results. Panel (a) shows the results based on flows of all households
with a child aged four or five at the time of the census. Separate results are shown for
the entire sample period (1900-2010) and the period 1940-2010. We show both graphs for
reference, because the measures disaggregated by income are only available for the period
1940-2010. Over the entire sample period, the outmigration odds ratio increases by about 10
percent following an increase in the tax broadening differential, Dot − Ddt .18 The response is
immediate and persists for three decades after the tax event. Over the period 1940-2010, the
outmigration response is larger at about 20 percent. Once again, the response is immediate
and persists for three decades. There is no evidence of differential trends in migration prior
to the tax event.
    Panel (b) displays the results for migration flows that contain at least one moving house-
hold in the top 5 percent of the observed income distribution in the current year.19 This
sample covers the period 1940-2010. The tax event causes the outmigration rate to imme-
diately increase by about 15 percent for households in the bottom 95 percent of the income
distribution. However, in the following decades, the response falls to about 5 percent and is
statistically insignificant. By contrast, the outmigration rate of households in the top 5 per-
cent of the income distribution immediately increases by about 20 percent following the tax
event, and the response grows to about 30 percent three decades later. The graphs suggest
that the location choices of top-earning households are more sensitive to the presence of an
income tax than households lower in the income distribution. Again, the graphs show no
evidence of differential trends in migration prior to the tax event.

3.4.2   Regression Results

Table 5 presents the baseline regression estimates based on Equation (8). The estimates in
Panel A are based on the child-based measure of migration. Columns 1 and 2 present results
for the entire study period: 1900-2010. In column 1 the coefficient on the income tax pres-
ence differential is 0.128, which is statistically significant at the 1 percent level. This means
that the introduction of the income tax by the origin state increases the five-year rate of out-
migration to the destination state by almost 13 percent, holding fixed the destination state’s
18 Equivalently, the outmigration odds ratio decreases by about 10 percent following a decrease in the tax broad-
   ening differential.
19 Households must also have a child aged four or five at the time of the census.



                                                       32
tax policy. Controlling for the net-of-tax rate in column 2 has little impact on the estimated
effect of introducing the income tax. Somewhat surprisingly, the estimated coefficient on the
log net-of-tax rate is close to zero and statistically insignificant.
   Columns 3 and 4 present results for the latter part of the sample period: 1940-2010. The
estimated effect of tax broadening becomes larger – implying an 18 percent increase in out-
migration – and remains significant at the 1 percent level. The larger coefficient may be due
to greater average mobility in the United States in the years following the Great Depression.
The estimated effect of introducing the income tax is unchanged when we add a control for
the net-of-tax rate. Now the estimated coefficient on the log net-of-tax rate is positive, but it
is small and statistically insignificant.
   The estimates using the report-based measure of migration (Panel B) are somewhat larger,
implying that tax broadening increases the rate of outmigration by around 20 percent. The
larger effects for the report-based measure compared to the child-based measure may reflect
the fact that households with a small child are less mobile – and their location decisions are
less responsive to tax policy – than the U.S. population as a whole.
   Columns 5-7 present results based on state pairs and years containing at least one moving
household in the top 5 percent of the income distribution. These results are based on the pe-
riod 1940-2010, when we observe household income. Column 5 reports estimates based on
all households within the selected sample. The estimated impact of introducing the income
tax (0.117) is smaller than in the full sample using the child-based measure, but it remains
significant at the 1 percent level. The estimated elasticity of outmigration with respect to the
net-of-tax rate is 1.3 and is significant at the 5 percent level. The degree of sample selection
in column 5 – due to focusing on flows with high earners – appears to be smaller for the
report-based measure, which produces an outmigration response that is very similar to the
one estimated in the full sample.
   Column 6 presents the outmigration response based on households in the bottom 95
percent of the income distribution, and column 7 presents the outmigration responses of
households in the top 5 percent of the income distribution. For both the child-based and
report-based measures of migration, the response to the introduction of the income tax is
significantly larger for high-earning households. For example, according to the child-based
measure, introducing the income tax raises the outmigration rate of lower-income house-


                                                33
holds by 11 percent, yet it raises the outmigration rate of high-income households by 25
percent. The 95 percent confidence interval on the response of high-income households ex-
cludes the point estimate for lower-income, so the outmigration responses appear to differ
substantially in both economic and statistical terms.
    Conditional on the presence of an income tax, top-earning households exhibit larger mi-
gration elasticities with respect to the net-of-tax rate compared to lower-earning households.
Using Equation (9), the elasticity for top earners is 1.80 and 1.76 for the child-based and
report-based measures, respectively. Moretti and Wilson (2017) find a very similar elastic-
ity for star scientists over the period 1977-2010. The similar results are particularly striking
given that our analysis uses a more representative subsample of state pairs over a longer
period of time, while relying on decennial data rather than yearly data.
    How does the mobility response to the introduction of the income tax compare to the
response to a large tax increase, starting from a positive rate? Using the expression in Equa-
tion (10) and the estimates in Panel A, column 5 of Table 5, introducing the income tax at a
rate of 1 percent causes inmigration to fall by 12.2 percent (S.E. = 3.4 percent). Starting from
a rate of 1 percent, the state would have to raise the tax rate to 10 percent to achieve the same
decline in inmigration.20 Overall, the results indicate that the introduction of the income tax
matters for mobility beyond its effect on the net-of-tax rate.
    The mobility responses appear large because they are calculated relative to the small base
of households that move over a five-year period. The percentage change in the population
stock is much smaller. For example, using the estimates in Panel A, column 5 of Table 5,
permanently introducing a 1-percent income tax causes the population stock to fall by 4.1
percent (S.E. = 1.2 percent) over each ensuing five-year period until tax differentials change
again.21 This effect is larger than the semiparametric difference-in-differences estimates for
population, which showed a 4-percent reduction after 10 years. However, the two results
are compatible. The estimate from the location-choice model assumes a permanent change
in tax differentials, whereas the DiD estimate compares states that adopted the tax in the
20 To see this, use Equations (10) and (11) and set ∆0,τ1 = ∆τ1 ,τ2 and τ1 = 0.01, and solve for τ2 .
21 The percentage change in the population stock is approximately ∆0,τ1 · M/P − Ω0,τ1 · L/P, where ∆0,τ1 and

   Ω0,τ1 are from Equation (10), M is the number of households moving into the state, L is the number of
   households leaving the state, and P is the initial population. In the child-based sample, ∆0,τ1 = −0.122 and
   Ω0,τ1 = 0.139 for τ1 = 0.01, and the migration-weighted averages of M/P and L/P are 0.161 and 0.151,
   respectively.


                                                      34
current year with states that did not adopt this year but that potentially adopted in some
future year. The DiD estimates thus largely reflect temporary changes in tax differentials.

3.4.3   Robustness

Introduction of Sales Tax

To check whether the migration results are biased due to confounding state policies, we
estimate the baseline specification while controlling for state differentials in the presence
of the sales tax. Panel (a) of Appendix Figure A.9 displays the results. Controlling for the
presence of the sales tax has virtually no impact on our baseline estimates.

Economic Shocks

Next we check whether economic shocks confound our estimates by controlling for state
differentials in log personal income per capita at the state level. Panel (a) of Appendix Fig-
ure A.9 shows that when we control for state income, the baseline estimate using the child-
based measure falls from to 0.180 to 0.157, and the baseline estimate using the report-based
measure falls from 0.203 to 0.151. However, in both cases the estimate remains economically
large and highly significant.

The Great Depression

Another potential concern is that the states hit hardest by the Great Depression were more
likely to adopt the income tax and would have lost residents to other states even in the
absence of adoption. However, as already shown, outmigration was more sensitive to tax
broadening after 1940 than before 1940. This result is inconsistent with the Great Depression
being a major confounder, and may be due to the increase in geographic mobility from 1940
to 1990 in the United States (Rosenbloom and Sundstrom, 2004, Molloy et al., 2011). Inter-
estingly, interstate mobility actually fell over the period 1991-2011 (Kaplan and Schulhofer-
Wohl, 2017). The results are similar when we exclude years after 1990, the main difference
being that top earners are somewhat more sensitive to tax rates. (Results available upon
request.)

Mobility-Enhancing Technology and Infrastructure

While the year effects in Equation (8) capture common shocks to mobility across all regions,
the importance of shocks to, say, technology or infrastructure may differ across regions.
For example, the dramatic expansion of residential air conditioning starting around 1960


                                             35
increased the relative attractiveness of hot states (Biddle, 2008). As a second example, the
construction of the interstate highway system starting in the 1950s increased the accessibility
of western states. Our estimates may be biased if changes in tax differentials are correlated
with region-specific shocks to mobility.
    Panel (b) of Appendix Figure A.9 shows how the results change when we control for
regional shocks. We first define the indicator variable Cold-Hot, which equals one for state
pairs that contain one hot state and one non-hot state, where “hot” states are those ranked
in the top 10 for average maximum temperature in July from 1901 to 2000.22 We then control
for Cold-Hot-by-year effects to allow aggregate shocks to differ for flows into and out of
hot regions compared to all other flows. Next we define the indicator variable East-West,
which equals one for state pairs that contain one western state and one non-western state.
Controlling for East-West-by-year effects allows aggregate shocks to differ for flows into
and out of the west compared to other flows. Finally, we define a set of region-pair indicator
variables, using the U.S. Census Bureau’s four-region categorization. Controlling for region-
pair-by-year effects allows aggregate shocks to differ for each of the 10 pairs of regions. All
three approaches for controlling for regional shocks have virtually no effect on the baseline
estimates.

Nearby versus Faraway States

We also examine whether migration flows between nearby states are more sensitive to tax
differentials than flows between more distant states. To do this, we augment the baseline
specification with an interaction between the origin-destination differential in the presence
of the income tax, Dot − Ddt , and an indicator variable that equals one if the pair of states are
“close” to each other. We measure proximity in three ways: whether the states share a border
(Neighbors), whether the states are located in the same region according to the U.S. Census
Bureau’s nine-region categorization (Same Region), and whether the states are located in the
same region according to the U.S. Census Bureau’s four-region categorization (Same Large
Region). The first measure captures simple geographic proximity, while the second and third
measures could additionally capture cultural and economic proximity. Appendix Table A.9
reports the results. There is no evidence that the migration response to tax broadening is
22 The
     states are Texas, Oklahoma, Arizona, Louisiana, Mississippi, Kansas, Arkansas, Alabama, Florida, and
 Georgia. The results are nearly identical when we use the top 15 hottest states. (Results available upon
 request.) The temperature data are from the NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information.


                                                  36
greater for pairs of states that are close to each other, regardless of the measure of proximity.
One possible interpretation is that the fixed costs of moving are large relative to the marginal
costs of distance conditional on moving.

3.5      Relation to Fiscal Results
The two sets of fiscal results in Section 2 can be explained, at least in part, by the long-run
decline in state population in response to tax broadening, which represents a significant
decline in the tax base. The especially strong outmigration response by high-income house-
holds likely reduced the impact of tax broadening on per capita revenue and expenditure,
but state governments were nonetheless able to increase the per capita budget in the long
run.
    Interestingly, the decline in the absolute level of revenue starting three years after adop-
tion appears sharper than the population response. This discrepancy suggests that other
factors, such as a reduction in labor supply or an increase in other forms of tax avoidance,
may have also contributed to the short-lived nature of the revenue increase.

4      Conclusion
Using a new panel database that covers the entire twentieth century and the start of the
twenty-first century, we investigate the consequences of a major investment in state capac-
ity: the introduction of the income tax by U.S. states. Our empirical strategy exploits the
staggered adoption of the tax, and accounts for selective timing of adoption based on re-
cent demographic and fiscal trends. We find that tax broadening increased the absolute size
of state governments in the short run but not the long run, while per capita budgets per-
manently increased. We explain the fiscal results by showing that tax broadening reduced
state population in the long run, as taxpayers fled to non-income-tax states. This outmigra-
tion response was particularly strong for high-income households, but not strong enough to
prevent per capita revenue from increasing.
    Our results identify the income tax as a key tool for expanding the role of government.
Yet they also show that the return on fiscal-capacity investments depends on the elasticity of
the new tax base. Population mobility provides a partial check against an ever-expanding
state.
    Our results suggest several directions for future research. One direction is to examine


                                               37
the consequences of broadening the tax base in other dimensions, such as through the in-
troduction of the sales tax. Another is to see whether our results for within-country popu-
lation mobility generalize to other countries. While the United States has one of the most
geographically mobile populations in the world, Finland, Denmark, and Great Britain have
similar rates of mobility (Molloy et al., 2011). Local governments in Finland and Denmark
rely heavily on the income tax, making these two countries leading candidates for future
research (OECD, 2002). Finally, future research should continue to investigate the effects of
state-capacity investments in low-income countries, where local taxation tends to be limited
(Gadenne and Singhal, 2014) but the return on government investments is potentially high.




                                             38
References
Abadie, Alberto, “Semiparametric Difference-in-Differences Estimators,” The Review of Eco-
 nomic Studies, 2005, 72 (1), 1–19.
Acemoglu, Daron, Camilo Garcı́a-Jimeno, and James Robinson, “State Capacity and Eco-
 nomic Development: A Network Approach,” American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (8),
 2364–2409.
  , Suresh Naidu, Pascual Restrepo, and James Robinson, “Democracy Does Cause
  Growth,” Journal of Political Economy, 2019, 127 (1), 47–100.
Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations, Significant Features of Fiscal Feder-
 alism, 1976-77: Federal-State-Local Finances, Vol. 2, Revenue and Debt March 1977.
Agrawal, David and Dirk Foremny, “Relocation of the Rich: Migration in Response to Top
 Tax Rate Changes from Spanish Reforms,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2019, 101
 (2), 214–232.
Aidt, Toke and Peter Jensen, “The Taxman Tools Up: An Event History Study of the Intro-
  duction of the Personal Income Tax,” Journal of Public Economics, 2009, 93 (1), 160–175.
Akcigit, Ufuk, Salom Baslandze, and Stefanie Stantcheva, “Taxation and the International
 Mobility of Inventors,” American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (10), 2930–2981.
Angrist, Joshua and Guido Kuersteiner, “Causal Effects of Monetary Shocks: Semipara-
 metric Conditional Independence Tests with a Multinomial Propensity Score,” The Review
 of Economics and Statistics, 2011, 93 (3), 725–747.
Baicker, Katherine, “The Spillover Effects of State Spending,” Journal of Public Economics,
  2005, 89 (2), 529–44.
Bakija, Jon and Joel Slemrod, “Do the Rich Flee from High State Taxes? Evidence from
  Federal Estate Tax Returns,” Working Paper 10645, National Bureau of Economic Research
  July 2004.
Bartik, Timothy, Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies?, Kalama-
  zoo, MI: Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, 1991.
Besley, Timothy and Torsten Persson, “The Origins of State Capacity: Property Rights,
  Taxation, and Politics,” American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (4), 1218–1244.
  and    , Pillars of Prosperity, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2011.
   and , “Taxation and Development,” in Alan Auerbach, Raj Chetty, Martin Feldstein,
  and Emmanuel Saez, eds., Handbook of Public Economics, Elsevier, 2013, pp. 51–110.
Biddle, Jeff, “Explaining the Spread of Residential Air Conditioning, 1955-1980,” Explo-
  rations in Economic History, 2008, 45 (4), 402–423.
Casaburi, Lorenzo and Ugo Troiano, “Ghost-House Busters: The Electoral Response to a
  Large AntiTax Evasion Program,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 10 2015, 131 (1), 273–


                                              39
  314.
Case, Anne, James Hines, and Harvey Rosen, “Budget Spillovers and Fiscal Policy Interde-
  pendence: Evidence from the States,” Journal of Public Economics, 1993, 52 (3), 285–307.
Dincecco, Mark, Political Transformations and Public Finances, Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
 versity Press, 2011.
  and Mauricio Prado, “Warfare, Fiscal Capacity, and Performance,” Journal of Economic
  Growth, 2012, 17 (3), 171–203.
Dusek, Libor and Sutirtha Bagchi, “Do More Efficient Taxes Lead to Bigger Government?
 Evidence from the Introduction of Withholding for the State Personal Income Tax,” Work-
 ing paper, Charles University, 2018.
Fox, William, “History and Economic Impact of the Sales Tax,” in Jerry Janata, ed., Sales
  Taxation, Institute for Professionals in Taxation, 2004.
Gadenne, Lucie and Monica Singhal, “Decentralization in Developing Economies,” Annual
 Review of Economics, 2014, 6 (1), 581–604.
Gennaioli, Nicola and Hans-Joachim Voth, “State Capacity and Military Conflict,” The Re-
 view of Economic Studies, 2015, 82 (4), 1409–1448.
Gillitzer, Christian, “Do Output Contractions Cause Investment in Fiscal Capacity?,” Amer-
 ican Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2017, 9 (2), 189–227.
Gordon, Roger and Wei Li, “Tax Structures in Developing Countries: Many Puzzles and a
 Possible Explanation,” Journal of Public Economics, 2009, 93 (7), 855–866.
Hoffman, Philip, “What Do States Do? Politics and Economic History,” The Journal of Eco-
 nomic History, 2015, 75 (2), 303–332.
Jensen, Anders, “Employment Structure and the Rise of the Modern Tax System,” Working
  Paper 25502, National Bureau of Economic Research January 2019.
Jordà, Oscar, “Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections,” Amer-
  ican Economic Review, March 2005, 95 (1), 161–182.
Kaplan, Greg and Sam Schulhofer-Wohl, “Understanding the Long-Run Decline in Inter-
 state Migration,” International Economic Review, 2017, 58 (1), 57–94.
Kleven, Henrik, Camille Landais, Mathilde Mu noz, and Stefanie Stantcheva, “Taxation
  and Migration: Evidence and Policy Implications,” Working Paper 25740, National Bu-
  reau of Economic Research April 2019.
  , Claus Thustrup Kreiner, and Emmanuel Saez, “Why Can Modern Governments Tax So
  Much? An Agency Model of Firms as Fiscal Intermediaries,” Economica, 2016, 83 (330),
  219–246.
Kleven, Henrik Jacobsen, Camille Landais, and Emmanuel Saez, “Taxation and Interna-
  tional Migration of Superstars: Evidence from the European Football Market,” American
  Economic Review, 2013, 103 (5), 1892–1924.

                                           40
  , , , and Esben Schultz, “ Migration and Wage Effects of Taxing Top Earners: Evidence
  from the Foreigners Tax Scheme in Denmark,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014, 129
  (1), 333–378.
Lehmann, Etienne, Laurent Simula, and Alain Trannoy, “Tax Me If You Can! Optimal Non-
  linear Income Tax Between Competing Governments,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  2014, 129 (4), 1995–2030.
Liebig, Thomas, Patrick Puhani, and Alfonso Sousa-Poza, “Taxation and Internal
  Migration–Evidence from the Swiss Census Using Community-Level Variation in Income
  Tax Rates,” Journal of Regional Science, 2007, 47 (4), 807–836.
Lindert, Peter, Growing Public, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
McFadden, Daniel, “Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behavior,” in Paul
 Zarembka, ed., Frontiers in Econometrics, Academic Press, 1974, pp. 105–42.
Mehrotra, Ajay, Making the Modern American Fiscal State, Cambridge: Cambridge University
 Press, 2013.
Mirrlees, J.A., “Migration and Optimal Income Taxes,” Journal of Public Economics, 1982, 18
 (3), 319–341.
Molloy, Raven, Christopher Smith, and Abigail Wozniak, “Internal Migration in the
 United States,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2011, 25 (3), 173–196.
Moretti, Enrico and Daniel Wilson, “The Effect of State Taxes on the Geographical Location
 of Top Earners: Evidence from Star Scientists,” American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (7),
 1858–1903.
  and , “Taxing Billionaires: Estate Taxes and the Geographical Location of the Ultra-
  Wealthy,” Working Paper 26387, National Bureau of Economic Research October 2019.
North, Douglass, Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance, Cambridge:
 Cambridge University Press, 1990.
O’Brien, Patrick, “The Nature and Historical Evolution of an Exceptional Fiscal State and
  its Possible Significance for the Precocious Commercialization and Industrialization of
  the British Economy from Cromwell to Nelson,” The Economic History Review, 2011, 64 (2),
  408–446.
OECD, “Revenue Statistics: 1965-2001,” Technical Report, OECD 2002.
Office of Tax Policy Research, “World Tax Database,” Technical Report, University of Michi-
 gan 2003.
Penniman, Clara, State Income Taxation, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1980.
Rosenbloom, Joshua and William Sundstrom, “The Decline and Rise of Interstate Migra-
 tion in the United States: Evidence from the IPUMS, 1850-1990,” in Alexander Field, ed.,
 Research in Economic History, Elsevier, 2004, pp. 289–325.
Ruggles, Steven, Sarah Flood, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, Erin Meyer, Jose Pacas, and

                                            41
  Matthew Sobek, “IPUMS USA: Version 9.0.,” Technical Report, IPUMS 2019.
Scheve, Kenneth and David Stasavage, “Democracy, War, and Wealth: Lessons from Two
  Centuries of Inheritance Taxation,” American Political Science Review, 2012, 106 (1), 81–102.
Schmidheiny, Kurt and Michaela Slotwinski, “Tax-Induced Mobility: Evidence from a For-
  eigners’ Tax Scheme inSwitzerland,” Journal of Public Economics, 2018, 167, 293–324.
Serrato, Juan Suárez and Philippe Wingender, “Estimating Local Fiscal Multipliers,” Work-
  ing Paper 22425, National Bureau of Economic Research July 2016.
Tax Policy Center, “State Individual Income Tax Rates: 2000-2019,” Technical Report, Urban
  Institute and Brookings Institution 2019.
Tilly, Charles, Coercion, Capital, and European States, 990-1992, Cambridge: Blackwell, 1992.
US Department of Commerce, “Wealth, Debt, and Taxation: 1902,” Technical Report, US
 Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census 1907.
  , “Wealth, Debt, and Taxation: 1913,” Technical Report, US Department of Commerce,
  Bureau of the Census 1915.
  , “Statistical Abstract of the United States,” Technical Report, US Department of Com-
  merce, Bureau of the Census 1924-1942.
  , “Annual Survey of State Government Finances and Census of Governments,” Technical
  Report, US Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census 2010.
Wallis, John, “American Government Finance in the Long Run: 1790 to 1990,” Journal of
 Economic Perspectives, 2000, 14 (1), 61–82.
Wilson, John, “The Effect of Potential Emigration on the Optimal Linear Income Tax,” Jour-
 nal of Public Economics, 1980, 14 (3), 339–353.




                                              42
              Figure 1: Year of Introduction of State-Level Individual Income Tax




                                                                                           1970 – 1979
                                                                                           1960 – 1969
                                                                                           1950 – 1959
                                                                                           1940 – 1949
                                                                                           1930 – 1939
                                                                                           1920 – 1929
                                                                                           1910 – 1919
                                                                                           No income tax
Notes: This figure displays U.S. states shaded according to the decade the state adopted the individual income
tax, where darker shades indicate later decades. States colored gray never adopted an individual income tax.
The source for 1902-1980 is Penniman (1980). We use administrative data to extend this source for 1980-2008.
Appendix Table A.1 lists the years each state adopted the individual income tax and corporate income tax.




                                                     43
                                                Figure 2: Dynamic Effects of Tax Broadening on Revenue and Expenditure
                                                    (a) Log Total Revenue                                                                           (b) Log Total Expenditure




                                                                                                                                            10
                                         10




                                                                                               Change in 100 × Log Total Expenditure
Change in 100 × Log Total Revenue




                                                                                                                                            5
                                         5




                                                                                                                                            0
                                         0




                                                                                                                                            -5
                                         -5




                                                                                                                                            -10
                                         -10
                                               -3 -4

                                                -1 2
                                                       0




                                                                                                                                             -3 -4

                                                                                                                                              -1 2
                                                 13 2
                                                 15 4
                                                 17 6
                                                 19 8
                                                 21 0
                                                 23 2
                                                 25 4
                                                 27 6
                                                 29 8
                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                               13 2
                                                                                                                                               15 4
                                                                                                                                               17 6
                                                                                                                                               19 8
                                                                                                                                               21 0
                                                                                                                                               23 2
                                                                                                                                               25 4
                                                                                                                                               27 6
                                                                                                                                               29 8
                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                     10




                                                                                                                                                   10
                                                       2
                                                       4
                                                       6
                                                       8




                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                     4
                                                                                                                                                     6
                                                                                                                                                     8
                                                     -




                                                                                                                                                   -
                                                    -1
                                                    -1
                                                    -1
                                                    -1
                                                    -2
                                                    -2
                                                    -2
                                                    -2
                                                    -2
                                                    -3




                                                                                                                                                  -1
                                                                                                                                                  -1
                                                                                                                                                  -1
                                                                                                                                                  -1
                                                                                                                                                  -2
                                                                                                                                                  -2
                                                                                                                                                  -2
                                                                                                                                                  -2
                                                                                                                                                  -2
                                                                                                                                                  -3
                                                    1-
                                                    3-
                                                    5-
                                                    7-




                                                                                                                                                  1-
                                                                                                                                                  3-
                                                                                                                                                  5-
                                                                                                                                                  7-
                                                   to




                                                                                                                                                 to
                                                  9-




                                                                                                                                                9-
                                          to
                                                  to




                                                                                                                                                to
                                                                                                                                                to
                                                 11




                                                                                                                                               11
                                         -5




                                                                                                                                            -5
                                                     Years Since Introduction of Income Tax                                                             Years Since Introduction of Income Tax

                                                 (c) Log Revenue per Capita                                                                       (d) Log Expenditure per Capita
                                         15




                                                                                                                                            15
                                                                                               Change in 100 × Log Total Expenditure p.c.
Change in 100 × Log Total Revenue p.c.
                                         10




                                                                                                                                            10
                                         5




                                                                                                                                            5
                                         0




                                                                                                                                            0
                                         -5




                                                                                                                                            -5
                                               -3 -4

                                                -1 2
                                                       0




                                                                                                                                             -3 -4

                                                                                                                                              -1 2
                                                 13 2
                                                 15 4
                                                 17 6
                                                 19 8
                                                 21 0
                                                 23 2
                                                 25 4
                                                 27 6
                                                 29 8
                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                               13 2
                                                                                                                                               15 4
                                                                                                                                               17 6
                                                                                                                                               19 8
                                                                                                                                               21 0
                                                                                                                                               23 2
                                                                                                                                               25 4
                                                                                                                                               27 6
                                                                                                                                               29 8
                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                     10




                                                                                                                                                   10
                                                       2
                                                       4
                                                       6
                                                       8




                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                     4
                                                                                                                                                     6
                                                                                                                                                     8
                                                     -




                                                                                                                                                   -
                                                    -1
                                                    -1
                                                    -1
                                                    -1
                                                    -2
                                                    -2
                                                    -2
                                                    -2
                                                    -2
                                                    -3




                                                                                                                                                  -1
                                                                                                                                                  -1
                                                                                                                                                  -1
                                                                                                                                                  -1
                                                                                                                                                  -2
                                                                                                                                                  -2
                                                                                                                                                  -2
                                                                                                                                                  -2
                                                                                                                                                  -2
                                                                                                                                                  -3
                                                    1-
                                                    3-
                                                    5-
                                                    7-




                                                                                                                                                  1-
                                                                                                                                                  3-
                                                                                                                                                  5-
                                                                                                                                                  7-
                                                   to




                                                                                                                                                 to
                                                  9-




                                                                                                                                                9-
                                          to
                                                  to




                                                                                                                                                to
                                                                                                                                                to
                                                 11




                                                                                                                                               11
                                         -5




                                                                                                                                            -5




                                                     Years Since Introduction of Income Tax                                                             Years Since Introduction of Income Tax

Notes: This figure plots semiparametric difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the introduction
of the income tax on the change in 100 × log revenue and expenditure, in non-per capita and per capita
terms, over different time horizons. Lagged differences and forward differences are defined in terms of two-
year periods to reduce the influence of missing data. The solid line plots the average treatment effect on the
treated, and the dashed lines plot 90 percent confidence intervals. The x-axis measures time periods relative
to the introduction of the income tax. The treatment effect is estimated via inverse probability weighting,
where the propensity score is specified as a probit model with year effects, five lags of log population, and
the first two lagged first differences of the outcome variable as covariates. Confidence intervals are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustering at the state level.




                                                                                              44
                                                      Figure 3: Dynamic Effects of Tax Broadening Event on Outmigration
                                                                              (a) All Outmigration Flows

                                                               1900-2010                                        1940-2010
                                          0.4




                                                                                            0.4
  Change in Outmigration Log Odds Ratio
                                          0.3




                                                                                            0.3
                                          0.2




                                                                                            0.2
                                          0.1




                                                                                            0.1
                                          0.0




                                                                                            0.0
                                          -0.1




                                                                                            -0.1
                                                 -2       -1     0       1      2     3            -2      -1   0         1   2   3
                                                                 Event Time                                      Event Time

                                                          (b) Heterogeneity by Income (Flows with Top Earners, 1940-2010)

                                                               Bottom 95%                                        Top 5%
                                          0.4




                                                                                            0.4
  Change in Outmigration Log Odds Ratio
                                          0.3




                                                                                            0.3
                                          0.2




                                                                                            0.2
                                          0.1




                                                                                            0.1
                                          0.0




                                                                                            0.0
                                          -0.1




                                                                                            -0.1
                                          -0.2




                                                                                            -0.2




                                                 -2       -1     0       1      2     3            -2      -1   0         1   2   3
                                                                 Event Time                                      Event Time

Notes: This figure plots point estimates and 90 percent confidence intervals for βh from Equation (12) for
different values of h. Event time is measured in decades relative to the introduction of the income tax, where
the introduction occurred between periods 0 and 1. The confidence intervals are robust to heteroskedasticity
and three-way clustering at the origin-destination pair, origin × year, and destination × year levels.




                                                                                          45
                         Table 1: The Effect of Tax Broadening on Revenue

Years since tax broadening:         −5 to −4 −3 to −2            1 to 2      5 to 6    9 to 10     19 to 20 29 to 30
                                      (1)      (2)                (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)      (7)

                                                               Panel A: Log Total Revenue

Average effect of tax broadening      −0.86      −0.06             7.71∗∗∗     0.76    −3.42       −0.27     −1.20
                                      (0.86)     (0.69)           (1.75)      (3.80)   (4.17)      (5.48)    (6.32)
Observations                           192         192            163         158       192          192      192
                                                              Panel B: Log Total Tax Revenue

Average effect of tax broadening        0.95       1.63           12.18∗∗∗     3.77    −1.61       −2.78       1.03
                                       (1.49)     (1.56)          (2.26)      (3.67)   (5.88)      (6.54)     (6.04)
Observations                            96         96              96          96        96          96        96
                                                         Panel C: Log Total Property Tax Revenue

Average effect of tax broadening        4.78       6.78         −14.45       −0.89      17.31       11.62     12.34
                                       (8.33)     (9.46)        (22.51)      (44.96)   (47.31)     (65.87)   (70.64)
 Observations                            192        192           163       158        192       192       192
Notes: This table presents semiparametric difference-in-differences estimates of the average effect of tax broad-
ening (i.e., the introduction of the income tax) over different time horizons. Changes in the outcome are mea-
sured relative to the baseline period of 0 to 1 years before the introduction of the income tax. We report
the average treatment effect on the treated. The treatment effect is multiplied by 100 to increase readability.
The estimators use inverse probability weighting, where the propensity score is estimated by probit and is a
function of year effects, five lags of log population, and the first two lagged first differences of the outcome
variable. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustering at the state
level. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                         46
                  Table 2: The Effect of Tax Broadening on Revenue per Capita

Years since tax broadening:        −5 to −4 −3 to −2          1 to 2       5 to 6     9 to 10   19 to 20   29 to 30
                                     (1)      (2)              (3)          (4)         (5)       (6)        (7)

                                                              Panel A: Log Revenue per Capita

Average effect of tax broadening    −0.83     −0.05             8.57∗∗∗     2.27        1.72      5.35       7.37∗
                                    (0.79)    (0.66)           (1.78)      (3.71)      (3.67)    (3.68)     (4.09)
Observations                         192        192            163          158        192        192        192
                                                          Panel B: Log Tax Revenue per Capita

Average effect of tax broadening      0.65      1.37          13.39∗∗∗      8.30∗∗∗     6.13∗     9.09∗∗    19.11∗∗∗
                                     (1.23)    (1.33)         (2.04)       (2.83)      (3.68)    (4.00)     (3.87)
Observations                          96        96              96          96          96        96         96
                                                      Panel C: Log Property Tax Revenue per Capita

Average effect of tax broadening    −0.16       2.35       −23.22         −17.32      −6.52 −23.64         −13.17
                                    (4.90)     (6.54)      (15.71)        (25.16)     (27.21) (35.46)      (38.33)
 Observations                          192       192         163         158        192       192         192
Notes: This table presents semiparametric difference-in-differences estimates of the average effect of tax broad-
ening (i.e., the introduction of the income tax) over different time horizons. Changes in the outcome are mea-
sured relative to the baseline period of 0 to 1 years before the introduction of the income tax. We report
the average treatment effect on the treated. The treatment effect is multiplied by 100 to increase readability.
The estimators use inverse probability weighting, where the propensity score is estimated by probit and is a
function of year effects, five lags of log population, and the first two lagged first differences of the outcome
variable. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustering at the state
level. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                         47
                       Table 3: The Effect of Tax Broadening on Expenditure

Years since tax broadening:        −5 to −4 −3 to −2          1 to 2       5 to 6   9 to 10    19 to 20   29 to 30
                                     (1)      (2)              (3)          (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)

                                                            Panel A: Log Total Expenditure

Average effect of tax broadening     −1.43      −0.44           3.09        3.75    −1.70      −1.45       −1.04
                                     (1.20)     (0.58)         (2.92)      (3.96)   (4.42)     (5.40)      (6.33)
Observations                          192        192           163          158      192         192        192
                                                          Panel B: Log Education Expenditure

Average effect of tax broadening     −0.22        0.53          7.38∗∗∗   −2.49     −8.78∗ −13.11∗        −14.41∗∗
                                     (1.80)      (1.02)        (2.78)     (4.05)    (4.99)  (6.81)         (7.15)
Observations                           96         96            96          96        96         96         96
                                                            Panel C: Log Health Expenditure

Average effect of tax broadening     −2.51      −2.21         −2.39       −1.69     −7.79 −17.39∗         −16.63
                                     (3.70)     (2.43)        (6.82)      (9.53)    (10.55) (9.79)        (14.21)
Observations                           96         96            96          96        96         96         96
                                                            Panel D: Log Safety Expenditure

Average effect of tax broadening       0.53       1.33        −7.97       −17.33 −29.34 −21.88            −32.67∗∗
                                      (1.75)     (1.06)       (14.69)     (14.90) (17.94) (14.53)         (13.79)
 Observations                            96        96           96         96         96        96         96
Notes: This table presents semiparametric difference-in-differences estimates of the average effect of tax broad-
ening (i.e., the introduction of the income tax) over different time horizons. Changes in the outcome are mea-
sured relative to the baseline period of 0 to 1 years before the introduction of the income tax. We report
the average treatment effect on the treated. The treatment effect is multiplied by 100 to increase readability.
The estimators use inverse probability weighting, where the propensity score is estimated by probit and is a
function of year effects, five lags of log population, and the first two lagged first differences of the outcome
variable. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustering at the state
level. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                       48
                Table 4: The Effect of Tax Broadening on Expenditure per Capita

Years since tax broadening:         −5 to −4 −3 to −2           1 to 2      5 to 6    9 to 10    19 to 20   29 to 30
                                      (1)      (2)               (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)

                                                           Panel A: Log Expenditure per Capita

Average effect of tax broadening     −1.35       −0.44           4.03         5.75      3.80       4.46       7.69∗∗
                                     (1.16)      (0.52)         (3.00)       (3.81)    (4.35)     (3.94)     (3.77)
Observations                           192        192            163         158        192          192      192
                                                    Panel B: Log Education Expenditure per Capita

Average effect of tax broadening     −0.67         0.26          8.60∗∗∗      1.70    −1.11      −1.33        3.50
                                     (1.97)       (1.04)        (2.66)       (4.69)   (6.23)     (6.77)      (6.27)
Observations                           96          96            96           96        96           96       96
                                                        Panel C: Log Health Expenditure per Capita

Average effect of tax broadening     −3.20       −2.59         −1.02          3.04      0.52     −4.51        1.61
                                     (3.62)      (2.40)        (6.60)        (8.92)    (9.22)    (8.16)     (11.45)
Observations                           96          96            96           96        96           96       96
                                                        Panel D: Log Safety Expenditure per Capita

Average effect of tax broadening     −0.08         0.94        −6.44       −11.98 −19.95         −8.21      −12.76
                                     (1.78)       (0.95)       (14.40)     (14.32) (16.33)       (12.62)     (9.67)
 Observations                            96         96           96         96         96        96         96
Notes: This table presents semiparametric difference-in-differences estimates of the average effect of tax broad-
ening (i.e., the introduction of the income tax) over different time horizons. Changes in the outcome are mea-
sured relative to the baseline period of 0 to 1 years before the introduction of the income tax. We report
the average treatment effect on the treated. The treatment effect is multiplied by 100 to increase readability.
The estimators use inverse probability weighting, where the propensity score is estimated by probit and is a
function of year effects, five lags of log population, and the first two lagged first differences of the outcome
variable. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustering at the state
level. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                         49
                                            Table 5: The Effect of Tax Differentials on Outmigration

                                                          All Outmigration Flows                                 Flows with Top Earners, by Income
                                                  1900-2010                        1940-2010                      All         < p95          ≥ p95
                                          (1)                  (2)          (3)                 (4)               (5)           (6)            (7)

                                                                                  Panel A: Child-Based Measure

      Post Income Tax (O − D)              0.128∗∗∗            0.134∗∗∗     0.180∗∗∗            0.178∗∗∗       0.117∗∗∗         0.109∗∗        0.252∗∗∗
                                          (0.036)             (0.042)      (0.040)             (0.046)        (0.041)          (0.044)        (0.059)
      Log(1 − Top MTR) (D − O)                                −0.141                            0.267          1.305∗∗          1.443∗∗        1.826∗∗
                                                              (0.440)                          (0.440)        (0.516)          (0.563)        (0.713)
      Observations                       18,269               17,669      14,065               13,464         3,645            3,645          3,645
                                                                                  Panel B: Report-Based Measure

      Post Income Tax (O − D)                                               0.205∗∗∗            0.196∗∗∗       0.188∗∗∗         0.183∗∗∗       0.312∗∗∗
                                                                           (0.047)             (0.051)        (0.039)          (0.040)        (0.055)
50




      Log(1 − Top MTR) (D − O)                                                                  0.552          0.988∗∗          0.991∗∗        1.769∗∗
                                                                                               (0.488)        (0.465)          (0.480)        (0.763)
       Observations                                                         13,617           12,731            7,011          7,011           7,011
     Notes: This table reports estimates of θ and η in Equation (8). In Panel A, the sample consists of origin-destination-years with non-zero migration
     flows of households with a child aged four or five at the time of the census, and five-year moves are identified by comparing the household state
     of residence to the child’s birth state. In Panel B, the sample consists of origin-destination-years with non-zero migration flows of households
     that reported their state of residence five years before the census, and five-year moves are identified by comparing the household state of
     residence to the household’s previous state of residence. The last three columns are based on flows with at least one moving household in the
     top 5 percent of the observed income distribution in the current year. These flows are for the years 1940-2010, when we observe household
     income. The outcome variable is the log odds ratio of the population share that moved from the origin state to the destination state relative to
     the population share that remained in the origin state. Post Income Tax (O − D) is the difference between the origin’s and destination’s indicator
     variable Post Income Tax, which equals one after the state introduces an individual income tax. Log(1 − Top MTR) (D − O) is the difference
     between the destination’s and origin’s log net-of-tax rate, which is based on the top marginal income tax rate. All regressions include origin-
     destination fixed effects and year effects. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are robust to heteroskedasticity and three-way clustering at
     the origin-destination pair, origin × year, and destination × year levels. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
Online Appendix
                                      Figure A.1: Density of Estimated Propensity Scores


                                15
            Estimated density
                                10
                                5
                                0




                                     0.0             0.1              0.2               0.3            0.4
                                           Propensity score: predicted probability of tax broadening

                                                  State-years in which income tax is introduced
                                                  State-years in which income tax is not introduced

Notes: This figure plots the density of the estimated probability of introducing the income tax in year t condi-
tional on not having the income tax in year t − 1. The solid line plots the density for state-years in which the
income tax was introduced, and the dashed line plots the density for state-years in which the income tax was
not introduced. The propensity score is estimated using a probit model and year effects and five lags of log
population as covariates. Densities are estimated using the Epanechnikov kernel.




                                                                 A1
                                  Figure A.2: Timing of Sales Tax, Income Tax, and Tax Withholding Introductions
                                         (a) Sales Tax and Income Tax                                                                       (b) Tax Withholding and Income Tax
                               1990




                                                                                                                                     1990
                                                                                                                                                                                          CT
                                                                                                                                                   ND




                                                                                                 Tax Withholding Introduction Year
                                                                                                                                                                                                 NJ
 Sales Tax Introduction Year
                               1970




                                                                                                                                     1970
                                                       VT                                                                                                      CA                           OH
                                                                                                                                                                                            PA
                                                                                                                                                                                            RI
                                                        MN                         NE                                                         MS                                          ME
                                                                                                                                                                                          IL
                                            MA
                                            VANY       ID                                  NJ                                                              AR KS
                                                                                                                                                               IA                        NE
                                                                                                                                                                                         MI
                                       WI                                     IN                                                                 VA                                 IN
                                                            KY                                                                               WI OK
                                                                                                                                                 MO          NM
                                                                                                                                                             MNLA                 WV
                                                                                                                                                MANYNSC
                                                                                                                                                      C    GA
                                                                                                                                                            UT                   AK
                                                                                                                                                                                 HI
                                                                                                                                                            IDALMD
                                                                                                                                                             MT   DC
                                                                                     PA                                                                       AZKY
                                                                                                                                                                 CO
                               1950




                                                                                                                                     1950
                                               SC     GA                            ME                                                                      VT
                                                           DC                                                                                      DE      OR
                                                       TN MD                        CTRI

                                                         LA
                                                        KS
                                                        AL
                                           ND
                                          MO          ARNM
                                                         IACO               HI     OH
                                       MSOK NC         UT
                                                        AZCA                 WV MIIL
                               1930




                                                                                                                                     1930
                                                                           Slope: 0.014                                                                                         Slope: 0.184
                                                                                 (0.111)                                                                                              (0.065)
                               1910




                                                                                                                                     1910
                                      1910           1930           1950           1970                                                     1910          1930           1950            1970
                                                   Income Tax Introduction Year                                                                         Income Tax Introduction Year

                                                      Fitted Line                  45° Line                                                                Fitted Line                   45° Line

Notes: This figure plots the year of introduction of the sales tax (Panel (a)) and the year of introduction of tax
withholding (Panel(b)) against the year of introduction of the income tax. The solid line plots the fitted values
from a univariate regression, and the dashed line plots points corresponding to the simultaneous introduction
of the two policies.




                                                                                                A2
                 Figure A.3: Dynamic Effects of Tax Broadening on Revenue and Expenditure: Robustness
                                                  (a) Log Total Revenue                                                                                 (b) Log Total Expenditure




                                                                                                                                                10
                                         10




                                                                                                   Change in 100 × Log Total Expenditure
Change in 100 × Log Total Revenue




                                                                                                                                                5
                                         5
                                         0




                                                                                                                                                0
                                         -5




                                                                                                                                                -5
                                         -10




                                                                                                                                                -10
                                         -15




                                                                                                                                                -15
                                               -3 -4

                                                -1 2
                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                 -3 -4

                                                                                                                                                  -1 2
                                                 13 2
                                                 15 4
                                                 17 6
                                                 19 8
                                                 21 0
                                                 23 2
                                                 25 4
                                                 27 6
                                                 29 8
                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                   13 2
                                                                                                                                                   15 4
                                                                                                                                                   17 6
                                                                                                                                                   19 8
                                                                                                                                                   21 0
                                                                                                                                                   23 2
                                                                                                                                                   25 4
                                                                                                                                                   27 6
                                                                                                                                                   29 8
                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                     10




                                                                                                                                                       10
                                                       2
                                                       4
                                                       6
                                                       8




                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                         4
                                                                                                                                                         6
                                                                                                                                                         8
                                                     -




                                                                                                                                                       -
                                                    -1
                                                    -1
                                                    -1
                                                    -1
                                                    -2
                                                    -2
                                                    -2
                                                    -2
                                                    -2
                                                    -3




                                                                                                                                                      -1
                                                                                                                                                      -1
                                                                                                                                                      -1
                                                                                                                                                      -1
                                                                                                                                                      -2
                                                                                                                                                      -2
                                                                                                                                                      -2
                                                                                                                                                      -2
                                                                                                                                                      -2
                                                                                                                                                      -3
                                                    1-
                                                    3-
                                                    5-
                                                    7-




                                                                                                                                                      1-
                                                                                                                                                      3-
                                                                                                                                                      5-
                                                                                                                                                      7-
                                                   to




                                                                                                                                                     to
                                                  9-




                                                                                                                                                    9-
                                          to
                                                  to




                                                                                                                                                    to
                                                                                                                                                    to
                                                 11




                                                                                                                                                   11
                                         -5




                                                                                                                                                -5
                                                    Years Since Introduction of Income Tax                                                                  Years Since Introduction of Income Tax

                                                (c) Log Revenue per Capita                                                                            (d) Log Expenditure per Capita
                                                                                                   Change in 100 × Log Total Expenditure p.c.
Change in 100 × Log Total Revenue p.c.
                                         15




                                                                                                                                                15
                                         10




                                                                                                                                                10
                                         5




                                                                                                                                                5
                                         0




                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                -5
                                         -5
                                               -3 -4

                                                -1 2
                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                 -3 -4

                                                                                                                                                  -1 2
                                                 13 2
                                                 15 4
                                                 17 6
                                                 19 8
                                                 21 0
                                                 23 2
                                                 25 4
                                                 27 6
                                                 29 8
                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                   13 2
                                                                                                                                                   15 4
                                                                                                                                                   17 6
                                                                                                                                                   19 8
                                                                                                                                                   21 0
                                                                                                                                                   23 2
                                                                                                                                                   25 4
                                                                                                                                                   27 6
                                                                                                                                                   29 8
                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                     10




                                                                                                                                                       10
                                                      2
                                                      4
                                                      6
                                                      8




                                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                                        4
                                                                                                                                                        6
                                                                                                                                                        8
                                                     -




                                                                                                                                                       -
                                                    -1
                                                    -1
                                                    -1
                                                    -1
                                                    -2
                                                    -2
                                                    -2
                                                    -2
                                                    -2
                                                    -3




                                                                                                                                                      -1
                                                                                                                                                      -1
                                                                                                                                                      -1
                                                                                                                                                      -1
                                                                                                                                                      -2
                                                                                                                                                      -2
                                                                                                                                                      -2
                                                                                                                                                      -2
                                                                                                                                                      -2
                                                                                                                                                      -3
                                                    1-
                                                    3-
                                                    5-
                                                    7-




                                                                                                                                                      1-
                                                                                                                                                      3-
                                                                                                                                                      5-
                                                                                                                                                      7-
                                                   to




                                                                                                                                                     to
                                                  9-




                                                                                                                                                    9-
                                          to
                                                  to




                                                                                                                                                    to
                                                                                                                                                    to
                                                 11




                                                                                                                                                   11
                                         -5




                                                                                                                                                -5




                                                    Years Since Introduction of Income Tax                                                                  Years Since Introduction of Income Tax

                                                              Controls Added:                                                                                         Controls Added:
                                                     Sales Tax Intro.            1 Econ. Shock                                                               Sales Tax Intro.            1 Econ. Shock
                                                     2 Econ. Shocks              3 Econ. Shocks                                                              2 Econ. Shocks              3 Econ. Shocks

Notes: This figure plots semiparametric difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the introduction of
the income tax on the change in 100 × log revenue and expenditure, in non-per capita and per capita terms,
over different time horizons. Lagged differences and forward differences are defined in terms of two-year
periods to reduce the influence of missing data. The solid line plots the average treatment effect on the treated,
and the dashed lines plot 90 percent confidence intervals. The x-axis measures time periods relative to the
introduction of the income tax. The treatment effect is estimated via inverse probability weighting, where the
propensity score is specified as a probit model with year effects, five lags of log population, and the first two
lagged first differences of the outcome variable as covariates. Additional covariates are added to the propensity
score as indicated in the figure. The sales tax control is a dummy variable for the introduction of the sales tax
within 10 years (past or future). The economic shocks are lagged first differences of log state personal income
per capita. Confidence intervals are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustering at the state level.




                                                                                                  A3
                                                            Figure A.4: The Effect of Tax Broadening on Revenue and Expenditure: Heterogeneity by Adoption Year
                                                                                                                                                                                 Panel A: Adoption Years: 1911-1940
                                                          (a) Log Total Revenue                                                                                 (b) Log Total Expenditure                                                                                (c) Log Revenue per capita                                    (d) Log Expenditure per capita
                                         10 15 20 25 30




                                                                                                                                               10 15 20 25 30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10 15 20 25 30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      10 15 20 25 30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Change in 100 × Log Total Expenditure p.c.
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Change in 100 × Log Total Revenue p.c.
                                                                                                       Change in 100 × Log Total Expenditure
     Change in 100 × Log Total Revenue
                                         5




                                                                                                                                               5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5
                                         0




                                                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                         -20 -15 -10 -5




                                                                                                                                               -20 -15 -10 -5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -20 -15 -10 -5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -20 -15 -10 -5
                                                 -3 -4

                                                  -1 2
                                                         0




                                                   21 0
                                                   23 2
                                                   25 4
                                                   27 6
                                                   29 8
                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                       -3 -4

                                                                                                                                                        -1 2
                                                                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                         17 6
                                                                                                                                                         19 8
                                                                                                                                                         21 0
                                                                                                                                                         23 2
                                                                                                                                                         25 4
                                                                                                                                                         27 6
                                                                                                                                                         29 8
                                                                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -3 -4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -1 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  13 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  17 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  19 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  21 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  23 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  25 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  27 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  29 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -3 -4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -1 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                         2
                                                         4
                                                         6
                                                         8
                                                       10

                                                   13 2
                                                   15 4
                                                   17 6
                                                   19 8




                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                               4
                                                                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                                                                               8
                                                                                                                                                             10

                                                                                                                                                         13 2
                                                                                                                                                         15 4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    10

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                17 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                19 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                21 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                23 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                25 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                27 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                29 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                       -




                                                      -1
                                                      -1
                                                      -1
                                                      -1
                                                      -2
                                                      -2
                                                      -2
                                                      -2
                                                      -2
                                                      -3




                                                                                                                                                             -




                                                                                                                                                            -1
                                                                                                                                                            -1
                                                                                                                                                            -1
                                                                                                                                                            -1
                                                                                                                                                            -2
                                                                                                                                                            -2
                                                                                                                                                            -2
                                                                                                                                                            -2
                                                                                                                                                            -2
                                                                                                                                                            -3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -3
                                                      1-
                                                      3-
                                                      5-
                                                      7-




                                                                                                                                                            1-
                                                                                                                                                            3-
                                                                                                                                                            5-
                                                                                                                                                            7-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     7-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   7-
                                                     to




                                                                                                                                                           to




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    to




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  to
                                                    9-




                                                                                                                                                          9-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 9-
                                                    to
                                                    to




                                                                                                                                                          to
                                                                                                                                                          to




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   to




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 to
                                                   11




                                                                                                                                                         11




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  11




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                11
                                         -5




                                                                                                                                               -5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -5
                                                              Years Since Introduction of Income Tax                                                                  Years Since Introduction of Income Tax                                                                    Years Since Introduction of Income Tax                                                                 Years Since Introduction of Income Tax




                                                                                                                                                                                  Panel B: Adoption Years: 1941-1976
                                                          (e) Log Total Revenue                                                                                 (f) Log Total Expenditure                                                                            (g) Log Revenue per capita                                          (h) Log Expenditure per capita
                                         15




                                                                                                                                               15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Change in 100 × Log Total Expenditure p.c.
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Change in 100 × Log Total Revenue p.c.
                                                                                                       Change in 100 × Log Total Expenditure
A4

     Change in 100 × Log Total Revenue
                                         10




                                                                                                                                               10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      15
                                         5




                                                                                                                                               5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      10
                                         0




                                                                                                                                               0
                                         -5




                                                                                                                                               -5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5
                                         -10




                                                                                                                                               -10
                                         -15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                               -15
                                         -20




                                                                                                                                               -20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -5
                                                 -3 -4

                                                  -1 2
                                                         0




                                                   13 2
                                                   15 4
                                                   17 6
                                                   19 8
                                                   21 0
                                                   23 2
                                                   25 4
                                                   27 6
                                                   29 8
                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                       -3 -4

                                                                                                                                                        -1 2
                                                                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -3 -4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -1 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  13 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  17 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  19 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  21 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  23 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  25 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  27 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  29 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -3 -4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -1 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                17 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                19 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                21 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                23 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                25 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                27 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                29 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                        2
                                                        4
                                                        6
                                                        8
                                                       10




                                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                                                              6
                                                                                                                                                              8
                                                                                                                                                             10

                                                                                                                                                         13 2
                                                                                                                                                         15 4
                                                                                                                                                         17 6
                                                                                                                                                         19 8
                                                                                                                                                         21 0
                                                                                                                                                         23 2
                                                                                                                                                         25 4
                                                                                                                                                         27 6
                                                                                                                                                         29 8
                                                                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    10
                                                       -




                                                      -1
                                                      -1
                                                      -1
                                                      -1
                                                      -2
                                                      -2
                                                      -2
                                                      -2
                                                      -2
                                                      -3




                                                                                                                                                             -




                                                                                                                                                            -1
                                                                                                                                                            -1
                                                                                                                                                            -1
                                                                                                                                                            -1
                                                                                                                                                            -2
                                                                                                                                                            -2
                                                                                                                                                            -2
                                                                                                                                                            -2
                                                                                                                                                            -2
                                                                                                                                                            -3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -3
                                                      1-
                                                      3-
                                                      5-
                                                      7-




                                                                                                                                                            1-
                                                                                                                                                            3-
                                                                                                                                                            5-
                                                                                                                                                            7-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     7-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   7-
                                                     to




                                                                                                                                                           to




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    to




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  to
                                                    9-




                                                                                                                                                          9-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 9-
                                                    to
                                                    to




                                                                                                                                                          to
                                                                                                                                                          to




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   to




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 to
                                                   11




                                                                                                                                                         11




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  11




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                11
                                         -5




                                                                                                                                               -5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -5
                                                              Years Since Introduction of Income Tax                                                                  Years Since Introduction of Income Tax                                                                    Years Since Introduction of Income Tax                                                                 Years Since Introduction of Income Tax


     Notes: This figure plots semiparametric difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the introduction of the income tax on the change
     in 100 × log revenue and expenditure, in non-per capita and per capita terms, over different time horizons. Lagged differences and forward
     differences are defined in terms of two-year periods to reduce the influence of missing data. Panel A plots the results for the years 1940 and
     earlier, and Panel B plots the results for the years 1941 and later. The solid line plots the average treatment effect on the treated, and the dashed
     lines plot 90 percent confidence intervals. The x-axis measures time periods relative to the introduction of the income tax. The treatment
     effect is estimated via inverse probability weighting, where the propensity score is specified as a probit model with year effects, five lags of log
     population, and the first two lagged first differences of the outcome variable as covariates. Confidence intervals are robust to heteroskedasticity
     and clustering at the state level.
     Figure A.5: The Effect of Tax Broadening on Revenue and Expenditure: Heterogeneity by Presence of Tax Withholding
                                                                                                                                                                                            Panel A: Income Tax Adopted before Withholding
                                                                      (a) Log Total Revenue                                                                                             (b) Log Total Expenditure                                                                     (c) Log Revenue per capita                                    (d) Log Expenditure per capita




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                25




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   25
                                                                                                                                                           25
                                         25




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Change in 100 × Log Total Expenditure p.c.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Change in 100 × Log Total Revenue p.c.
                                                                                                                   Change in 100 × Log Total Expenditure




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20
     Change in 100 × Log Total Revenue




                                                                                                                                                           20
                                         20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   15
                                                                                                                                                           15
                                         15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   10
                                                                                                                                                           10
                                         10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5
                                                                                                                                                           5
                                         5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                           0
                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -5
                                                                                                                                                           -5
                                         -5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -10
                                                                                                                                                           -15 -10
                                         -15 -10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -15
                                                        -3 -4

                                                         -1 2
                                                                0




                                                          13 2
                                                          15 4
                                                          17 6
                                                          19 8
                                                          21 0
                                                          23 2
                                                          25 4
                                                          27 6
                                                          29 8
                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                          -3 -4

                                                                                                                                                                           -1 2
                                                                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -3 -4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -1 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   13 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   15 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   17 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   19 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   21 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   23 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   25 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   27 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   29 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -3 -4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -1 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      15 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      17 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      19 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      21 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      23 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      25 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      27 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      29 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                2
                                                                4
                                                                6
                                                                8
                                                              10




                                                                                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                                                                                  8
                                                                                                                                                                                10

                                                                                                                                                                            13 2
                                                                                                                                                                            15 4
                                                                                                                                                                            17 6
                                                                                                                                                                            19 8
                                                                                                                                                                            21 0
                                                                                                                                                                            23 2
                                                                                                                                                                            25 4
                                                                                                                                                                            27 6
                                                                                                                                                                            29 8
                                                                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10
                                                              -




                                                             -1
                                                             -1
                                                             -1
                                                             -1
                                                             -2
                                                             -2
                                                             -2
                                                             -2
                                                             -2
                                                             -3




                                                                                                                                                                                -




                                                                                                                                                                               -1
                                                                                                                                                                               -1
                                                                                                                                                                               -1
                                                                                                                                                                               -1
                                                                                                                                                                               -2
                                                                                                                                                                               -2
                                                                                                                                                                               -2
                                                                                                                                                                               -2
                                                                                                                                                                               -2
                                                                                                                                                                               -3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -3
                                                             1-
                                                             3-
                                                             5-
                                                             7-




                                                                                                                                                                               1-
                                                                                                                                                                               3-
                                                                                                                                                                               5-
                                                                                                                                                                               7-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      7-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         7-
                                                            to




                                                                                                                                                                              to




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     to




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        to
                                                           9-




                                                                                                                                                                             9-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    9-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       9-
                                                           to
                                                           to




                                                                                                                                                                             to
                                                                                                                                                                             to




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    to




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       to
                                                          11




                                                                                                                                                                            11




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   11




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      11
                                         -5




                                                                                                                                                           -5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -5
                                                                          Years Since Introduction of Income Tax                                                                              Years Since Introduction of Income Tax                                                         Years Since Introduction of Income Tax                                                      Years Since Introduction of Income Tax




                                                                                                                        Panel B: Income Tax Adopted Simultaneously with Withholding
                                                                      (e) Log Total Revenue                                                                                             (f) Log Total Expenditure                                                                 (g) Log Revenue per capita                                          (h) Log Expenditure per capita
                                         10 15




                                                                                                                                                           10 15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Change in 100 × Log Total Expenditure p.c.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Change in 100 × Log Total Revenue p.c.
                                                                                                                   Change in 100 × Log Total Expenditure
A5

     Change in 100 × Log Total Revenue




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                25




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   25
                                         5




                                                                                                                                                           5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20
                                         0




                                                                                                                                                           0
                                         -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10 -5




                                                                                                                                                           -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10 -5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -5
                                                        -3 -4

                                                         -1 2
                                                                0




                                                          13 2
                                                          15 4
                                                          17 6
                                                          19 8
                                                          21 0
                                                          23 2
                                                          25 4
                                                          27 6
                                                          29 8
                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                          -3 -4

                                                                                                                                                                           -1 2
                                                                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                            13 2
                                                                                                                                                                            15 4
                                                                                                                                                                            17 6
                                                                                                                                                                            19 8
                                                                                                                                                                            21 0
                                                                                                                                                                            23 2
                                                                                                                                                                            25 4
                                                                                                                                                                            27 6
                                                                                                                                                                            29 8
                                                                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -3 -4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -1 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   13 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   15 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   17 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   19 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   21 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   23 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   25 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   27 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   29 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -3 -4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -1 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      15 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      17 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      19 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      21 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      23 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      25 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      27 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      29 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                               2
                                                               4
                                                               6
                                                               8
                                                              10




                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                 4
                                                                                                                                                                                 6
                                                                                                                                                                                 8
                                                                                                                                                                                10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10
                                                              -




                                                             -1
                                                             -1
                                                             -1
                                                             -1
                                                             -2
                                                             -2
                                                             -2
                                                             -2
                                                             -2
                                                             -3




                                                                                                                                                                                -




                                                                                                                                                                               -1
                                                                                                                                                                               -1
                                                                                                                                                                               -1
                                                                                                                                                                               -1
                                                                                                                                                                               -2
                                                                                                                                                                               -2
                                                                                                                                                                               -2
                                                                                                                                                                               -2
                                                                                                                                                                               -2
                                                                                                                                                                               -3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -3
                                                             1-
                                                             3-
                                                             5-
                                                             7-




                                                                                                                                                                               1-
                                                                                                                                                                               3-
                                                                                                                                                                               5-
                                                                                                                                                                               7-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      7-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         7-
                                                            to




                                                                                                                                                                              to




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     to




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        to
                                                           9-




                                                                                                                                                                             9-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    9-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       9-
                                                           to
                                                           to




                                                                                                                                                                             to
                                                                                                                                                                             to




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    to




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       to
                                                          11




                                                                                                                                                                            11




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   11




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      11
                                         -5




                                                                                                                                                           -5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -5
                                                                          Years Since Introduction of Income Tax                                                                              Years Since Introduction of Income Tax                                                         Years Since Introduction of Income Tax                                                      Years Since Introduction of Income Tax


     Notes: This figure plots semiparametric difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the introduction of the income tax on the change
     in 100 × log revenue and expenditure, in non-per capita and per capita terms, over different time horizons. Lagged differences and forward
     differences are defined in terms of two-year periods to reduce the influence of missing data. Panel A plots the results for the years 1940 and
     earlier, and Panel B plots the results for the years 1941 and later. The solid line plots the average treatment effect on the treated, and the dashed
     lines plot 90 percent confidence intervals. The x-axis measures time periods relative to the introduction of the income tax. The treatment
     effect is estimated via inverse probability weighting, where the propensity score is specified as a probit model with year effects, five lags of log
     population, and the first two lagged first differences of the outcome variable as covariates. Confidence intervals are robust to heteroskedasticity
     and clustering at the state level.
                                             Figure A.6: Dynamic Effects of Tax Broadening on State Population


                                             2
                                             0
            Change in 100 × Log Population
                                             -2
                                             -4
                                             -6
                                             -8
                                             -10
                                               -8
                                               -7
                                               -6
                                               -5
                                               -4
                                               -3
                                               -2
                                               -1




                                               10
                                               11
                                               12
                                               13
                                               14
                                               15
                                               16
                                               17
                                               18
                                               19
                                               20
                                                0
                                                1
                                                2
                                                3
                                                4
                                                5
                                                6
                                                7
                                                8
                                                9

                                                                Years Since Introduction of Income Tax
Notes: This figure plots semiparametric difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the introduction of
the income tax on the change in 100 × log population over different time horizons. The solid line plots the
average treatment effect on the treated, and the dashed lines plot 90 percent confidence intervals. The x-axis
measures years relative to the introduction of the income tax. The treatment effect is estimated via inverse
probability weighting, where the propensity score is specified as a probit model with year effects and five lags
of log population as covariates. Confidence intervals are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustering at the state
level.




                                                                             A6
       Figure A.7: Dynamic Effects of Tax Broadening on State Population: Robustness


                                             4
            Change in 100 × Log Population
                                             2
                                             0
                                             -2
                                             -4
                                             -6
                                             -12 -10 -8
                                                      -8
                                                      -7
                                                      -6
                                                      -5
                                                      -4
                                                      -3
                                                      -2
                                                      -1




                                                      10
                                                      11
                                                      12
                                                      13
                                                      14
                                                      15
                                                      16
                                                      17
                                                      18
                                                      19
                                                      20
                                                       0
                                                       1
                                                       2
                                                       3
                                                       4
                                                       5
                                                       6
                                                       7
                                                       8
                                                       9
                                                          Years Since Introduction of Income Tax

                                                                    Controls Added:
                                                           Sales Tax Intro.            1 Econ. Shock
                                                           2 Econ. Shocks              3 Econ. Shocks

Notes: This figure plots semiparametric difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the introduction of
the income tax on the change in 100 × log population over different time horizons. The solid line plots the
average treatment effect on the treated, and the dashed lines plot 90 percent confidence intervals. The x-axis
measures years relative to the introduction of the income tax. The treatment effect is estimated via inverse
probability weighting, where the propensity score is specified as a probit model with year effects and five lags
of log population as covariates. Additional covariates are added to the propensity score as indicated in the
figure. The sales tax control is a dummy variable for the introduction of the sales tax within 10 years (past or
future). The economic shocks are lagged first differences of log state personal income per capita. Confidence
intervals are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustering at the state level.




                                                                       A7
               Figure A.8: The Effect of Tax Broadening on Population: Heterogeneity by Adoption Year
                                                   (a) Adoption Years: 1911-1940                                                                     (b) Adoption Years: 1941-1976
                                 6




                                                                                                                                   6
                                 3




                                                                                                                                   3
Change in 100 × Log Population




                                                                                                  Change in 100 × Log Population
                                 0




                                                                                                                                   0
                                 -3




                                                                                                                                   -3
                                 -6




                                                                                                                                   -6
                                 -9




                                                                                                                                   -9
                                 -21 -18 -15 -12




                                                                                                                                   -21 -18 -15 -12
                                               -8
                                               -7
                                               -6
                                               -5
                                               -4
                                               -3
                                               -2
                                               -1




                                               10
                                               11
                                               12
                                               13
                                               14
                                               15
                                               16
                                               17
                                               18
                                               19
                                               20
                                                0
                                                1
                                                2
                                                3
                                                4
                                                5
                                                6
                                                7
                                                8
                                                9




                                                                                                                                                 -8
                                                                                                                                                 -7
                                                                                                                                                 -6
                                                                                                                                                 -5
                                                                                                                                                 -4
                                                                                                                                                 -3
                                                                                                                                                 -2
                                                                                                                                                 -1




                                                                                                                                                 10
                                                                                                                                                 11
                                                                                                                                                 12
                                                                                                                                                 13
                                                                                                                                                 14
                                                                                                                                                 15
                                                                                                                                                 16
                                                                                                                                                 17
                                                                                                                                                 18
                                                                                                                                                 19
                                                                                                                                                 20
                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                                                  7
                                                                                                                                                  8
                                                                                                                                                  9
                                                        Years Since Introduction of Income Tax                                                            Years Since Introduction of Income Tax

Notes: This figure plots semiparametric difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the introduction of
the income tax on the change in 100 × log population over different time horizons. Panel (a) plots the results
for the years 1940 and earlier, and Panel (b) plots the results for the years 1941 and later. The solid line plots the
average treatment effect on the treated, and the dashed lines plot 90 percent confidence intervals. The x-axis
measures years relative to the introduction of the income tax. The treatment effect is estimated via inverse
probability weighting, where the propensity score is specified as a probit model with year effects and five lags
of log population as covariates. Confidence intervals are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustering at the state
level.




                                                                                                 A8
               Figure A.9: The Effect of Tax Broadening on Outmigration: Robustness
           (a) Policy and Economic Shocks                                                       (b) Regional Shocks
 Child-Based Measure, 1900-2010                                            Child-Based Measure, 1900-2010
                         Baseline                                                                    Baseline
             Control for Sales Tax                                             Control for Cold-Hot × Year FE
                                                                             Control for East-West × Year FE
                                                                            Control for Region-Pair × Year FE
 Child-Based Measure, 1940-2010
                         Baseline                                          Child-Based Measure, 1940-2010
             Control for Sales Tax                                                                   Baseline
          Control for State Income                                             Control for Cold-Hot × Year FE
                  Control for Both                                           Control for East-West × Year FE
                                                                            Control for Region-Pair × Year FE
Report-Based Measure, 1940-2000
                                                                          Report-Based Measure, 1940-2000
                         Baseline
                                                                                                     Baseline
             Control for Sales Tax                                            Control for Cold-Hot × Year FE
          Control for State Income                                           Control for East-West × Year FE
                  Control for Both                                          Control for Region-Pair × Year FE
                                     0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30                                         0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30
                                              Coefficient Estimate                                                       Coefficient Estimate

Notes: This figure plots point estimates and 95 percent confidence intervals for θ in Equation (8) for different
measures of outmigration, time periods, and sets of control variables. In Panel (a) the sales tax control is
  S − D S , where D S is an indicator variable equal to one if the origin state has a sales tax in year t, and D S
Dot      dt         ot                                                                                          dt
is defined similarly for the destination state. The state income control is the difference between log personal
income per capita in the destination state and log personal income per capita in the origin state. In Panel (b)
the Cold-Hot indicator variable equals one for pairs of states containing one of the top 10 hottest states and
one state not in the top 10, based on average maximum temperature in July from 1901 to 2000. The East-
West indicator variable equals one for pairs of states containing one western state and one non-western state.
Regions are defined according to the U.S. Census Bureau’s four-region categorization.




                                                                     A9
                    Table A.1: Year of Introduction of State-Level Income Tax

 State                  Individual       Corporate         State                 Individual       Corporate

 Wisconsin                    1911            1911         Louisiana                   1934            1934
 Mississippi                  1912            1921         California                  1935            1929
 Oklahoma                     1915            1931         Kentucky                    1936            1936
 Massachusetts                1916            1919         Colorado                    1937            1937
 Virginia                     1916            1915         Maryland                    1937            1937
 Delaware                     1917            1957         Washington, D.C.            1939            1939
 Missouri                     1917            1917         Alaska                   1959-80            1959
 New York                     1919            1917         Hawaii                      1959            1959
 North Dakota                 1919            1919         West Virginia               1961            1967
 North Carolina               1921            1921         Indiana                     1963            1963
 South Carolina               1922            1922         Michigan                    1967         1967-75
 New Hampshire                1923            1970         Nebraska                    1967            1967
 Arkansas                     1929            1929         Connecticut                 1969            1915
 Georgia                      1929            1929         Illinois                    1969            1969
 Oregon                       1930            1929         Maine                       1969            1969
 Idaho                        1931            1931         Ohio                        1971       1971-2005
 Tennessee                    1931            1923         Pennsylvania                1971            1935
 Utah                         1931            1931         Rhode Island                1971            1947
 Vermont                      1931            1931         New Jersey                  1976            1958
 Alabama                      1933            1933         Florida                    None             1971
 Arizona                      1933            1933         Nevada                     None            None
 Kansas                       1933            1933         South Dakota               None            None
 Minnesota                    1933            1933         Texas                      None            None
 Montana                      1933            1917         Washington                 None            None
 New Mexico                   1933            1933         Wyoming                    None            None
 Iowa                         1934            1934
Notes: The source for 1902-1980 is Penniman (1980). We use administrative data to extend this source for 1980-
2008. Note that a typo in Penniman (1980) identifies the Virginia’s year of adoption of the individual income
tax as 1961 instead of 1916.




                                                     A10
                                  Table A.2: Sources for Fiscal Data

 Data Year          Source                                        Edition          Tables             Pages

 1902               US Department of Commerce (1907)                1907              10              980-95
 1903               US Department of Commerce (1915)                1915             7, 9          38-9, 42-3
 1913               US Department of Commerce (1915)                1915             6, 8          36-7, 40-1
 1915               US Census Statistical Abstract                  1929             228                  222
 1917a              US Census Statistical Abstract                  1939             224                  220
 1922               US Census Statistical Abstract                  1929             228                  222
                    US Census Statistical Abstract                  1939             224                  220
 1923               US Census Statistical Abstract                  1924             185                  199
 1926               US Census Statistical Abstract                  1928             222                  216
 1927               US Census Statistical Abstract                  1930             228                  223
                    US Census Statistical Abstract                  1939             224                  220
 1928               US Census Statistical Abstract                  1931             218               224-5
 1929               US Census Statistical Abstract                  1931             218               224-5
 1930               US Census Statistical Abstract                  1933             202               201-2
 1931               US Census Statistical Abstract                  1933             202               201-2
 1932               US Census Statistical Abstract                  1934             204                  202
                    US Census Statistical Abstract                  1939             224                  220
 1937               US Census Statistical Abstract                  1939             223               218-9
                    US Census Statistical Abstract                  1939             224                  220
 1938               US Census Statistical Abstract                  1941             231               240-1
 1940               US Census Statistical Abstract                  1941             234                  243
                    US Census Statistical Abstract                  1942             234               248-9
 1942-2008          Census of Governments                           N/A             N/A                N/A
Notes: Census of Governments data are available biannually from 1942 to 1950 and annually after 1950 at https:
//www.census.gov/programs-surveys/gov-finances/data/historical-data.html and the Statistical Abstracts
are available at https://www.census.gov/library/publications/time-series/statistical abstracts.html
 a Property taxes only.




                                                    A11
                                     Table A.3: Summary Statistics

                                              Mean       Std. Dev.      Min.         Max.         Obs.
 General
  Post Income Tax                              0.57          0.49        0.00         1.00        5661
  Bottom Marginal Income Tax Rate (%)          1.08          1.35        0.00         6.35        5523
  Top Marginal Income Tax Rate (%)             3.51          3.92        0.00        19.80        5523
  Personal Exemption, Single Filer             6.88          6.40        0.00        40.59        2648
 Outcomes (Non Per Capita)
  Population (millions)                        3.51          4.21        0.04        37.32        5561
  Total Revenue                               12.31         22.84        0.01       312.27        3958
  Total Taxes                                  6.27         10.42        0.00       119.65        3622
  Total Income Taxes                           2.28          5.26        0.00        67.60        3523
  Property Tax Revenue                         0.15          0.40        0.00         5.06        3910
  Total Expenditure                           11.58         21.11        0.01       246.68        3908
  Education Expenditure                        4.14          6.70        0.00        74.74        3428
  Public Safety Expenditure                    0.44          0.83        0.00        10.47        3427
  Health Expenditure                           0.39          0.90        0.00        11.99        3414
  2-Year Colleges                              8.04         13.51        0.00       105.00        5559
  4-Year Colleges                              6.71          5.25        0.00        36.00        5559
 Outcomes (Per Capita)
  Total Revenue p.c.                        2822.00      2675.50        17.30     29797.37        3958
  Total Taxes p.c.                          1392.25      1060.53        14.45     13447.59        3622
  Total Income Taxes p.c.                    444.88        487.97        0.00      5235.59        3523
  Property Tax Revenue p.c.                   63.08        200.02        0.00      3668.79        3910
  Total Expenditure p.c.                    2645.20      2321.57        16.31     18615.11        3908
  Education Expenditure p.c.                 925.72        651.52        0.53      4300.75        3428
  Public Safety Expenditure p.c.             105.76        168.62        0.00      2112.83        3427
  Health Expenditure p.c.                     81.53         94.45        0.00       925.38        3414
  2-Year Colleges p.c. (per 1 million)         2.42          2.71        0.00        21.28        5445
   4-Year Colleges p.c. (per 1 million)            3.25         2.64         0.00        24.19     5445
Notes: The personal exemption is measured in 2008 USD thousands, non per capita fiscal outcomes are mea-
sured in 2008 USD billions, and per capita fiscal outcomes are measured in 2008 USD per capita.




                                                 A12
                   Table A.4: The Effect of Tax Broadening on State Population

 Years since tax broadening:         −8 to −5    −4 to −1      0 to 3      4 to 7    8 to 11    12 to 15   16 to 19
                                       (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)

                                          Panel A: Inverse probability weighting using 3 lags of log population

 Average effect of tax broadening       0.03         0.04      −0.46      −0.93       −2.81      −3.79      −3.39
                                       (0.75)       (0.08)     (0.40)     (1.13)      (1.93)     (2.51)     (3.11)
 Observations                           731         731          731        731        731        731         731
                                          Panel B: Inverse probability weighting using 4 lags of log population

 Average effect of tax broadening     −0.23        −0.01       −0.38      −0.75       −2.53      −3.41      −2.91
                                      (0.65)       (0.05)      (0.39)     (1.10)      (1.90)     (2.44)     (3.02)
 Observations                           731         731          731        731        731        731         731
                                          Panel C: Inverse probability weighting using 5 lags of log population

 Average effect of tax broadening       0.10       −0.01       −0.43      −0.92       −2.83      −3.85∗     −3.50
                                       (0.43)      (0.05)      (0.36)     (1.01)      (1.79)     (2.32)     (2.87)
 Observations                            731          731        731        731       731       731        731
Notes: This table presents semiparametric difference-in-differences estimates of the average effect of tax broad-
ening (i.e., the introduction of the income tax) on log state population over different time horizons. We report
the average treatment effect on the treated. The treatment effect is multiplied by 100 to increase readability.
The estimators use inverse probability weighting, where the propensity score is estimated by probit and is a
function of year effects and three, four, or five lags of log population, as indicated. Standard errors, reported
in parentheses, are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustering at the state level. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05,
∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                      A13
      Table A.5: Effect of Tax Differentials on Outmigration (Alternative Imputations)

                                                            All Outmigration Flows
 Years with imputed tax rates:         None               1930-1940          1920-1940         1911-1940
                                        (1)                  (2)                (3)               (4)

                                                          Panel A: Child-Based Measure

 Post Income Tax (O − D)                 0.173∗∗∗            0.168∗∗∗            0.142∗∗∗         0.134∗∗∗
                                        (0.048)             (0.046)             (0.043)          (0.042)
 Log(1 − Top MTR) (D − O)                0.245               0.148             −0.124           −0.141
                                        (0.451)             (0.444)            (0.444)          (0.440)
 Observations                          16,199              16,813              17,417           17,669
                                                          Panel A: Report-Based Measure

 Post Income Tax (O − D)                 0.165∗∗∗            0.196∗∗∗            0.196∗∗∗         0.196∗∗∗
                                        (0.053)             (0.051)             (0.051)          (0.051)
 Log(1 − Top MTR) (D − O)                0.553               0.552               0.552            0.552
                                        (0.484)             (0.488)             (0.488)          (0.488)
  Observations                            11,246          12,731              12,731            12,731
Notes: This table reports estimates of θ and η in Equation (8) using differing degrees of imputation for the
income tax rate. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                    A14
                         Table A.6: The Effect of Tax Differentials on Outmigration (Alternative Income Cutoffs)

                                                 Flows with 90th Percentile Earners                        Flows with 99th Percentile Earners
                                              All               < p90              ≥ p90                All               < p99              ≥ p99
                                              (1)                 (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)                 (6)

                                                                                 Panel A: Child-Based Measure

       Post Income Tax (O − D)                0.144∗∗∗            0.141∗∗∗           0.261∗∗∗           0.097               0.096              0.281∗∗
                                             (0.040)             (0.044)            (0.053)            (0.062)             (0.066)            (0.111)
       Log(1 − Top MTR) (D − O)               1.317∗∗∗            1.481∗∗∗           1.690∗∗            0.782               0.950              1.154
                                             (0.449)             (0.500)            (0.697)            (0.887)             (0.954)            (1.334)
       Observations                          5,397              5,397              5,397               1,057              1,057              1,057
                                                                                 Panel B: Report-Based Measure

       Post Income Tax (O − D)                0.174∗∗∗            0.166∗∗∗           0.288∗∗∗           0.158∗∗∗            0.156∗∗∗           0.340∗∗∗
                                             (0.042)             (0.043)            (0.056)            (0.041)             (0.042)            (0.070)
A15




       Log(1 − Top MTR) (D − O)               0.932∗∗             0.950∗∗            1.525∗∗            1.267∗∗             1.245∗∗            2.263∗∗
                                             (0.456)             (0.469)            (0.732)            (0.571)             (0.579)            (1.059)
        Observations                            8,793             8,793                8,793              2,998              2,998             2,998
      Notes: This table reports estimates of θ and η in Equation (8). In Panel A, the sample consists of origin-destination-years with non-zero migration
      flows of households with a child aged four or five at the time of the census, and five-year moves are identified by comparing the household state
      of residence to the child’s birth state. In Panel B, the sample consists of origin-destination-years with non-zero migration flows of households
      that reported their state of residence five years before the census, and five-year moves are identified by comparing the household state of
      residence to the household’s previous state of residence. The last three columns are based on flows with at least one moving household in the
      top 5 percent of the observed income distribution in the current year. These flows are for the years 1940-2010, when we observe household
      income. The outcome variable is the log odds ratio of the population share that moved from the origin state to the destination state relative to
      the population share that remained in the origin state. Post Income Tax (O − D) is the difference between the origin’s and destination’s indicator
      variable Post Income Tax, which equals one after the state introduces an individual income tax. Log(1 − Top MTR) (D − O) is the difference
      between the destination’s and origin’s log net-of-tax rate, which is based on the top marginal income tax rate. All regressions include origin-
      destination fixed effects and year effects. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are robust to heteroskedasticity and three-way clustering at
      the origin-destination pair, origin × year, and destination × year levels. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
      Table A.7: Marginal Effects of Population Lags on Probability of Tax Broadening

                                                   Probability of Introducing Income Tax
                                   (1)            (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)
 ∆ Log Population, t − 1                        −1.412∗∗∗        −1.408∗∗∗        −1.346∗∗∗        −1.463∗∗∗
                                                (0.519)          (0.523)          (0.507)          (0.510)
 ∆ Log Population, t − 2                                         −0.232           −0.239           −0.322
                                                                 (0.353)          (0.368)          (0.357)
 ∆ Log Population, t − 3                                                          −0.270           −0.241
                                                                                  (0.326)          (0.315)
 ∆ Log Population, t − 4                                                                             0.364
                                                                                                    (0.444)
 Log Population level effect       0.001          0.003            0.003            0.003            0.004
                                  (0.010)        (0.009)          (0.009)          (0.010)          (0.010)
  Observations                        731          731             731              731               731
Notes: This table presents estimated marginal effects from a probit model of the probability of introducing the
income tax conditional on not having an income tax in the previous year. This probability is modeled as a
function of year effects, lags 1 through K − 1 of the change in local population, and lag K of the level of log
population. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustering at the
state level. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                        A16
Table A.8: Marginal Effects of Neighbor Adoption and Population Lags on Probability of
Tax Broadening

                                                    Measure of Neighbor Adoption of Tax
                                      (1)                   (2)                  (3)                 (4)
                                   Any Neigh.           All Neigh.            # Neigh.          Frac. Neigh.
 Neighbor Adoption of Tax             −0.034               −0.022              −0.005              −0.061
                                      (0.028)              (0.033)             (0.007)             (0.040)
 ∆ Log Population, t − 1              −1.448∗∗∗            −1.404∗∗∗           −1.466∗∗∗           −1.387∗∗∗
                                      (0.495)              (0.502)             (0.503)             (0.493)
 ∆ Log Population, t − 2              −0.362               −0.293              −0.355              −0.341
                                      (0.346)              (0.363)             (0.343)             (0.349)
 ∆ Log Population, t − 3              −0.261               −0.207              −0.255              −0.225
                                      (0.316)              (0.310)             (0.311)             (0.316)
 ∆ Log Population, t − 4                0.288               0.398                0.341               0.363
                                       (0.452)             (0.435)              (0.443)             (0.451)
 Log Population level effect            0.005               0.003                0.004               0.003
                                       (0.010)             (0.010)              (0.009)             (0.010)
  Observations                             731              731                  731                  731
Notes: This table presents estimated marginal effects from a probit model of the probability of introducing the
income tax conditional on not having an income tax in the previous year. This probability is modeled as a
function of year effects, lags 1 through K − 1 of the change in local population, and lag K of the level of log
population. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustering at the
state level. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                     A17
   Table A.9: The Effect of Tax Differentials on Outmigration: Heterogeneity by Proximity

                                                                       All Outmigration Flows
                                                     1900-2010                                              1940-2010
                                        (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)                (6)

                                                                     Panel A: Child-Based Measure

Post Income Tax (O − D)                 0.131∗∗∗          0.130∗∗∗          0.128∗∗∗          0.183∗∗∗          0.186∗∗∗           0.197∗∗∗
                                       (0.039)           (0.038)           (0.040)           (0.042)           (0.041)            (0.043)
Post Income Tax (O − D)              −0.024                                                 −0.037
 × Neighbors                         (0.071)                                                (0.085)
Post Income Tax (O − D)                                 −0.015                                                −0.059
 × Same Region                                          (0.063)                                               (0.085)
Post Income Tax (O − D)                                                     0.001                                                −0.079
 × Same Large Region                                                       (0.049)                                               (0.058)
Observations                         18,269            18,269             18,269            14,065            14,065            14,065
                                                                    Panel B: Report-Based Measure

Post Income Tax (O − D)                                                                       0.208∗∗∗          0.210∗∗∗           0.218∗∗∗
                                                                                             (0.049)           (0.048)            (0.049)
Post Income Tax (O − D)                                                                     −0.050
 × Neighbors                                                                                (0.078)
Post Income Tax (O − D)                                                                                       −0.066
 × Same Region                                                                                                (0.077)
Post Income Tax (O − D)                                                                                                          −0.063
 × Same Large Region                                                                                                             (0.062)
Observations                                                                                13,617            13,617            13,617
Notes: This table reports estimates of Equation (8) augmented to include interactions with the indicator variables measuring geographic
proximity. Neighbors equals 1 if the origin and destination states share a border. Same Region equals 1 if the origin and destination states
are located in the same region according to the U.S. Census Bureau’s nine-region categorization. Same Large Region equals 1 if the origin
and destination states are located in the same region according to the U.S. Census Bureau’s four-region categorization. In Panel A, the
sample consists of origin-destination-years with non-zero migration flows of households with a child aged four or five at the time of the
census, and five-year moves are identified by comparing the household state of residence to the child’s birth state. In Panel B, the sample
consists of origin-destination-years with non-zero migration flows of households that reported their state of residence five years before the
census, and five-year moves are identified by comparing the household state of residence to the household’s previous state of residence.
The last three columns are based on flows with at least one moving household in the top 5 percent of the observed income distribution
in the current year. These flows are for the years 1940-2010, when we observe household income. The outcome variable is the log odds
ratio of the population share that moved from the origin state to the destination state relative to the population share that remained in
the origin state. Post Income Tax (O − D) is the difference between the origin’s and destination’s indicator variable Post Income Tax, which
equals one after the state introduces an individual income tax. Log(1 − Top MTR) (D − O) is the difference between the destination’s and
origin’s log net-of-tax rate, which is based on the top marginal income tax rate. All regressions include origin-destination fixed effects and
year effects. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are robust to heteroskedasticity and three-way clustering at the origin-destination
pair, origin × year, and destination × year levels. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                                   A18
Deriving Mobility Responses to Tax Reforms
This section derives expressions for migration responses to intensive-margin and extensive-
margin tax reforms. In the first subsection we calculate the elasticity of migration with re-
spect to the net-of-tax rate, conditional on the presence of the income tax.1 In the second
subsection, we derive the migration response to the introduction of the income tax at some
initial tax rate. In the final subsection, we examine how the response to the introduction of
the income tax compares to the response to a large increase in the tax rate starting from a
positive rate.

Intensive-Margin Reform

According to the model in Section 3.3.1, the probability that individual i initially living in
state o moves to state d in period t is

                              i        exp(−θDdt + η log(1 − τdt ) + γod )
                             Podt =                                          ,
                                      ∑k exp(−θDkt + η log(1 − τkt ) + γok )

where we have ignored the effect of corporate taxes to simplify notation.2 Consider a small
change to τdt , conditional state d already having an income tax. The individual-specific
migration elasticity is given by

                                                    i
                                              dlogPodt
                                  εiodt ≡                              i
                                                           = η · (1 − Podt ).
                                            dlog(1 − τdt )

     Let Iot denote the set of individuals initially living in state o in period t. Then the number
                                                     i , and the inmigration elasticity for state d
of migrants to state d in period t is ∑o6=d ∑i∈ Iot Podt
is
                                              i )
                          dlog(∑o6=d ∑i∈ Iot Podt                   i / dlog(1 − τ )
                                                    ∑o6=d ∑i∈ Iot dPodt           dt
                 ε dt ≡                           =                        i
                              dlog(1 − τdt )                ∑o6=d ∑i∈ Iot Podt
                                                   i ) Pi
                          ∑o6=d ∑i∈ Iot η · (1 − Podt   odt
                     =                           i
                                ∑o6=d ∑i∈ Iot odt
                                               P
1 Someof the calculations in the first subsection are similar to those in Kleven et al. (2013).
2 Recall
       that γod captures the value of amenities, cost of living, and moving costs. The year effects, φt , from
 Equation (8) factor out of the above expression.




                                                      A19
Let Not denote the number of individuals initially living in state o in period t. Then because
the (ex-ante) migration probability does not depend on individual characteristics, we can
       i = P
write Podt  odt and define the number of migrants from o to d as Modt = Not Podt . The elas-
ticity can therefore be written as ε dt = η · (1 − Pdt ), where Pdt = (∑o6=d Modt Podt )/(∑o6=d Modt )
is the weighted average of migration probabilities.
   Finally, define the overall inmigration elasticity ε to be the weighted average of ε dt ,
weighting by the number of migrants Mdt = ∑o6=d Modt . Then

                                         ∑t ∑d Mdt ε dt
                                 ε≡                     = η · (1 − P ),
                                          ∑t ∑d Mdt

where P = (∑t ∑d ∑o6=d Modt Podt )/(∑t ∑d ∑o6=d Modt ). In our setting, P equals 0.016 using
the child-based measure of migration and 0.007 using the report-based measure, so the in-
migration elasticity is very close to η.
   We can similarly define state o’s outmigration elasticity with respect to the net-of-tax rate,

                                                              i ))
                                           dlog(∑i∈ Iot (1 − Poot
                                  ξ ot   ≡                         .
                                               dlog(1 − τot )

Calculations similar to those above yield ξ ot = −η · Poot . Define the overall outmigration
elasticity ξ to be the weighted average of ξ ot , weighting by the number of people leaving
state o, Lot = Not (1 − Poot ). Then

                                           ∑t ∑o Lot ξ ot
                                    ξ≡                    = −η · P̃,
                                            ∑t ∑o Lot

where P̃ = (∑t ∑o Lot Poot )/(∑t ∑o Lot ) is the weighted average probability of staying, weight-
ing by the number of people leaving the state. In our setting P̃ equals 0.849 using the child-
based measure of migration and 0.904 using the report-based measure, so the outmigration
elasticity is close to −η.

Extensive-Margin Reform

Next we calculate the percentage change in migration due to the introduction of the income
tax at initial rate τ. Define Vodt ≡ −θDdt + η log(1 − τdt ) + γod and let Podt |τdt =τ denote the
individual migration probability (which does not vary across i) when the destination tax


                                                   A20
rate is τ. The inmigration response to the introduction of the income tax at rate τ is

                                     Podt |τdt =τ − Podt |τdt =0
                           ∆0,τ
                            odt ≡                                = A · exp(−θ + η log(1 − τ )) − 1,
                                             Podt |τdt =0

where

                                                                       exp(Vokt )
                                                           1 + ∑k6=d   exp(γod )
                                         A=                                          exp(Vokt )
                                                                                                  .
                                              exp(−θ + η log(1 − τ )) + ∑k6=d        exp(γod )

                                                              exp(Vokt )
Note that A > 1 but A ≈ 1 because ∑k6=d                       exp(γod )
                                                                           = 1/Podt |τdt =0 − 1 is large due to the fact
that Podt |τdt =0 is very small.3 We therefore use the approximation

                                          ∆0,τ
                                           odt ≈ exp(− θ + η log(1 − τ )) − 1 ≡ ∆ .
                                                                                 0,τ



This approximation slightly overstates the negative effect of tax broadening on inmigration
in the same way that η slightly overstates the inmigration response to a small change in the
tax rate.
       Because the approximation to ∆0,τ
                                     odt does not vary across origins or destinations, the per-
centage change in the number of migrants Mdt , as well as the weighted average of inmigra-
tion responses across destinations, are also approximated by ∆0,τ .
       The outmigration response to the introduction of the income tax at rate τ is

                         (1 − Poot |τot =τ ) − (1 − Poot |τot =0 )        1 − exp(−θ + η log(1 − τ ))
        Ω0,τ
         ot ≡                                                      =                                           .
                                     1 − Poot |τot =0                                                exp(V )
                                                                     exp(−θ + η log(1 − τ )) + ∑d6=o exp(γod )
                                                                                                          oo


                             exp(Vod )
Note that ∑d6=o              exp(γoo )
                                         = 1/Poot |τot =0 − 1, which is close to zero because Poot |τot =0 is close to
one. We can therefore use the approximation4

                                           Ω0,τ
                                            ot ≈ exp( θ − η log(1 − τ )) − 1 ≡ Ω .
                                                                                0,τ

3           exp(Vokt )
    ∑k6=d   exp(γod )
                         = 61.5 when we plug in the average moving probability based on the child-based measure.
4 The   calculated effects are very similar if, instead of using an approximation, we plug in values between 0.8
    and 1 for Poot |τot =0 .




                                                                A21
Tax Introduction vs. Large Rate Increase

Finally, we compare the effect of the introduction of the income tax to the effect of a large
increase in the tax rate starting from a positive rate. Consider two tax rates, τ1 and τ2 , where
τ1 < τ2 and the difference between the two is “large.” Using calculations similar to those in
the previous subsection, it is straightforward to show that the percentage change in inmigra-
                                                                                         −τ2 
tion due to increasing the tax rate from τ1 to τ2 is approximately ∆τ1 ,τ2 ≡ exp η log 11− τ1 − 1.
   A natural question is how large τ2 would have to be in order for the tax rate increase
to have the same effect on inmigration as the introduction of the tax at rate τ1 . Setting
∆0,τ1 = ∆τ1 ,τ2 yields τ2 = 1 − exp(−θ/η + 2 log(1 − τ1 )). Introducing the income tax at a
rate of 1 percent causes inmigration to fall by 12 percent, according to the estimates of θ and
η from the specification using the child-based measure and all flows containing top earners.
Starting from a rate of 1 percent, the state would have to raise the tax rate to 10 percent to
achieve the same decline in inmigration.




                                              A22
