NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE BIRTH OF EDGE CITIES IN CHINA:
MEASURING THE SPILLOVER EFFECTS OF INDUSTRIAL PARKS
Siqi Zheng
Weizeng Sun
Jianfeng Wu
Matthew E. Kahn
Working Paper 21378
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21378

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2015

We thank Nick Mueller and seminar participants at the January 2015 ASSA, USC, LSE and University
College, London and UNLV for useful comments. We thank the UCLA Ziman Center for Real Estate
for generous funding. Jianfeng Wu thanks the School of Economics at Fudan University for granting
us access to key data. He also thanks the MOE Project of the Key Research Institute of the Humanities
and Social Sciences at the China Center for Economic Studies (CCES), and the Research Institute
of the Chinese Economy (RICE) at Fudan University. We are indebted to Zhikuo Liu for helpful discussions.
Siqi Zheng and Weizeng Sun thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 71273154
and No. 71322307) and the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University (NCET-12-0313)
for research support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Siqi Zheng, Weizeng Sun, Jianfeng Wu, and Matthew E. Kahn. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Birth of Edge Cities in China: Measuring the Spillover Effects of Industrial Parks
Siqi Zheng, Weizeng Sun, Jianfeng Wu, and Matthew E. Kahn
NBER Working Paper No. 21378
July 2015
JEL No. H42,H72
ABSTRACT
Several Chinese cities have invested billions of dollars to construct new industrial parks. These place
based investments solve the land assembly problem which allows many productive firms to co-locate
close to each other. The resulting local economic growth creates new opportunities for real estate
developers and retailers that develop properties and stores close to the new park. The city mayor has
the political clout and the personal promotion incentives to anticipate these effects as he chooses whether
and where within the city to build the park. Using several geo-coded data sets, we measure the localized
spillover effects of the new parks on local incumbent firm productivity, the growth of retail activity
close to the park and local real estate pricing and construction. We document the heterogeneous effects
of investment in parks. Those parks featuring a higher level of human capital, a greater level of co-agglomeration
among firms within the park, and a smaller share of State Owned Enterprises offer greater spillover
effects.

Siqi Zheng
Hang Lung Center for Real Estate
Tsinghua University
Beijing, 100084, CHINA
zhengsiqi@tsinghua.edu.cn
Weizeng Sun
Hang Lung Center for Real Estate
Tsinghua University
Beijing 100084, P. R. China
sunweizeng@gmail.com

Jianfeng Wu
School of Economics
and China Center for Economic Studies (CCES)
Fudan University
600 Guoquan Road
200433, Shanghai
P.R.China
wujianfeng@fudan.edu.cn
Matthew E. Kahn
UCLA Institute of the Environment
Department of Economics
Department of Public Policy
Anderson School of Management
UCLA Law School, Box 951496
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1496
and NBER
mkahn@ioe.ucla.edu

Introduction
The rise of edge cities in the United States has fostered urban growth through
providing global corporations with the advantage of cheaper land, and advanced new
capital infrastructure and a high quality of life for employees and executives (Garreau
1991). Over the last twenty years, China’s local officials have made much larger
place based investments as they have sought to create new suburban edge cities.
These new industrial parks are contained geographic areas within a city with special
land, tax, financial and economic policies to recruit highly productive manufacturing
and service firms (Wang 2013).

Physical proximity between firms who seek to

co-agglomerate facilitates local productivity growth.

The well paid workers at these

new employment centers seek nearby housing and retail opportunities.

Real estate

developers and retail entrepreneurs respond to this increased local market potential by
supplying new housing and consumer amenities.

This “chain reaction” of new jobs

causing real estate construction and the opening of new high end retail opportunities
creates a vibrant edge city.
Through its multi-billion dollar place based investments, China’s central and local
governments have made a large bet that the agglomeration benefits of industrial parks
offer a stream of benefits that exceed the upfront cost of establishing the parks and the
opportunity cost of allowing the land that the park sits on to be allocated for other
purposes.

Local governments have paid for place based projects using debt financing.

According to IMF estimates, local-government debt reached 36% of GDP in 2013,
double its share of GDP in 2008, and will increase to 52% of GDP in 2019.

The

popular press has suggested that China’s local governments face a potential major debt
crisis.1

This ugly scenario is less likely to occur if place based investments generate

significant economic spillovers. Wang (2013) estimates that industrial parks in Chinese
cities increase the total factor productivity, foreign direct investment (FDI) and local
workers’ earnings.
China’s unique political system grants city mayors with powers that far exceed
their Western counterparts. China’s local leaders have strong incentives to pursue
economic growth because this increases their promotion chances. New industrial parks
can stimulate economic growth because they solve a co-ordination problem and a land
1

See http://www.wsj.com/articles/debt-that-once-boosted-its-cities-now-burdens-china-1422415981
2

assembly problem (Combes et. al. 2012). Establishments that seek to co-agglomerate
within a small geographic area face transaction costs in simultaneously seeking to
co-locate. Even if they could agree to do so, there is no reason to believe that a major
city would have a large enough vacant plot of land that would allow them to
simultaneously execute this plan.

In this sense, the industrial park permits a degree of

co-ordination in a timely fashion that is unimaginable in a setting featuring a land
market with pre-existing durable structures and long lags between sales dates.
This paper uses detailed within city geocoded data to study the Chinese local
governments past success in creating vibrant new edge cities. Our metrics of “success”
focus on economic dynamics within cities in geographic areas close to the new parks.
We test whether successful “work-live-play” places emerge based on outcome criteria
such as localized job growth, TFP increases for incumbent firms, new housing
construction, increased home prices, and increased retail opportunities. These
outcomes directly benefit the local government officials because their fiscal revenue is
tied to the commercial and residential land sales, and also the tax from productive
firms.
To test for the extent of localized agglomeration spillovers, we merge together
several geocoded data sets in China’s eight major cities – 120 industrial parks, the
productivity and employment data of manufacturing firms between the years of 1998
and 2007, and the housing and retail data after 2006. This piece of our empirical work
builds on research documenting spatial industrial spillover effects (Greenstone,
Hornbeck, Moretti 2010, Arzaghi and Henderson 2010).
Previous research studying the effects of China’s industrial parks has focused
solely on the productivity impacts on the select set of firms who choose to locate in the
park (see Lu, Wang and Zhu 2015) and has studied the overall city level treatment
effects of building a park (the treatment) in a given year and comparing growth in such
treated cities to a set of plausible control cities (Wang 2013). Using data on recent
Chinese industrial parks (built between 2004 and 2008),

Lu, Wang and Zhu (2015)

document that such parks do cause a 12% increase in firm employment, 14.2%
increase in output, and also significant increases in capital, capital to labor ratio and
labor productivity for firms within parks.

Our study differs from this past work along

three key margins. First, we focus on the localized spillover effects due to industrial
3

parks based on very fine geographic level data. Second, we are interested in both
production and consumption spillovers, so we study how an industrial park triggers the
birth of an “edge city” featuring both production and consumption activities. Third, we
allow industrial parks to differ along several dimensions – the park’s birth cohort and
age, the synergy of industries within a park, and how a park “fits” with the local
incumbent industries. Estimating the heterogeneous effects of those parks allow us to
infer why some parks are successful and some are not in terms of forming a vibrant
“edge city” (as a subcenter) far away from the metropolitan area’s main center.
Our study builds on research estimating localized productivity spillover effects.
Most agglomeration studies focus on the United States (see Rosenthal and Strange
2004, Arzaghi and Henderson 2008, Greenstone, Hornbeck and Moretti 2010). Our
new estimates of the co-agglomeration effects builds on the estimates from developed
cities generated by Ellison, Glaeser and Kerr (2010). Several studies have examined
the role of place based policies on U.S local and regional growth (see Rossi-Hansberg
et. al. 2010, Kline and Moretti 2013, Neumark and Kolko 2010). Their general
conclusion is that those place-based policies do not lead to net growth, instead, they
“reshuffle” economic activities from one place to another place. Such “zero sum”
reshuffling suggests that place based policies do not lead to new growth and instead
can have perverse consequences by distorting the efficient allocation of resources.
However, this argument may not hold in China. Macro research has documented the
productivity wedges across Chinese firms (Hsieh and Klenow 2009). If place based
policies, such as industrial parks, help to reallocate labor and capital to its highest and
best use then local economic growth is likely to result.
Our most novel empirical contribution is to study the consequences of urban
sub-center growth on the emerging “consumer city” (see Glaeser, Kolko and Saiz
2001). Urban economists have increasingly been studying cities as centers of
consumption. This research has tended to focus on the United States and Europe. A
novel feature of our study is to link the rise of the industrial parks (centers of
production) to the emergence of new consumer city clusters. While China’s cities are
known for their high levels of urban air pollution (see Zheng and Kahn 2013), there is
nascent rising demand for quality of life in China’s cities. Quality of life is both a
function of city level local public goods such as climate and air pollution but is also a
4

function of consumer opportunities (Waldfogel 2008).

Industrial park workers seek to

reduce their commute costs and they are well paid, thus new residential communities
and retail opportunities emerge close to the new parks (Lucas and Rossi-Hansberg,
2002). Moretti (2010) estimates such local multipliers using US census data, and finds
that for each additional job in manufacturing in a given city, 1.6 jobs are created in the
nontradable sector in the same city, and this effect is significantly larger for skilled jobs
because they command higher earnings (2.5 for skilled jobs and 1 for unskilled jobs).
While past consumer city research has focused on developed nations, one of our
paper’s contributions is to document the rise of nascent consumer cities in Communist
China.
The benefits of place based policies are likely to be localized and heterogeneous
(Glaeser and Gottlieb 2008, Kline 2010, Faggio, Silva and Strange, 2015). We present
new evidence on the heterogeneous spillover effects of different types of industrial
parks. We test several ideas from the economic geography and urban economics
literature (Moretti 2004, Rauch 1999). Parks that feature a higher human capital level,
a lower level of State Owned Enterprise share and parks that are a better “fit” with the
local incumbent industries (in terms of stronger input-output linkages, labor market
pooling, and knowledge spillover) have larger local spillovers. Our micro data based
approach allows us to test for a rich set of such heterogeneous effects, and to study the
key mechanisms generating such spillovers.
Industrial parks are not assigned to geographic locations at random.

They are

more likely to be built at the suburban fringe where land is cheaper and has not already
been developed. We argue that both the invisible hand and the Chinese “managed
hand” of the state play a key role as there is a complementarity between highways and
fringe industrial parks. Measuring the benefits of active industrial policy remains an
open research topic (Beason and Weinstein 1996, Harrison and Rodriguez-Clare 2009).
We carefully discuss site selection issues and study how this affects our estimates of
productivity and consumption spillovers.

We contrast OLS and IV estimates of park

spillover effects on local economic activity in which we instrument for the industrial
park’s location within a city. We argue that OLS and IV estimates of localized
spillover effects answer two distinct economic questions. OLS estimates of spillover
effects associated with industrial parks built in specific parts of the city provide a
5

historical ex-post evaluation of the effectiveness of past Chinese Communist Party
industrial policy investments.

In a second set of results, we instrument for where

parks are built using topographic, historical land use and population density variables.
These instruments proxy for the economic cost of building a park in a given
geographic location within a city.

By using such cost shifters as instruments, our IV

results recover estimates of the productivity effects of park construction in low cost
versus high cost areas within a city.

As we will discuss below, we control for many

observed attributes of different locations such as each location’s distance from the city
center. Thus, in our IV regressions we will be comparing the productivity dynamics
for areas equidistant to the city center that differ with respect to their cost of
constructing a new park.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Sections 2 we introduce the
institutional background and our conceptual framework; Section 3 describes data and
models industrial parks’ site selection. Section 4 and 5 present our estimates of the
production and consumption spillovers, respectively. We conclude in Section 6.

2. Background and Conceptual Framework
2.1 Industrial Parks and Local Leaders’ Investment Problem
Local leaders who seek to be promoted within the Chinese political system have
strong incentives to invest in projects that yield local economic growth (Wu et. al. 2013,
Zheng et. al. 2014). The goal of establishing industrial parks is to promote FDI,
international trade, technological innovation and employment. Industrial parks are at
different levels: state-level, provincial-level, and prefecture (or below)-level.
Higher-level parks enjoy more favorable policies, such as lower interest rate loans,
larger tax, land price and utility price discounts. In this paper we focus on state-level
and provincial-level parks.2

Being a host city of such parks has become a favorite

strategy of city mayors to compete for FDI and foster local economic growth.
2

The reason that we only focus on state-level and provincial level parks is because many of the lower-level
industrial parks did not obtain formal approval from the central and provincial governments and violated the
relevant laws and regulations. In 2003, the central government did a thorough investigation into industrial parks
regarding the violation of land use regulation and other regulations. A large number of those lower-level industrial
parks were abolished after this investigation. See detailed documentation in Cartier (2001) and Adler (2013).
6

In choosing whether to invest in a park, local leaders face a trade-off between a
stream of benefits an industrial parks offers and the upfront and opportunity costs of
establishing the park. To create a park, a local leader acquires a large parcel of vacant
land (or relocates current residents).

Industrial parks are highly land intensive. This

land must be acquired and this land has a major opportunity cost as developers could
build new residential towers or commercial properties.

Land closer to the city center

is already occupied and is expensive to acquire. Suburban fringe farmland represents a
much more attractive location for building parks due to the low land conversion cost
there.3

Once the leader acquires the land, he invests to improve the infrastructure

including; paved roads, highways, sewage system, the supply of water, power, gas,
cable and phone services and some landscaping.

The leader also introduces

preferential policies for potential park entrants to attract productive firms, such as tax
break and customs duty exemption, discounted land-use fees, and special treatment in
securing bank loans (Wang 2013, Adler 2013).
Chinese local leaders are powerful but capital constrained. If they are able to raise
enough funds, they can build a park quickly. They raise funds through various channels.
On average, bank loans, land sale revenue and on-budget fiscal revenue account for
28%, 25% and 33% of the sources of municipal infrastructure investment in China in
2010, respectively, and the rest of the money comes from other non-bank financial
channels.4 Some local leaders borrow heavily. An industrial park in Liaoning province
plans to invest 4.2 billion yuan (US$680 million) in 2015, and almost 100% of this
investment comes from bank or trust loans.5
Each industrial park has an Administrative Committee (AC), which, on behalf of
the city government, takes the responsibility to direct and to administer the park – such
as project approval, local taxation, land management, finance, personnel, and public
service provision. Once an industrial park is built, the AC leaders will actively solicit
FDI and domestic firms with the potential to be highly productive.

3

Such farmland was owned by rural villages. If the city government (the upper government of those rural villages)
wants to build a new industrial park on the farmland, it needs to covert the use type of that land parcel from
agriculture use to industrial use, and compensate the rural village. In most cases the range of compensation for
farmers for land taken is quite low because it is often based on income generated in agriculture use instead of being
tied to its opportunity cost (the value of the land if allocated to urban use) (Ding and Song 2005).
4
See: Ryan Rutkowski. Four Myths about local Infrastructure Investment in China. China Economic Watch,
the Peterson Institute for International Economics. http://blogs.piie.com/china/?p=3281
5
See: http://www.wantchinatimes.com/news-subclass-cnt.aspx?id=20140816000014&cid=1203
7

The Park’s AC has a plan for the park’s industrial composition and the anchor
industries (for instance car producers or biotech companies). A recruitment strategy
will intend to maximize the industrial synergies both within the park and in a vicinity
of the park.

Private negotiations take place between the AC and the potential entrants

regarding the exact bundle of subsidies each firm will receive if it agrees to enter the
park.

The AC will offer additional incentives to those firms that they desire the most.

This recruitment process bears a close resemblance to the anchor tenant issue that
arises in filling a successful shopping mall (Pashigian and Gould 1998, Gould,
Pashigian and Prendergast 2005) and the development of U.S suburban planned towns
(Henderson and Mitra 1996). Both the owner of a mall and the Chinese local leaders
has a strong incentive to internalize the spillovers taking place within their respective
borders.

A key difference between mall owners and local leaders is that mall owners

only gain profit from activity within their mall.

In U.S edge cities, developers only

internalize the spillover gains taking place within their land parcel’s area.

If there are

positive spillover effects from a mall to the local community, the mall owner has no
claim to those. In contrast, Chinese local leaders have an incentive to internalize these
additional outside the park spillover effects, because their goal is to maximize the total
output from all the economic activities within their political boundary.

In the case of

U.S edge cities, the edge city competes with the center city and may make choices that
do not maximize the synergies with the incumbent center city (Henderson and Mitra
1996, Orfield 2011).

In the Chinese case, the city mayor is in charge of the entire

jurisdiction (including the center city and the edge city) and thus internalizes all of the
possible synergistic effects.

The main purpose of this paper is to estimate those

spillovers and explore the heterogeneity in such spillovers with respect to park
attributes, and the extent to which this park “fits” with the local incumbent industries.
2.2 Concentrated Purchasing Power Generated by a New Industrial Base
We will estimate the localized production and consumption spillovers that an
industrial park generates in its vicinity. Here we provide a simple framework to
motivate our empirical approach.

The goal of our empirical work is quantify the

“chain reaction” created by the introduction of a new industrial park.
Our starting point is that industrial parks attract productive firms, and also improve
8

the productivity of incumbent firms located close and within the park.

Such parks

will have no aggregate impact on urban growth if their creation simply leads to a
spatial reshuffling of economic activity that would have located somewhere in the
same city had the park not been created. Wang (2013) presents a cross-city study
documenting the positive overall effect of China’s industrial parks on urban growth.
Such a city/macro study abstracts away from internal workings of a city and that study
did not examine how the real estate market or the retail sector is affected by the growth
of a major suburban employment center.
Productivity spillovers
Each incumbent manufacturing establishment in a city is endowed with a
production function. All else equal, firms located closer to the city center (where the
main agglomeration takes place) are more productive. Standard urban economics
logic posits that a geographic location’s distance to the city center is a sufficient
statistic for measuring this agglomeration force.

Once an industrial park is built, each

location within a city becomes two dimensional as we track the plant’s distance to the
city center and its distance to the closest industrial park. If a city has multiple parks,
other parks will also have some effect on this plant. In the empirical analysis we will
construct a variable to measure this global impact of all the parks in the city, but now
we abstract from this and only consider the closest park.
An incumbent firm chooses the amount of labor, L (priced at a competitive wage
w); capital, K (with input price p); and land, LAND (priced in the competitive land
market with rent r), to maximize its corresponding profit  . A is the productivity
shifter (TFP), and is used to capture the agglomeration economies this firm enjoys.
Output’s price is normalized to one.
M ax L , K ,T   f ( A , L , K , LA N D )  w L  pK  rLA N D

(1)

Here we allow agglomeration externalities, A, to depend on the firm’s distance to
the

central

business

district

D  ( distance _ cbd , distance _ park ) ,

(CBD)

and

the

and the park’s economic power,

we assume the economic power of the CBD is given).

nearest
pow erpark

park
(here

In our empirical work below,

we model a park’s economic power as a function of its size of economic activity, its
9

average human capital level, the share of SOEs in the park, and the park’s
co-agglomeration index. This power index is an emergent attribute of a park that
depends on how many firms and which firms choose to enter the park, and this is based
on those firms’ private negotiation with the park’s AC. Such firms face a discrete
choice decision concerning which city they locate in and which part of a city they
choose to locate.6
A  A ( distance _ cbd , distance _ park ; power park )

(2)

Where  A /  distance _ cbd  0;  A /  distance _ park  0 ;  A /  power park  0
The positive agglomeration economies increase the productivity of nearby
incumbent plants. This will lead to higher output,  f /  A  0 , and thus higher profit,
which will trigger the entry or relocation of firms who are interested in gaining access
to such spillovers to the vicinity of the park. Incumbent firms enjoying increased
productivity because of their proximity to the new park should also be less likely to
exit. The incumbent firms experiencing productivity growth will expand by occupying
more land and hiring more workers. The growth of the park itself and the subsequent
entry of firms and firm expansion in the park’s vicinity lead to competition for inputs,
so labor and land prices will rise.
w / A  0 , r / A  0

The increases in both employment and wage in and around the park create the
market potential base for the emergence of the consumer city sub-center, as described
below.
The Emergence of an “Edge City” : Measuring Consumption Spillovers
Cities are centers of both production and consumption (Glaeser, Kolko and Saiz
2001). Handbury and Weinstein (2014) demonstrate that big cities offer greater variety
of consumer goods that effectively offer lower consumer prices for specific varieties
We are unable to observe the bargaining game that has taken place between a productive firm and competing
mayors. Our analysis should be viewed as a conditional analysis. Given that the AC has filled the park, we can study
the industrial composition of the park and its consequences on local production and consumption. We will contrast
how parks differ in their productivity spillover effects as a function of their composition but we will not be able to
answer questions pertaining to whether the park’s composition would be much different if the AC had been slightly
more aggressive in competing against other cities’ ACs in recruiting firms.
10
6

than what can be found in smaller cities.

When there is a density of consumer

purchasing power, there is a profit incentive for niche suppliers to co-locate to supply
such goods (Waldfogel 2008). The creation of a large industrial park creates a spatially
concentrated center of employment and purchasing power. Such new workers are
likely to seek out short commutes to work and this creates incentives for real estate
developers to bid for land and to develop housing towers in close proximity to the
industrial parks. As more people live and work in this new “edge city” and given that
these individuals are well paid, the opportunities for retail and restaurants soar and this
should trigger entry. These spillover effects of the park both in terms of new housing
construction and new retail activity represent an important consumer city
agglomeration.
We use the concept of “market potential” (Hanson 2005) to describe the rise in
purchasing power around the industrial park, which is the demand base for both the
housing and retail markets in this edge city:
m arket _ potential edge city =  l em ploym ent l  w age l  e

 d l , park

(3)

Where employmentl and wagel are the employment and average wage in
community l, and dl,park is the distance between community l and the park. So our
market potential measure is the distance weighted purchasing power of communities in
the edge city and the closer communities to the park have larger weights.
We first consider new home sales and home prices.

The monocentric model of

urban economics predicts that home prices decline with distance from the city center to
compensate workers for a longer commute to the city center. Zheng and Kahn (2008)
report evidence from Beijing documenting support for this claim.

If the new

industrial parks generate significant increase in the edge city’s market potential, then
home prices should rise, controlling for distance to the city center.
house _ price  house _ price ( distance _ cbd , distance _ p ark ; m arket _ potential edge city )

(4)
 house _ price /  market _ potential  0

and  house _ price /  D  0, D  ( distance _ cbd , distance _ park ) .
11

Home sales will also rise with the market potential in the edge city. We posit that
we will observe larger increase in home sales in the communities closer to the park
where housing price appreciation is higher:
 house _ sales /  distance _ park  0

Since an industrial park is always located in the city fringe where housing supply
is more elastic, we expect that the increase in home sales is relatively smaller than the
increase in home prices.
The retail sector will also respond to the growth of a new suburban cluster.

In the

Bresnahan and Reiss (1990, 1991) model, market demand retail is determined by the
number of consumers (in our context, employment in the edge city), and a
representative consumer’s demand function, demand, which is a function of the income
and the retail price (retail_price). Translating this relationship using our notation
yields:
retail edge city  retail ( m arket _ potential edge city , retail _ price )

(5)

Their demand specification assumes that if the number of consumers doubles, total
market demand will double at any given price; and if consumers become richer, total
market demand will also increase. In our case, the retail market in a city is segmented
into many local submarkets, denoted by the two distances D (dcbd, dpark). As the
employment and wage in the edge city around the park increases, the demand in the
local retail market in the park’s vicinity will also rise. Thus, we should observe more
retail store openings in those communities closer to the park
 retail /  distance _ park  0

Waldfogel (2008) extends this model to allow for preference heterogeneity.

If

richer consumers have a preference for higher quality restaurants and stores then they
have an incentive to co-agglomerate because such niche variety stores face fixed costs
to opening and will only open if the demand for their niche is large enough to at least
cover the fixed costs. If a park has high human capital workers, more sophisticated
richer workers and there is a purchasing power to attract top restaurants and this makes
living and working there even more attractive as an endogenous consumer edge city
12

emerges (Diamond 2012).

3. Data
Our study focuses on eight major cities in China: Beijing, Shanghai, Shenzhen,
Tianjin, Dalian, Wuhan, Xi’an and Chengdu. These cities include all three first-tier
cities in China (Beijing, Shanghai, Shenzhen) and a couple of the top second-tier cities.
3.1 Four Geocoded Data Sets
We construct four key geocoded data sets for these eight cities: (1) 120 state- and
provincial-level industrial parks listed in the 2006 “Bulletin List for the Official
Boundaries of Chinese Industrial Parks” (See Figure 1),7 (2) manufacturing plants in
the Annual Survey of Industrial Firms (ASIFs) dataset from 1998 to 2007. This survey
is conducted by National Bureau of Statistics of China (NBSC); (3) All newly-built
residential complexes developed by real estate developers from 2006 to 2013. These
data are obtained from each city’s local housing authority; (4) New openings of retail
establishments during 2006 and 2013 for the categories of restaurants, entertainment
facilities and retail shops. These data are obtained from dianping.com, which is China’s
leading local retail information and commentary platform, like yelp.com in the US.
*** Insert Figure 1 about here ***
Due to data availability constraints, our housing and retail data cover the time
period 2006 to 2013 while the industrial parks data cover the years 1998 to 2007. This
means that what we observe is how “people follow jobs”, rather than how “jobs follow
people”, in edge cities.
The Spatial unit of analysis
Given that we seek to quantify localized spillover effects, we must construct
consistent geographical units for studying the spatial distribution of industrial plants,
housing towers and retail stores. Within a Chinese city, there are three levels of
administrative units (from the upper to the lower level): district (or county), jiedao
7

This information is supplied by the Ministry of Land and Resources of China (MLRC);
13

(“zone” thereafter) and juweihui (“small zone” thereafter). Beijing has 16 districts, 320
zones and 5274 small zones. In the eight cities, the average sizes of a zone and a small
zone are 47.9 and 4.1 square kilometers, respectively.
We know the exact geographic boundaries of industrial parks and zones, but we
only have the centroid (rather than its geographic boundary) of a small zone. For all
plants in our data set, we know their zone identifiers, and for about 60% of them we
know their small zone identifiers. We know the exact street address of all residential
complexes and retail establishments. We set up 2 km*2 km grid maps (each cell is 4
square kilometers, the same as the average size of a baby zone) for all eight cities, so
that we can count the number of new home sales and new retail openings by grid cell.
Using a major industrial park in Beijing (“Beijing Economic and Technological
Development Zone”) as an example, Figure 2 shows the above geographic units of
analysis we use when doing the geocoding work.
*** Insert Figure 2 here ***
The Industrial Parks Data Set
According to the 2006 “Bulletin List for the Official Boundaries of Chinese
Industrial Parks”, there are 120 state- and provincial-level industrial parks in these
eight cities, accounting for 8.6% in all such parks in China. From the list we know each
park’s name, location, and the year this park was established. From the websites of
industrial parks’ ACs we obtain the exact geographic boundary of each park (for those
parks that do not have websites or public released information, we contacted the local
officials in their ACs to get the boundary information). We then geocode the exact
boundaries of all the 120 parks in the GIS maps of the eight cities (Figure 1). Each city
has several industrial parks – Beijing has 21 parks, and Dalian has 8 parks. The
average park’s size is 11.88 square kilometers.8
Chinese cities have experienced four waves of establishing industrial parks: 1978
–1985, 1986–1990, 1991–1995, and 1996–2008 (Wang 2013). The first three
waves happened before the start year of our manufacturing plants data set, and the last
8

The largest park is 64, and the smallest one of 0.2 square kilometers. If we measure the distance from the centroid
of a park to the corresponding city’s CBD, the average park is located 24.9 kilometers away. The most remote park
is 95.1 kilometers from the city center.
14

wave almost overlaps with our data set. So we define the parks established before1996
as “old parks”, and those established in or after 1996 as “new parks”.
The Manufacturing Plants Data Set
We obtain plant-level data from the Annual Survey of Industrial Firms (ASIFs)
dataset conducted by National Bureau of Statistics of China (NBSC) from 1998 to
2007. All the state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and non-state owned enterprises with
annual sales of more than 500 million RMB in the manufacturing sector are surveyed,
with detailed information on a plant’s identification, operations and performance, and
all financial variables. Those firms hire roughly 70% of the industrial employment,
generate 90% of the industrial outputs and 98% of the exports (Brandt et al. 2012). An
advantage of this ASIFs data set (compared to the economic census data set) is that it
enables us to estimate plant-level total factor productivity (TFP). We use the data on
outputs and intermediate inputs, deflated by output and input price indices in Brandt et
al.(2012), to calculate real capital stock, real value added, and then estimate plant-level
TFP. We link plants over time using their information on ID, name, industry code,
small zone/zone identifier, etc., and construct an unbalanced panel of 58,834 plants in
this ten year period for these eight cities.
To measure the spillovers of these industrial parks in their vicinity, we map plants
into industrial parks9, so that we are able to identify whether a plant is located inside or
outside the industrial parks. Figure 3 shows that industrial parks do emerge as
subcenters in a city, with much higher employment density (number of jobs per square
kilometer) both within parks and in their vicinity, compared to other places in the city.
We also compute the average human capital level (years to schooling) by park by year.
Figure 3 shows that the human capital level in industrial parks and the zones within 2
9

This involves two processes: geocoding the boundaries of the 120 industrial parks in those eight cities’ GIS maps,
and geocoding plants in the ASIFs dataset in the GIS maps, so that these two can be merged. We use China’s
Streetmap GOOGLE online to do the geocoding work. We start with the official street addresses of an industrial
park and its land use drawings, and then use ArcGIS to precisely identify the location and geographic boundary of
an industrial park. We exploit the address information of each plant in the ASIFs dataset and geocode the exact
locations of these plants in GIS maps. We match ASIFs address information with the street maps using village (or
Juweihui) names and township (or Jiedao) names. The ASIFs dataset provides the village-(or Juweihui-) level codes
for each firm for the period of 2004-2007. To get the village-(or Juweihui-) level codes for firms for the period of
1998-2003, we pursued a number of ways. First, we track the firm’s village- (or juweihui-) level code for firms in
the ASIFs data set in the period of 1998-2002 by taking advantage of the information on village (or Juweihui) names.
Second, because some firms have no information on village (or Juweihui) names, we utilize the information on
township (or Jiedao) names to get their corresponding township- (or Jiedao-) level codes. Third, if some firms have
neither village (or Juweihui) names nor township (or Jiedao) names especially in 2003, we turn to Baidu, a local
google searching engine, to find their address information by using firms’ name information. Then we repeated the
first step or the second step to get their village-(or Juweihui-) level codes or township- (or Jiedao-) level codes.
15

km and 5 km from parks are significantly higher than that in the rest of the city.
*** Insert Figure 3 about here ***
We construct two key variables from this plant data set for our empirical analysis.
The first variable is the plant-level productivity measure – total factor productivity
(TFP). Figure 3 shows that industrial parks and their vicinity do show significantly
higher TFP. The average TFP within parks is even higher than that in CBD.10
The second variable is the park-specific co-agglomeration index. Ellison and
Glaeser (1997) developed a methodology of industry pair EG co-agglomeration index,
which measures the extent to which the two industries tend to co-locate in a certain
area.11 We run a simple regression to see how an industrial park’s co-agglomeration
index evolves over time as the park gets older. The polynomial regression generates the
curve presented in Figure D-2 in Appendix D. For the average industrial park, as more
firms enter the park, the industry synergy increases over time. This suggests that local
governments use their “managed hand” to recruit those firms they want, and this
increases the degree of industrial synergy within a park. In the Technical Appendix A
we provide the details of how we construct these two variables.
The Housing Data Set
We obtain the price and quantity data for all newly-built residential complexes
developed by real estate developers from 2006 to 2013 from the local housing
authorities in these eight cities.

This data set has the information of the average

transaction price and the number of units sold by residential complex by month. The
sample size varies from 8,000 to 40,000 complex-month in the eight cities. The
physical attributes for each complex include the floor area ratio (FAR), greening space
rate (GREEN), and ratio of parking space to the number house units (PARKING).

One possibility is that, if incumbent firms anticipate that a park will open up soon. In this case, they may take
actions to accumulate inputs and then their TFP could be artificially low in the period just before the park opens. If
this is true, we will overestimate parks’ effect in generating TFP spillovers. In Figure D-1 in Appendix D we plot the
TFP trends of incumbent firms which had existed at least two years before the introduction of an industrial park
nearby. We do not observe any TFP drop before the park establishment.
11
Our park-specific co-agglomeration index is the weighted average of the bilateral EG co-agglomeration indices
for the existing industry pairs in the park (using employment in each industry pair as the weight). Intuitively, if those
industry pairs that have higher EG co-agglomeration indices have larger employment shares in a park, this park will
have a higher park-specific co-agglomeration index, which means that the industries in the park enjoy a higher level
of synergy. We calculate the park-specific co-agglomeration index by year using the employment data of three-digit
level manufacturing industries in China during 1998-2007.
16
10

Using data on the longitude and latitude of each residential complex, we geocode
all the residential complexes. We calculate each complex’s locational attributes such
as distance to the city center, distance to the closest industrial park, and which 2 km*2
km grid cell this complex is in. We also calculate for each grid cell, in each month the
number of units sold. As shown in Figure 3, there are peaks of both quantities and
prices in the housing market in the vicinity of the new industrial parks.12

These

figures highlight that the new parks are creating new city sub-centers.

The Consumption Amenities Data Set
We construct a dataset for local private consumption goods based on dianping.com
which is China’s leading local retail information and commentary platform, like
yelp.com in the US. The website covers 12 general categories and nearly 200
sub-categories. The three biggest categories are restaurants, entertainment facilities,
and retail shops. For these three major categories, there are more than 990 thousand
retail establishments in these eight cities as of 2013. We know the establishment dates
of those shops. We geocode them in the GIS maps and calculate each category’s
density in each grid cell. Figure 3 shows that all three types of consumption amenities
have their density peaks in the vicinity of industrial parks.
Table 1 provides definitions and summary statistics of the key variables we use in
this paper.

Unlike previous localized spillover studies, we have introduced a more

comprehensive approach that captures the impact of new parks on the productivity in
the manufacturing sector, as well as on the residential sector and the retail sector.
Such coverage is crucial because our ASIF dataset contains high-tech companies that
produce high-tech goods, such as Intel, Samsung, IBM, Lenovo, Siemens, etc., but it
does not contain those high-tech companies that produce Internet services such as
Baidu and Alibaba.

By explicitly studying the residential and retail sectors, our

empirical approach captures these impacts.

12

There is a limited supply of residential land within industrial parks (most of the land is zoned as industrial land)
so many managers and workers buy or rent their apartments in nearby places.
17

*** Insert Table 1 here **

3.2 Evidence on the Industrial Park Site Selection Decision
In a city, industrial parks are not randomly assigned to locations.

In a large city

featuring durable capital and farming activity at the fringe, specific geographic areas
within the city will differ with respect to land use patterns, infrastructure, and industrial
agglomeration. The cheapest and easiest land to create into a park is likely to be at
the suburban fringe but such land may be disconnected from the rest of the city and
offer few synergistic effects with existing activity.

The mayor has a strong incentive

to tradeoff these facts when he decides where to place a new park.
Consider an extreme case in which the mayor has perfect foresight concerning
what will be the spillover effects from building a new park in each feasible location
within the city.
treatment effect.

In this case, the site selection choice will reflect the anticipated
Consider two different models of site locational choice.

In the first

case, the mayor embraces a complementarity model of economic growth where he
places the park in the strongest part of the city. In this case, a naïve econometrician will
over-state the true causal impact of a new park because the park has been place in an
area with excellent unobservable productive attributes.

In a second case, consider a

mayor who engages in “spatial compensation” such that he places the park in the area
with the weakest fundamentals. He might pursue this strategy to reduce spatial
economic inequality. In this second case, the naïve OLS econometrician would
under-state the impact of parks because they have been systematically placed in areas
with weak fundamentals.
Chinese local leaders are powerful but capital constrained.

Land is one key input

in production that they can access because of their ability to seize it from farmers
located at the suburban fringe. Mayors recognize that industrial parks are land
intensive.

When deciding on where to locate an industrial park, the land is the major

component in the mayor’s upfront out-of-pocket cost. To reduce relocation costs and
the compensation paid to the original residents on the land parcel where the industrial
park will occupy, the local leader tends to choose a low-density place at the city edge,
18

with a large share of farm land. In this way both the relocation cost (paid to original
residents) and the compensation cost (paid to villages who own the farm land) will be
relatively low.

We create our instrumental variables based on this logic. One is the

developed land share in 1980 (DEVELPED_LAND%_1980), revealed by the remote
sensing map of that year. The resolution of this remote sensing map is 1 km*1 km grid
cells. From the map we can calculate the share of developed land in each cell, and we
aggregate this share to the zone level. The higher this share is, the less likely this zone
will be chosen by the local leader for an industrial park due to the high land acquisition
and compensation costs. The second instrumental variable is historical population
density by zone in 1982 (China’s 3rd population census), POP_DENSITY_1982. Higher
historical population density also means higher compensation cost if this area is
converted to an industrial park. Unfortunately this historical population data is
unavailable in Shenzhen and Xi’an, so the observations in these two cities will be
dropped when this IV is included.
Using the 1980 remote sensing maps, we create our third instrumental variable,
COMMUNIST_LAND%_1980, which measures the share of land that was designated
to big public projects (such as dams, power plants, etc.) owned by China’s Communist
Party (CCP) and CCP military uses in the old time before China’s economic reform in
1980s. There were no land market and other factor markets at that time so the location
decisions of such land uses were solely based on CCP’s central orders. Therefore this
variable tracks the persistence of past CCP land use orders for major public projects.
We expect that the higher this “communist land use” ratio, the less likely this zone will
be converted to an industrial park later due to the high engineering cost of such
conversion.
We use the topographic data to construct our fourth instrumental variable,
FLAT_LAND%, which measures the share of land with slope smaller than 15 degrees.
Building industrial parks on relatively flat land will incur smaller engineering cost,
since many parks contain large-scale factory buildings, warehouses, and also high-rise
office buildings. The validity of the above four IVs relies on the assumption that those
cost measures are only correlated with the probability of building an industrial park at
a certain location, but are not correlated with the productivity potential at this location.

19

We run two versions of probit models to study the correlates between where a park
is built as a function of location attributes. In the first version, we are interested in if
zone k is the home to at least one park in 2006. We estimate Equation (6), where Z
contains our instrumental variables, and X are zone-level controls. The series of X are
location attributes of zone k, such as the distances to the CBD, the railway station, the
airport and the closest university, which are all predetermined locations long time
before the industrial park was built. We do not include the distance to the highway
because a vast highway construction was built in this period so we cannot identify
whether the highway affects industrial park location or highways are built because a
new park has been built.

We include city fixed effects.

prob .( whether zone k is hom e to park ( s ))   0    1 l  Z lk    2 h  X hk  city FEs +  kt (6)
l

h

In the second version (Equation (7)), we focus on the 27 industrial parks
established in our study period (year 1998-2006). We match each park with all the
zones in that city, so the observation here is a zone-park pair. We estimate a conditional
logic model to examine whether a newly-established park j matches with zone k. In
addition to including the vector of instrumental variables, we are also interested in
whether the local leader locates the park in a zone whose original industrial
composition has a higher synergy with the proposed industry composition in the park.
Such a complementary strategy would maximize the future possible agglomeration
economies.

To test this, we construct a co-agglomeration index between zone k’s

original industrial composition (in the initial year) and the park j’s industrial
composition in the end year, coagglomerationjk , and include it in this conditional logic
model.
prob . ( w hether park j m atches w ith zone k )   0 


l

1l

 Z lk 



2h

h

 coagglom eration jk  city FEs +  jkt

 X hk

(7)

Table 2 presents the estimates of our park selection models. Columns (1) and (2)
reports the regression results of the probit model Equation (6). Industrial parks are
more likely to locate in the zones further away from CBD where farmland is more
available and the opportunity cost is also small. At the same time, industrial parks are
more likely to locate close to the railway stations and universities. Such locations have
20

productivity advantages. Zones with larger share of developed land in 1980, larger
share of flat land, or higher population density in 1982, are less likely to have industrial
parks in 2006. The “communist land use” share in 1980 has the right sign but is
statistically insignificant. The joint F test for the Z vector (which we will use as
instruments below) is statistically significant at 1% level.
In the second version of park site selection model (columns (3) and (4) in Table 2),
we introduce our zone-park co-agglomeration index (COAGGLOMERATIONjk). This
variable is not statistically significant. This implies that, at least on average, local
leaders do not consider the incumbent firms’ synergy with the proposed industrial park
when choosing the location for that park. The three variables,
DEVELOPED_LAND%_1980, FLAT_LAND% and log(POP_DENSITY_1982)
perform well in this conditional logit model. Again, the joint F test for all IVs is
statistically significant at the 1% level.
*** Insert Table 2 about here ***
Based on the coefficients of the four instrument variables in column (2) in Table 2,
we can construct a “propensity score index” for park location:
propensity score for park location for zone k 

 ˆ

1l

 Z lk

(8)

l

The higher this index, the higher probability (predicted by these four instrumental
variables) that zone k receives a park. In Figure 4, we map this propensity score for
Beijing and we contrast it with the actual park locations within the city. A darker
color means that the propensity score is higher. We observe that parks do locate in
those places with higher scores. We also plot each zone’s average TFP against this
propensity score index in Figure 4. There is no clear correlation between these two.
The red dots are those zones with parks.
*** Insert Figure 4 about here ***

4. Estimating Productivity Spillovers
21

4.1 Average TFP Spillovers: OLS and IV Results
We focus on TFP when measuring of local productivity spillovers. We will also
examine firm exit probability. We will then study the dynamics of the spatial
distribution of local aggregate manufacturing employment activity both within and
around industrial parks. This latter outcome measure is useful for judging the increased
localized demand for new real estate and consumption opportunities.
Within-Park TFP Premiums
Before estimating the TFP spillovers of industrial parks, we first provide evidence
that parks do attract productive firms, and also improve the incumbent firms’ TFP. Lu
et. al. (2015) present evidence that industrial parks do improve firm employment,
output, capital, capital to labor ratio and labor productivity, but they do not directly test
the TFP effect due to data constraint.13 The existence of this within-park TFP premium
is the base for our further exploration of TFP spillovers. We estimate Equation (9) for
all plants in our data set:
log( TFPit )   0   1  log( D ISTAN C E _ C EN TER i )   2  X i   3  PARK ij +  4  AFTER jt
  5  PARK ij  AFTER jt  district  year trend  industry -year FE s +  it

(9)

Where the subscript i, j, t refers to plant i, industrial park j and year t. In this
equation and all the equations below, DISTANCE_CENTERi is the real travel distance
(the driving distance based on the road network in that city) from plant i to the city
center.14 Xi is a vector containing the plant-specific variables we control for, including
whether this plant is a SOE, and this plant’s distances to the closest railway station,
airport and university. PARKij equals to 1 if plant i is located in park j. AFTERjt equals
to 1 if park j exists in year t. So this is a DID specification and our main interest lies on
the coefficient (  5 ) of the interaction term

P A R K ij  A F T E R jt .

We recognize that this

coefficient could be positive due to both selection and treatment effects.
We define the spatial unit of analysis as follows; when we study industrial plant
13

Lu et. al. (2015) assume that all of the benefits are within the park and their control group are the nearby firms.
Our paper provides the evidence that those nearby firms receive significant spillovers from parks. So their control
group is also treated and they underestimate parks’ effect.
14
We use a new travel-distance algorithm written by John Voorheis, a PhD candidate in Economics at the
University of Oregon, to construct this real travel distance measure. This STATA code is available on
http://pages.uoregon.edu/jlv/code.html.
22

spillovers we define a plant is within an industrial park if its small zone’s centroid is
located within the park’s boundary (if this plant only has zone identifier then we use
that zone’s centroid) and the park exists in that year.
Table 3 presents five estimates of equation (9). Column (1) is estimated using OLS
and includes all plants with either zone or small zone identifiers.

We observe a

significantly negative gradient for TFP with respect to the distance to the city center.
SOE plants have a TFP discount of about 24.4%. All else equal, those plants in
industrial parks have a 22.7% TFP premium, which is a sum of both selection and
treatment effects. We then only keep those plants with small zone identifiers, and 62%
of the plants are left. In column (3) we include plant fixed effects to explicitly model
the firm selection effect. The TFP premium shrinks from 22.9% (column (2)) to 14.6%
for this subsample of incumbent plants. By including plant fixed effects, we are
identifying the park effect based on the subsample of incumbent firms that were
located in the industrial park’s area before and after the park opened.

The fact that the

park’s fixed effect shrinks highlights that the ACs are recruiting productive firms.
In columns (4) and (5) we report IV estimates where we instrument for whether a
zone has a park using our historical land use, historical population density, and land
slope as IVs. The joint F tests for IVs in the first stage are all statistically significant.
We can observe that the TFP premium for within-park plants rises from 22.9% (based
on the OLS results) to 27%-35%. The fact that our productivity estimates rise when we
instrument for the spatial placement of the park (and the instrument is based on
identifying low cost areas within the city to place the park) suggests that the mayors
are either unaware of the differential benefits of placing a park in one area or another
within the city or they are intentionally seeking to place the parks in less productive
parts of the city.

This is consistent with our finding in Table 2 that the zone-park

co-agglomeration index does not matter in the park site selection model.
*** Insert Table 3 about here ***
Estimating TFP Spillovers
We estimate a similar equation as Equation (9) but here we only keep those plants
located outside of the industrial parks. We measure a plant’s proximity to a park by its
distance to the closest park (log(DISTANCE_PARK)). In this equation and all the
23

equations below, DISTANCE_PARK is measured as the real travel distance based on the
road network in that city (see footnote #14 for how we construct this variable). This is
a dynamic variable – it will shrink if a new park is located near the plant.
We recognize that in a major city that local productivity could also be affected by
the main city center (CBD) and other industrial parks in the same city. The CBD and
other parks increase the city’s overall size and this would increase the city’s economic
growth. We use the distance to CBD (DISTANCE_CENTER) to control for the global
impact of the city’s main center. We construct a variable (GLOBAL_PARK_IMPACT) to
measure this global impact of all the parks in the city. We borrow the idea in the market
potential studies to construct this variable:
2

2

  d  
ij
G LO BAL _ PARK _ IM PACT it   w ij  log( EM P jt )   1  
   log( EM P jt )
d max  
j j0
j j0 




(10)
In each year t, we identify all the existing parks in the city, and the closest park j0.
For all the parks except of park j0, we use the inverse distance (in quadratic weighting
function) from this plant i to those parks as weights to compute the weighted sum of
those parks’ employment in year t. If a city has more parks and the plant is relatively
closer to those parks, we expect this plant will receive more spillovers and thus have a
higher TFP. We will control for this “global impact” of parks, and focus on the gradient
of the spillovers from the closest park. We estimate Equation (11).

log( TF Pit )   0   1  log( D ISTA N C E _ C E N TE R i )   2  X i   3  log( D ISTA N C E _ P A R K ij )

(11)

  4  G LO B A L _ P A R K _ IM P A C T  district  year trend  industr y  year F E s +  it

The coefficient  3 measures the spatial decay rate of the park’s TFP spillovers,
i.e.,  A /  DISTANCE _ PARK  0 in our conceptual framework. Panel A in Table 4 reports
the regression results. This spatial decay rate is -0.056 for all plants (column (1)) and is
-0.044 for the plants with small zone identifiers (column (2)), and both are OLS
regressions. Note that this “local” TFP gradient generated by the closest park is 1.1 to
1.6 times the “global” TFP gradient generated by the CBD.

In columns (3) we
24

include plant fixed effects, and this decay rate shrinks a little bit to -0.041. So the firm
selection issue (a park’s AC selects more productive firms into the park) does not
induce a big overestimation of this local TFP gradient. Besides the “local” impact of
the closest park, the “global” impact of all other parks in the city is also statistically
significant. One standard deviation increase in GLOBAL_PARK_IMPACT can induce a
0.12 standard deviation increase in TFP.
Columns (4) and (5) report IV regressions. This decay rate becomes steeper
(-0.124 and -0.19) compared to that in column (2). Now this local TFP gradient
generated by the closest park is 4 to 6 times the gradient from the CBD. Consistent
with the results presented in Table 2, this OLS-IV comparison also indicates that,
instead of putting an industrial park in the most productive parts of the city, city
mayors tend to place them in less productive places in the city. We note that this
finding is based on controlling for the distance to the city center so we are comparing
geographic areas in a concentric circle around the city center.
*** Insert Table 4 about here ***
If industrial parks generate positive productivity spillovers in their vicinity, we
should observe that, all else equal, firms closer to the park will have a higher
probability to survive.

We test this by estimating the following probit model:

prob .( w hether plant i exits )   0   1  A G E i   2  log( D ISTA N C E _ C E N TE R i )   3  X i
  4  ( D ISTA N C E _ P A R K ij )  C ity F E s +  it

(12)
The observation in this regression is plant i in our firm data set. AGEi is the age of
plant i since its appearance in our firm data set. If it exits from our data set during our
study period, the dependent variable equals to 1, otherwise it equals to 0. There may be
several reasons for a plant’s exit: closure, relocation, or the size of its total output
shrinks to far below the threshold of the ASIFs survey (500 million RMB).15 Since we
do not know the reasons for why individual firms exit the sample, we assume that all
sample exits represents a firm’s death.

Table A2 in the Appendix C reports the

regression results of this probit model. Column (1) is for all plants. Older plants have a
15

Plants whose sales slip to a small extent below this threshold are not automatically removed from this sample
since the 5 million RMB is not a ‘hard’ rule (see details in Brandt et al. (2012))
25

higher probability to be closed. We find that plants closer to industrial parks have a
lower probability to exit. This is another piece of evidence documenting the industrial
parks’ production spillovers. Interestingly, those plants closer to the city center,
universities and railway station have a higher probability to be closed. One possibility
is that those places are undergoing urban redevelopment and industrial land uses are
replaced by commercial and residential land uses, so many manufacturing firms are
relocated to other places.

4.2 Heterogeneity in TFP spillovers
We now test for industrial park TFP spillover heterogeneity by allowing the TFP
spatial gradient to vary along four dimensions. The first dimension is based on the age
of the park. We have two cohorts – old parks established before 1996 and new ones
established in or after 1996.

If the Chinese leaders built the best parks first and if

diminishing returns have taken place for subsequent parks then we will observe that the
new parks have weaker spillovers than the old ones.

We find evidence of diminishing

returns, the spatial gradient of the old parks’ TPF spillovers is 2.3 times that of the new
parks (-0.171 vs. -0.075).

Within each cohort, our panel data set of manufacturing

plants’ TFP allows us to examine as a park gets more mature, does its spillover effect
get larger. Panel B in Table 4 reports such heterogeneous spillovers. Within the old
park cohort, as a park matures over time, its TPF spillovers get stronger. For the new
parks, those with an age between 11-15 years also have much stronger spillovers than
younger ones. The regression has the same specification as column (3) in Panel A
(OLS regression with district-time trend and industry-year fixed effects).
The second heterogeneity depends on the park’s own economic power. We
construct five “park power” indicators (powerpark,m, m=1,2,3,4,5): (1) park’s distance to
the CBD. Closer distance means stronger linkage with the city’s mean economic center
so more powerful; (2) park’s size. Larger parks are more powerful; (3) the share of
SOE employment in the park. SOEs are less productive so smaller share of SOEs
means more powerful parks; (4) the average human capital level (years to schooling) in
the park. Higher human capital means more powerful; (5) the co-agglomeration index
for the industries residing in the park, higher synergy between those industries will lead
26

to a more powerful park.

Our hypothesis is that more powerful parks (measured by

these five indices) generate larger spillovers.
The third heterogeneity dimension measures the extent to which this park “fits”
with the local incumbent industries. Following Glaeser and Kerr (2009), Ellison et al.
(2010) and Jofre-Monseny et al. (2011), We construct four park-vicinity “synergy
indices” (synergypark-vicinity,n, n=1,2,3,4) to measure the input-output linkages, the size of
labor market pooling and the knowledge spillover possibility between within-park and
outside-park firms.

In Appendix B, we report the details of how we construct these

four indices. Our hypothesis here is that if an incumbent firm in a park’s vicinity has
higher synergy indices with the park, it will enjoy a larger spillover effect from the
park.
The fourth heterogeneity depends on plant attributes. We construct two variables to
measure a plant’s size and age. Size is measured in a plant’s employment. We group all
plants into three age categories based on their establishment year: before 1978 (before
the economic reform), between 1979 and 1998 (earlier stage of the economic reform)
and after 1998 (later stage of the reform).
We estimate Equation (13) to (15) to explore the heterogeneity in the spatial decay
rate of TFP spillovers with respect to the second to the fourth sets of heterogeneity
measures.
log( TF Pit )   0   1  log( D ISTA N C E _ C E N TE R i )   2  X i   3  log( D ISTA N C E _ P A R K ij )
+  4  G LO B A L _ P A R K _ IM P A C T 

4

 (

5, m

 pow er park , m  log( D ISTA N C E _ P A R K ij ))

m 1

(13)

 district  year trend  industry  year F E s +  it

log( TF Pit )   0   1  log( D ISTA N C E _ C E N TE R i )   2  X i   3  log( D ISTA N C E _ P A R K ij )
+  4  G LO B A L _ P A R K _ IM P A C T +

5

 (

5, n

 synergy park  vicinity , n  log( D ISTA N C E _ P A R K ij ))

n 1

(14)

 district  year trend  industry  year F E s +  it

log(T F Pit )   0   1  log( D IST A N C E _ C E N T E R i )   2  X i   3  log( D IST A N C E _ P A R K ij )
+  4  G L O B A L _ P A R K _ IM P A C T +  5  P L A N T _ SIZ E it  log( D IST A N C E _ P A R K ij )
3

+  ( 6 l  A G E _ G R O U Pit , l  log( D IST A N C E _ P A R K ij ))
l2

(15)

 district  year trend  indu stry  year F E s +  it
27

Table 5 reports the heterogeneity TFP spillovers results. In the first three columns we
interact the four park-vicinity synergy indices with log(DISTANCE_PARK). In column
(1) with all plants, higher input linkage and output linkage, as well as stronger skill
spillover between within-park and outside-park plants will lead to larger park TFP
spillovers. We only keep those plants with small zone identifier in column (2) and then
further include plant fixed effects in column (3), and the output linkage index is
statistically significant. All the four synergy indices are jointly significant in the three
columns, indicating that those parks that are better “fit” into their vicinity in terms of
industry synergies can generate higher TFP spillovers.

In columns (4)-(6) we interact

the five park power indices with log(DISTANCE_PARK). Distance to CBD does not
influence this gradient significantly, while the other four power indices have some
impacts and have the right signs. These five interaction terms are also jointly
significant, showing that more powerful parks lead to higher spillover effects. In
columns (7)-(9) we interact plant size (employment) and age group dummies with
log(DISTANCE_PARK). Smaller and younger plants enjoy higher TFP spillovers from
nearby parks.
*** Insert Table 5 about here ***

5. Estimating Consumption Spillovers
5.1 The Increase in Consumer Market Potential in Edge Cities
The productivity increase both inside the park and in its vicinity will attract new
entrants, and the incumbent firms will also expand their employment.

A growing

workforce that seeks a short commute to work will seek out housing and retail
opportunities near the new industrial park. All together the market potential will
increase and thus trigger new housing construction and retail activities in those edge
cities.
To measure these effects, we estimate equations (16) and (17) where the dependent
variable is the manufacturing employment density EMP. The unit of analysis here is
zone k.

In estimating these regressions, in one specification we use the data for all

zones and in a second we focus on the subset of zones outside parks. For the latter, we
28

control for the global impact of other parks in the city, and focus on the impact of the
closest park. See Equation (16) and (17).
E M Pkt   0   1  log( D IST A N C E _ C E N T E R k )   2  P A R K kj +  3  A F T E R jt   4  P A R K kj  A F T E R jt

(16)

 D istrict F E s  Year F E s   kt

E M Pkt   0   1  log( D IST A N C E _ C E N T E R k )   2  log( D IST A N C E _ P A R K kjt )
+  3  G L O B A L _ P A R K _ IM P A C T kt  D istrict F E s  Year F E s   kt

(17)

Table 6 studies how the presence of an industrial park leads to local manufacturing
employment growth. All columns are zero inflated poisson (ZIP) regressions. Columns
(1) – (3) include all zones, and columns (4) to (6) only includes those zones located
outside of parks. Column (1) shows that, all else equal, a zone with an industrial park
features 78% higher manufacturing employment density.

In the IV regression

(column (2), joint F test for IVs in the first stage are statistically significant), this
employment density gap is even higher—about twice of the counterpart’s density. We
do find industrial parks significantly influence the nearby employment density, and the
spatial decay rate is about -52% (both in logs, column (4)), and it is 1.3 times the decay
rate from the CBD. The size of this decay rate is smaller in the IV regression than in
the OLS regressions (columns (4) and (5)). As column (3) and (6) show, an industrial
park’s power in generating local employment growth is larger for larger parks, and for
those parks with higher human capital, a larger co-agglomeration index and lower
share of SOE firms. The global impact of other parks on the local employment is
insignificant.
*** Insert Table 6 about here ***
5.2 Home Sales and Pricing
In many major Chinese cities, the center city is the most vibrant part of the
metropolitan area.

Similar to major European cities, jobs, government, and amenities

are clustered downtown (Brueckner, Thisse and Zenou 1999). Given the attraction of
the city center, real estate prices are quite high close to the downtown and decline with
distance from the downtown (Zheng and Kahn 2008).

29

Chinese mayors seek to encourage economic growth in other parts of the
metropolitan area. As we documented in Table 2, a typical industrial park is located at
the edge of the urban area whose previous use as agriculture land. The emergence of
this new edge city and the rising purchase power of consumers will generate new
demand for housing and local consumption goods, and thus trigger housing
development and the opening of new retail stores nearby, as shown in Figure 3. The
main land use type within industrial parks is industrial land, so managers and workers
in those plants will buy or rent residential units outside but near the park. That is why
in Figure 3 we see the closest zones to parks have the highest densities of housing
transactions in the surrounding area, even higher than that in parks.
To empirically test whether there is a booming housing market around the park, we
construct two dependent variables – the number of new home sales in the 2 km*2 km
grid cell g by quarter (HOUSE_SALESgt), and the transaction price in a residential
complex l by quarter (HOUSE_PRICElt). We use each complex’s exact street address
to calculate its shortest real travel distance to the closest park’s boundary. We expect
that, controlling for the real travel distance to the main center (CBD), those grid cells
closer to a park will see more new home sales, and we should also observe that homes
closer to the park sell for a price premium. We control for the global impact of other
parks in the city. See Equation (18) and (19).
HOUSE _ SALES gt   0   1  log( DISTANCE _ CENTER g )   2  log( DISTANCE _ PARK gj )
+  3  GLOBAL _ PARK _ IM PACT gt  district FEs  year FEs   gt

(18)

log( H O U SE _ PRICE lt )   0   1  log( D ISTANCE _ CENTER l )   2  log( D ISTANCE _ PARK lj )  φ  X l
+  3  G LO BAL _ PARK _ IM PACT lt  district FEs  year FEs   lt

(19)
We are only able to trace back the housing transaction data to 2006, and at that
time all industrial parks had been built, therefore what we observe are the
consequences of industrial parks on nearby housing market, rather than the reverse
effect from housing market to parks.
The estimates of the housing quantity equation (Equation (18)) are reported in
columns (1) – (3) in Table 7, which are ZIP regressions. In column (1), after controlling
30

for distance to the CBD, we observe a negative gradient with respect to the distance to
the closest park (as a subcenter). The size of this spatial decay rate is quite large, about
-0.221 (log-log). Note that the price gradient with respect to the distance to the CBD is
insignificant here. In the ZIP-IV regression (column (2)), this decay rate becomes
smaller (-0.199) , and it is statistically significant at 1% level, indicating there may be
some unobserved location attributes that are positively related to both residential
development activities and the location choice of an industrial park. The global impact
of other parks on local housing sales is also statistically significant but the economic
size is small.
Column (3) tells us that residential units close to the parks further from the CBD,
and the parks with higher human capital and higher co-agglomeration index are more
likely to be sold out. The five heterogeneity measures of a park’s power are jointly
significant.
Columns (4) – (6) report hedonic housing price regressions (Equation (18)). We
control for a residential complex’s physical attributes such as its construction density
(floor-to-area ratio), parking space share and green space ratio (Xl). We find a
significantly negative gradient of housing price with respect to the distance to the
nearby park. This housing price decay rate is about -0.101 (log-log) in column (4)
(OLS), and its absolute value also shrinks in the IV regression in column (5) (-0.095).
The magnitude of this local gradient is about 55% of the global price gradient (-0.170)
with respect to the distance to the CBD. The global impact of other parks on local
housing prices is also statistically significant and has a big economic size– a standard
deviation increase in GLOBAL_PARK_IMPACT can induce a 0.55 standard deviation
increase in local housing sales.

Larger parks, parks with higher co-agglomeration

index, higher human capital, less SOE employment are more attractive to home buyers.
The five heterogeneity measures of a park’s power are also jointly significant.
*** Insert Table 7 about here***
Retail Activities
We explore how industrial parks impact local retail opportunities, using data on
three major types of local consumption goods, restaurants, retail shops and
entertainment facilities. We seek to test whether industrial parks have triggered a
31

“snowball” gentrification effect and created a vibrant consumption neighborhoods in
edge cities. We run Equation (20) for the new openings of each of these three local
consumption goods, and the unit of analysis here is grid cell/year.
 RETAIL gt   0   1  log( D ISTAN C E _ C EN TER g )   2  log( D ISTAN C E _ PARK gj )
+  3  G LO BAL _ PARK _ IM PAC T gt  district FEs  year FEs   gt

(20)
The regression results of Equation (20) are presented in Table 8. Columns (1), (4)
and (7) are ZIP regressions; (2), (5), (8) are IV regressions (joint F tests for IVs are
statistically significant in the first stage); and (3), (6), (9) are ZIP regressions with
interaction terms. Those grid cells closer to industry parks do see more openings of
fancy restaurants, shops and entertainment places. And again, the spatial decay rates of
these three consumption amenities shrink in IV regressions. The local gradient
generated by the closest park is about a quarter of the global gradient generated by the
main center for all the three amenity types. The global impact of other parks on the
quantity of consumption amenities is statistically significant but the economic sizes are
small. We again find that parks further away from the CBD and parks with larger size
have larger gentrification effects. The five heterogeneity measures of a park’s
economic power are also jointly significant for these three local private goods.
*** Insert Table 8 about here ***
Recall that the coefficients of DISTANCE_PARK in TFP equations become larger
in IV regressions compared to those in OLS regressions. Here for housing and retail
equations, we find such coefficients all shrink from OLS to IV regressions in TFP
equations. This indicates that, city mayors locate parks in those places with larger
consumption potential, but smaller production potential. One possible explanation for
city mayors’ intension behind this park location decision is that, city mayors can
receive higher land sale revenue by selling the residential and commercial land parcels
near industrial parks if the parks’ consumption spillovers are large. Housing and retail
are non-tradable goods. Instead, city mayors have to set very low price for industrial
land parcels in parks and also provide tax break in the initial years to attract mobile
firms. Chinese city mayors have a term constraint (four years for one term. A mayor
always stay in position for one to two terms). From the mayor’s perspective, the
32

revenue from residential and commercial land sales can be realized in a lump-sum
form in the short-run, while tax revenue from productive firms can only come in
annually in the long-term, so they have the incentive to place parks in those places with
higher consumption potential.

6. Conclusion
At the broadest level, our paper provides strong support for Marshallian theories of
localized production and consumption co-agglomeration in a leading developing
country. Using the opening of over 120 industrial parks across eight major Chinese
cities as a natural experiment, we quantify the spatial decay patterns in productivity,
firm survival, real estate construction, real estate pricing, and retail store openings for
economic activity close to these new suburban centers of productivity. Consistent with
Marshall’s core hypotheses, we find that proximity to the parks reduce the costs of
moving goods, people, and ideas.
Unlike other agglomeration studies, we have explicitly integrated our analysis of
the production and consumption side of the economy.

The new park creates a

spatially concentrated increase in local market potential as well paid workers seek
nearby housing and retail opportunities. We have provided new evidence on this local
multiplier effect in a developing nation (Moretti 2010). This local multiplier effect is
larger for those industrial parks that attract more human capital and more private firms.
We have explicitly modeled the tradeoffs that the mayor faces in siting a new park
in a specific area within a city.

A forward looking mayor has an incentive to

recognize that each area in a city may offer different benefits and impose different
costs if a park is built there.

When we use cost shifter proxies as instrumental

variables, we estimate a larger TFP treatment effect from building a park. But, we
estimate smaller IV estimates in our housing and retail regressions.

This collective

set of facts suggests that mayors locate parks in those places featuring greater
consumption potential but lower producer efficiency potential.
One explanation for these facts is due to the Chinese political system. Chinese
mayors face term limits so that they serve for at most eight years. From the mayor’s
perspective, the revenue from residential and commercial land sales can be realized in
33

a lump-sum form in the short-run, while tax revenue from productive firms can only
come in annually in the long-term, so they have the incentive to place parks in those
places with higher consumption potential.

34

References
Adler, Solomon. (2013), The Chinese Economy, Routledge.
Arzaghi, Mohammad, and J. Vernon Henderson. (2008) “Networking off madison avenue”, The
Review of Economic Studies, 75 (4), 1011-1038.
Beason, Richard, and David E. Weinstein. (1996), “Growth, economies of scale, and targeting in
Japan (1955-1990)”, The Review of Economics and Statistics, 78, 286-295.
Brandt, Loren, Johannes Van Biesebroeck, and Yifan Zhang. (2012), “Creative accounting or
creative destruction? Firm-level productivity growth in Chinese manufacturing”, Journal of
Development Economics, 97 (2), 339-351.
Bresnahan, Timothy F., and Peter C. Reiss. (1990), “Entry in monopoly market”, The Review of
Economic Studies, 57 (4), 531-553.
Bresnahan, Timothy F., and Peter C. Reiss. (1991), “Entry and competition in concentrated
markets”, Journal of Political Economy, 99, 977-1009.
Brueckner, Jan K., Jacques-Francois Thisse, and Yves Zenou. (1999), “Why is central Paris rich and
downtown Detroit poor?: An amenity-based theory”, European Economic Review, 43 (1):
91-107.
Cartier, Carolyn. (2001) “Zone Fever, the Arable Land Debate, and Real Estate Speculation:
China’s evolving land use regime and its geographical contradictions”, Journal of
Contemporary China, 10 (28), 445-469.
Combes, Pierre‐Philippe, et al. (2012), “The productivity advantages of large cities:
Distinguishing agglomeration from firm selection”, Econometrica, 80 (6), 2543-2594.
Diamond, Rebecca. (2012), “The determinants and welfare implications of us workers’ diverging
location choices by skill: 1980-2000.” Job Market Paper, Harvard University
Ding, Chengri, and Yan Song, eds. (2005), Emerging land and housing markets in China. Lincoln
Inst of Land Policy.
Ellison, Glenn, and Edward L. Glaeser. (1997), “Geographic concentration in US manufacturing
industries: a dartboard approach”, Journal of Political Economy, 105(5), 889-927.
Ellison, Glenn, Edward L. Glaeser, and William R. Kerr. (2010), “What Causes Industry
Agglomeration? Evidence from Coagglomeration Patterns”, American Economic Review, 100,
1195-1213.

Faggio, Giulia, Olmo Silva, and William C. Strange. "Heterogeneous agglomeration.", Review
of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
Garreau, Joel. (1991), Edge cities: Life on the new frontier, NY: Doubleday.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Joshua D. Gottlieb. (2008), “The economics of place-making policies”, No.
w14373. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Glaeser, Edward L., Jed Kolko, and Albert Saiz. (2001), “Consumer city”, Journal of economic
geography, 1 (1), 27-50.
Glaeser, Edward L., and William R. Kerr. (2009), “Local industrial conditions and entrepreneurship:
how much of the spatial distribution can we explain?”, Journal of Economics & Management
Strategy, 18 (3), 623-663.
Gould, Eric D., B. Peter Pashigian, and Canice J. Prendergast. (2005), “Contracts, externalities, and
incentives in shopping malls”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 87 (3), 411-422.
Greenstone, Michael, Richard Hornbeck, and Enrico Moretti. (2010), “Identifying agglomeration
spillovers: Evidence from winners and losers of large plant openings”, Journal of Political
Economy, 118 (3), 536-598.
35

Handbury, Jessie, and David E. Weinstein. (2014), “Goods prices and availability in cities”, The
Review of Economic Studies, rdu033.
Hanson, Gordon H. (2005), “Market potential, increasing returns and geographic
concentration”, Journal of international economics, 67 (1), 1-24.
Harrison, Ann, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. (2009), “Trade, foreign investment, and industrial
policy for developing countries”, No. w15261. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Henderson, Vernon, and Arindam Mitra. (1996), “The new urban landscape: Developers and edge
cities”, Regional Science and Urban Economics, 26 (6), 613-643.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter Klenow, (2009), “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and
India”. Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXXIV 4, 1403-1458.
Jofre-Monseny, Jordi, Raquel Marín-López, and Elisabet Viladecans-Marsal. (2011), “The
mechanisms of agglomeration: Evidence from the effect of inter-industry relations on the
location of new firms”, Journal of Urban Economics, 70 (2), 61-74.
Kline, Patrick. (2010), “Place based policies, heterogeneity, and agglomeration”, The American
Economic Review, 100, 383-387.
Kline, Patrick M., and Enrico Moretti., (2013) “Local economic development, agglomeration
economies, and the big push: 100 years of evidence from the Tennessee valley authority”, No.
w19293. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Lu, Yi, Wang Jin, Zhu Lianming (2015), Do Place-Based Policies Work? Micro-Level Evidence
from China’s Economic Zones Program.
Lucas, Jr, Robert E., and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. (2002) "On the internal structure of cities",
Econometrica, 70(4), 1445-1476.
Moretti, Enrico. (2004), “Workers’ education, spillovers, and productivity: evidence from
plant-level production functions”, American Economic Review, 94, 656-690.
Moretti, Enrico. (2010), “Local Multipliers”, American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings,
100: 1-7.
Neumark, David, and Jed Kolko. (2010), “Do enterprise zones create jobs? Evidence from
California’s enterprise zone program”, Journal of Urban Economics, 68 (1), 1-19.
Orfield, Myron. (2011), American metropolitics: The new suburban reality, Brookings Institution
Press.
Pashigian, B. Peter, and Eric D. Gould. (1998), “Internalizing Externalities: the Pricing of Space in
Shopping Malls 1”, The Journal of Law and Economics, 41 (1), 115-142.
Rauch, James E. (1999), “Networks versus markets in international trade”, Journal of international
Economics, 48 (1), 7-35.
Rosenthal, Stuart S., and William C. Strange. (2004), “Evidence on the nature and sources of
agglomeration economies”, Handbook of regional and urban economics, Vol. 4, 2119-2171.
Rossi-Hansberg, Esteban & Pierre-Daniel Sarte & Raymond Owens. (2010), “Housing
Externalities”, Journal of Political Economy, 118 (3), 485-535.
Waldfogel, Joel. (2008), “The median voter and the median consumer: Local private goods and
population composition”, Journal of Urban Economics, 63 (2), 567-582.
Wang, Jin. (2013), “The economic impact of special economic zones: Evidence from Chinese
municipalities”, Journal of Development Economics, 101, 133-147.
Wu, Jing, et al. (2013), “Incentives and outcomes: China’s environmental policy”, No. w18754.
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Zheng, Siqi, et al. (2014), “Incentives for China's urban mayors to mitigate pollution externalities:
The role of the central government and public environmentalism”, Regional Science and
Urban Economics, 47, 61-71.
36

Zheng, Siqi, and Matthew E. Kahn. (2008), “Land and residential property markets in a booming
economy: New evidence from Beijing”, Journal of Urban Economics, 63 (2), 743-757.
Zheng Siqi, and Matthew E. Kahn. (2013). “Understanding China's Urban Pollution Dynamics”,
Journal of Economic Literature, 51(3), 731-772.

37

Figure 1 Within-city locations and geographic boundaries of industry parks

Beijing

Shanghai

Xi’an

Shenzhen

Chengdu

Dalian

38

Wuhan

Tianjin

39

Figure 2

Geographic Unit of Analysis

40

Figure 3
Cities

The Spatial Distributions of Key Economic Activity Indicators in Eight

TFP (in logarithm)

Employment density (workers/km2)

New housing sales (number of units/km2)

Housing prices (RMB/m2)

New restaurant openings (number of
opennings/km2)

New entertainment facility openings
(number of opennings/km2)

New retail shop openings
(number of opennings/km2)

41

Figure 4. A Propensity Score Index for Predicting a Beijing Park’s Location

(1) Propensity score for park location and the real park locations in Beijing

11
10

TFP

9
8
7
6
5
0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

Propensity Score
Zone

Park_Zone

(2) Propensity score for park location and parks’ average TFP in Beijing

42

Table 1 Variable Definitions and Summary Statistics

Variable
Definition
Manufacturing data by plant by year
Total factor productivity of plant i in year t (in logarithm)
TFPit
Real travel distance (based on the road network) of plant i to the city center (km)
DISTANCE_CENTERi
=1 if plant i is in an existing industrial park j in year t
PARKij·AFTERjt
Real travel distance (based on the road network) of plant i to the closest industrial park
DISTANCE_PARKijt
j in year t (km)
=1 if plant i is an SOE (State Owned Enterprise)
SOEi
Total employment of plant i in year t (in logarithm)
PLANT_SIZEit
Age of plant: AGE=1 for the plants established before 1978; AGE=2 for those
AGEit
established between 1978 and 1998; AGE=3 for those established after 1998
The global impact of all parks (except the closest one) on plant i in year t. See
GLOBAL_PARK_IMPACTit
Equation (9).
Distance to the closest railway station in year t (km)
DISTANCE_RAILWAYit
Distance to the closest airport in year t (km)
DISTANCE_AIRPORTit
Distance to the closest university (km)
DISTANCE_UNIVERSITYi
Industrial Park attributes by park by year
Real travel distance (based on the road network) of park j to the city center (km)
DISTANCE_CENTERjt
The planned area of park j (km2)
PARK_SIZEj
Share of SOEs in park j in year t
SOE_SHAREjt
Share of workers with education attainment of college and above in park j in year t
HUMAN_CAPITALjt
Co-agglomeration index of park j in year t (see Appendix A for how we construct this
COAGGLOMERATIONjt
variable)
Distance to the nearest railway in year t (km)
DISTANCE_RAILWAYjt
Distance to the nearest airport in year t (km)
DISTANCE_AIRPORTjt
Distance to the nearest university (km)
DISTANCE_UNIVERSITYj
Park-vicinity “synergy indices” (see Appendix B for how we construct these variable)
Input linkages between park j and industry r in year t
INPUT_LINKAGErjt
Output linkages between park j and industry r in year t
OUTPUT_LINKAGErjt
The size of labor market pooling between park j and industry r in year t
LABOR_POOLINGrjt
The knowledge spillover possibility between park j and industry r in year t
SKILL_SPILLOVERrjt
IVs for park locational choice by zone
DEVELOPED_LAND%_1980k Developed land share in 1980

Obs.

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

179588
179588
179588

8.26
21.20
0.33

1.18
18.19
0.47

-2.90
0.36
0

15.57
229.620
1

179588

5.68

8.49

0

124.61

179588
179588

0.31
4.73

0.46
1.15

0
2.08

1
11.37

179588

2.35

0.61

1

3

179588

117.82

72.54

0

254.78

179588
179588
179588

5.96
23.10
14.47

5.68
13.87
16.94

0.01
1.21
0.16

66.64
102.40
190.51

942
942
942
942

26.67
13.48
0.30
0.18

16.65
14.59
0.15
0.06

4.99
0.20
0
0.08

87.29
64.08
1
0.39

942

0.14

0.09

-0.02

0.55

942
942
942

6.46
27.72
17.50

4.85
17.32
16.16

0.40
2.83
0.46

28.04
79.38
82.14

34800
34800
34800
34800

0.02
0.03
0.02
0.02

0.05
0.06
0.02
0.02

0
0
0
0

0.77
0.84
0.30
0.31

1689

29.17

32.84

0

100
43

The share of land that was designated to big public projects (such as dams, power
plants, etc.) and military uses
The share of land with slope smaller than 15 degrees
FLAT_LAND%k
Historical population density by zone in 1982
POP_DENSITY_1982k
Employment density by zone by year
Manufacturing employment density in zone k in year t (/km2)
EMPkt
The global impact of all parks (except the closest one) on zone k in year t. See
GLOBAL_PARK_IMPACTkt
Equation (9).
Housing construction and retail activities by 2km×2km grid by year
Number of new housing sales in grid g in year t
HOUSE_SALESgt
Number of new restaurant openings in grid g in year t
RESTAURANTgt
Number of new entertainment establishment openings in grid g in year t
ENTERTAINMENTgt
Number of new retail shop openings in grid g in year t
SHOPgt
The global impact of all parks (except the closest one) on cell g as of year 2007. See
GLOBAL_PARK_IMPACTg
Equation (9).
Residential complex data by complex by year
Average housing sale price in complex l in year t (yuan RMB/m2)
HOUSE_PRICElt
Distance to the city center (km)
DISTANCE_CENTERl
Distance to the closest industrial park (km)
DISTANCE_PARKl
The global impact of all parks (except the closest one) on complex l as of year 2007.
GLOBAL_PARK_IMPACTl
The floor area ratio
FARl
Greening space ratio (%)
GREENl
Parking space share
PARKINGl
COMMUNIST_LAND%_1980k

1689
1689
1461

1.11
0.89
5508.84

4.51
0.18
13208.12

0.00
0.10
0

84.66
1.00
166185.2

15999
15999

235.86
67.52

744.77
52.96

0
0

19075
253.05

174280
174280
174280
174280

23.29
1.63
0.43
2.33

197.39
15.93
4.27
24.81

0
0
0
0

10826
1312
309
2184

174280

76.26

52.83

1.55

278.71

117132
117132
117132
117132
117132
117132
117132

8335.98
13.54
6.06
83.24
2.93
36.71
0.76

5383.29
12.43
5.66
63.11
2.11
9.26
0.44

1000
0.05
0.55
0.46
0.06
0
0

48003
152.02
161.97
271.75
27.45
95
6.89

44

Table 2 The Within City Determinants of Industrial Park Locational Choice
Dependent variable: A Dummy Indicating whether park j locates in zone k
PANEL A
Dependent variable =1
If zone k is the home to at least
one park in 2006
(1)
(2)

log(distance to the closest existing parkkt)
log(DISTANCE_CENTERk)
log(DISTANCE_RAILWAYkt)
log(DISTANCE_AIRPORTkt)
log(DISTANCE_UNIVERSITYk)
COAGGLOMERATIONjk
Between zone k (initial year) and park j (end
year)
DEVELOPED_LAND%_1980k
COMMUNIST_LAND%_1980k
FLAT_LAND%k
(share of land with slope smaller than 15°)

0.031**
(0.013)
-0.024***
(0.007)
-0.004
(0.0122)
-0.059***
(0.012)

***

Joint F-test of IVs
Observations
chi2

**

(8.710)

(14.230)

**

-0.015
(0.007)
-0.117
(0.095)
2.823*
(1.706)

Yes
31.91***
(0.000)
1689
170.6

-1.07e-3
(4.42e-4)
-0.001
(0.002)
0.382***
(0.079)
-0.470***
(0.165)
Yes
36.57***
(0.000)
1461
169.3

Yes
7.24*
(0.064)
5234
30.18

-0.021**
(0.008)
-0.093
(0.088)
3.216
(2.449)
-4.620*
(2.767)
Yes
9.89**
(0.042)
4769
30.49

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

-1.16e-3
(4.33e-4)
-0.001
(0.002)
0.337***
(0.064)

log(POP_DENSITY_1982k)
City fixed effects

0.046***
(0.015)
-0.022***
(0.007)
-0.001
(0.0141)
-0.058***
(0.013)

Dependent variable =1
If park j established in
1998-2006 located in zone k
(3)
(4)
-0.228
0.213
(0.199)
(0.243)
0.124
0.506
(0.282)
(0.313)
-0.335***
-0.414***
(0.096)
(0.099)
-0.501**
-0.518**
(0.219)
(0.256)
0.185
-0.353
(0.271)
(0.295)
-2.630
-12.060

PANEL B: Propensity score index for park location
(calculated using the coefficients of the 4 IVs in column (2), see Equation (8))

Propensity score for park location
0.15
0.04
-0.12
0.21
Note: Panel A reports results from fitting versions of equations (6) and (7). Column (1) and (2) employ probit
model to examine whether zone k is the home to at least one industrial park by the end of our study period (year
2006), so it is a cross-sectional regression with zones as observations. Column (3) and (4) employ conditional
logistic model to examine whether a newly-established park j (we only focus on the 27 industrial parks established
in our study period, year 1998-2006) matches with zone k. Here the observations are zone-park pairs.
COAGGLOMERATIONjk is the co-agglomeration index calculated between zone k’s original industrial
composition one year before park j was established and park j’s industrial composition in year 2007.
DEVELOPED_LAND%_1980, COMMUNIST_LAND%_1980, FLAT_LAND% and log(POP_DENSITY_1982) are
exogenous variables for parks’ location choice, see the text for how we construct them. Since historical population
data is unavailable in Shenzhen and Xi’an, the observations in these two cities are dropped in column (2) and (4).
Marginal effects are reported for probit models (column (1) and (2)). Robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses, which are clustered by urban district. * denotes p < 0.10, ** denotes p < 0.05, *** denotes p < 0.01.
Panel B reports the statistics for propensity score index for park location, which is calculated using the coefficients
of the 4 IVs in column (2), see Equation (8).

45

Table 3

The TFP Premium for Plants Located Within Industrial Parks

Dependent variable: TFPit (in logarithm)

log(DISTANCE_CENTERi)
PARKij
AFTERjt
PARKij·AFTERjt
SOEi
log(DISTANCE_RAILWAYit)
log(DISTANCE_AIRPORTit)
log(DISTANCE_UNIVERSITYi)
Constant
District-Time trend
Industry-year fixed effects
Plant fixed effects
Joint F-test of IVs in first stage
(p-value)

Plants with zone
or small zone
identifiers
(1)
OLS
-0.054***
(0.019)
0.047
(0.037)
0.005
(0.025)
0.227***
(0.043)
-0.244***
(0.015)
-0.022**
(0.010)
0.011
(0.024)
-0.053***
(0.018)
7.832***
(0.351)
Yes
Yes
No

Plants with small zone identifiers
(2)
OLS
-0.065***
(0.023)
-0.008
(0.034)
-0.006
(0.025)
0.229***
(0.037)
-0.212***
(0.015)
-0.033***
(0.008)
-0.015
(0.017)
-0.041***
(0.016)
10.03***
(0.083)
Yes
Yes
No

(3)
OLS

-0.0189
(0.0229)
0.146***
(0.0386)
0.0218
(0.0156)
0.0841**
(0.0399)
-317.3
(199.9)
Yes
Yes
Yes

(4)
3 IVs
-0.056***
(0.010)
-0.129
(0.132)
-0.015
(0.044)
0.269**
(0.128)
-0.213***
(0.008)
-0.032***
(0.004)
-0.017*
(0.009)
-0.049***
(0.008)
10.04***
(0.467)
Yes
Yes
No

(5)
4 IVs
-0.074***
(0.011)
-0.169
(0.139)
-0.051
(0.049)
0.352**
(0.139)
-0.225***
(0.008)
-0.034***
(0.004)
-1.06e-4
(0.010)
-0.042***
(0.008)
10.09***
(0.464)
Yes
Yes
No

5.59***
4.88***
(0.000)
(0.000)
10.70***
7.62***
PARKij·AFTERjt regression
(0.000)
(0.000)
Observations
179588
112014
112014
112014
98237
R2
0.196
0.193
0.712
0.188
0.185
Note: This table reports results from fitting versions of equation (9). All plants both within- and outside-parks are
included. It is a DID specification that we include whether plant i is located in park j (PARKij), whether park j exists
in year t (AFTERjt), and the interaction term between these two dummies (PARKij·AFTERjt). Therefore the default
category is the TFPs of the out-side plants before the closest park was established. For a plant outside parks, we
match it to its closest park and use that park’s opening time to assign value to AFTERjt. In column (1) we include all
the plants (with either zone or sub-zone identifier), in column (2)-(5) we only include the plants with sub-zone
identifier so the sample size shrinks by about 38%. District-trend fixed effects and industry-year fixed effects are
included in all the regressions. Plant fixed effects are included in column (3). The four exogenous variables in
Table
2
(DEVELOPED_LAND%_1980,
COMMUNIST_LAND%_1980,
FLAT_LAND
and
log(POP_DENSITY_1982)) are used as IVs for PARKij (and their interactions with AFTERjt as IVs for
PARKij·AFTERjt) in our IV regressions. In column (5) the observations in Shenzhen and Xi’an are dropped as the
historical population data is unavailable in these two cities. The joint F-tests in column (4) and (5) show that the IVs
are jointly significant in the first-stage IV regressions. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses, which are
clustered by zone in column (1) and by small zone in column (2)-(5). * denotes p < 0.10, ** denotes p < 0.05, ***
denotes p < 0.01.
PARKij regression

46

Table 4

TFP Spillovers in a Vicinity of an Industrial Park

Dependent variable: TFPit (in logarithm)
PANEL A: Average Effects for All Parks

log(DISTANCE_CENTERi)
log(DISTANCE_PARKijt)
GLOBAL_PARK_IMPACTit
SOEi
log(DISTANCE_RAILWAYit)
log(DISTANCE_AIRPORTit)
log(DISTANCE_UNIVERSITYi)
Constant
District-time trend
Industry-year fixed effects
Plant fixed effects
Joint F-test of IVs in first stage
(p-value)
Observations
R2

Plants with zone or small
zone identifier
(1)
OLS
-0.035*
(0.018)
-0.056***
(0.013)
1.64e-3***
(5.25e-4)
-0.250***
(0.017)
-0.021**
(0.008)
-0.006
(0.021)
-0.013
(0.017)
7.631***
(0.153)
Yes
Yes
No

(2)
OLS
-0.039*
(0.020)
-0.044***
(0.013)
1.84e-3***
(4.61e-3)
-0.232***
(0.017)
-0.030***
(0.008)
-0.036*
(0.021)
0.007
(0.018)
9.917***
(0.095)
Yes
Yes
No

123109
0.187

79157
0.185

Plants with small zone identifier
(3)
OLS
-0.041**
(0.020)
1.96e-3***
(4.82e-4)
-0.026
(0.019)
0.051
(0.041)
94.74
(97.08)
Yes
Yes
Yes
79157
0.695

PANEL B: Heterogeneous Gradients of TFP Spillovers
for Old and New Parks with Different Ages
(The same specification as column (3) in Panel A)

(4)
3 IVs
-0.028**
(0.012)
-0.124***
(0.030)
1.41e-3***
(3.21e-4)
-0.232***
(0.009)
-0.028***
(0.005)
-0.030***
(0.011)
0.016
(0.011)
10.07***
(0.471)
Yes
Yes
No
33.48***
(0.000)
79157
0.185

(5)
4 IVs
-0.029**
(0.013)
-0.190***
(0.034)
5.84e-4
(3.69e-4)
-0.248***
(0.009)
-0.029***
(0.005)
-0.011
(0.012)
0.023**
(0.009)
8.315***
(0.256)
Yes
Yes
No
24.57***
(0.000)
66951
0.181

Park age
0-5 years
6-10 years
11-15 years
>15 years
-0.171
-0.106
-0.136
-0.177
-0.150
Old parks (built before 1996)
(0.096)
(0.114)
(0.098)
(0.094)
(0.095)
New parks (built in or after
-0.075
-0.073
-0.030
-0.145
1996)
(0.024)
(0.024)
(0.026)
(0.054)
Note: Panel A in this table reports results from fitting versions of equation (11). Only plants outside parks are
included. DISTANCE_PARKijt is calculated by plant as plant i’s distance to the closest industrial park. In column (1)
we include all the plants (with either zone or small zone identifier), in column (2)-(5) we only include the plants
with sub-zone identifier so the sample size shrinks by about 36%. District-trend fixed effects and industry-year fixed
effects are included in all the regressions. Plant fixed effects are included in column (3). The variable
GLOBAL_PARK_IMPACT measures the global impact of all the parks (except the closest one, j0) on a plant in the
Average

2

G LO BAL _ PARK _ IM PACT it 



w ij  log( EM P jt ) 

j j0

2

  d  
ij
 1   d    log( EM P jt )
j j0 
  max  

city. It is defined as:
, where we use the
inverse distance (in quadratic weighting function) from this plant i to those parks as weights to compute the
weighted sum of those parks’ employment in year t.
We construct the IVs for DISTANCE_PARKijt (in logarithm) in the following way: for each IV in Table 2
(DEVELOPED_LAND%_1980, COMMUNIST_LAND%_1980, FLAT_LAND and log(POP_DENSITY_1982), we
calculate the weighted average of this IV’s values in all zones except of the zone where this outside-park firm is
located, using the inverse distance (in quadratic weighting function) from this firm’s zone to all the other zones as
weights: IV j ( D istance ) 

w
n j

jn

 IV , where w jn

2

 d jn  
 1  
 

 d m ax  


2

. We use these four weighted average variables

as the IVs for this outside-firm’s distance to the closest park. In column (5) the observations in Shenzhen and Xi’an
are dropped as the historical population data is unavailable in these two cities. The joint F-tests in column (4) and (5)
show that the IVs are jointly significant in the first-stage IV regressions. Robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses, which are clustered by zone in column (1) and by small zone in column (2)-(5).
47

Panel B reports the heterogeneous spatial gradient of the TFP spillovers in a park’s vicinity. Old parks are those
built before 1996, and new parks are those built in or after 1996. For each park cohort, we also look at the
heterogeneity in the spatial gradient by park’s age (0-5 years, 6-10 years, 11-15 years, older than 15 years). Robust
standard errors are reported in parentheses.
* denotes p < 0.10, ** denotes p < 0.05, *** denotes p < 0.01.

48

Table 5 Measuring the Determinants of TFP Spillover Heterogeneity
Dependent variable: TFPit (in logarithm). OLS Regressions

log(DISTANCE_CENTERi)
log(DISTANCE_PARKijt)
INPUT_LINKAGEijt*log(DISTANCE_PARKijt)
OUTPUT_LINKAGEijt *log(DISTANCE_PARKijt)
LABOR_POOLINGijt *log(DISTANCE_PARKijt)
SKILL_SPILLOVERijt *log(DISTANCE_PARKijt)
log(DISTANCE_CENTERj)*log(DISTANCE_PARKijt)
PARK_SIZEj*log(DISTANCE_PARKijt)
SOE_SHAREjt*log(DISTANCE_PARKijt)
HUMAN_CAPITALjt*log(DISTANCE_PARKijt)
COAGGLOMERATIONjt*log(DISTANCE_PARKijt)
PLANT_SIZEit*log(DISTANCE_PARKijt)
AGEit (1978-1998)*log(DISTANCE_PARKijt)
AGEit (1998-)*log(DISTANCE_PARKijt)

Heterogeneity w.r.t. spillover synergies
Plants with
zone or
Plants with small zone
small zone
identifier
identifier
(1)
(2)
(3)
-0.036**
-0.039*
(0.018)
(0.020)
-0.024*
-0.014
-4.56e-4
(0.014)
(0.014)
(0.026)
-0.121**
-0.023***
-9.67e-4
(0.055)
(0.007)
(0.009)
-0.153**
-0.203***
-0.238***
(0.078)
(0.075)
(0.076)
-0.123
-0.376
0.386
(0.258)
(0.290)
(0.267)
-0.478*
-0.062
-0.453*
(0.266)
(0.307)
(0.272)

Heterogeneity w.r.t. park attributes
Plants with
zone or
Plants with small zone
small zone
identifier
identifier
(4)
(5)
(6)
-0.030*
-0.042**
(0.018)
(0.021)
0.020
-0.009
-0.182
(0.052)
(0.046)
(0.139)

-5.85e-3
(0.008)
-5.20e-4*
(3.10e-4)
0.352***
(0.078)
-0.844***
(0.280)
-0.060
(0.044)

7.64e-3
(0.008)
-3.34e-4
(2.89e-4)
0.271***
(0.076)
-0.765***
(0.232)
-0.019
(0.050)

0.021
(0.045)
-7.88e-4*
(4.69e-4)
0.129*
(0.073)
-0.053**
(0.027)
-0.335
(0.308)

Heterogeneity w.r.t. plant attributes
Plants with
zone or
Plants with small zone
small zone
identifier
identifier
(7)
(8)
(9)
-0.046***
-0.056***
(0.017)
(0.020)
-0.592***
-0.567***
0.038
(0.027)
(0.028)
(0.109)

0.054***
(0.003)
0.283***
(0.016)
0.329***
(0.0163)

0.052***
(0.003)
0.277***
(0.017)
0.324***
(0.017)

0.013***
(0.004)
-0.122
(0.109)
-0.120
(0.110)
49

1.52e-3***
1.71e-3***
1.88e-3***
1.45e-3***
1.75e-3***
1.98e-3***
1.76e-3***
1.88e-3***
1.91e-3***
(5.23e-4)
(4.61e-4)
(5.03e-4)
(5.29e-4)
(4.69e-4)
(5.06e-4)
(5.22e-4)
(4.55e-4)
(5.03e-4)
-0.251***
-0.232***
-0.251***
-0.233***
-0.219***
-0.207***
SOEi
(0.017)
(0.017)
(0.017)
(0.017)
(0.016)
(0.016)
-0.021**
-0.031***
-0.037*
-0.019**
-0.030***
-0.041*
-0.024***
-0.033***
-0.041*
log(DISTANCE_RAILWAYit)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.022)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.022)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.022)
-0.006
-0.036*
0.058
-0.003
-0.037*
0.059
-0.005
-0.033*
0.058
log(DISTANCE_AIRPORTit)
(0.021)
(0.021)
(0.049)
(0.021)
(0.021)
(0.049)
(0.020)
(0.020)
(0.049)
-0.013
0.007
-0.012
0.008
-0.017
0.002
log(DISTANCE_UNIVERSITYi)
(0.017)
(0.018)
(0.016)
(0.018)
(0.017)
(0.018)
7.657***
9.928***
40.07
7.290***
9.887***
32.93
7.974***
9.841***
39.81
Constant
(0.155)
(0.096)
(182.7)
(0.225)
(0.106)
(182.8)
(0.168)
(0.093)
(182.8)
District-Time trend
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Industry-year fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Plant fixed effects
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
Joint F-test of interaction variables
18.39***
24.21***
9.49***
5.63***
3.77***
2.90**
181.89***
166.50***
3.33**
(p-value)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.002)
(0.013)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.019)
Observations
123109
79157
79157
123109
79157
79157
123109
79157
79157
R2
0.189
0.187
0.704
0.188
0.186
0.704
0.207
0.203
0.704
Note: This table reports OLS regression results from fitting versions of equation (13)-(15) by including interaction terms between spillover synergy indices with log(DISTANCE_PARKijt) in
column (1) - (3), interaction terms between park attributes with log(DISTANCE_PARKijt) in column (4) - (6), and interaction terms between plant attributes with log(DISTANCE_PARKijt) in
column (7) - (9). The joint-F tests show that the interaction terms are jointly significant in all columns. See Appendix B for details about how we construct the spillover synergy indices. Robust
standard errors are reported in parentheses, which are clustered by zone in column (1), (4), (7) and by small zone in column (2), (3), (5), (6), (8) and (9). * denotes p < 0.10, ** denotes p < 0.05,
*** denotes p < 0.01.
GLOBAL_PARK_IMPACTit

50

Table 6

Local Manufacturing Employment in a Vicinity of Industrial Parks

Dependent variable: Density of manufacturing employment in zone k,. ZIP regressions

log(DISTANCE_CENTERk)
PARKkj
AFTERjt
PARKkj*AFTERjt

ZIP
(1)
-0.822***
(0.057)
0.454
(0.400)
0.028
(0.157)
0.783**
(0.367)

All zones
ZIP with IVs
(2)
-0.447***
(0.066)
0.016
(0.123)
0.096**
(0.046)
1.133***
(0.167)

log(DISTANCE_CENTERk)* PARKkj*AFTERjt
PARK_SIZEj* PARKkj*AFTERjt
SOE_SHAREjt* PARKkj*AFTERjt
HUMAN_CAPITALjt* PARKkj*AFTERjt
COAGGLOMERATIONjt* PARKkj*AFTERjt

ZIP
(3)
-0.441***
(0.138)
0.417
(0.414)
-0.072
(0.136)
0.180
(0.912)
-0.138
(0.226)
0.017***
(0.006)
-1.743***
(0.615)
4.256**
(1.654)
2.644
(2.208)

log(DISTANCE_CENTERk)

log(DISTANCE_PARKkjt)

District fixed effects
Year fixed effects
Joint F-test of IVs in first stage
(p-value)
PARKjt regression
PARKij·AFTERjt regression

7.404***
(0.311)
Yes
Yes

5.028***
(1.538)
Yes
Yes

4.998***
(0.446)
Yes
Yes

-0.369**
(0.187)

4.01e-4
(0.003)
5.505***
(0.645)
Yes
Yes

0.003
(0.004)
6.832***
(0.514)
Yes
Yes
9.29***
(0.000)

PARK_SIZEj*log(DISTANCE_PARKkjt)
SOE_SHAREjt*log(DISTANCE_PARKkjt)
HUMAN_CAPITALjt*log(DISTANCE_PARKkjt)
COAGGLOMERATION_INDEX jt*log(DISTANCE_PARKkjt)

Constant
District fixed effects
Year fixed effects
Joint F-test of IVs in first stage

***

-0.517***
(0.128)

log(DISTANCE_CENTERj)*log(DISTANCE_PARKkjt)

GLOBAL_PARK_IMPACTkt
Constant

Zones outside parks
ZIP
ZIP with IVs
ZIP
(4)
(5)
(6)
-0.394**
-0.595***
-0.436***
(0.160)
(0.067)
(0.145)

0.358
(0.386)
-0.117
(0.075)
-0.006**
(0.003)
0.766**
(0.324)
-4.399**
(1.772)
-0.050
(0.124)
-4.34e-4
(0.003)
6.101***
(0.730)
Yes
Yes

4.91
(0.000)
5.39***
(0.000)

51

Joint F-test of interaction variables
23.48***
24.60***
(0.000)
(0.000)
(p-value)
15999
13685
15999
Observations
15089
12958
15089
Observations
4944
3976
4944
Nonzero obs.
4887
3965
4887
Nonzero obs.
26.09
25.81
Vuong
23.08
23.41
Vuong
Note: The dependent variable is manufacturing jobs per square kilometer by zone by year. Column (1)-(3) report results from fitting versions of equation (16), which is a DID specification. The
construction of IVs for PARK in column (2) is similar with that in Table 2. Column (4)-(6) report results from fitting versions of equation (17), and we drop those zones located in industrial
parks. The construction of IVs for log(DISTANCE_PARK) (the distance from the zone’s centroid to the closest park) in column (5) is similar with that in Table 3. In the first stage of the ZIP
models in column (2) and (5), inflate regression, we regress employments density (in zone or sub-zone) on some location variables (DISTANCE_CENTER, DISTANCE_CENTER2,
DISTANCE_CENTER3, log(DISTANCE_RAILWAY), log(DISTANCE_AIRPORT), log(DISTANCE_UNIVERSITY)), zone (or sub-zone) size, the city quadrant this zone (or sub-zone) locates in
(north, south, east, or, west), district fixed effects and year fixed effects. For ZIP IV regressions (Column (2) and (5)) we employ bootstrap procedure to correct the standard errors). The Vuong
statistics all favor the ZIP model. Observations in Shenzhen and Xi’an are dropped in column (2) and (5). Standard errors are reported in parentheses, which are clustered by district. * denotes p
< 0.10, ** denotes p < 0.05, *** denotes p < 0.01.

52

Table 7 Local Real Estate Construction and Pricing

log(DISTANCE_CENTERw)
log(DISTANCE_PARKgjt)
log(DISTANCE_CENTERj)*log(DISTANCE_PARKgjt)
PARK_SIZEj*log(DISTANCE_PARKgjt)
SOE_SHAREjt*log(DISTANCE_PARKgjt)
HUMAN_CAPITALjt*log(DISTANCE_PARKgjt)
COAGGLOMERATIONjt*log(DISTANCE_PARKgjt)
GLOBAL_PARK_IMPACTl

New home sales (by Grid)
ZIP regressions
ZIP with
ZIP
ZIP
IVs
(1)
(2)
(3)
-0.028
-0.020
-0.013
(0.070)
(0.041)
(0.040)
-0.221***
-0.199***
-0.075
(0.050)
(0.051)
(0.107)
-0.054*
(0.030)
-0.007**
(0.003)
-0.037
(0.077)
-0.073**
(0.032)
0.098
(0.190)
0.023***
0.024***
0.024***
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.005)

New home prices
OLS regressions

log(DISTANCE_CENTERl)
log(DISTANCE_PARKljt)

District fixed effects
Year fixed effects
Joint F-test of IVs in first stage
(p-value)
Joint F-test of interaction terms
(p-value)
Observations

2.861
(0.962)
Yes
Yes

174280

-3.116
(2.093)
Yes
Yes
3.51**
(0.015)
153048

2.743
(0.666)
Yes
Yes

11.90**
(0.036)
174280

(4)
-0.163***
(0.017)
-0.101***
(0.012)

(5)
-0.170***
(0.020)
-0.095***
(0.013)

0.005***
(0.001)
0.012***
(0.002)
3.55e-3***
(4.63e-4)
0.118***
(0.017)
8.014***
(0.163)
Yes
Yes

0.005***
(0.001)
0.016***
(0.003)
3.87e-3***
(5.20e-4)
0.111***
(0.017)
7.440***
(0.104)
Yes
Yes
6.37***
(0.000)

(6)
-0.191***
(0.028)
-0.161***
(0.043)
0.015
(0.013)
-0.014*
(0.008)
0.058**
(0.028)
-0.084
(0.079)
-0.159***
(0.058)
0.005***
(0.001)
0.012***
(0.002)
3.53e-3***
(4.65e-4)
0.118***
(0.017)
8.927***
(0.181)
Yes
Yes

SOE_SHAREjt*log(DISTANCE_PARKljt)
HUMAN_CAPITALjt*log(DISTANCE_PARKljt)
COAGGLOMERATIONjt*log(DISTANCE_PARKljt)
GLOBAL_PARK_IMPACTl

PARKINGl
Constant

OLS

PARK_SIZEj*log(DISTANCE_PARKljt)

GREENl

***

IV

log(DISTANCE_CENTERj)*log(DISTANCE_PARKljt)

FARl

***

OLS

Constant
District fixed effects
Year fixed effects
Joint F-test of IVs in first stage
(p-value)
Joint F-test of interaction terms
(p-value)
Observations

117132

104367

2.46**
(0.032)
117132

53

Nonzero obs.
164210
144113
164210
Nonzero obs.
Vuong
85.36
85.36
Vuong
R2
R2
0.721
0.710
0.722
Note: Column (1)-(3) report results from fitting versions of equation (18). The dependent variable is the count of new home sales by 2×2km grid by year. The construction of
log(DISTANCE_PARK) (the distance from the grid’s centroid to the closest park) in column (2) is similar with that in Table 3. Standard errors are reported in parentheses, which are clustered by
zone. Column (4)-(6) report results from fitting versions of equation (19). The hedonic model is a regression of each home sale’s price on its location attributes including distance to the nearest
industrial park, distance to the city center, and physical attributes including floor area ratio, greening space ratio and parking space share (see more details in table 1). The construction of
log(DISTANCE_PARK) (the distance from the housing complex to the closest park) in column (5) is similar with that in Table 3. For ZIP IV regressions (Column (2)) we employ bootstrap
procedure to correct the standard errors). Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses, which are clustered by grid (2×2km). * denotes p < 0.10, ** denotes p < 0.05, *** denotes p < 0.01.

54

Table 8 Local Retail Establishment Growth
ZIP model, by grid by year

RESTAURANTkt
ENTERTAINMENTkt
SHOPkt
ZIP with
ZIP with
ZIP with
ZIP
ZIP
ZIP
ZIP
ZIP
ZIP
IVs
IVs
IVs
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
-1.096***
-1.082***
-1.088***
-0.955***
-0.971***
-0.965***
-1.154***
-1.118***
-1.158***
log(DISTANCE_CENTERw)
(0.090)
(0.086)
(0.091)
(0.069)
(0.051)
(0.063)
(0.093)
(0.048)
(0.004)
-0.349***
-0.292***
0.033
-0.274***
-0.254***
0.042
-0.346***
-0.264***
0.058***
log(DISTANCE_PARKgjt)
(0.040)
(0.039)
(0.223)
(0.036)
(0.054)
(0.180)
(0.046)
(0.046)
(0.017)
-0.070*
-0.028
-0.0417***
log(DISTANCE_CENTERj)*log(DISTANCE_PARKgjt)
(0.041)
(0.033)
(0.003)
-0.038*
-0.051***
-0.052***
PARK_SIZEj*log(DISTANCE_PARKgjt)
(0.020)
(0.017)
(0.002)
0.018
0.023***
0.009***
SOE_SHAREjt*log(DISTANCE_PARKgjt)
(0.014)
(0.007)
(0.001)
-0.013
-0.016*
-0.015***
HUMAN_CAPITALjt*log(DISTANCE_PARKgjt)
(0.010)
(0.009)
(7.76e-4)
-3.86e-4**
-2.28e-4*
-4.30e-4***
COAGGLOMERATIONjt *log(DISTANCE_PARKgjt)
(1.94e-4)
(1.33e-4)
(1.85e-5)
0.006*
0.012**
0.004
-8.67e-4
0.005***
-0.002
0.005
0.008**
0.003***
GLOBAL_PARK_IMPACTg
(0.004)
(0.006)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.001)
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(2.90e-4)
6.145***
0.603
6.481***
4.980***
1.776***
5.339***
6.713***
2.703***
7.069***
Constant
(0.612)
(1.532)
(0.625)
(0.521)
(0.354)
(0.519)
(0.703)
(0.159)
(0.049)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
District fixed effects
Year fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Joint F-test of IVs in first stage
9.60***
15.16***
5.11***
(p-value)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
Joint F-test of interaction terms
12.67**
21.11***
10.24*
(p-value)
(0.027)
(0.001)
(0.069)
Observations
174280
153048
174280
174280
153048
174280
174280
153048
174280
Nonzero obs.
156940
137888
156940
162129
142333
162129
157038
137698
157038
Vuong
41.95
36.14
28.36
24.45
40.34
37.29
Note: This table reports results from fitting versions of equation (20). The dependent variables are the count of restaurants, entertainment facilities and retail shops by grid by year, respectively.
The construction of log(DISTANCE_PARK) (the distance from the grid’s centroid to the closest park) in column (2) is similar with that in Table 3. For ZIP IV regressions (Column (2), (5) and
(8)) we employ bootstrap procedure to correct the standard errors). Standard errors are reported in parentheses, which are clustered by zone. * denotes p < 0.10, ** denotes p < 0.05, *** denotes
p < 0.01.

55

Appendix A
Constructing Plant-level TFP and Park-level Co-agglomeration Index Measures
Constructing plant-level TFP measure
To estimate the plant-level TFP, we first consider a firm with a Cobb-Douglas
production function,




Yit  Ait Litl K it k

(A1)

Where Yit is output for plant i at time t, which is the function of labor, L, and capital, K.
A(τ) measures the extent to which local public infrastructure, τ, enhances a plant’s
productivity.
Then we take the natural logs of equation (A1) and estimate:
ln Yit   0   l  ln Lit   k  ln K it   it

(A2)

The dependent variable is real value added at the plant level, which is constructed by
separately deflating output, net of goods purchased for resale and indirect taxes, and
material inputs. Labor input, L, is measured by the number of employees each year.
Capital stock is measured by plant-level real book value of fixed assets. The
information on plants’ fixed investment is not available in the ASIFs dataset, which
reports the value of plants’ fixed capital stocks at original purchase price, and their
capital stock at original purchase prices less accumulated depreciation. These book
values are the sum of nominal values and are not comparable across time and firms.
We follow the procedure developed by Brandt et al (2012) and estimate plants’ real
value of the capital stock in each year. εit is the error term, which has two components,
a white noise component, ηit, and a time-varying productivity shock, ωit.
A major concern in estimating equation (A2) is that the correlation between
unobservable productivity shocks, ωit, and the input factors chosen by the plant. This
may produce inconsistent estimates under OLS. A second problem is the endogeneity
arising from sample selection. Plants exit when productivity falls below a certain
threshold, and thus the surviving firms will have ωit from the selected sample, which
has an effect on the inputs employed. To address both of these two problems, we rely
on Olley-Pakes (OP) estimator (Olley and Pakes 1996). We estimate the production
function for plants in each two-digit sectors separately with Olley-Pakes. Thus, the
measured TFP of plant i in year t, tfpit, is defined as:
log(TFPit )  ln Yit  ˆ l  ln Lit  ˆ k  ln K it

(A3)
56

The estimated inputs coefficients obtained from estimating equation (A2) with
Olley-Pakes are presented in Table A1. For comparison we also report OLS estimates
with different production coefficients. The correlation between the OP and OLS is
quite high: 0.976 in value. Both of the labor and capital estimates are underestimated
with OLS, as expected when unobserved productivity is also possibly correlated with
labor inputs and real capital stock.
Table A1 Firm-level production estimation results

Labor (L)
Capital (K)
Observations

OP

OLS

0.375***

0.351***

(36.48)

(186.55)

0.524***

0.417***

(8.69)

(141.18)

249,267

247,378

Note: t statistics are reported in parentheses. * denotes p < 0.10, ** denotes p < 0.05, *** denotes p <
0.01.

Constructing park-level EG co-agglomeration index
We construct the EG co-agglomeration index in the following three steps: First, we
quantify industry pairwise co-agglomeration by making use of the index of
co-agglomeration (EG) developed in Ellision and Glaeser (1997). The EG index for
industries r and q is:

 rq




N
n 1

( s nr  x n )( s nq  x n )
N

1   n 1 x n

2

(A4)

Where
index geographic areas. snr is the share of industry r’s employment in area n.
xn is the mean employment share in area n across manufacturing industries.
Second, we calculate the employment share of industry r contained in the industrial
park j, defined as srj.
Third, we compute industry pair employment shares in park j as follows:
j

s rq  ( s jr  s jq ) / 2

(A5)

Finally, the co-agglomeration index for park j is
57

j

 

 
r

j

q

 rq  s rq

(A6)

In this analysis, we calculate EG index γrq for three-digit level manufacturing industries
for each park using the ASIFs data set for the period of 1998-2007.

58

Appendix B Constructing Park-Vicinity Synergy Indices

We aim to identify the sources of an industrial park’s spillover effect on the nearby
incumbent firms. Following Glaeser and Kerr (2009), Ellison et al. (2010), and
Jofre-Monseny et al.(2011), our first step is to construct measures of the extent to
which two industries (1) have a strong input-and-output linkage; (2) share the same
type of workers ; or (3) have a higher probability of knowledge spillovers. The second
step is, for a specific industry an outside-park firm belongs to, we construct industry
pairs by matching this industry with all the industries within the park, and then
computing the weighted sum of the above industry-pair measures (the weight is set to
be the employment share of that within-park industry in the whole park’s employment).
We first measure the advantage that a firm exploits from locating close to a park rife
with potential input suppliers and output demanders. The variables Inputr←q is defined
as the share of industry r’s inputs come from industry q, and Onputr→q as the share of
industry r’s goes to industry q. These two measures range from zero to one since they
are calculated relative to all input suppliers and output demanders. We calculate these
two variables for two-digit-level manufacturing sectors using the input-output flows
information according to the 2002 China Input-Output Tables published by China
Bureau of Statistics.
Based on these two variables, the first synergy index measures the impact of a park j in
terms of input flows on an industry r outside the park, which is defined as:

IN PU T _ LIN K AG E rj 



( Input r  q 
q  1... Q

E qj
Ej

(A7)

)

Similarly, the second synergy index measures the impact of a park j associated with
output flows on an industry r outside the park, which is defined as:

O U T PU T _ L IN K AG E rj 



( O nput r  q 
q  1... Q

E qj
Ej

)

(A8)

Where Q indexes the number of industries and E indexes the number of workers.
Now we turn to the labor pooling mechanism. According to the 1995 Industry Census
data, employees are classified in 5 occupations, workers and apprentices, engineers,
administrative staffs, logistics staffs, and others. Following Jofre-Monseny et al.(2011),
we construct the labor similarity index for industry q and r, which measures the
similarity of their distribution of workers by occupation between these two industries:
59

Labor Sim ilarity rq  1 /

1


2

O

|

E or
Er



E oq
Eq

(A9)

|

where O indexes the types of occupations and E indexes the number of workers. Labor
Similarityrq represents the extent to which the share of workers in industry r need to
change to mimic the distribution of occupations in industry q, ranging between 0 and 1.
Hence, Labor Similarityrq takes the positive values and is greater than one. Based on
labor similarity index, we calculate industry-specific the labor similarity weights for
industry r with industries q as:

W rq 

Labor Sim ilarity rq



q  1... Q

(A10)

Labor Sim ilarity rq

Using Wrq, we define the availability of suitable labor forces of a park j for an industry
r outside the park as our third synergy index:

LABO R _ PO O LIN G rj 



q  1... Q

(W rq 

E qj
Ej

)

(A11)

LABOR_POOLINGrj is the weighted sum of industry r in park j employment shares
where industries share the more similar types of labors in terms of occupations are
given higher weights.
The last metric is to examine the extent to which a firm can enjoy knowledge spillover
benefits from a park nearby. We use the 1995 Industry Census data and calculate the
share of employees in terms of their education levels for 2-digit-level industries. We
classify the workers into four types according to their educations, those with college
and above, with high school, with middle school, and with primary school and below.
The variable Skill Similarityqr measures the extent to which industry r and industry q
share the same skilled workers:

Skill Sim ilarity rq  1 /

1


2

|
n

E nr
Er



E nq
Eq

|

(A12)

where n indexes education levels and

E nr
Er

denotes the share of workers with

education level n for industry r. Skill Similarityrq takes the positive values great than
one. The industry-specific the labor similarity weights for industry r with industries q
as:
60

S rq 

Skill Sim ilarity rq



q  1...Q

Skill Sim ilarity rq

(A13)

Using Srq, the knowledge spillovers in terms of skill sharing of a park j for an industry
r outside the park is defined as our forth synergy index:

K N O W LED G E _ SPILLO VER rj 



q  1... Q

( S rq 

E qj
Ej

)

(A14)

KNOWLEDGE_SPILLOVERrj is the weighted sum of industry r in park j employment
shares where industries share the more similar skilled workers are given higher
weights.

61

Appendix C

Probit Model of Plant Closing Probability

Table A2 Probit Model of Plant Closing Probability
Dependent variable: Whether plant i is closed
All
Lower TFP plants
Higher TFP plants
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.004***
0.004***
-0.004***
AGEj
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.062**
0.038
0.064*
log(DISTANCE_PARKi)
(0.029)
(0.026)
(0.036)
-0.073**
-0.081**
-0.089***
log(DISTANCE_CENTERi)
(0.032)
(0.035)
(0.034)
-0.018
-0.025
-0.020
log(DISTANCE_RAILWAYi)
(0.028)
(0.027)
(0.035)
0.056
0.031
0.083*
log(DISTANCE_AIRPORTi)
(0.036)
(0.039)
(0.043)
-0.148***
-0.151***
-0.167***
log(DISTANCE_UNIVERSITYi)
(0.028)
(0.029)
(0.034)
0.545***
0.949***
0.269
Constant
(0.132)
(0.143)
(0.169)
City fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
37527
18761
18766
R2
201.9
177.8
95.90
Note: This table reports results from fitting versions of equation (13). The observation is a plant outside industrial
parks. If the plant was closed during our study period (1998-2007), the dependent variable equals to 1, 0 otherwise.
The distance variables are calculated as the average distances of plant i to those locations during its duration period.
Liner probability regression is employed. Marginal effects are reported for PROBIT models (column (1) and (2)).
Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses, which are clustered by district. * denotes p < 0.10, ** denotes p
< 0.05, *** denotes p < 0.01.

62

Appendix D. Figures
Figure D-1 TFP trends of incumbent firms before park establishment
8.6

log(TFP)

8.4
8.2
8
7.8
7.6
7.4

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

Number of years before park establishment
<1

1-2km

2-3km

3-4km

>4km

Notes: We only include those incumbent firms which had existed at least two years before the introduction of an
industrial park nearby. We do not observe any TFP drop before park establishment.

Figure D-2. Co-agglomeration Trend with the Age of an Industrial Park
0.03

0.025

0.02

0.015

0.01

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25

C o  A gglom eration index  3.19  10

6

3

 A ge  1.11  10

(1.86* )

4

2

 A ge  0.00133  A ge  park fixed effects
(  1.61 )

(1. 54 )

63

