NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INVENTING PRIZES:
A HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE ON INNOVATION AWARDS AND TECHNOLOGY POLICY
B. Zorina Khan
Working Paper 21375
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21375

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2015

I am especially grateful to Marcella Alsan, Stanley Engerman, Walter Friedman, Keith Maskus, Alessandro
Nuvolari, Yi Qian, and Brian Wright for careful reading and comments that significantly improved
the paper. I have also benefited from discussions with Ran Abramitzky, Lee Branstetter, Colleen Chien,
Richard Epstein, Avner Greif, Stephen Haber, Naomi Lamoreaux, Mark Lemley, Andrei Markevitch,
Adam Mossoff, Tom Nicholas, Rob Merges, Ted Sichelman, Daniel Spulber, and participants in the
Bay Area IP Professors’ Workshop and the IP2 Workshop at Stanford. Generous assistance with archival
data was provided by Serge Bénoit, Esther Brubaker, Anne Chanteux, Christiane Demeulenaere-Douyère,
Gérard Emptoz, Liliane Hilaire-Pérez, Phil Hoffman, Gilles Postel-Vinay, and the very helpful staff
at the Société pour l’encouragement de l’industrie nationale, the Institut national de propriété industrielle,
the Archives nationales, the Bibliothèque nationale de France, the Conservatoire national des arts et
métiers, the Royal Society of Arts, and the British Library. This project was funded by research grants
from the National Science Foundation and Bowdoin College, and was completed while I was a National
Fellow of the Hoover Institution at Stanford University. Liability for errors is limited to the author.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by B. Zorina Khan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Inventing Prizes: A Historical Perspective on Innovation Awards and Technology Policy
B. Zorina Khan
NBER Working Paper No. 21375
July 2015
JEL No. N80,O3,O31
ABSTRACT
Prizes for innovations are currently experiencing a renaissance, following their marked decline during
the nineteenth century. However, Daguerre’s “patent buyout,” the longitude prize, inducement prizes
for butter substitutes and billiard balls, the activities of the Royal Society of Arts and other “encouragement”
institutions, all comprise historically inaccurate and potentially misleading case studies. Daguerre,
for instance, never obtained a patent in France and, instead, lobbied for government support in a classic
example of rent-seeking. This paper surveys empirical research using more representative samples
drawn from Britain, France, and the United States, including “great inventors” and their ordinary counterparts,
and prizes at industrial exhibitions. The results suggest that administered systems of rewards to innovators
suffered from a number of disadvantages in design and practice, some of which might be inherent
to their non-market orientation. These findings in part explain why innovation prizes lost favour as
a technology policy instrument in both the United States and Europe in the period of industrialization
and economic growth.

B. Zorina Khan
9700 College Station
Bowdoin College
Brunswick, ME 04011
and NBER
bkhan@bowdoin.edu

"Everybody has won and all must have prizes."
---Alice in Wonderland, Chapter III.

Technological progress has been characterized as a “lever or riches” that has been responsible for
a significant fraction of human welfare in the past three centuries.1 In such areas as innovations
in pharmaceuticals and healthcare, the stakes can be as fundamental as the difference between
large financial gains or losses for firms, and life or death for consumers. It is therefore not
surprising that policy debates surrounding inventions and innovations have frequently been
controversial. Policy makers of the past explored the full range of options that were available for
promoting ingenuity, including patents, prizes, subsidies, bounties, trade secrecy protection,
cartelization and the protection of monopolies, as well as specialized institutions dedicated to
administering inducements for innovation. What is, perhaps, surprising, is the extent of
historical myopia that manifests itself in the policy debates of the twenty-first century.
Proponents of different policies today tend to make selected and often inaccurate reference to
history, without a full assessment of all the relevant costs and benefits, a practice that creates the
potential for suboptimal rules and standards.
In the nineteenth century, President Abraham Lincoln, a patentee himself, was convinced
that economic and business prosperity depended on strong property rights in patents. In 2014,
the President of the United States included patent policy in his State of the Union address, but
from a critical perspective that called for major reforms in longstanding rules and standards
regarding such intellectual property rights. Nobel Prize winners in economic theory have
contended that “probably the best solution would be to maintain the patent system on drugs and a
1

For excellent overviews, see Joel Mokyr, The Lever of Riches: Technological Creativity and Economic Progress.
New York: Oxford University Press, 1990. Mokyr has also produced a number of other thought-provoking works on
related issues, including The Gifts of Athena: Historical Origins of the Knowledge Economy, Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press, 2002; and Joel Mokyr, The Enlightened Economy: An Economic History of Britain,
1700-1850. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2009.

few other products that are expensive to innovate and cheap to copy, and eliminate patents on
everything else.”2 Others, however, are more concerned about the negative effects of
pharmaceutical patents on the provision of drugs and access to medical care.3 According to
some extremists, it is time to abolish the entire intellectual property system, which they regard as
an “unnecessary evil” and an unwarranted monopoly.4
By way of contrast, both academics and American policy makers today are increasingly
enthusiastic about prizes. The White House urges that “history should be our guide” and “the
Federal Government should… use high-risk, high-reward policy tools such as prizes and
challenges to solve tough problems.”5 The federal government has begun to finance prizes as a
means of generating new ideas and products, claiming that prizes “have a good track record of
spurring innovation.”6 Numerous businesses have also offered large privately-funded prizes for
objectives that range from specific targets to solutions for more general problems.7 Many
2

See http://www.becker-posner-blog.com/2012/09/reforming-the-patent-system-toward-a-minimalist-systembecker.html. Joseph Stiglitz, another Nobel Prize winner, takes a similar position in "Scrooge and intellectual
property rights," BMJ 333.7582 (2006): 1279-1280.
3
William W. Fisher III and Talha Syed, Infection: The Health Crisis in the Developing World and What We Should
Do About It, Stanford University Press (forthcoming); Michael Kremer and Rachel Glennerster, Strong Medicine:
Creating Incentives for Pharmaceutical Research on Neglected Diseases, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
2004.
4
Michele Boldrin and David K. Levine, Against Intellectual Monopoly, a work that is copyrighted, New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2008. See also Fritz Machlup and Edith Penrose, “The Patent Controversy in the
Nineteenth Century,” Journal of Economic History, 10 (1) 1950: 1-29.
5
A Strategy for American Innovation, 2009,
https://www.whitehouse.gov/administration/eop/nec/StrategyforAmericanInnovation.
6
See “Implementation of Federal Prize Authority: Progress Report, A Report from the Office of Science and
Technology Policy In Response to the Requirements of the America COMPETES Reauthorization Act of 2010,”
Office of Science and Technology Policy, March 2012,
http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/ostp/competes_report_on_prizes_final.pdf. The America
COMPETES Reauthorization Act of 2010 granted all Federal agencies the authority to administer prize
competitions to increase innovation.
7
Netflix, for example, offered one million dollars in 2006 for an algorithm to improve its predictive capacity. The
competition attracted some 27,000 entrants and the prize was awarded in 2009 to a team that achieved the specified
target. The (excessive?) number of entrants may mirror problems that also occur in “patent races” (Michael Baye
and Heidrun C. Hoppe, "The strategic equivalence of rent-seeking, innovation, and patent-race games," Games and
Economic Behavior, 44 (2) 2003: 217-226.) The publicity was undoubtedly valuable for Netflix, but the firm later
reported that the benefits it derived from the prize-winning code were limited because “the additional accuracy gains
that we measured did not seem to justify the engineering effort needed to bring them into a production
environment.” This owed in part to a changed market environment, for which the findings from the competition

economists lobby for these nonmarket-oriented policies as complements or superior alternatives
to intellectual property rights.8 The rationale for promoting innovation prizes ranges from
attractive properties of theoretical economic models to unexamined case studies, and these
debates would benefit from more empirical analysis and information drawn from the actual
historical record.
This survey considers the nature and consequences of alternative technology policy
instruments in the United States, Britain and France during the early industrial period. The paper
reviews the use and misuse of case studies regarding several prominent innovation awards,
assesses the experience of prestigious prize-granting institutions, and presents the results from
systematic empirical research on historical innovation prizes. The first section revisits the record
for several popular case studies that have figured prominently as representative of the historical
experience for inducement awards and related policy initiatives. The second section discusses
the salient details regarding the award of prizes by the Royal Society of Arts in England, and the
Society for the Encouragement of National Industry in France. The final section outlines the
results from large-scale empirical studies based on several different samples of prizes, including
awards to great inventors, and prize grants at industrial exhibitions in the nineteenth century.
These findings have implications for effective innovation policies, but the paper does not attempt
to project schemes for the design of an optimal inducement mechanism.

I. PRIZES IN PRACTICE

were less relevant. See Xavier Amatriain and Justin Basilico, “Netflix Recommendations: Beyond the 5 stars (Part
1),” available on the firm’s website at http://techblog.netflix.com/2012/04/netflix-recommendations-beyond-5stars.html.
8
Joseph Stiglitz, “Give prizes not patents,” New Scientist, 16 September 2006, p. 21.

A substantial amount of theoretical economic research addresses the question of innovation
prizes.9 Theorists primarily distinguish between ex ante inducement awards, ex post prizes such
as rewards to the winners of competitions, targeted prizes that relate to a specific and welldefined problem, and prizes for nonspecific achievements such as lifetime-career awards, while
more expansive definitions include research grants that subsidize inputs into technology, and
procurement contracts. The analysis at times contrasts intellectual property rights and alternative
arrangements as mutually exclusive, whereas other approaches assume their complementary
existence.10 Both technological discovery and the transformation of an invention into a
commercially useful innovation are stochastic and dynamic processes that are inherently difficult
to predict, so it is important to understand the fundamental role of information, valuation, and
incentives in policy alternatives. For instance, in a pioneering article, Brian Wright concludes
that the choice between intellectual property and other mechanisms will depend on the degree of
informational asymmetry between inventors and prize-granting agencies; if value and cost
cannot be accurately determined by grantors, patents would tend to dominate other prospective
incentive measures.11 What has been markedly missing from such valuable discussions,
however, is direct attention to the pragmatic details of how innovation prizes have worked in
practice, the political economy of administered institutions, and the deadweight losses that may
result from associated sources of inefficiency.
The most popular and influential example of an inducement prize is the significant sum
that was offered for an accurate means of gauging longitude at sea, so it is worth re-examining
9

An excellent overview is available in Suzanne Scotchmer, Innovation and Incentives, Cambridge: MIT Press,
2004. See also Benjamin N. Roin, “Intellectual Property versus Prizes: Reframing the Debate,” University of
Chicago Law Review, vol. 81, 2014: 999-1078.
10
See, for instance, Bronwyn Hall et al., "The choice between formal and informal intellectual property: a review,"
Journal of Economic Literature 52 (2) 2014: 375-423; Michael Kremer and Heidi Williams, "Incentivizing
innovation: Adding to the tool kit," Innovation Policy and the Economy, Vol. 10 (2010): 1-17.
11
Brian Wright, “The Economics of Invention Incentives: Patents, Prizes and Research Contracts,” American
Economic Review, 73 (4) 1983: 691-707.

this case study.12 Specialists with a detailed knowledge of this case tend to be somewhat
skeptical about the effectiveness of the Longitude prize, which nobody ever officially won.13
John Harrison (1693-1776), a poor uneducated clockmaker, encountered numerous obstacles in
his dealings with the Board that administered the prize, including competition from some who
were also attempting to win the award on their own account.14 A full 47 years elapsed before
Harrison actually received compensation from another source than the Longitude Board. It is
possible that the information about the winning technology generated spillovers that benefited
the industry, but the incentives were quite different for the losers, who bore the risk of revealing
their inventive ideas without obtaining a return. The astronomer Samuel Molyneux was
appointed to examine the work of another participant in the race, Zachariah Williams, and

12

The British Parliament passed a bill in July 1714 “for providing a public reward for such person or persons as
shall discover the longitude at sea.” The bill offered “10,000 pounds if the method were accurate to within 1 degree,
or 60 nautical miles; 15,000 pounds if the method were accurate to within 2/3 degree, or 40 nautical miles; 20,000
pounds if the method were accurate to within ½ degree, or 30 nautical miles.” The panel of judges comprised 22
commissioners, including the astronomer royal, the Speaker of the House of Commons, and the lords of Admiralty.
See the records at Papers of the Board of Longitude RGO 14/1, available at http://cudl.lib.cam.ac.uk/view/MSRGO-00014-00001/19. A modern version of this prize, Longitude 2014 (https://longitudeprize.org) notes that
“Bacteria are evolving to become resistant to the antibiotics we have successfully used for decades to treat
infections. Longitude Prize is looking to help tackle the problem with a £10 million prize fund for a diagnostic tool
that can rule out antibiotic use or help identify an effective antibiotic to treat a patient.” At the same time, other
grantors are offering equally large sums for similar solutions. For instance, the Department of Health and Human
Services plans that “A prize of up to $20 million will be awarded to the first group(s) to develop a rapid, point-ofcare diagnostic test to be used by health care providers to identify highly resistant bacterial infections” (nih.gov
website). See also Jon White, “Why it's time to resurrect a centuries-old prize,” New Scientist, Volume 222, Issue
2970, 24 May 2014, p. 29; and M. Diane Burton and Tom Nicholas, “Patents and the Search for Longitude,”
unpublished working paper, July 2015.
13

David Landes, Revolution in Time, Cambridge: Belknap, Harvard University Press, 1983. For a popular account
that also highlights the inefficiencies and biases associated with the administration of this prize, see Dava Sobel,
Longitude: The True Story of a Lone Genius Who Solved the Greatest Scientific Problem of His Time, New York:
Penguin Press, 1996.
14
As shown in the empirical section, the social standing of inventors affected the likelihood of prize awards. For
instance, the uneducated George Stephenson and the well-connected Sir Humphry Davy both resolved the problem
of an effective safety lamp. According to the Dictionary of National Biography, Davy received public accolades and
a testimonial of £2000, whereas Stephenson was given the “paltry” sum of 100 guineas.

Williams claimed that Molyneux stole his design. Williams understandably became so secretive
about his methods that it was difficult to accurately assess his contributions.15
The positive assessment of the role of prizes in generating a solution to longstanding
problems at times risks faulty logic involving post hoc ergo propter hoc fallacies. David Landes
points out that, while it is true that the British prize was associated with numerous attempts to
resolve the problem, the issue had been known and researched for more than a century prior to
the passage of the Longitude Bill in 1714. Enormous sums had been offered throughout Europe
for the discovery of a means of measuring longitude, long before the British introduced their own
prize, and those had all failed to produce a positive outcome. Despite the outlay of significant
resources towards assessing and aiding applicants, Spain, Venice and Holland had eventually
given up, because “necessity may be the mother of invention, especially if backed by money, but
there is no substitute for the kind of environment that generates novelty.” 16 Markets may have
failed because of spillovers that could not be privately captured, but it is also possible that, even
in the absence of state-sponsored prizes, another substitute would have been developed, because
of the significant profits that awaited anyone who resolved the problem.
In Europe, an extensive array of targeted prizes were conferred on inventors who directed
their efforts to specific discoveries, such as the premium offered for margarine and food
preservation, and the sums directed toward the process to make soda from sodium chloride.17 In
a related example, the French Academy of Sciences in 1775 offered a cash prize for the

15

Albert J. Kuhn, “Dr. Johnson, Zachariah Williams, and the Eighteenth-Century Search for the Longitude,”
Modern Philology, Vol. 82, No. 1 (Aug., 1984): 40-52.
16
David Landes, “The Creation of Knowledge and Technique: Today's Task and Yesterday's Experience,”
Daedalus, Vol. 109, No. 1, (Winter, 1980): 111-120, p. 114. Similar examples appear in the archives of the Royal
Society of Arts in London, where committees concluded that prizes, claimed fifty years or more after their initial
introduction, had functioned as successful inducements.
17
Liam Brunt, Josh Lerner, and Tom Nicholas, "Inducement prizes and innovation," Journal of Industrial
Economics 60, no. 4 (2012): 657-696, study the awards of the Royal Agricultural Society in England and conclude
that such prizes promoted technological progress and competition.

discovery of a process to create sodium carbonate from the cheaper sodium chloride.18 Nicolas
Leblanc succeeded in finding a viable manufacturing solution, but he never received the prize
and his factory was expropriated by the revolutionary government. From one perspective, such
prizes succeeded if, despite the failure of Harrison or Leblanc to win the award, the offers did
induce inventors to turn to the issue that was in need of a resolution. However, even if
unawarded prizes provided an effective one-period inducement, this argument fails to take into
account the deterrent effect owing to a fall in the credibility of the granting agency or
mechanism. That is, the process of invention is a repeated game and, when a prize is not
bestowed even though the conditions are satisfied, this occurrence reduces the perceived
probability of future awards and thus the expected benefits of prizes.19
Other prominent examples of such innovation prizes reveal additional complexities,
including the potential for overcompensation of some inventors through multiple overlapping
awards. Premiums from the state did not preclude inventors from also pursuing profits through
other means, including patent protection. For instance, Napoleon III offered a monetary prize for
the invention of a cheap substitute for butter that may have induced Hippolyte Mège to make
significant improvements in margarine production. In assessing the efficacy of this prize it
should be noted that many inventors worldwide were already pursuing the idea of a cheap and
longer-lasting substitute for butter, and for the use of such fats in candles and soap. Mège not
only won the prize money, but also obtained patent protection for fifteen years in France in 1869,
and patented the original invention and several improvements in England, Austria, Bavaria, and
18

Charles C. Gillispie. "The Discovery of the Leblanc Process." Isis. 48 (June 1957): 152-170.
The key point is that systematic awards take place in the context of a repeated game. If this were not the case, it
would be rational for governments or private institutions to costlessly benefit, by continually announcing an array of
spectacular prizes for inventions, and to subsequently refuse to make the award once the solution was discovered.
For a French example, see the prize of one million francs which Napoleon offered in 1810 for the inventor of an
effective flax-spinning machine. Philippe Girard succeeded in making such a machine but never received the award,
although his heirs were later given a small pension after his death. Gabriel Desclosières,Vie et inventions de
Philippe de Girard, inventeur de la filature mécanique du lin (2e éd.), Paris: A. Pigoreau, 1881.
19

the United States. He sold the patent rights in Holland and the United States, to assignees who
made the improvements that transformed the patented product into a commercially-viable good.
In the absence of these follow-on patent rights, it is not clear that Mège himself would have had
the incentive to invest in efforts to turn the discovery into a better product.20
The experience of the patentee John Wesley Hyatt is also often cited as an example of an
inducement prize that was administered by a private company.21 The billiard table producers
Phelan and Collender had offered a prize of $10,000 in 1863 for a material to replace costly and
increasingly scarce ivory inputs that were used to make billiard balls.22 This was not a new area
of inquiry, as witnessed by the accomplishments of British inventors Alexander Parkes and
Daniel Spill, as well as prior American patents on this subject-matter, but Hyatt sustained an
independent patent claim on his contribution.23 Both Parkes and Spill failed as entrepreneurs,
and Hyatt’s patented version proved to be successful in the marketplace. The $10,000 prize was
never paid out, but it is possible that Hyatt himself chose not to accept it. He established several
firms (including the prominent Celluloid Manufacturing Company), which allowed him to obtain
benefits from the marketplace, as a multiple patentee and entrepreneur, that were far in excess of
the prize money that Phelan and Collender had offered. This example illustrates problems of
20

To avoid this problem, it is possible to structure the terms of the prize to offer interim awards until the product or
process is successfully commercialized.
21
Hyatt’s first patent was obtained in 1861; his first patent for billiard balls was granted in 1865; and he later filed
over two hundred patents on a wide variety of inventions.
22
This New York company was the largest manufacturer of billiards tables in the world, employing over 150 men
and significant capital. The firm continually introduced patented innovations, and both Hugh Collender and Michael
Phelan were successful multiple patentees. The partners were flamboyant promoters, and it is possible that the prize
may have been offered as a means of gaining free publicity. (“These gentlemen are more enterprising than most of
the New York manufacturers, and do not hide their light under a bushel. They have made their names so familiar to
the public, and their manufactory so well known, that it is impossible to write a comprehensive account of the
manufactures of New York without noticing it,” according to John Leander Bishop, A History of American
Manufactures from 1608 to 1860, Edw. Young, 1864, p. 612.)
23
A fascinating account of the progress of invention in the industry is given in Celluloid Manuf’g Co. v. American
Zylonite Co., CC S.D. NY, 26 F. 692, 1886. See also Tim A Osswald and Sylvana Garcıa-Rodrıguez, “The History
of Sustainable Bio-based Polymers,” in Sanjay Kumar Sharma et al. (eds), A Handbook of Applied Biopolymer
Technology: Synthesis, Degradation and Applications, London: Royal Society of Chemistry, 2011: 1-21. Hyatt
obtained a trademark in 1873 on the term “celluloid.”

adverse selection (where only “lemons” are awarded the payoff), and also difficulties in arriving
at an accurate inducement “price” when part of the benefit to the winner comprises additional
gains such as market power.
Scholars who favour “patent buyout” policies typically cite the example of the
“Daguerreotype patent,” claiming that the French government purchased the rights to a patent
whose social value was great, and allowed everyone to have free access to the technology.
According to Michael Kremer’s account, “In 1839 the French government purchased the
Daguerreotype patent and placed it in the public domain. Such patent buyouts could potentially
eliminate the monopoly price distortions and incentives for rent-stealing duplicative research
created by patents, while increasing incentives for original research.”24 The facts are somewhat
different, however. Most noticeably, a search in nineteenth-century patent records reveal that
Daguerre never obtained a patent in France at any point in his life for this or any other invention.
As such, there was no patent for the French government to buy out, and the case study instead
highlights the incentives for unproductive “rent-stealing” that arises when returns can be
negotiated through a political process.
In popular histories, Daguerre typically receives sole credit for the discovery of a method
of reproducing photographic images. However, work in photography had been in progress for
over a century, and arguably the most significant advances up to that date had been made by
Joseph-Nicéphore Niépce. Daguerre formed a partnership with Niépce, who died in 1833 and
bequeathed his inventive rights to his son. Isidore Niépce agreed that it was advisable for

24

Michael Kremer, “Patent Buyouts: A Mechanism for Encouraging Innovation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
(1998) 113 (4): 1137-1167. The quote is from the abstract of this article. For related buyout theories, see the
discussion in Alberto Galasso et al., “Market Outcomes and Dynamic Patent Buyouts,” No. w20197. National
Bureau of Economic Research, 2014. Michael Kremer, “Creating Markets for New Vaccines. Part II: Design
Issues,” Innovation Policy and the Economy, Vol. 1 (2000): 73-118, motivates the discussion with the Longitude
Prize.

marketing purposes that Daguerre should have the sole attribution rights to the joint work
Daguerre had accomplished with Isidore’s father.25 The political economy behind Daguerre’s
prize of August 1839 was typical of the stratagems and manipulations that French inventors often
adopted to get support and payouts from the authorities.26 Instead of paying the extremely high
fees for a patent, and trying to interest licencees or assignees, Daguerre was able to secure the
patronage of François Arago, a politician and influential member of the Académie des Sciences,
who lobbied strongly on Daguerre’s behalf in favour of a government grant. When the inventor
turned over to the Ministry of the Interior a packet with the specification and information on the
discovery, Arago was involved in the process of examining and verifying their validity on behalf
of the French government, in something of a conflict of interest.
In view of the “patent buyout” argument, it is ironic that Daguerre’s main plea to the
French legislature was that he was unable to apply for a patent to gain benefits from the process:
“Unfortunately for the authors of this great discovery, it is impossible for them to commercialize
it and thereby obtain compensation for the sacrifices they have endured as a result of their long
and hitherto fruitless trials. Their invention is not susceptible to patent protection ... It is
therefore necessarily the case that this process must belong to everyone or else it must remain
unknown.”27 Daguerre thus contended that his idea was an unpatentable trade secret and, once it
25

The two seem to have had a falling-out, however, as Isidore later inveighs against Daguerre for "the
Machiavellian tendencies which have taken away … the honor for which M. J.-N. Niépce had toiled over a period of
twenty years": Historique de la découverte improprement nommée Daguerréotype, précédée d'une notice sur son
véritable inventeur M. Joseph-Nicéphore Niépce de Chalon-sur-Saône; par son fils Isidore Niépce, Paris: Astier,
1841 (my translation).
26
See Liliane Hilaire-Perez, L'Invention technique au siècle des lumières, Paris: Albin Michel, 2000; and B. Zorina
Khan, The Democratization of Invention: Patents and Copyrights in American Economic Development, Cambridge:
NBER and Cambridge University Press, 2005, Chapter 2.
27
My translation (and my emphasis) of: “Malheureusement pour les auteurs de cette belle découverte, il leur est
impossible d'en faire un objet d'industrie et de s'indemniser des sacrifices que leur ont imposés tant d'essais si longtemps infructueux. Leur invention n'est pas susceptible d'être protégée par un brevet. … il faut donc nécéssairement
que ce procédé appartienne à tout le monde ou qu'il reste inconnu.” Louis-Jacques-Mandé Daguerre, Historique et
description des procédés du daguerréotype et du diorama, Paris: Delloye, 1839, p. 2. The main details in this section
are drawn from this original text, which includes official documents for the transaction.

was revealed, the whole world would have free access to his ideas and he would be unable to
appropriate any returns. As such, the choice before the legislature was for his secret to die with
him and be lost to the world (“il devait se perdre et mourir avec ses inventeurs”), or for the state
to buy the information and so benefit the public. An appeal was further cannily made to the
essentially mercantilist nature of the French authorities, by hinting that otherwise foreigners
might make an offer that Daguerre could not refuse. The measure was quickly approved, and an
annual lifetime pension of 10,000 francs was awarded for the discovery.28
Daguerre at the same time proceeded to file for a patent in England under the name of
Miles Berry (a British patent agent), giving the lie to the notion that the invention was
unpatentable, and reneging on the bargain that the French government would buy the discovery
on behalf of the entire world.29 Daguerre and Berry then placed a true patent buyout prospectus
before the British government, on the grounds that the inventor was “obliged to ask so large a
sum to Individuals for Licences that few can afford to take them.”30 As a result of this alleged
failure of the market to recognize the true value of the invention, the inventor wished “to solicit
Her Majesty or the Government of England to purchase the said Patent right for the purpose of
throwing it open in England for the benefit of the Public and preventing this important Discovery
being fettered or limited by individual interest or exertion.”31 Daguerre’s British patent buyout

28

The request was initially for an upfront award of 200,000 francs, but an annual lifetime payment seemed more
politically expedient than such a large lump sum payout. Six thousand francs per annum went to Daguerre, and the
remainder to Isidore Niepce, with residual rights of 50 percent of this sum payable during their widows’ lifetime.
Louis-Jacques-Mandé Daguerre, Historique et description des procédés du daguerréotype et du diorama, Paris:
Delloye, 1839.
29
See patent No. 8194 (August 14, 1839) for "A New or Improved Method of Obtaining the Spontaneous
Reproduction of all the Images Received in the Focus of the Camera Obscura." England maintained a registration
system, where patentees did not have to be the “first and true inventor” in reality, and it was common for agents like
Berry to obtain patents on behalf of foreigners. See also the Court of Common Pleas, Beard v. Egerton et al., May
27, 1846.
30
This “Memorial” is included in the appendix to R. Derek Wood, “The Daguerreotype Patent, The British
Government, and The Royal Society,” History of Photography, 4 (1)1980: 53–59.
31
Wood Appendix, op cit.

proposal was made on March 30, 1840; the government representative politely and tersely
declined the opportunity on March 31, 1840, on behalf of Her Majesty’s Treasury.
Patent buyouts are often proposed because they would allow ideas to circulate freely and
because such access enables cumulative inventions to flourish without the transactions costs and
deadweight loss that a monopolistic right of exclusion might impose. The Daguerre-Niépce
method did indeed spread quickly, comprising an undoubted advantage of the French policy, but
this approach to photographic reproduction was also short-lived and did not become the
dominant process in the marketplace. Instead, the English inventor William Fox Talbot patented
a technique in 1841 through which photographic prints could be developed from negatives, and it
was this approach that ultimately prevailed throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries in
the pre-digital era.32 The buyout of the Daguerre process may also have created its own problem
of cumulative invention, by putting in the public domain all of the efforts of prior inventors
whose work was incorporated in the Daguerreotype, without their permission and without
offering them any compensation.33 Questions also remain about whether the monetary award
accurately gauged the true value of the invention, given the availability of (present and
imminent) substitutes that were not taken into account in the public accounting; the deadweight
loss of taxation and redistributive effects of using public funds to benefit one group in society
(photographers); and, ultimately, the incentives that such a policy creates for inefficient rentseeking and patronage on the part of inventors and their influential connections.34

32

Talbot’s methods were different and independent of Daguerre’s and the validity of his patented discovery was
upheld in litigation. He was publicly criticized for the price of its use, and chose to appropriate returns through the
practice of price discrimination, charging professional photographers higher licence fees than amateurs.
33
Even if the process had been patented, this would still be true, because French patents were granted via a
registration system without any prior examination to determine the incremental contributions that were worthy of
exclusive property rights.
34
The role of such connections was important in European innovation awards, and comprised an additional cost of
administered prizes. Even in competitions with open access, worthy applications were at times not rewarded,
because the inventors lacked the advantage of patrons to exert their influence in prosecuting the claim on behalf of

II. EARLY PRIZE-GRANTING INSTITUTIONS
As the example of Daguerre highlights, European policies towards inventions and innovations in
the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries were based on an extensive but somewhat arbitrary array
of rewards and incentives. Inventors or introducers of inventions could benefit from titles,
pensions that sometimes extended to spouses and offspring, loans (some interest-free), lump-sum
grants, bounties or subsidies for production, exemptions from taxes, and monopoly grants in the
form of exclusive privileges.35 As such, the French and British experience offers a valuable
opportunity to analyze the relative benefits and costs of alternative institutions and policy
instruments for generating technological innovation. This section focuses on the analysis of
innovation inducements offered by two of the primary societies in London and Paris for the
encouragement of technological discoveries during the industrial revolution.
A key institution in the granting of prizes, medals, and “encouragements,” the Société
d'Encouragement pour l'Industrie Nationale (Society to Encourage National Industry or SEIN),
was founded in 1801.36 As the name suggests, its objectives were to promote economic

the inventor. “Unfortunately the government had no uniform policy for all inventors. Some it aided financially;
others it did not. More flagrantly inconsistent was its policy of granting monopolistic rights in many lines to court
favorites, so that the greater number enjoying exclusive privileges were not inventors,” Shelby T. McCloy, French
Inventions of the Eighteenth Century, Lexington: University of Kentucky Press, 1952, p. 171.
35
The award of technological prizes was administered by ad hoc committees or institutions who varied significantly
in the extent to which the application was debated or formally examined, and in the accuracy of their valuations. (As
Scientific American recognized, “The Expert Committee would have a very delicate duty to perform in fixing the
cash valuations, and they would constantly be subjected to risks and probabilities of making egregious errors.”
Scientific American, March 1852, vol 7, p. 221.) In 1790, M. Devilliers demonstrated two inventions in Paris: a
device to measure longitude and one to purify the town water supply. He claimed a total of 4,200 livres, and offered
to donate a quarter of the award to the paupers in the town, and the French Committee on Agriculture and
Commerce saw no need for deliberations before granting his request. In other cases, committees engaged in
extensive due diligence, and only offered conditional awards that awaited successful outcomes before payouts. See
B. Zorina Khan, The Democratization of Invention, op. cit.
36
Societies such as the Paris Académie des Sciences ostensibly offered prizes for discoveries in pure science,
although at times the subject matter included technological issues. See Maurice Crosland, “From Prizes to Grants in
the Support of Scientific Research in France in the Nineteenth Century: The Montyon Legacy,” Minerva, Vol. 17,
No. 3 (Autumn, 1979): 355-380.

development by furthering technological innovation and manufacturing, and specifically to
distribute information, assess and fund new inventions, and award prizes.37 The SEIN is often
characterized as a private free-market initiative to promote French industrial competitiveness, but
scholars point out that it was initially a state-founded and state-run institution that was created by
representatives primarily from such government departments as the Ministry of the Interior.38
In any event, it is clear that throughout its first century the administrators, committees and
members of the SEIN were primarily drawn from the elite circles of politicians, aristocrats,
scientists, professors, bankers, and wealthy manufacturers, who were not all necessarily qualified
to gauge inventive merit.39 Juries or committee membership may in part have been offered as an
honour, rather than as a means of obtaining the most competent or technically-qualified
personnel.
The Society published an annual list of proposed areas, to which it sought to attract
applicants for cash prizes, medals, and “encouragements” or other support for projects. The list
identified the problem, in specific terms in some cases, and quite broad and vague phrases in
others, along with the monetary value of the prize that was at stake. The Jacquard loom for silks,
improved turbines by Claude Burdin and his student Benoit Fourneyron, and the naturalization of
sugar beets, illustrate the successes of the Society. In 1810 Nicolas-François Appert received a
payout of 12,000 francs for his discoveries of improvements in food preservation, although his

37

Jean-Antoine Chaptal, President of the Society from 1801-1832, proved to be a remarkable force and leader in the
movement to support national industry, and was himself an accomplished scientist and industrialist.
38
The SEIN is typically described as the spontaneous creation of influential individuals and entrepreneurs who
wished to support domestic industry, but some researchers refer to this perspective as a “founding myth.” See
Andrew J. Butrica, “Creating a Past: The Founding of the Société d'Encouragement pour l'Industrie Nationale
Yesterday and Today,” The Public Historian, 20 (4) 1998: 21-42.
39
http://cnum.cnam.fr/CGI/fpage.cgi?BSPI.92/823/100/916/61/726 Bulletin for 1893, pp. 813-840 lists the
members of the board of directors since the inception. See also Serge Chassagne, “Une Institution Originale de la
France Post-Revolutionnaire et Imperiale: La Société D’encouragement pour L’industrie Nationale,” Histoire,
Économie et Société, 8e Année, No. 2 (2e trimestre 1989): 147-165.

method of employing heated glass bottles was not entirely novel.40 Appert did not have to turn
his rights over to the public; the sole requirement for earning the award was the printing of 200
copies of a short book to describe his methods, and he signed each volume individually, warning
potential infringers that he would prosecute them.41 The Society awarded Appert a silver medal
in 1816, followed by a gold medal in 1820, and a lack of coordination across prize-granting
societies allowed him to garner cash awards and prizes for the same discovery from several
different sources.42 Administered prize systems implied such negotiations and strategy could
increase the inventor’s rewards independently of the value of the invention and, consequently, as
Liliane Hilaire-Pérez notes, “in France, to invent meant to go into politics.”43

40

The Appert process seems to provide an example of an ex post award, rather the outcome of an inducement.
Relevant supporting original documents are included in Nicolas Appert, L’Art de conserver, pendant plusieurs
années, toutes les substances animales et végétales, Paris: Patris et Cie, 1810. See also the biography of Appert in
Potin, J., Exposition universelle internationale de 1889 à Paris, Rapports du jury international, Classes 70 et
71,1891: 9-14. Salting, boiling, pickling, and freezing had been practiced for centuries as cheap methods of
conserving foods, and several scientists had devised a similar process to Appert’s. Appert had long been
experimenting on the job with ways to improve on the flavor of such preserved foods. He was able to interest
English financiers who in 1804 funded his small manufactory in Massy that employed about 30 women, and this
work drew the attention of connected officials, as well as the popular press. The Bureau consultatif des arts et
manufactures subjected his foods to several tests and testimonies from elite panelists. As might be expected from a
former gourmet chef, the samples he offered the panel included delicacies like freshly-picked truffles that had been
preserved, cherries, raspberries and cream, that had been put up by hand in bottles in a very labour-intensive
process. Clearly, Appert’s bottles were not ideal for provisioning an army, and the English method of canning (with
American improvements) was more efficient. In France, “Appertized” establishments were small artisanal shops,
the price of preserved foods was too expensive for large-scale usage, (French!) soldiers detested the taste of the
tinned mass-produced items, cases of massive food poisoning led to wariness, and these goods remained a niche
product until the end of the nineteenth century. See Martin Bruegel, “Du temps annuel au temps quotidien: la
conserve appertisée à la conquête du marché, 1810-1920,” Revue d'histoire moderne et contemporaine, 44 (1) 1997:
40-67. Appert’s manufacturing efforts were not financially successful and the state made him an annual pension of
1200 francs to ease his poverty.
41
“L’auteur s’est conformé a tout ce qu’exige la loi pour assurer sa propriété; il prévient en conséquence qu’il
poursuivra les contrefacteurs et débitants d’exemplaires contrefaits…” (This signed warning appeared on the
frontispiece of Appert’s 1810 book, op. cit.) Appert submitted the copies of this work to the Bureau consultatif des
Arts et Manufactures. Similarly, James Douglas, an English engineer, was able to gain the support of influential
officials, including Chaptal, which he was able to parlay into a portfolio of benefits, including a large loan from the
Conservatoire des arts et métiers, patents for his machines, as well as funds from the Society for the Encouragement
of National Industry. Michael P. Fitzsimmons, From Artisan to Worker: Guilds, the French State, and the
Organization of Labor, 1776-1821, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010.
42
The archival records of both the RSA and the SEIN indicate a significant number of “repeat players.” The
prevalence of repeat winners, rather than losers who subsequently won, suggests that the patterns were likely not due
to learning.
43
“Invention and the State in 18th-Century France,” Technology and Culture, 32 (4) 1991: 911-931.

Table 1 shows the subject-matter for the prizes that were granted during the first halfcentury of the Society’s existence. The percentage distribution by value indicates the relative
importance of the awards during this critical period, and suggest the prizes were not wholly
aligned with the economic value of innovations for the individual industry. The Society offered
valuable support for heavy industry and metals, including forges, locomotives, machine tools, as
well as steam engines. However, awards for the domestic cultivation of sugar beets and sugar
production accounted for 9.3 percent of prizes, relative to a mere 1.2 percent for locomotives,
and it is not clear why sugar should have been viewed as more meritorious than transportation.
The ceramics industry obtained a surprising 12.7 percent of funding, and fine arts and music
similarly received 11 percent of the prizes and encouragements. The criteria for some grants
were associated with inventive novelty and higher productivity, but others were less related to
technological excellence, and included justifications that ranged from close imitation of foreign
goods, to good workmanship and the beauty of an item, and even the moral character of the
applicants.44 The Bulletin of the Society for 1820 included figures that showed 184,000 francs
had been offered as prizes since the founding of the institution, whereas only 41.6 percent of this
sum had actually been granted. In some instances, the prize was withdrawn because the problem
had already been resolved elsewhere, or because no applicants were deemed to be worthy, which
were indicative of effective due diligence. In many other areas, the award remained unclaimed
throughout its history because of a lack of entries, indicating nobody had been “induced” by the
offer, perhaps because the award was too low or the problem was insoluble or uninteresting.
Such failures need to be taken into account, to avoid a selection bias in the assessment of
inducement prizes.
44

These statements are based on a perusal of several thousand pages of handwritten committee reports in the attic of
the Society in Paris, France.

In view of current advocacy in favour of prizes for medical discoveries, it is relevant to
note that several prizes were offered in nineteenth-century France, and in other countries, for
cures, preventive measures, and medical solutions to public health problems such as cholera.45
The French Academy of Sciences bestowed a prize of 5000 francs on Léon Doyère for his
experiments on cholera victims, whereas specialists disparaged his efforts as already known in
points, and incorrect in others. The Russian government offered 25,000 roubles for the best
treatise on this subject, and made investments in examining 125 entries, none of which was
practicable.46 A well-known and often-cited prize of 100,000 francs, the Bréant award, was
offered for a means of curing cholera, or for prevention of the epidemics. The Bréant fund made
a minor payout but remained largely intact and unclaimed well into the twentieth century, despite
numerous submissions that proved to be largely ineffective or even irrelevant. Clearly, “money
left on the table” in this way was not costless, because there was an opportunity cost in terms of
more viable or productive alternatives that could have been funded.
The Royal Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce
(commonly known as the Royal Society of Arts or the RSA) offers another example where the
historical details are not entirely consistent with popular anecdotes. The Royal Society of Arts
has been cited as an institution that serves as a model for the adoption of prizes instead of
intellectual property rights. For instance, Joseph Stiglitz, a theorist and holder of the Nobel Prize
in Economics, proclaims: “the alternative of awarding prizes would be more efficient and more
equitable. It would provide strong incentives for research but without the inefficiencies

45

An example is S. 627 (113th Congress): Medical Innovation Prize Fund Act of March 2013. For an assessment of
policy towards medical innovation, see Marlynn Wei, "Should Prizes Replace Patents-A Critique of the Medical
Innovation Prize Act of 2005," BUJ Sci. & Tech. L. 13 (2007): 25; and Ernst Berndt et al., “Advance Market
Commitments for Vaccines Against Neglected Diseases: Estimating Costs and Effectiveness” Health Economics
16(3) 2007: 491-511.
46
See S.L. Kotar and J.E. Gessler, Cholera: A Worldwide History, McFarland, 2014.

associated with monopolisation. This is not a new idea – in the UK for instance, the Royal
Society of Arts has long advocated the use of prizes. But it is, perhaps, an idea whose time has
come.”47
The RSA was founded in London in 1754, in part to “embolden enterprise,” according to
its charter. Initially, the Society published annual lists of items for which inducement awards
were to be offered, in the form of honorary medals and cash payouts. These prizes were
administered by specific committees in the designated categories of Polite Arts, Mechanics,
Agriculture, Chemistry, Manufactures, as well as Colonies and Trade. The society achieved
some success in calling attention to scarcity in such industrial areas as the production of soda
made from salt. In others, such as its treatment of the great inventor John Kay, its record is less
than stellar.48 The Royal Society itself was the target of persistent criticism throughout this
period, including scathing assessments by its own disillusioned members, who attributed awards
to arbitrary factors such as personal influence, the persistence of one's recommenders, or the selfinterest of the institution in making the award. As in France, the mercantilist doctrines that
informed the choices of the Royal Society of Arts (RSA) meant that a great deal of effort and
funds were directed toward nationalistic attempts to replicate items and inputs that were already
being produced more efficiently in foreign countries.

47

Joseph Stiglitz, “Give prizes not patents,” New Scientist, 16 September 2006, p. 21.
The experience of the famous English textile machine inventor, John Kay, illustrates the asymmetries and risks
involved in individual bargains struck with such authorities. Kay settled in France because of state promises of
support as well as a monopoly on textile shuttles, and he substantially aided this country’s technological competency
in the textile industry. The Royal Society in England promised him a generous reward to leave France, and then
reneged on the agreement once he was back in London. Kay then contacted Prudaine de Montigny, Conseiller
d’Etat in London, to explore the possibility of receiving French financial aid if he again immigrated to Paris. Later
that same year, Kay wrote to M. de Brou, Intendant de Rouen, to complain that he was still not receiving the annuity
he had been promised. This account is based on correspondence and documents in the French National Archives.
See B. Zorina Khan and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “Institutions and Technological Innovation During Early Economic
Growth: Evidence from the Great Inventors of the United States, 1790-1930,” in Institutions and Economic Growth,
(eds) Theo Eicher and Cecilia Garcia-Penalosa, MIT Press (2006):123-158.
48

The Royal Society, an early advocate of prizes, did not view them as complementary to
patents and, indeed, was initially hostile to the grant of patents. The Rules and Orders of the
Society stipulated that prize winners were not permitted to obtain patents for their inventions.
This led to an adverse selection effect, because the owners of important discoveries chose to
obtain patents and bypassed the RSA, whereas the owners of minor inventions had an incentive
to try to claim a prize award that was in excess of the market value of the item.49 As a result, the
annals of the RSA prizes were largely devoted to undistinguished contributions, and the truly
significant innovations were to be found in the roster of patentees, rather than in RSA records.
For instance, the inventor Samuel Clegg obtained a patent for an important gas-meter in 1815,
and the RSA gold medal was instead given for an incremental improvement on Clegg’s patent.
As one contemporary observer pointed out: “Of the importance of these discoveries the Society
is by no means ignorant; but as, in connection with the majority of the industries which grew out
of these discoveries, patents were obtained, the Society refused to take cognizance of them,
having effectually closed its doors against all patented inventions; the necessary result, as coal,
iron, and the steam engine extended their influence, was that the Society lost power and
position….”50
As was the case for the French SEIN, the archives of the Royal Society of Arts reveal
prizes which remained unawarded over the course of decades, as well as other prizes offered for

49

The most palpable successes of the RSA were typically in subject areas that were unpatentable, such as the 1802
medal and cash award to Henry Greathead’s lifeboat, which also received numerous other awards from Parliament,
as well as from other institutions. Inventors who competed for nonmonetary awards may have been interested in the
prospect of attracting the notice of a patron on one of the committees, or in promoting their claims to the military or
the government.
50
The quote is from an address of the Financial Officer of the Society, Samuel Thomas Davenport, “A Glance of the
Past and Present of the Society of Arts, with some suggestions as to the Future,” Journal of the Royal Society of
Arts, vol 17, 1868: 10-27, p. 22.

problems that had long been resolved or patented.51 For instance, in 1777 a gold medal was
available for a method to measure the degree of sweetness in saccharine substances, that no one
ever attempted to resolve.52 Sir Henry Trueman Wood, a Secretary of the RSA for several
decades, points to the inability of the committees to identify or predict the course of
economically important new technologies.53 A large sum was allotted to the provision of an
improved supply of fish to markets in London, although the results were not entirely satisfactory
in terms of meeting the expectations of the Committee in question. Panels of judges applied
idiosyncratic criteria to the assessment of applications and, Wood noted, some of the awards may
have been motivated by criteria besides the objective quality of the invention, such as sympathy
or friendship. Other chroniclers (including another Secretary) of the RSA conclude that
economic advance soon “made obsolete the whole idea of encouraging industrial progress by the
award of prizes.”54 Outsiders tended to regard the institution with a more sanguine perspective,
but conceded that “Of course it is true that the Society of Arts can take no credit for the
development of the iron industry in Britain, or that of the steam-engine, and little for the creation

51

Sir Henry Trueman Wood, “The Royal Society of Arts VI.—The Premiums. (1754-1851) ,” Journal of the Royal
Society of Arts, vol. LX January 26 1912: 263-274. The other unattributed examples in this paragraph are drawn
from this article. The quoted phrase appears on p. 268.
52
Wood censures some of the decisions that were motivated by “lamentable ignorance” (p. 210), but looks on the
bright side, musing that “while a great many undeserving inventions were rewarded, there are not a great many
which were rejected and which afterwards proved themselves of any value” p. 209. Henry Trueman Wood, “The
Royal Society of Arts,” VI.—The Premiums, Journal of the Royal Society of Arts, Vol. 60 (3086) 1912: 208-216.
53
See H. T. Wood, A history of the Royal Society of Arts, Murray, London, 1913:
“That in the lists so many familiar names are missing is certainly disappointing. One would like to have found the
names of Watt, Hargreaves … amongst those whose inventions were recognized and rewarded by the Society of
Arts. But in the early records none of these names appear. Why is this? … A committee which could anticipate the
direction in which industry or science would progress would have to be composed of men with prescience beyond
their fellows (p. 241)…Another reason which prevented the Society from taking cognizance of many important
inventions was the regulation which excluded patented articles (p. 244).” Instead, one notes awards for obsolete
spinning wheels, for which “various prizes were offered, and certain small improvements were duly rewarded.
None of them, however, were of any great value, and, as we fully recognize now, the efforts of the Society were
quite futile, and its energy was entirely misdirected” (p. 260).
54
D. Hudson and K. W. Luckhurst, The Royal Society of Arts, 1754-1954, London: John Murray, 1954, p. 177.

of the Lancashire textile industry. It may even be doubted whether the awards of prizes and
medals would have had the least effect in strengthening enormous economic forces.”55
The general conclusions of authors, including insiders and officers of the Society, is that
the policy of granting prizes resulted in a few successes, but that industrialization in Britain was
largely independent of such awards. Their views are supported by the data, drawn from the
archival records of the RSA. Figure 1 shows the time series of awards bestowed during the
eighteenth century, and reveals a sharp drop-off in the total amount of prizes in the decade after
the Society’s founding in 1754. The levels after 1770 comprise a much lower plateau of activity,
which do not reflect the expansion and structural change in the wider economy. Table 2
examines the patterns of awards at a more disaggregated level. These data indicate that the
awards of the Society within the declining patterns over time were for innovations that were
primarily outside of the burgeoning manufacturing sector, which accounted for just 7.3 percent
of total funds allocated through 1782.56 Prizes were given in agriculture for the introduction of
imported fodder-crops such as Swedish turnips, rhubarb and the mangold-wurzel, but not for
innovative plant breeding. However, over twenty million trees were planted owing to awards
that were largely offered to the landed gentry. As in France, the sector that benefited most from
the premiums that the RSA bestowed was the “polite arts,” including watercolours, sketches,
55

Rupert Hall, “The Royal Society of Arts: Two Centuries of Progress in Science and Technology,” Journal of the
Royal Society of Arts, Vol. 122 (5218) 1974: 641-658, p. 644. He adds, “the main pioneers … went without
recognition, perhaps because of patent protection. It is my impression that such awards had negligible effects on
major industrial changes” p. 645. For a debate about such issues in the early textile industry, see Trevor Griffiths et
al., “Inventive activity and the British textile industry , 1700-1800,” Journal of Economic History, 52 (4) 1992: 881906; Richard Sullivan, “Patent counts and Textile invention: A comment of Griffiths, Hunt and O’ Brien,” Journal
of Economic History, 55 (3) 1995:667-670; Patrick O’ Brien et al., “There is nothing outside the text and there is no
safety in numbers: a reply to Sullivan,” 55 (3) 1995:671-672.
56
Similarly, between 1731 and 1839, the prestigious Copley Medal was largely given for optics, heat and electricity,
anatomy, and chemistry, with just 12 percent of the awards in the area of mechanics. The vast majority of these
awards (90 percent) went to higher status gentlemen and professionals, with only 10 percent given to artisans or
tradesmen, and the authors note some degree of “internal favoritism” in the selection process. See M. Yakup Bektas
and Maurice Crosland, “The Copley Medal: the Establishment of a Reward System in the Royal Society, 17311839,” Notes Rec. R. Soc. Lond. 46 (1) 1992: 43-76.

sculpture, and “musick.” The analysis by contemporary insiders and the data are thus consistent
with the notion that the course of British industrialization was not significantly altered or aided
by the policies of the premier prize-granting institution of its time.
It is therefore not surprising that, in both England and France, the systematic institution
of “inducement prizes” that had prevailed in the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries failed
to survive except for sporadic instances. In England, by the 1820s the Royal Society realized the
inefficiencies associated with prizes, and instead switched to lobbying in favour of patents. By
the time of the Crystal Palace Exhibition in 1851, the RSA had not only acknowledged the value
of patents, it had become active in lobbying for reforms to strengthen the British patent laws
along the lines of the U.S. model.57 The system of inducement prizes in France and England was
typically replaced by research grants to underwrite the costs of R&D inputs into the technology
production process.58 Both institutions also switched their mandate towards the provision of
information and technical education.59 The RSA even refused to accept further funding from
benefactors who wished to designate prizes, because such endowments hampered their desire to
reform their policies away from such targeted awards and towards more productive endeavours
for “the advancement of Natural Knowledge.”60

57

H T Wood, History of the Royal Society of Arts, London: John Murray, 1913, p. 212:“Indeed, it was only in our
own generation that the value of protection by patent was fully realised, and that - to quote once more an oftenquoted saying of the late Sir William Siemens - if an invention were found lying in the gutter, it would be worth
while to assign it to an owner who would have an interest in looking after it.”
58
See, for instance, Maurice Crosland, “From Prizes to Grants in the Support of Scientific Research in France in the
Nineteenth Century: The Montyon Legacy,” Minerva, Vol. 17, No. 3 (Autumn, 1979): 355-380; Roy M. MacLeod,
"The Royal Society and the government grant: Note on the Administration of Scientific Research, 1849-1914",
Historical Journal , XIV, 2 (1971): 323-358; and Robert Fox, “Scientific Enterprise and the Patronage of Research in
France 1800-70,” Minerva, Vol. 11, No. 4 (October 1973): 442-473.
59
“Arthur Aikin, the Society's Secretary from 1817 to 1839, clearly perceived about halfway through this period that
a more valuable function for the Society would be the communication of knowledge of technical or commercial
matters, and the discussion of papers, rather than prize awards,” Rupert Hall, Journal RSA, p. 648.
60
“In the majority of cases the terms of gift have limited the application of the money to certain definite purposes,
and, in particular, to the award of medals or other prizes for scientific discoveries… The President and Council have
again and again had the experience that the usefulness of the Society for the advancement of Natural Knowledge has
been greatly hampered by the lack of funds of which they could freely make use according to their own judgment.”

III. EMPIRICAL RESEARCH ON PATENTS AND PRIZES

The patent and innovation policy controversies of the twenty-first century have often
unknowingly replicated concerns from the past regarding the nature and consequences of
technology institutions.61 For instance, pivotal Supreme Court decisions have in part been
justified with references to history that exhibit a faulty understanding of the actual development
of intellectual property markets.62 Policy debates would therefore benefit from an historical
perspective on the design, operation and consequences of incentive mechanisms for promoting
technological change and innovations. At the same time, even if selected supporting anecdotes
are accurate, their representativeness needs to be determined through the systematic empirical
analysis of data drawn from a number of independent sources.
Patent institutions have played a primary role in the technology policy of the world’s
leading industrial nation, so it is perhaps not coincidental that a significant amount of research
has already been directed towards the empirical analysis of patent systems and outcomes.63 Such
“Memorandum as to the wishes of the Council in respect of benefactions to the Society,” unnumbered page in Yearbook of the Royal Society of London, Issue 11, London: Harrison and Sons, 1900.
61
B. Zorina Khan, “Trolls and Other Patent Inventions: Economic History and the Patent Controversy in the
Twenty-First Century,” George Mason Law Review, vol. 21 (2014): 825-863.
62
In eBay Inc. v. MercExchange, L.L.C., 547 U.S. 388 (2006), Justices Kennedy, Stevens, Souter, and Breyer noted
in a concurring opinion that injunctive remedies might not be as appropriate because “the nature of the patent being
enforced and the economic function of the patent holder present considerations quite unlike earlier cases. An
industry has developed in which firms use patents not as a basis for producing and selling goods but, instead,
primarily for obtaining licensing fees.” For evidence that such considerations are not “quite unlike earlier cases,”
see Naomi R. Lamoreaux and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “Market Trade in Patents and the Rise of a Class of Specialized
Inventors in the Nineteenth -Century United States,”American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 91 (May
2001):39-44.
63
For surveys, see the special issue of Business History Review, 87 (1) 2013; B. Zorina Khan and Kenneth L.
Sokoloff, “The Early Development of Intellectual Property Institutions in the United States,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, vol. 15 (3) 2001: 233-246; Petra Moser, "Patents and Innovation: Evidence from Economic History,"
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27(1): 23-44; B. Zorina Khan, The Democratization of Invention: Patents and
Copyrights in American Economic Development, NBER and Cambridge University Press (2005); Fiona Murray et
al. "Grand Innovation Prizes: A theoretical, normative, and empirical evaluation." Research Policy 41.10 (2012):
1779-1792; Williams, Heidi. "Innovation Inducement Prizes: Connecting Research to Policy." Journal of Policy
Analysis and Management 31, no. 3 (2012): 752-776. A sample of research on more specific historical issues

scholars as Kenneth Sokoloff have produced extensive evidence that patents played a substantial
role in influencing the rate and direction of inventive activity during industrialization, and were
also associated with advances in productivity.64 Inventions and inventors of all backgrounds
were responsive to economic incentives.65 From the first decades of the nineteenth century,
strongly enforced property rights in patents facilitated trade and commercialization, with all the
attendant benefits of market exchange.66 The vast majority of “great inventors” who produced
the transformative innovations in both the United States and Britain (especially after the latter
reformed their patent laws towards the U.S. model) were patentees.67 A major feature of the
includes: Tom Nicholas, “The Role of Independent Invention in U.S. Technological Development, 1880-1930,”
Journal of Economic History, 70 (1) 2010:57-82; Tom Nicholas, “Did R&D Firms Used to Patent? Evidence from
the First Innovation Surveys,” Journal of Economic History, 71 (4) 2011:1032-1059; Dhanoos Sutthiphisal and
Shih-Tse Lo, “Crossover Inventions and Knowledge Diffusion of General Purpose Technologies: Evidence from the
Electrical Technology,” Journal of Economic History, 70 (3) 2010:744-764. For the European experience, see
Christine MacLeod, Inventing the Industrial Revolution, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1988;
Liliane Hilaire-Perez, L'invention technique au siècle des Lumières. Paris : Albin Michel, 2000. Relevant articles
include Alessandro Nuvolari and Valentina Tartari, “Bennet Woodcroft and the value of English patents, 16171841,” Explorations in Economic History, 48 (1) 2011:97-115; Richard J. Sullivan, “The Revolution of Ideas:
Widespread Patenting and Invention During the English Industrial Revolution,” Journal of Economic History, 50 (2)
1990: 349-363. For examples of innovation from freely shared information among competitors, see Alessandro
Nuvolari, "Collective Invention during the British Industrial Revolution: The Case of the Cornish Pumping Engine."
Cambridge Journal of Economics 28(3) 2004: 347-63; and Robert Allen, “Collective Invention,” Journal of
Economic Behavior & Organization, 4 (1)1983:1-24.
64
Kenneth L. Sokoloff, "Inventive Activity in Early Industrial America: Evidence From Patent Records, 1790–
1846," Journal of Economic History, vol. 48 (04) 1988: 813-850; Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “Invention, Innovation, and
Manufacturing Productivity Growth in the Antebellum Northeast,” in Robert Gallman and John Wallis, eds, Growth
and Standards of Living Before the Civil War. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992:345 378; B. Zorina
Khan and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “The Early Development of Intellectual Property Institutions in the United States,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 15 (3) 2001: 233-246. B. Zorina Khan and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, "Patent
Institutions, Industrial Organization and Early Technological Change: Britain and the United States, 1790-1850," in
Technological Revolutions in Europe, 1760-1860, eds. M. Berg and K. Bruland, Edward Elgar, London (1998):292313. See also B. Zorina Khan, “Looking Backward: Founding Choices in Innovation and Intellectual Property
Protection,” in Douglas Irwin and Richard Sylla (eds), Founding Choices: American Economic Policy in the 1790s,
NBER and University of Chicago (2010): 315-342.
65
B. Zorina Khan, “Creative Destruction: Technological Change and Resource Reallocation during the Civil War,”
Journal of Interdisciplinary History (forthcoming 2015); B. Zorina Khan, "Married Women's Property Laws and
Female Commercial Activity: Evidence from United States Patent Records, 1790-1895," Journal of Economic
History, vol. 56 (2) 1996: 356-88.
66
B. Zorina Khan, "Property Rights and Patent Litigation in Early Nineteenth-Century America," Journal of
Economic History, vol. 55 (1) 1995: 58-97. See also Adam Mossoff, “The Rise and Fall of the First American
Patent Thicket: The Sewing Machine War of the 1850s,” 53 Arizona Law Review 165 (2011), and Adam Mossoff
“Patents as Constitutional Private Property: The Historical Protection of Patents under the Takings Clause,” 87
Boston University Law Review 689 (2007).
67
B. Zorina Khan and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “A Tale of Two Countries: Innovation and Incentives among Great
Inventors in Britain and the United States, 1750-1930,” in Roger Farmer (ed) Macroeconomics in the Small and the
Large, Edward Elgar (2009): 140-156; B. Zorina Khan and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “Institutions and Technological
Innovation During Early Economic Growth: Evidence from the Great Inventors of the United States, 1790-1930,” in
Institutions and Economic Growth, (eds) Theo Eicher and Cecilia Garcia-Penalosa, MIT Press (2006):123-158; B.
Zorina Khan and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “Institutions and Democratic Invention in 19th Century America,” American

patent system is that it allows for a separation of the assessment of technical value (determined
by examiners through a centralized process) and the economic value (determined by the market
through a decentralized process) of an invention. Impecunious inventors in particular benefited
from markets in patents, because they were able to specialize in inventive activity, and obtain
returns in the market place by selling or licensing their patent rights to others who were better
equipped to commercialize their discoveries.68 An extensive network of specialized
intermediaries facilitated patent sales and licensing, and helped to reduce the transactions costs
of trades in new technologies, in both national and international markets.69
The central role of patents and the market for technology in American policy was
recognized by prominent foreign observers. Sir William Thomson (Lord Kelvin), a British
inventor and scientist, was a judge at the 1876 Centennial Exhibition in Philadelphia, which
featured displays for Bell’s telephone, the Westinghouse airbrake, Edison’s improved telegraph,
sewing machines, refrigerator cars and numerous other patented discoveries. He reported :
“Judged by its results in benefiting the public, both by stiumulating inventors and by giving a
perseveringly practical turn to their labours, the American patent law must be admitted to be
most successful, and the beneficence of its working was very amply illustrated throughout the

Economic Review, vol. 94 (May) 2004: 395-401; B. Zorina Khan and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “Lives of Invention:
Patenting and Productivity among Great Inventors in the United States, 1790-1930,” Les archives de l’invention
(eds) Marie-Sophie Corcy et al. (2004): 181-199; B. Zorina Khan and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, "`Schemes of Practical
Utility': Entrepreneurship and Innovation among `Great Inventors' During Early American Industrialization, 17901865," Journal of Economic History, vol. 53 (2) 1993: 289-307; B. Zorina Khan and Kenneth L. Sokoloff,
"Entrepreneurship and Technological Change in Historical Perspective: A Study of Great Inventors During Early
Industrialization," Advances in the Study of Entrepreneurship, Innovation, and Economic Growth, vol. 6 (1993): 3766.
68
Kenneth L. Sokoloff and B. Zorina Khan, "The Democratization of Invention during Early Industrialization:
Evidence from the United States," Journal of Economic History, vol. 50 (2) 1990: 363-78; B. Zorina Khan and
Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “A Tale of Two Countries: Innovation and Incentives among Great Inventors in Britain and
the United States, 1750-1930,” in Roger Farmer (ed) Macroeconomics in the Small and the Large, Edward Elgar
(2009): 140-156.
69
Naomi R. Lamoreaux, Kenneth L. Sokoloff, and Dhanoos Sutthiphisal, “Patent Alchemy: The Market for
Technology in U.S. History,” Business History Review 87 (Spring 2013): 3-38; Naomi R. Lamoreaux and Kenneth
L. Sokoloff, “Long-Term Change in the Organization of Inventive Activity,” Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 93 (Nov. 1996): 12686-92; Naomi R. Lamoreaux and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “The Market for
Technology and the Organization of Invention in U.S. History,” in Entrepreneurship, Innovation, and the Growth
Mechanism of the Free-Enterprise Economies, eds. Eytan Sheshinski, Robert J. Strom, and William J. Baumol,
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2007, 213-43; B. Zorina Khan, “Selling Ideas: An International Perspective
on Patenting and Markets for Technology, 1790-1930,” Business History Review, vol. 87 (Spring) 2013: 39–68..

American region of the Exhibition, where, indeed, it seemed that every good thing deserving a
patent was patented.”70 A Swiss Commissioner to the Philadelphia Exhibition likewise
successfully urged his own countrymen to model its policy after the U.S. and introduce a patent
system.71 A special commission from Japan was even more emphatic, asking “‘What is it that
makes the United States such a great nation?’… we investigated and we found it was patents,
and we will have patents.”72
Patents comprised a central feature of U.S. innovation policies, and this orientation is
reflected in the stock of academic research. By way of contrast, relatively little systematic
evidence has been produced in the area of prize incentives. In the earliest such attempt, an
insightful nineteenth-century observer in England, Samuel Sidney, sought to determine “Whether
… manufacturing inventions [can be] stimulated, by invitations to compete for substantial or
honorary awards?”73 Sidney spent ten years investigating the data on prizes at exhibitions, as
well as the incentives that various societies offered for encouraging industry. His investigations
led him to conclude that prizes generally tended to be inefficient, and improvements in market
demand and competition offered more effective inducements for inventive activity. The prize
system, he found, merely encouraged “a long list of machines which, for practical purposes, are
no better than toys.”74 For instance, the market value of useful inventions tended to be far greater
than any prize that could be offered, whether by private or state initiative. Even prestigious
70

See Great Britain Parliament, House of Commons, Parliamentary Papers, House of Commons and Command,
Volume 34 , London: H.M. Stationery Office, 1877, p. 271.
71
“We must introduce the patent system. All our production is more or less a simple copy. ... It is evident that this
absolute want of protection will never awaken in a people the spirit of invention. ... America has shown us how in a
few years a people, in the midst of circumstances often embarrassing, can merit by its activity, its spirit of enterprise,
and its perseverance, the respect and admiration of the whole world, and acquire in many respects an incontestable
superiority.” cited in “Arguments before the Committee on Patents of the Senate and House of Representatives,”
45th Congress, 2nd Session, Mis. Doc. No. 50, Washington, D.C.:Government Printing Office, 1878: 448–49.
72
Cited in “Patents in relation to Manufactures,” Story B. Ladd, 12th Census of the United States, vol. 10 (4) pp.
751–66.
73
Samuel Sidney, “On the Effect of Prizes on Manufacturers,” Journal of the Society of Arts, Vol. 10 (April) 1862:
374-382, p. 374. Sidney was an Assistant Commissioner of the Crystal Palace Exhibition in London in 1851.
74
Sidney, op. cit., p. 376.

institutions such as the Royal Agricultural Society and the Royal Society of Arts had failed to
develop truly significant inventions.75 Moreover, the competitor for a prize had an incentive to
overspend on the item in an attempt to win, regardless of whether such investments were
practicable in the marketplace. As a result, winners tended to be among the wealthiest of the
competitors: “The theory that prizes encourage humble merit is only a theory, for experience
shows that in a series of yearly contests wealth wins, as it must when hundreds of pounds must
be expended to win ten.”76 However, he found that, from the perspective of manufacturers or
retailers, prizes served as a useful marketing strategy, comparable to advertisements and
enhanced brand name capital. Sidney’s thoughtful assessment are all consistent with the
quantitative analysis of national and international prize systems discussed here.
Systematic insights into the relationship between incentives and innovation can be
gleaned from a large sample of British inventors who were responsible for the great inventions of
the period before the Second World War. 77 The sample includes information on all of the prizes
and other forms of official recognition the British great inventors received, and indicates that less
than 40 percent of these eminent inventors were recipients of awards. When many might be
equally deserving, a question arises about why one is selected, and some observers identify
instances when such awards, medals and prestigious appointments owed to nepotism, bias and
even corruption.78 Statistical analysis of the factors that influenced the probability that an

75

For a more positive assessment of the effectiveness of the Royal Agricultural Society, see Liam Brunt, Josh
Lerner, and Tom Nicholas, “Inducement Prizes and Innovation,” 60 (4) 2012: 657-696.
76
Sidney, op cit., p. 376.
77
B. Zorina Khan, “Premium Inventions: Patents and Prizes as Incentive Mechanisms in Britain and the United
States, 1750-1930” in Dora L. Costa and Naomi R. Lamoreaux (eds), Understanding Long-Run Economic Growth:
Geography, Institutions, and the Knowledge Economy, NBER and University of Chicago (2011): 205-234. The
British sample of over 400 inventors and several thousand inventions was compiled from a broader series of
biographical dictionaries, including the 2004 Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (DNB), and the Biographical
Dictionary of the History of Technology (BD), among others.
78
An extensive survey in Britain concluded that presenters were concerned about “the indiscriminate manner in
which awards are often bestowed” (Great Britain, Board of Trade, Report of the Committee appointed by the Board

inventor would receive a prize shows that patentees were more likely to get prizes, so the
incremental incentive effects of an additional prize were likely quite low. The grants of prizes to
British great inventors owed in part to their personal connections rather than to factors that might
have enhanced the technical value of the discovery. The most significant variable affecting the
award of a prize was an elite or Oxbridge education, which doubled the likelihood of such
winning recognition, despite the contemporary hostility of such institutions to pragmatic studies.
At the same time, specialized education or employment in science or technology fields, which
might be expected to enhance inventiveness and productivity, did not significantly affect the
probability of getting a prize. Such findings are consistent with the growing disillusionment in
Europe with prizes as an incentive mechanism for generating innovation.
A number of empirical studies have been based on samples of prizes and exhibits at
international fairs, as a means of gauging the relationship of prizes and patents to overall
inventive activity.79 Such studies offer valuable insights; however, counts of the prize entries at
international exhibitions are unlikely to be representative of the inventive capital either within or
across individual industries or countries.80 In the first place, the size and content for displays for
of Trade to make enquiries with reference to the participation of Great Britain in great international exhibitions,
Exhibitions Branch, London: Wyman and Sons, 1907, p. 3.) See, also, “The recent disclosures of the underhand
dealing which had been found to be present at certain exhibition awards could not be but a powerful factor in the
consideration of the worth or worthlessness of such awards…” The Electrical Engineer, Volume 6 (August 8) 1890,
London: Biggs & Company, 1890, p. 116. On Nobel prizes, see S.Sri Kantha, “The question of nepotism in the
award of Nobel prizes,” Medical Hypotheses, 34 (1) 1991: 28-32. “Could science history be compiled on the basis
of the Nobel prizes? I think not,” is the view of István Hargittai, The Road to Stockholm: Nobel Prizes, Science,
and Scientists, Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press, 2002, p. 247. See also Herbetz Claus and Dirk Sliwka,
“When higher prizes lead to lower efforts—The impact of favoritism in tournaments,” Economics Letters, 120 (2)
2013: 188-191, suggesting that perceived favoritism may tend to reduce effort.
79
Such studies are summarized in Petra Moser, “Patents and Innovation – Evidence from Economic History,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27 (1) 2013: 23–44.
80
Since many of the exhibitors tended to be firms, agents or commercializers, rather than inventors, it is impossible
to accurately determine which items had been patented. Contemporary observers noted that a number of the entries
at the Crystal Palace were actually copies of articles invented and patented in the United States. Crystal Palace
Juries were instructed to “reward an important Machine without undertaking to pronounce whether the novelties
exhibited in its construction have been originated by the Exhibitor, or have been borrowed or adapted by him from
some one else.” (Official Catalogue of the Great Exhibition of the Works of Industry of All Nations, Reports by the
Juries, p. xxv.) According to the rules, exhibits did not have to be new and some were several decades old, and

any group of products or country were determined in part by distance and political expedience,
rather representing random draws from the underlying population of inventions.81 As Table 3
indicates, at the 1851 Crystal Palace event, Britain and its dependents accounted for 7,381 or 53
percent of all exhibitors, in comparison to 12 exhibitors from the entire continent of South
America, 12.3 percent from France, and 499 or 3.6 percent from the United States. At the Paris
Universal Exhibition of 1855, by way of contrast, France and its dependents now comprised 50.1
percent of all 21,779 exhibitors, while Britain and its colonies were a mere 15 percent, and the
United States, at 0.6 percent, was the same size as the Greek contingent.
Even if the “home court advantage” is accounted for, there were significant differences in
participation within and across industries and countries that were uncorrelated with technological
capability. For instance, the funding for the exhibitions, as well as variation in costs (travel,
insurance, and other expenses), influenced the number and composition of the displays. Some
financing derived from private initiative, while others were funded by national governments, and
this variation occurred across products and countries at any specific event, as well as across
time.82 Exhibitors tended to be export-oriented firms seeking customers, and were not
necessarily representative of the population of inventors or inventions. Their presence was
affected by the conditions for the market for their specific products at home, relative to their
without a time-limited test of novelty, counts of exhibits cannot be usefully compared across industries, countries or
fairs. Instead, juries were instructed to give prizes for criteria that had little or nothing to do with technological
inventiveness or patentability, such as beauty of design and appearance, “adaptability to use, economy in first cost,
durability, economy of maintenance, excellency [sic] of workmanship, strength.” The percentage of prizes by
country tended to be proportionate to the exhibitors rather than to technological value, and above fifty percent of
exhibits typically received recognition of one sort or another. Many of the Judges were chosen because of their
personal prestige rather than because they were familiar with the latest technologies and, even if qualified, political
issues, differences in language and personal preferences complicated the already opaque decision-making process.
81
B. Zorina Khan, “Trolls and Other Patent Inventions: Economic History and the Patent Controversy in the
Twenty-First Century,” George Mason Law Review, vol. 21 (2014): 825-863.
82
The United States was in the middle of a war at the time of the Paris Universal Exhibition of 1862, and Congress
allowed only $2,000, so just 128 Americans participated among the total of 26,348 exhibitors, whereas the U.S.
government allocated more than $1.4 million to the Paris exhibition of 1900, which obviously boosted participation.
The French government was typically generous in supporting participation at all international exhibitions, relative to
other countries, especially in certain industries which it considered politically expedient.

expected gains overseas.83 The prize entries reflected this commercial orientation, and numerous
items on display were not patentable or even innovations; many comprised agricultural produce,
interesting specimens of minerals and taxidermy, embroidery, and final goods that illustrated
good workmanship or attractive design elements rather than innovation.84 Moreover, the award
of prizes tended to be proportional to the number of exhibitors and did not necessarily proxy
inventive quality or quantity.
One way to control for some of the biases of samples drawn from prize-granting events at
the international or national levels is to consider within-city variation. In the United States prizes
were not as prevalent as in Europe and, indeed, the most prominent of these honorific awards
were introduced in the United States at the instigation of foreigners.85 However, innovation
institutions sponsored industrial fairs in most large cities in the United States, on a roughly
annual basis, which attracted a majority of entries from nearby areas. These exhibitions were
sampled to construct a panel data set of technological innovations that were submitted for prizes,
comprising some 20,000 entries from major cities, including Boston, New York, Philadelphia,
San Francisco, Cincinnati, St. Louis, Raleigh (North Carolina), Charleston (South Carolina), and

83

See Great Britain, Board of Trade, Exhibitions Branch, London: Wyman and Sons, 1907, p. 3:
“an exhibition which may offer special advantages as an advertisement for one trade may prove to be of little or no
value to another, owing to the highly developed state of that industry in the country in which the exhibition is held.
Thus a manufacturer of agricultural machinery, who could expect but little profit from exhibiting his goods at an
Exhibition in the United States of America, might derive benefit through showing them in Russia, and a maker of
aniline dyes, who might be reluctant, for the same reason, to exhibit his products at Berlin, might be willing to show
them at, St. Louis or Chicago.”
84
Representative entries for Switzerland, for instance, included machines, but also various paintings, “a double
American rifle,” gemstones, lace, fringed shawls, miniature milk tubs, goat skins, cow bells, embossed drinking
cups, wood carvings, and a watch-stand “made by a pupil of the Asylum for the Blind.” An examination of Swiss
entries at international exhibitions indicates that many prizes were awarded for workmanship and design rather than
new inventive ideas. This is confirmed by contemporary observers, “The novelties [chronometers] were improved
designs rather than new movements,” B.P. Johnson, Report on the International Exhibition of industry and Art,
London, 1862, (1863), p. 74.
85
For instance, the John Scott Medal and premium was funded by a legacy from the London pharmacist, who
bequeathed $4000 in 1815 for “premiums to ingenious men or women who make useful inventions.” Awards and
honours from foreign governments and institutions were liberally bestowed on famous American patentees such as
Thomas Edison, Samuel Colt, and Sir Hiram Maxim (the first American to be knighted by the Queen of England).

Atlanta, over the course of the nineteenth century.86 These individual-level observations were
matched with the patent records to identify the inventions that were patented. The matched data
were then linked with the manuscript population censuses, to obtain information on the
backgrounds of individual inventors, such as occupation, age, wealth and geographical mobility.
The subsequent analysis at the level of individual innovations and inventors was conducted
separately by city, as opposed to a higher level of regional aggregation, and the revealed
consistency in the results across cities lends some confidence in the generality of the patterns.
As shown before, observers of the U.S. patent system in the nineteenth century noted that
almost everything that could be patented was patented, and the data on the propensity to patent
for American “great inventors” support these claims.87 At the same time, it is also true that a
considerable and diverse amount of creativity was indeed occurring outside the formal patent
system, and we can speculate why such items were not patented. First, some might argue that
such inventors actively rejected the patent option, and instead decided to appropriate returns
through other means such as trade secrecy. However, secrecy seems somewhat implausible as a
general explanation for data based on prize competitions, since it is unlikely that secrecy would
be promoted by participating in a public exhibition. Second, if inventors rationally compare the
costs to the benefits of patent protection, and decide to forego patenting, it is possible that a
number of these unpatented inventions were of minimal technical or economic value. Third,
many exhibits at prize competitions were simply not eligible to be considered for a patent, either

86

For a description of two of these samples, see B. Zorina Khan, Inventing in the Shadow of the Patent System:
Evidence from 19th-Century Patents and Prizes for Technological Innovation, NBER Working Paper No. w20731,
December 2014; and B. Zorina Khan, Of Time and Space: A Spatial Analysis of Knowledge Spillovers among
Patented and Unpatented Innovations, NBER Working Paper No. w20732, December 2014.
87
A lobbyist for changes in patent laws noted with disgust that “Every lady is enveloped in patents, from the crown
of her head to the soles of her feet” and pointed to the numerous “patented inventions with which the kitchen of
every family is infested.” See Pamphlets, Patents: “The Patent Laws,” 1846-1879, Volume 1 (1879): 3-21, p. 9.

because they lacked novelty, or because the innovation fell outside the subject matter that could
be patented.88
The stated objective of such industrial exhibitions was to advance the standing of
innovative workers and artisans. Nevertheless, participants in these events were drawn from
markedly more prominent socioeconomic backgrounds than the general population of
patentees.89 Indeed, the information on occupations show that exhibitors were significantly less
likely to be artisans and ordinary labourers than were patentees, and the representation of artisans
at the exhibitions also declined over time. Occupational class does not directly translate into
economic or social status or influence, but the information on wealth-holding from the
population censuses of 1850, 1860 and 1870 provides additional evidence on the economic status
of exhibitors relative to patentees in general. These data confirm Samuel Sidney’s finding, since
the participants in the exhibitions were substantially wealthier than the general population and
the population of patentees. 90 For instance, in 1860 the sample from the industrial fairs owned
average personal property that was almost twice as extensive as that of patentees in general, and
more than double their average real estate holdings.
Patents must satisfy specific rules and standards that are outlined in the laws; applications
are examined through an objective rule-based centralized process; and applicants have the right
to appeal the decisions of examiners. None of these criteria was true of prizes, and leads to the
88

Patent examiners in the United States have the task of filtering applications for novelty and for conformity with
the rules and standards of the Patent Office and the patent laws. The descriptions for the vast majority of exhibits
tend to be quite vague and, without detailed specialized knowledge about each exhibit, it is impossible to determine
the amount of novel inventive capital vested in unpatented exhibits. However, it is straightforward to categorize the
patentability of each item in terms of subject matter. Application of this minimal filter of subject matter indicates
that prize-oriented exhibits were typically quite different from patents and, indeed, the majority of exhibits that were
not patented were actually unpatentable.
89
B. Zorina Khan, “The Social and Economic Consequences of Patent Institutions and Prizes in Technology
Markets,” in D. Halbert and W. Gallagher (eds), Law and Society Perspectives on Intellectual Property, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press (forthcoming 2015).
90
See, for instance, B. Zorina Khan, Inventing in the Shadow of the Patent System: Evidence from 19th-Century
Patents and Prizes for Technological Innovation, NBER Working Paper No. w20731, December 2014.

key question of what determined whether an entrant received a prize or not. The statistical
analysis of separate datasets, including prizes and awards to great inventors in Britain, and to
great inventors in the United States, exhibitions of the Massachusetts Mechanics Institute, and
the American Institute of New York, are all consistent. These studies indicate that, unlike
patents, almost all of the variation in prize awards remains unexplained, implying that these
grants were based on fairly random and unsystematic rationales.91 The multivariate regression
results from the industrial exhibitions show that the most significant factor that influenced
outcomes was financial status: exhibitors with greater personal wealth were more likely to win
gold and silver medals. However, the mechanism through which wealthier exhibitors gained an
edge over their competition is unclear. Advantages for wealthy applicants may have been
associated with greater expenditures on their presentation at the fairs, name recognition, or
perhaps to less obvious connections with the award juries. It is also possible that the individual’s
wealth was correlated with unobserved variation in the ownership of businesses.92 In general,
the results indicate that the awards reflected characteristics of the inventor, rather than
characteristics of the invention.
The judges for these technology classes in the industrial exhibitions stated their objective
was to reward novelty and inventive ingenuity. In practice, they bestowed medals for an array
of other reasons besides inventiveness, including overcoming adversity (such as age or physical
handicaps), cheapness of the item, neatness, and aesthethic factors.93 In addition, as in the
European institutions, a nationalistic orientation towards import substitution was evident when
91

B. Zorina Khan, Inventing in the Shadow of the Patent System, op cit.
A panel study of national industrial exhibitions in France shows that women who were associated with family
firms experienced more success at these events. B. Zorina Khan, Invisible Women: Entrepreneurship, Innovation
and Family Firms in France during Early Industrialization, NBER Working Paper w20854, January 2015.
93
Some contemporary assessments in the United States similarly refer to the process as “invidious”( “Awards at
Exhibitions,” Electrical Review, 1885.); as well as “impractical and liable to the grossest abuse… special systems ,
where favors are sought for and obtained by particular parties in a particular manner” ( Scientific American, March
1852, vol 7, p. 221.)
92

awards were given to the producers of American goods that attempted to replicate innovations
originally created in foreign countries. The decentralization of judging committees, the lack of
transparency and the private nature of their decision making process, and the absence of appeal
from their rulings, all encouraged idiosyncratic and inconsistent decisions.94 It is thus not
surprising that observers continually criticized the arbitrary way in which the awards were given
out, at domestic and international fairs alike. This mattered, because a lack of systematic
methods of allocating awards reduced the incentives for inventors who realized that prizes in
many instances were uncorrelated with inventive merit.
Research has also been directed towards the assessment of positive spillovers (benefits
that ensue to others besides the parties directly involved in an activity) from inventive activity.95
Scholars typically contrast patents as monopolies (that offer the right to exclude) to prizes
(assumed to offer free access to ideas) and hypothesize that the latter are likely to confer a
greater benefit on society. This focus on the patentee’s right to exclude risks underestimating the
effects of the corresponding obligation to disclose. The usual justification for offering patent
protection proposes a bargain or a social contract by means of which inventors obtain a
temporary monopoly in their discoveries, in return for disclosing their ideas in sufficient detail

94

Numerous research papers find such biases in a diverse array of review contexts. See for instance, D. Ginther, et
al., “Race, Ethnicity, and NIH Research Awards,” Science, 333 (6045) 2011:1015-1019, (in response to which the
NIH proposes to offer prizes for solutions to avoid such biases!); Tom Coupé, “Peer review versus citations – An
analysis of best paper prizes,” Research Policy, Volume 42 (1) 2013: 295-301, finds that winners of prizes for
academic articles are rarely the best papers as gauged by citations; Jordi Blanes i Vidal and Clare Leaver, “Bias in
Open Peer-Review: Evidence from the English Superior Courts,” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization,
forthcoming 2015.
95
B. Zorina Khan, Of Time and Space: A Spatial Analysis of Knowledge Spillovers among Patented and
Unpatented Innovations, NBER Working Paper No. w20732, December 2014. For related studies, see Petra Moser,
“Do Patents Weaken the Localization of Innovations? Evidence from World's Fairs, 1851-1915,” Journal of
Economic History, 71 (2) 2011:363-382; Ralf Richter and Jochen Streb, “Catching-Up and Falling Behind:
Knowledge Spillover from American to German Machine Toolmakers,” Journal of Economic History, 71 (4)
2011:1006-1031; Dhanoos Sutthiphisal and Shih-Tse Lo, “Crossover Inventions and Knowledge Diffusion of
General Purpose Technologies: Evidence from the Electrical Technology,” Journal of Economic History, 70 (3)
2010:744-764.

that the invention can be recreated by someone who is skilled in the arts.96 However, this is not
necessarily the case in practice; for instance, in Britain and France, ineffective rules about
specifications, and limited access to patented information owing to high transactions and
monetary costs, meant that the disclosure mechanisms were quite weak.97 Trade secrets or
prizes, on the other hand, might impose a social cost if the information is not made available to
others in a usable format despite its low incremental cost. On net, both theory and practice are
unclear about whether unpatented ideas would tend to generate knowledge spillovers, or to
inhibit them.
Patents and prize-winning innovations at the U.S. industrial exhibitions differed in many
regards, including the propensity to create external benefits beyond those accruing to the
inventors themselves. Prizes were less systematic, were not significantly associated with
location and geography, and did not generate geographical and technological spillovers. Spatial
autocorrelation analysis of patents and prizes revealed that patents led to spillovers that
significantly increased both patented and unpatented innovations in nearby counties.98 This is
consistent with the bargain or contract view of patents, which proposes that the limited grant of a
monopoly right to inventors benefits society, because in exchange the public gains information
about the discovery that increases social welfare. From the earliest years of the patent system,

96

A nineteenth-century observer noted that “the assertion that the patent-system interferes injuriously with
intellectual progress by blocking the course of thought is curiously at variance with the evidence of history.” See
James Richardson, Our Patent System and What We Owe to It, Scribner’s Monthly, Nov. 1878, p. 103.
97
B. Zorina Khan, The Democratization of Invention: Patents and Copyrights in American Economic Development.
NBER and Cambridge University Press, 2005. Tom Nicholas’s interesting study of Japan during the Meiji era finds
that nonmonetary prizes increased patents, created large spillovers of technical knowledge, and enhanced the
diffusion of information. Such results may owe to poor measures by the patent authorities to ensure disclosure,
effective efforts by prize-grantors to disseminate information, or both. Tom Nicholas, “Hybrid Innovation in Meiji
Japan,” International Economic Review, 54 (2) 2013:575-600.
98
B. Zorina Khan, Of Time and Space: A Spatial Analysis of Knowledge Spillovers among Patented and
Unpatented Innovations, NBER Working Paper No. w20732, December 2014 . Spatial autocorrelation exists when
the values of a variable comprise a function of its location and spatial characteristics that are defined in terms of a
specific measure of distance. See Luc Anselin, Spatial econometrics: methods and models, Springer, 1988.

policy makers engaged in discussions about how to ensure that information was available to the
broader public. The patent grant requires a specification that is sufficiently detailed to enable a
person who is skilled in the arts to recreate the patented invention. Patent legislation included
measures to publish information about patents that were granted in annual reports that were
widely disseminated, and expired patents were published in newspapers, while the U.S. Patent
Office maintained local depositories throughout the country. Thus, even if the patentee had
acquired a monopoly for (at that time) fourteen to seventeen years, access to the information
about the discovery likely facilitated inventions that worked around the initial patent, or led to
ideas for follow-on inventions.
By way of contrast, the patterns for prizes were inconsistent with the presence of
technological spillovers. Thus, access to technological exhibits did not generate as much
diffusion of information as was the case for inventions that were protected by patent grants.
Exhibits sponsored by the American Institute of New York or the Cincinnati Mechanics’
Association might have been open to the public, and some inventors might have been able to
copy from the displays, but there was likely a selection effect that influenced the owners of
valuable inventions that were readily duplicable to avoid displaying them at fairs. Moreover, if
competitors did not attend the events, there were relatively few effective mechanisms that might
have led to the spread of unpatented information embodied in prize-winning innovations. This
was of course a function of the decentralized nature of the prize system in industrial exhibitions,
but even in European countries that offered centralized institutions such as the Royal Society of
Arts, access to unpatented inventions and knowledge about them was quite limited.
Awards and prizes undoubtedly facilitated the efforts of businesses to advertise and
commercialize their innovations. Manufacturers at many exhibitions had the choice of monetary

awards rather than medals of equivalent value, but typically opted to reject the cash, choosing
instead to accumulate medals from numerous fairs, and touting their success in magazines,
journals and on product packaging. Medals may have proven useful in competitive markets as a
means of product differentiation, and as a way of signaling higher quality or brand-name capital,
although this function became less relevant with the advent of mass advertising and
trademarking.99 Some scholars propose that such ex post prizes at exhibitions stimulated new
inventions because they generated publicity for promising areas of endeavor. 100 Even if a prize
system were successful in generating new inventions, it would also be necessary to ensure that
additional incentives were provided to effectively manage the unpredictable and often lengthy
processes required to transform an idea into a commercially viable product. In short, the jury is
still out on the question of whether prizes served to induce inventive activity and productivity
gains, and the subject remains an important topic for future research.

IV. CONCLUSION
Today both developed and developing societies have a vital interest in determining the optimal
policies towards technological innovation, including the nature and consequences of different
rules and standards. At the same time, as Harold Demsetz pointed out, “much public policy
economics implicitly presents the relevant choice as between an ideal norm and an existing
99

According to testimony to the British Parliament, “Considerable progress has been made of recent years in the art
of advertising, and the advertisement afforded by displaying goods at an International Exhibition is consequently
regarded by many as being of less importance than formerly” (p. 3). Moreover, “when a business is young you reap
very great advantage in bringing it before the public through the medium of exhibition; but when a business is well
established like ours is I do not think you do reap so much advantage.” See Great Britain, Board of Trade, Report of
the Committee appointed by the Board of trade to make enquiries with reference to the participation of Great Britain
in great international exhibitions, Exhibitions Branch, London: Wyman and Sons, 1907.
100
Petra Moser and Tom Nicholas, for example, find that prizes at the Crystal Palace Exhibition offered publicity
that significantly enhanced technological progress, in “Prizes, Publicity, and Patents – Non-Monetary Awards as a
Mechanism to Encourage Innovation,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 2013 Volume 61: pp. 763–788. This
mechanism is plausible, and suggests that future work is needed that attempts to control for unobserved variation in
all the other private and public sources of information that were simultaneously available to inventors, including
patent documents, on-the-job insights, technical supply factors, and the pressures of market demand.

"imperfect" institutional arrangement. This nirvana approach differs considerably from a
comparative institution approach in which the relevant choice is between alternative real
institutional arrangements.”101 What lessons does the evidence from the past about “real
institutional arrangements” offer for designing an effective mechanism to create incentives for
new and useful forms of technological creativity? Any answer to this question is obviously
speculative, since it requires an accurate assessment of the characteristics of prize systems that
are inherent to this institution, relative to discretionary features that can be adjusted through
careful and conscious design of specific instruments. However, historical evidence presents a
valuable opportunity for exploring key features of this debate.
The framers of U.S. policies were aware of the options that had prevailed in the colonial
period and in Europe, but rejected the use of “premiums” in favour of property rights in
patents.102 The patent system was market-oriented, offered open access to creative individuals
regardless of their social status and background, enabled strong enforcement of such rights,
ensured useful disclosure, and promoted extensive markets for technology. The empirical
evidence on the early patent system in the United States suggests that patents and their effective
legal enforcement played a substantial role in influencing the rate and direction of inventive
activity in a country that would become the world’s leading industrial nation. Patent institutions
were not perfect but, as Demsetz points out, their imperfections did not necessarily imply the

101

Harold Demsetz, “Information and efficiency: Another viewpoint,” Journal of Law and Economics, 12 (1) 1969:
1–22, p.1 (emphasis removed).
102
The use of prizes and bounties was common in the colonial period, and the Continental Congress in 1783
“recommended to the Legislatures of the several states to … encourage the establishment of useful manufactures
either by premiums or by such other means as they may find most effectual.” See B. Zorina Khan, “Looking
Backward: Founding Choices in Innovation and Intellectual Property Protection,” in Douglas Irwin and Richard
Sylla (eds), Founding Choices: American Economic Policy in the 1790s, NBER and University of Chicago (2010):
315-342.

superiority of any other system.103 Perhaps the most telling evidence comprises the endogenous
diffusion and adoption of the distinctive U.S. rules and standards towards property rights in
patents by other countries who wished to emulate its industrial achievements,.
Whereas, the majority of organizations that had specialized in granting prizes for
industrial innovations ultimately became disillusioned with this policy, and the practice of
bestowing technology awards declined among both private and public institutions. As observers
noted in the nineteenth century, industrial prizes faltered in part because of their lack of marketorientation, and even the democratic nature of economic institutions in the United States could
not overcome such drawbacks in administered prize systems.104 Judges had to combine technical
and industry-specific knowledge with impartiality, but even the most competent personnel could
not ensure consistency; decision-making among panels was complicated by differences in
standards, interpretation, capture, and risk-aversion. Such difficulties tended to lead to
haphazard decisions, or were often overcome by simply making the award to the person or the
firm with the most established reputation. Juries were not immune to the effects of outright bias,
capture, cognitive dissonance, lobbying, and “marketing.”105 Prizes tended to offer private
benefits to both the proposer and the winner, largely because they served as valuable
advertisements, with few geographical spillovers. Winners of such awards were generally
unrepresentative of the most significant innovations, in part because the market value of useful
103

“Not that the system as developed in this country or anywhere else is perfect; no one claims that; but it is
infinitely better than any substitute for it that has ever been proposed,” James Richardson, “Our Patent System and
What We Owe to It, ” Century Magazine,1878.
104
Adam Smith had early on noted that “pecuniary rewards for the inventors of new machines … would hardly ever
be so precisely proportioned to the merit of the invention” as in the case of patents, where “if the invention be good
and such as is profitable to mankind, he will probably make a fortune of it; but if it be of no value he also will reap
no benefit.” Smith, Adam, Lectures On Jurisprudence, Meek, R. L. et al. (eds), vol. V, Glasgow
Edition, Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 1982, p. 103.
105
When the Nobel Prize was awarded to two cliometricians, William Parker noted that the event held a “lesson in
marketing” for business historians. SeeWilliam N. Parker, “A "New" Business History? A Commentary on the 1993
Nobel Prize in Economics,” The Business History Review, 67 (4) 1993: 623-636.

inventions would typically be far greater than any prize that could be offered by private or state
initiative. Even prestigious and well-funded institutions such as the Royal Society of Arts failed
to develop truly valuable inventions.
A systematic assessment of the role of incentives for innovation in the nineteenth century
therefore highlights the advantages of market-oriented policies which economize on information,
especially in the decentralized determination of price, value, and “winners.” Market mechanisms
also bypassed many of the high transactions costs attendant on negotiating, monitoring, and
contracting with applicants and winners. This is not to say that administered inducements are
never effective, especially in the context of such market failure as in the provision of medicines
or vaccines characterized by significant gaps between private and social returns. However, in
distinguishing between the numerous ingenious theoretical mechanisms that have been proposed,
such transactions costs need to be recognized and incorporated. In particular, governance issues
and the potential for rent-seeking and corruption should be explicitly addressed, especially in the
context of countries where complementary institutions and political control mechanisms are
weak or nonexistent. In any event, history indicates that the evolution of the institution of
innovation prizes over the past three centuries serves as a cautionary tale rather than as a success
story. As such, significantly more research needs to be completed before we can conclude that
such awards should be re-introduced in the twenty-first century as a preferred means of
promoting technological change and economic progress.

Table 1: Awards of the French Society for the Encouragement of National Industry, 1802-1851
(French Francs)

Agriculture
Beaux-Arts
Boats
Ceramics
Chemical products
Clocks and opticals
Domestic economy
Dyes
Foods
Forges
Hats and Shoes
Heat and Light
Legacies
Locomotives
Machine tools
Metals
Music
Orthopedics
Paper
Political economy
Prize Argenteuil
Steam engines
Sugar
Weapons
Weaving
Wines
Total

Medals and
Prizes
%
Other
%
TOTAL %
28600
12.3
21980
8.3
50580
10.1
16100
6.9
32040
12.1
48140
9.7
11000
4.7
8935
3.4
19935
4.0
34700
14.9
28810
10.8
63510
12.7
6600
2.8
2480
0.9
9080
1.8
0
0.0
8575
3.2
8575
1.7
1200
0.5
1000
0.4
2200
0.4
0
0.0
3990
1.5
3990
0.8
8500
3.6
9150
3.4
17650
3.5
0
0.0
11050
4.2
11050
2.2
4000
1.7
3930
1.5
7930
1.6
9000
3.9
9670
3.6
18670
3.7
0
0.0
16613
6.3
16613
3.3
0
0.0
6185
2.3
6185
1.2
8500
3.6
23350
8.8
31850
6.4
22000
9.4
11180
4.2
33180
6.7
2000
0.9
4495
1.7
6495
1.3
1000
0.4
5315
2.0
6315
1.3
5000
2.1
3030
1.1
8030
1.6
0
0.0
1500
0.6
1500
0.3
24000
10.3
0
0.0
24000
4.8
17500
7.5
15900
6.0
33400
6.7
21700
9.3
6620
2.5
28320
5.7
0
0.0
795
0.3
795
0.2
11800
5.1
27665
10.4
39465
7.9
0
0.0
1280
0.5
1280
0.3
233200
100
265538
100.0
498738
100

Source: Annuaire de la Societe d’Encouragement pour L’industrie Nationale, Paris, 1852.

Figure 1: Premiums (£) Bestowed by the Royal Society of Arts, 1755-1790

6000
5000

£

4000
3000
2000
1000
0
1755

1760

1765

1770

1775

1780

1785

Source: Summary Abstracts of the Rewards Bestowed by the Society, 1754-1782, London: Royal Society
of Arts, 1806; and Annual Transactions of the Royal Society of Arts, London, various years.

Table 2: Royal Society of Arts Payments (£), by Sector, 1754-1782
Agriculture
Chemistry
Colonies
Manufacturing
Mechanics
Polite Arts
Miscellaneous

Prizes
3281
1391
2786
2058
2453
8596
6141

Medals
596
25
103
11
80
588
132

TOTAL
3876.9
1415.9
2888.9
2069.2
2532.6
9184.3
6273.3

%
13.7
5.0
10.2
7.3
9.0
32.5
22.2

Source: Summary Abstracts of the Rewards Bestowed by the Society, 1754-1782, London: Royal Society
of Arts, 1806. The categories correspond to the titles of the Committees that administered the awards.

Table 3: Exhibitors at International Exhibitions in 1851 and 1855, by Country
Exhibitors at Crystal Palace Exhibition, 1851
Austria
Belgium
Britain & Colonies
China
France
Germany
Netherlands
Others
South America
Spain
Switzerland
United States

Number
731
506
7381
30
1710
1536
113
870
12
286
263
499

Percent
5.2
3.6
53.0
0.2
12.3
11.0
0.8
6.2
0.1
2.1
1.9
3.6

Total

13937

100.0

Exhibitors at Paris Universal Exposition, 1855
Austria
Belgium
Britain & Colonies
China
France & Colonies
Germany
Netherlands
Portugal
South America
Spain
Switzerland
United States
Greece
Others

Number
1298
687
3269
0
10914
2198
411
443
38
569
408
131
131
1282

Percent
6.0
3.2
15.0
0.0
50.1
10.1
1.9
2.0
0.2
2.6
1.9
0.6
0.6
5.9

Total

21779

100.0

Source: Official Catalogue of the Great Exhibition of the Works of Industry of All Nations, 1851,
London: Spicer Brothers, 1852; Paris Universal Exhibition of 1867: Catalogue of the British Section,
London, 1867; Reports of the Commissioners of the United States to the International Exhibition held at
Vienna, edited by Robert H. Thurston, 1876.

