                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE INTERGENERATIONAL TRANSMISSION OF WAR

                                        Filipe Campante
                                     David Yanagizawa-Drott

                                       Working Paper 21371
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21371


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2015




We thank Alberto Abadie, Alberto Alesina, Robert Barro, Alberto Bisin, John Friedman, and Andrei
Shleifer for helpful conversations, and seminar participants at HKS, Harvard-MIT (Positive Political
Economy), Middlebury, Northwestern (Kellogg), NYU, Sao Paulo School of Economics, Stanford
GSB, UC Berkeley and the Political Economy of Development and Conflict Workshop in Barcelona
for many useful comments. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Filipe Campante and David Yanagizawa-Drott. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Intergenerational Transmission of War
Filipe Campante and David Yanagizawa-Drott
NBER Working Paper No. 21371
July 2015
JEL No. D74,D90,J12,J13,Z10

                                               ABSTRACT

We study whether war service by one generation affects service by the next generation in later wars,
in the context of the major US theaters of the 20th century. To identify a causal effect, we exploit the
fact that general suitability for service implies that how close to age 21 an individual’s father happened
to be at a time of war is a key determinant of the father’s likelihood of participation. We find that a
father’s war service experience has a positive and significant effect on his son’s likelihood of service.
We estimate an intergenerational transmission parameter of approximately 0.1, across all wars, and
that each individual war had a substantial impact on service in those that followed. We find evidence
consistent with cultural transmission of war service from fathers to sons, and with the presence of
substitutability between this direct transmission and oblique transmission (from society at large). In
contrast, father’s war service increases sons’ educational achievement and actually reduces the likelihood
of military service outside of wartime, suggesting that the results cannot be explained by material incentives
or broader occupational choice. Taken together, our results indicate that a history of wars helps countries
overcome the collective action problem of getting citizens to volunteer for war service.


Filipe Campante
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
filipe_campante@harvard.edu

David Yanagizawa-Drott
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
david_yanagizawa-drott@harvard.edu




An Online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w21371
            “My father’s pride in his service as a pilot in the Army Air Corps [during World
        War II] helped shape my own decision to serve [in Vietnam] (...). Generations were
        linked by service and those values were passed down from father to son to a new
        generation.”

                                                                                         – John F. Kerry1


1      Introduction
Wars are immensely costly endeavors, both from economic and human perspectives, and very often
bring about important consequences for the countries and societies that engage in them. It is thus
unsurprising that a long literature in the social sciences has focused on studying the determinants
of war, mostly looking at the issue from the perspective of leaders or policy-makers.2
    Yet if countries go to war, it is individuals who actually do the fighting, at obviously enormous
risk and cost even for those who survive physically unscathed. It follows that a full understanding
of the determinants of war has to be microfounded on the decisions of individuals on whether to
serve in a time of war.
    Indeed, participation in war is a classic case of a collective action problem, where the benefits
accrue to the general population while the risks and costs are disproportionately borne by the
relativey few who fight (Olson 1971). While part of the answer has often involved compulsion,
the fact is that individual decisions are ultimately at the heart of the matter – not least because
conscription can always be avoided or resisted, at some cost, and is typically unpopular (Simon
and Abdel-Moneim 2011) – and as such they must affect the calculations political leaders face in
choosing whether to pursue war.3
    This paper studies one key element in those individual decisions: is war service transmitted
across generations? In other words, does a father’s war experience affect the likelihood that his
sons will also serve in subsequent wars?4 And if so, what forces give rise to such transmission?
    To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to answer these questions. The main
empirical challenge is that any intergenerational correlation one may find does not imply a causal
effect: a higher likelihood of service among the sons of veterans could reflect, for instance, a
    1 This is an excerpt from Kerry’s blurb for Takiff (2003), a book on “American Fathers and Sons in World War II
and Vietnam.”
    2 For overviews of the literature and issues involved, see for instance Vazquez (2000) and Van Evera (2013), from

the perspective of international relations, or Jackson and Morelli (2011), from a political economy perspective.
    3 As we will discuss in greater detail, many conscripted individuals avoid going to war (Kasinsky 1976; Rotsker

2006), conscription typically involves many exceptions, and volunteers have historically been a major part of war
efforts involving conscription.
    4 We refer to “fathers” and “sons,” since war service was overwhelmingly male over the 20th century.




                                                         1
physical or psychological aptitude or inclination that correlates across generations, perhaps due
to genetic factors. It could even mask a negative causal effect, say, if the horrors of war would
generate an aversion to following that path oneself.
    We study these questions in the context of the four major US theaters of the 20th century –
World War I, World War II, Korea, and Vietnam.5 Our strategy for causal identification relies on
the fact that whether someone’s father is a war veteran depends on the father’s age at the time of
war. In particular, because suitability for service and draft eligibility vary with age, the likelihood
that the father participated in a war peaks for 21-year old individuals, and declines in essentially
monotonic fashion as the distance to age 21 increases. Our key premise is that there is no reason
why individuals born 21 years before wartime would have particular characteristics – compared
to those born symmetrically, say, 25 or 17 years before that same war – directly affecting the
likelihood of war service by their offspring.
    We apply this strategy to US Census micro data linking the behavior and outcomes of fathers
and sons.6 We first show the reduced-form effect across all four wars, whereby the father’s year-
of-birth distance to the peak year reduces the likelihood of the son’s serving in war: on average, an
additional five years of distance implies that sons are 1.5 percentage point less likely to go to war,
a 13% drop relative to the mean likelihood in the sample. Similarly, the first-stage relationship
shows that the additional five years would reduce the probability of a father having gone to war by
15 percentage points, corresponding to a decline of just over one-third with respect to the mean.
    In the two-stage least squares (2SLS) context, these magnitudes imply, across all wars, an
intergenerational transmission parameter of around 0.1. In other words, under the exclusion re-
striction that the father’s year-of-birth distance to peak year only affects the son’s war service
decision through the likelihood that the father has gone to war himself, inducing the father to serve
increases by about 10 percentage points the likelihood of his military-age son serving in the next
generation’s war.
    The positive relationship holds for each of the four major wars taken separately, suggesting a
persistent and robust phenomenon. While the size of the estimated parameter declined over the
20th century, the relatively smaller scale of the war efforts post-World War II implies that the
aggregate effects are always non-trivial, and rather stable. For instance, our estimates would imply
that the service of World War I fathers explains up to 12% of World War II service members in
our sample, while World War II fathers account for about 20% of Vietnam veterans, who in turn
    5 We will also examine the intergenerational effects over Gulf War service, separately from the four major wars, for

reasons we will discuss in detail.
    6 Linking fathers and sons is only feasible for a non-random subsample of the Census. We will discuss in depth

the issues of external validity with respect to the population, but we find, in essence, that our results are likely to be,
if anything, a slight underestimate of the effects for the population. Similarly, we also show that they are not much
affected by attrition due to war casualties.



                                                            2
account for around 14% of Gulf War soldiers. This indicates that intergenerational transmission
remained an important factor explaining war service throughout the century.
    Our finding has immediate implications for the dynamics of war over time. In fact, calibrating
our estimates into the demographic trajectory of the US male population indicates that US wars
over the 20th century provided a sizable boost in terms of available manpower for subsequent wars
– in the cases of World War II, Korea, and Vietnam, the wars turned out to be well-timed to seize
that boost. These aggregate estimates should be interpreted cautiously, as the very existence of
intergenerational effects could lead to general equilibrium and political economy forces affecting
the scale, duration, and composition of subsequent wars. Still, they illustrate the potential dynamic
links between wars over time, and how they are affected by the size and spacing of those wars.
    We then look at the specific nature of the mechanism behind that intergenerational transmission.
We first consider the possibility of a “cultural transmission” channel: the war service experience
could affect individual beliefs and attitudes, which a father could then choose to transmit to his
sons, and which may induce them to serve in war. While we do not have direct evidence on indi-
vidual attitudes across generations, a simple model of purposeful transmission of cultural traits, in
the spirit of Bisin and Verdier (2001), predicts that such changes in attitudes would induce changes
in parenting strategies, with increased effort in transmitting one’s traits to his offspring. It also
predicts that the intergenerational transmission within the familiy and the “oblique transmission”
from society at large should be “cultural substitutes”: fathers may invest less in inculcating values
related to war service if there is a strong chance that those values will be passed on by a society
where they are widespread.
    Consistent with this mechanism of cultural transmission at the individual level, we document
evidence, in the context of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY), of an effect of war
service on parenting strategies, as perceived by sons – and not by daughters. Specifically, sons
become more likely to report that their fathers adopted an authoritative parenting style, which has
been defined as one where parents “mold their children’s preferences so as to align them with their
own“ (Doepke and Zilibotti 2014, p. 3) We also find that the intergenerational transmission is
weaker in counties where there is a larger share of war veterans in the population, consistent with
cultural substitutability.
    We also show that our results cannot be explained as a mere instance of a broader kind of occu-
pational choice decisions, whereby military careers “run in the family,” as many other professions
might, and wartime service simply triggers military careers. Instead, and quite remarkably, there is
a negative effect of father’s war service on the likelihood of the son’s serving outside of wartime.
As it turns out, on net, we find no effect of father’s war service on the overall likelihood of sons
having been in the military. In other words, our results speak to the intergenerational transmission
of war, not of military service in general.


                                                 3
     We further consider the possiblity of wartime service affecting the decisions of the next gener-
ation through material incentives. In principle, war service could have an effect on parents’ deci-
sions in ways that worsen the economic opportunities available to their progeny, thereby increasing
the latter’s likelihood of war service. However, we find a positive causal effect of father’s war ser-
vice on sons’ education, consistent with the intergenerational transmission of the achievement in-
duced by the many programs supporting veterans’ educational pursuits (Angrist 1993; Bound and
Turner 2002). This finding is of independent interest, in that it underscores the cross-generational
effects of the war experience, as well as the long-run, dynamic effects of war on the evolution of
human capital. It also helps us make sense of the negative effect on non-wartime service by the
sons of veterans. In line with those patterns, we also find that father’s war service increases the
likelihood that teenage sons will aspire to a military career, but actually decreases that likelihood
at the young adult stage.7
     In sum, we find evidence consistent with the intergenerational transmission of war service being
at least in part driven by a mechanism of individual cultural transmission. While it is plausible that
this cultural transmission could ultimately increase the propensity to join the military in general, it
seems that it takes the call of war for that impulse to trump the improved labor market prospects.8
     More broadly, we look at our finding as a vivid example of intergenerational transmission of
life experiences. This point is important, for instance, if we are interested in the economic effects
of culture. If, following Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2006, p.24), we define culture as “those
customary beliefs, values, and social constraints that [...] groups transmit fairly unchanged from
generation to generation,” then understanding its evolution requires understanding this dynamic
process of intergenerational transmission. In particular, the extent to which whatever changes
emerge in that process can be attributed to the accummulation of individual experiences – as op-
posed to, say, genetic drift – matters a great deal for policy and for whether we should expect it to
affect the evolution of culture. We provide individual-level evidence on how this evolution takes
place across generations.9
     Our paper relates directly to the literature that has investigated the intergenerational links in
economic decisions and outcomes, such as education (Currie and Moretti 2003, Holmlund, Lin-
dahl, and Plug 2011), earnings (Solon 1999), or welfare dependence (Dahl, Kostol, and Mogstad
2014). In particular, we also speak to the literature that has looked at the intergenerational trans-
mission of occupational choices, especially in sociology (see Erikson and Goldthorpe 2002) but
   7 We  also assess and rule out explanations running through purely demographic channels.
   8 The  example of John Kerry, already mentioned in the epigraph, is illustrative. The son of a World War II veteran,
he enlisted in the Navy in 1966, as he was about to graduate from Yale, and requested duty in Vietnam. He obviously
had a high opportunity cost, and it seems unlikely that he would have joined the military in the absence of war. He did
not pursue a military career, leaving active duty in 1970.
   9 A complementary strand within the literature on the evolution of culture has studied long-term effects of individual

experiences (e.g. Malmendier and Nagel 2011; Giuliano and Spilimbergo 2014), with a within-generation focus.


                                                           4
also in economics (Dal Bó, Dal Bó, and Snyder 2009). Our paper underscores, in the context of
a stark and consequential decision, that life experiences have effects that are transmitted across
generations, while showing evidence for a specific channel related to cultural transmission.
    We also contribute to the literature on the determinants of participation in conflict, which has
mostly been concerned with civil war (Humphreys and Weinstein 2008, Blattman and Miguel
2010). One of its central themes has been precisely the mechanisms for solving the collective
action problem inherent in that participation. This literature has focused on the impact of economic
circumstances affecting the material costs and benefits of individuals from engaging in war, and
on elements of intrinsic motivation (e.g. grievances, in the context of civil war) or social sanctions.
Along similar lines, the literature on the determinants of miltary enlistment in the US has also
mostly focused on the socio-economic environment at the time of the decision (Kleykamp 2006).10
    We add to these strands a perspective on the cultural aspect of that decision, and its transmission
across generations, which also underscores the dynamic effects of conflict. To the extent that our
findings would extend to other contexts, this may also help us understand the possibility of “conflict
traps” (Collier 2003; Besley and Reynal-Querol 2014), and of war begetting war, as pointed out by
observers of international politics (Singer and Small 1974, Maoz 2004): fighting a war today helps
countries or groups solve the collective action problem in finding volunteers in the future.
    In addition, we speak to the strand of literature that has studied the effects of military service,
in the US, on a number of outcomes, ranging from earnings (Angrist 1990; Angrist and Krueger
1994) and education (Angrist 1993; Bound and Turner 2002) to health (Dobkin and Shabani 2009;
Lillard and Fahringer 2014) or political attitudes (Jennings and Markus 1977).11 This literature
has not focused on intergenerational transmission, which is our main object of analysis.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background on US war service over the
20th century. Section 3 describes the data and the empirical strategy. Section 4 shows the key
results on intergenerational transmission of war, and Section 5 presents the results broken down by
war, to examine the linkages between different wars over time. Section 6 then provides evidence
on the mechanisms behind the intergenerational transmission. Section 7 concludes.


2       Background: US War Service in the 20th Century
In addition to numerous troop deployments for combat all over the world, the US fought in four
major wars over the 20th century: World War I, World War II, Korea, and Southeast Asia (Viet-
    10 This
          literature has recognized and studied the intuitive idea that military service “runs in the family” (Faris 1981,
Stander and Merrill 2000), but without addressing war service specifically, or dealing with causal identification.
  11 A related literature has studied the effects of conscription avoidance on various outcomes, from education (Card

and Lemieux 2001) to political attitudes (Erikson and Stoker 2011). Yet another strand has focused on the effect of
forced recruitment in the context of developing countries (e.g. Blattman and Annan 2010).


                                                            5
nam). The period of involvement, number of service members involved, and casualties in each of
these conflicts, along with the briefer but also important Gulf War (“Desert Shield / Desert Storm”)
are displayed in Table 1.12 The number of service members refers to all who served during the time
of war, as distinct from those who actually saw combat. This is also what the Census data on vet-
eran status, which we will use in our empirical analysis, refers to. (This means that our results
should be interpreted as speaking broadly to the effects of wartime service.)

                                              [TABLE 1 HERE]

    The first observation coming out of this table is the sheer scale of the engagements: more
than 37 million Americans were engaged in war service over the 20th century. The personal risk
involved in that service is also of note: about 5% of those service members ended up dead or
wounded – a number that does not account for psychological effects that are now known to be very
important (Tanielian and Jaycox 2008). While a risk of this magnitude is most likely to weigh
heavily in the average individual decision to go to war, it is worth mentioning that the numbers are
small from the standpoint of sample attrition due to war deaths, a theme we will return to when
discussing our results.
    Not surprisingly, in light of the scale of US involvement, the four major wars involved a compo-
nent of conscription (Simon and Abdel-Moneim 2011). In World War I, the Selective Service Act
of 1917 authorized a draft of all male citizens between 21 and 31 years of age (later expanded to
18 to 45). Later, the 1940 Selective Training and Service Act (“Burke-Wadsworth Act”) imposed
peacetime conscription, meaning that men between the ages of 21 and 35 were required to register
with local draft boards so that the military could fill their personnel needs via a draft lottery. Entry
into World War II expanded the registration age range to age 18 to 65, with those aged 18 to 45
being immediately liable for service. In 1948, the peacetime draft was revised to cover ages 18 to
26, establishing a system that would survive (with amendments) until the end of conscription and
the move to an all-volunteer military, in 1973, in the aftermath of the Vietnam War.13
    In spite of the role of conscription, individual decisions regarding whether to serve or not
have always been a central element in determining wartime service. First and foremost, a large
component of all war efforts was voluntary, as can be readily seen by contrasting the figures in
Table 1 with those depicted in Figure 1, which compiles the number of draft inductees for all years
in which conscription was in place. Even in the case of the largest of them all, namely World War
   12 We exclude the Spanish-American War, which lasted between 1898 and 1902, since it will not be part of our

empirical analysis.
   13 There still is mandatory registration with the Selective Service System, for men aged 18 to 25, for pos-

sible conscription. In practice, while most do register, many do not or fail to comply with mandates such
as registering changes of address; such violations have typically not been prosecuted at least since 1986 (see
http://hasbrouck.org/draft/prosecutions.html). That said, the last men to be conscripted were brought into the mili-
tary in June 1973 (born in 1952), and the last draftee on active duty retired in November 2014 (Brown 2014).

                                                         6
II, when the need for conscripted soldiers was at its highest, just under 40% of service members
were classified as volunteers. By the time of Vietnam, a significant majority of service members
were in fact volunteers (Rotsker 2006).

                                               [FIGURE 1 HERE]

    In addition, all conscription episodes involved exceptions – ranging from “conscientious ob-
jector” or dependency or “essential occupation” exemptions, to medical and general fitness exemp-
tions – which naturally afforded leeway to avoid service.14 In the limit, draft evasion was always
an option that, albeit costly, was taken by a non-negligible number of individuals: the number of
“apparent draft offenders” in the Vietnam era is estimated in excess of half-a-million individuals
(Rotsker 2006), and most were eventually pardoned (Simon and Abdel-Moneim 2011).
    For all these reasons, it makes sense to study war service as an individual decision that can be
affected by factors such as a family history of service.
    Still, the possibility of conscription should naturally affect the decisions even of those who
were not drafted and thus choose whether to volunteer. Since data issues lead us to focus on
the four major wars, our main analysis will keep uniformity with respect to the presence of con-
scription. It follows that our main results should be interpreted as quantifying the importance of
intergenerational transmission of war service under a system where fathers may well be induced
to serve largely because they are drafted, and sons later decide whether to volunteer or whether to
comply with a conscription order. We will then look separately at the post-Vietnam data, to assess
whether a father’s service in the conscription era has an impact on his son’s decision to serve in
war during the all-volunteer era.
    Another salient aspect of war service at the time of the four major 20th-century wars is that it
was in essence, though not entirely, a male endeavor. In World War II, for instance, there were just
under 400,000 women in service – all volunteers, since there has never been female conscription in
the US. In addition, up until 1973, after the end of the Vietnam War, women were not allowed in the
field of combat, and had a very limited role in combat zones in general (Holm 1993). We will thus
focus on the links between fathers and sons, while using differences across genders occasionally
as a source of contrast.
  14 As a particularly salient example, in the Vietnam era a draftee could obtain deferment as long as he was a full-time

student working towards a degree. As noted by Takiff (2003, p. 2) in his collection of stories told by Vietnam veterans,
“most of the Vietnam veterans in this book had at least some choice in the matter [of serving]”.




                                                           7
3       Empirical Framework

3.1      Data
Our primary analysis is based on micro data from the decennial US Census of 1950-2000, acquired
through IPUMS-USA. For the main US theaters we will study – namely, World War I, World War
II, the Korean War, and the Vietnam War – the Census contains veteran status information on
whether each individual served in the U.S. Armed Forces during each war.15
     In contrast, perhaps as a result of the smaller scale of the Gulf War compared to its predeces-
sors, the subsequent Census did not ask about wartime service specifically: the questions related to
veteran status were instead framed in terms of time periods. This introduces additional measure-
ment error, in that some of the respondents will not have served during wartime. For this reason,
we will focus our analysis on the four major wars, and then look separately at Gulf War-era service
by looking at the 1990-1995 period, which is the available range covering the period of the war.16
     A key challenge is to match data across fathers and sons. Unfortunately, the Census does
not provide data on the universe of father-son relationships, but rather only for those cases where
fathers and sons are in the same household.17 The vast majority of adult sons do not live with their
fathers, of course, and moreover our sample is, unsurprisingly, not representative of the overall
population. For instance, the likelihood of being in our sample is strongly and negatively related
with age. This can be seen very clearly in the density functions depicted in Figure A1, in the
Appendix, aggregating all Census years in our time range.
     This selection into cohabitation would be particularly problematic if it were related to the
willingness to serve in wars. To probe for this, in Figure A2 we plot the likelihood of being a
war veteran for each cohort in the male population, versus in the matched sample. Consistently,
across all censuses, the likelihood is approximately similar, suggesting that selection based on
latent willingness to serve in war is not a key concern.18
    15 Obviously, each Census only contains information on service in wars that preceded it, so we cannot use those
before 1950, which would only cover participation in World War I. The censuses do not contain information on the
branch of the armed forces, or what type of battles the individuals experienced, if any at all. The definitions of war
periods all come straight from the Census.
   16 We will not consider the effect of Vietnam veteran fathers on service in the later, 21st-century wars in Afghanistan

and Iraq. This is because the available sample size is rather small: the length of time between Vietnam and these
conflicts is long enough that there are few 21st-century soldiers who have Vietnam-era fathers. In addition, among
those who do, the distribution of father years of birth is quite asymmetric around the Vietnam peak year of 1947 –
quite naturally, a lot more fathers of Afghanistan and Iraq veterans were born after 1947 than before. Needless to say,
the time between the Gulf War and the later wars is much too short for there to be many children of those veterans
fighting in Iraq or Afghanistan.
   17 We link fathers and sons using the variable “poploc,” which according to the Census “identifies social relationships

(such as stepfather and adoptive father) as well as biological relationships.”
   18 Note that the 1950 Census is an outlier when it comes to the likelihood of service, both for our sample and the

overall population. This is due to the inconsistent implementation of the census, where many enumerators did not ask


                                                            8
    We can repeat this visual exercise for other demographic characteristics. As it turns out, sam-
ple and population are largely similar, across all censuses, as can be seen in Figure A3 in the
Appendix. The one exception is single status: in short, it is essentially the young and single who
are disproportionately likely to be living with their fathers.
    We can use this wealth of available demographic characteristics in more systematic fashion, to
further check the determinants of selection into the sample. Specifically, we run a set of bivariate
regressions in the full sample, with a dummy indicating son living with father as the dependent
variable, and different observable characteristics on the right-hand side. The resulting (standard-
ized) coefficients are plotted in Figure A4.19 They confirm that age and single status are the key
correlates of the likelihood of living with one’s father. A couple of other variables (socio-economic
status, unemployed status) are also relevant predictors, though on a much smaller scale. We will
later exploit these predictors to assess the external validity of our key findings.


3.2     Identification Strategy
The key idea behind our empirical strategy is that, due to features such as draft eligibility and
general suitability for service, the likelihood of war service peaks around age 21, and declines as
distance to that age increases. This can be seen in Figure 2, which plots the likelihood of wartime
service across birth cohorts of the 20th century, in the US Census data. Across all wars, cohorts
born around 21 years before the midpoint of the war have the highest likelihood.20

                                               [FIGURE 2 HERE]

    Since there is no obvious reason why individuals born around 21 years before a war breaks out
will have particular observable or unobservable characteristics that directly affect the likelihood of
war service by their offspring, it follows that a father’s year of birth – or more precisely, its absolute
distance to the closest year that happens to be 21 years before the midpoint of a subsequent war –
is a plausibly exogenous source of variation for the likelihood of the father serving in a war. This
strategy thus allows us to estimate the effect of the latter on the son’s likelihood of going to the
subsequent generation’s war.
    This is best understood with a simple example. Consider three individuals, A, B and C, all born
in the same year. Individual A’s father was born in 1896, and was 21 years-old at the time of World
the veteran status question. It is unclear what bias this would introduce in our context, since any random measurement
error in son veteran status will primarily lead to larger standard errors, and random measurement error in father veteran
status will be purged by the instrument. Nevertheless, our results are robust to dropping the 1950 Census altogether,
as we show in Table A2 in the Appendix.
   19 The corresponding regression results are in Table A1 in the Appendix.
   20 For a descriptive account of war service across generations over the 20th century in the US, see Carlson and

Andress (2009).


                                                           9
War I; Individual B’s father, in contrast, was born five years earlier, in 1891; and Individual C’s
father was born five years later, in 1901. The key idea is that the distance of their fathers’ year of
birth relative to 1896 should not systematically affect A’s decision to serve in World War II, relative
to B and C, other than through the likelihood of the fathers serving in World War I. The same is
true, mutatis mutandis, for 1922 (21 years before the mid-point of US involvement in World War
II), 1931 (Korea), or 1947 (Vietnam).
     To implement the strategy, we study the following (first-stage) relationship, in the matched
subsample of fathers and sons:

                                                                             0
(1)   FatherWarServiceict = β FS ∗ FatherYOBdistict + f ( FatherYOBict )θ + Xijct γ + ε ijct ,

where FatherWarServiceict is a dummy indicating whether the father of individual i born in co-
hort c, observed in Census year t, reported to have served in any of the wars under analysis,
FatherYOBict is the father’s year of birth, and Xijct is a vector of additional control variables.
    The main independent variable of interest is FatherYOBdistict : the absolute distance between
the father’s year of birth and the closest year that happens to be 21 years before the midpoint of a
subsequent war. This variable is depicted in Figure 3, in which the key peak-age cohort years are
marked. By contrasting the figure with Figure 2, we see that they are essentially mirror images
of one another: the likelihood of war service by cohort peaks in those key years. In short, the
main idea of our empirical strategy is that the likelihood of war service is strongly decreasing in
FatherYOBdistict : β FS < 0.

                                        [FIGURE 3 HERE]

    The variable FatherYOBdistict makes clear that our strategy is exploiting the symmetry around
the peak-age cohort years, as already suggested by our simple example. In other words, we are
not simply comparing individuals whose fathers were 21 at the midpoint of the previous war to
others whose fathers were x years older; rather, we are comparing that first set of individuals,
simultaneously, both to those whose fathers were x years older and to those whose fathers were
x years younger. While older parents are likely to be systematically different, our premise is that
there is little reason to think that both older and younger parents will be systematically different,
in the same way, from those born in certain years that are, for all intents and purposes, as good as
randomly picked.
    We can go one step further by controlling for father’s year of birth, FatherYOBict , to address
concerns of broad changes in the determinants of war service across cohorts over the long time
span we study. We do so by including a function f (·), experimenting with linear and third-order
polynomial specifications. The vector Xijct includes Census year fixed effects and son birth-year


                                                  10
fixed effects. This means that our variation is comparing sons who were born in the same year, con-
trolling for any cohort effects.21 Finally, for additional robustness, we will also show specifications
that include demographic controls and state fixed effects in Xijct .
    To focus on the relevant variation, we restrict the baseline sample to cohorts that were born in
the relevant time period. Specifically, since young children and elderly men are highly unlikely to
serve in wars, we restrict the sample to fathers born after 1880, and to cohorts of sons no younger
than age 16 by the end of the Vietnam War.
    We also estimate the reduced-form equation:

                                                                          0
(2)      WarServiceict = β RF ∗ FatherYOBdistict + f ( FatherYOBict )θ + Xijct γ + νijct ,

where WarServiceict is a dummy indicating whether individual i (i.e. the son) actively served in
any of the wars under analysis, using the same set of covariates and fixed effects as in (1). Note
that, when we include son birth-year fixed effects and control for the year of birth of fathers, we
effectively control for the difference in age between fathers and sons; by the same token, the com-
bination of birth-year fixed effects and Census year fixed effects also implies that we effectively
control for the age of the sons at the time of the censuses.
    We can also estimate the following equation, via IV/2SLS, in order to scale the reduced-form
effect, β RF :

                                                                           0
(3)    WarServiceict = β IV ∗ FatherWarServiceict + f ( FatherYOBict )θ + Xijct γ + ε̃ ijct .

Under the exclusion restriction that the distance in the father’s year of birth to the peak cohorts only
influences the likelihood of the son’s war service through its effect on whether the father served in
war, β IV captures the parameter for what we may label “pure” intergenerational transmission of
war: the difference in the likelihood of war service between sons whose fathers went to war, and
sons whose fathers did not go to war. A weaker version of the exclusion restriction would state that
the influence works only through the likelihood of service, which could also encompass choices
made in order to counteract that increased likelihood. The interpretation of β IV would then refer to
a “broad” intergenerational transmission: the effect of increasing a father’s probability of serving
in war over the son’s decision.
    Another possibility consistent with our reduced-form specification would allow for the possi-
bility of social effects. For instance, it could be the case that a father’s proximity to peak age at the
time of war also increases the likelihood of his friends and peers going to war. Contact with those
  21 It is not obvious that one should include son cohort fixed effects,
                                                                       since it may be endogenous to whether the father
went to war: for example, veteran fathers could choose to delay when to have children. However, as we will show, the
estimates are very similar with and without these fixed effects, indicating this is not a concern in practice.



                                                            11
war-exposed friends and peers could in turn affect the father in ways that eventually get transmitted
to his sons.22 In short, the experience of war service could get transmitted across generations in
both direct and indirect ways, both of which are important from a policy perspective.
    Finally, we should note that our instrument estimates the intergenerational transmission pa-
rameter for individuals whose fathers were induced to serve because of their appropriate age at the
time of war (the “compliers”). If treatment effects are heterogenous, the local average treatment
effect we estimate may therefore be different from the average treatment effect. In other words, we
cannot estimate the effect among those fathers who never serve regardless of their age at the time
of war (the “never-takers”), or fathers who always serve regardless of their age (“always-takers”).
The latter group is arguably non-existent, since it is extremely rare for very old people or young
children to serve in war; the group of never-takers is likely to be substantially larger, but of limited
policy interest.23


4      Main Results: The Intergenerational Transmission of War
We first pool together all the available data from the four major war theaters. Because sons effec-
tively only serve in subsequent wars relative to their fathers, this estimation will exploit variation
arising from fathers serving in the first three wars – World War I, World War II, and Korea – and
the effects on service by sons in later wars: World War II, Korea, and Vietnam. It will therefore be
a weighted average of the intergenerational transmission parameter across the wars during the 20th
century. This parameter will provide an estimate of the overall importance of the intergenerational
mechanism during the long time period of the major U.S. wars of the 20th century, covering the
conscription era.


4.1      First-Stage and Reduced-Form Results
Table 2 displays the first-stage and reduced-form estimates from a linear specification. The esti-
mates on father’s year-of-birth distance to the war peak cohort are statistically significant (at the
1% level) across all specifications; in fact, it is rather clear, from inspection, that the first stage
is very strong. Columns 1-2 show the basic first-stage specification linking our instrument to the
likelihood that the father is a war veteran, first with linear and then polynomial father-year-of-birth
controls. The estimate implies that each additional year of distance from the father’s birth relative
    22 Anotherpossibility is that the father’s friends could directly influence the son, but it seems far-fetched that this
would be a quantitatively meaningful channel in comparison to the father-to-son transmission.
   23 We use these terms loosely, in the spirit of the LATE framework (Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin 1996). For example,

strictly speaking, the ”always-takers” are defined for a dummy instrument, but in our main specification the instrument
is continuous.



                                                           12
to the closest peak year for war service implies a decrease of 3 percentage points in that likelihood.

                                               [TABLE 2 HERE]

    Columns 6-7 in turn show the same basic specifications for the reduced form. The estimate
entails that an individual is about 0.3 percentage points less likely to go to war than another com-
parable individual whose father happened to be born one year closer to the peak. Put differently,
a five-year difference in terms of father distance to peak cohort induces a 1.5 percentage-point
decrease in the probability of war service, which corresponds to a decline of about 13% relative to
the sample mean.
    It is instructive to consider a visual representation of the residuals from these basic specifica-
tions, in Figure 4, in order to gain intuition about the nature of the variation that is driving our
results. (The upper panel showcases the residuals from the first-stage regression, as in Column 2,
while the lower panel does the same for the reduced form in Column 7.)24 The negative correla-
tions between both father’s and son’s war service, on one hand, and the instrument, on the other, is
rather easy to grasp from a visual inspection of each panel. Contrasting the two panels, we see the
immediate implication: the war service dummies for the two generations move very much in tan-
dem. Last but not least, we can see that the actual variation in the instrument, in the data, is indeed
essentially symmetric around the peak war-cohort years, in line with the premise that motivates
our empirical strategy.

                                              [FIGURE 4 HERE]

    Table 2 also considers additional specifications. First, Columns 3 and 8 add son year-of-birth
fixed effects, so that we identify the effect off the comparison between individuals born in the same
year, and additionally control for factors such as the age difference between fathers and sons, or
the age of sons at the time of war. The estimates barely change. This reassures us that the effect
we find is not meaningfully affected by mechanical demographic patterns triggered by the specific
timing of wars – such as, say, veterans being more likely to have war-age sons at the time of the
subsequent war, simply because of their age.25 Columns 4-5 and 9-10 then show that the estimates
are also robust when we exclude from the sample the fathers who are very unlikely to have gone
to war, because they are far removed from peak age at the time of conflict, or when we control for
state fixed effects and race.
  24 We    trim the plot at 1941, because the number of fathers with birth years greater than 1941 gets dramatically
smaller – typically less than 1,000, when we have about 5-10 times more for earlier years. Trimming those later years
leaves out only 0.7% of the sample.
   25 It could also be that the effect of war service actually works partly through demographic channels, in a non-

mechanical way, to the extent that war service may affect, for instance, fertility decisions (e.g. Vandenbroucke 2014).
We will discuss this possible demographic channel later in the paper.


                                                         13
    The last column introduces the mother’s year-of-birth distance to the peak war year. Since
very few mothers would have been war veterans – and even those who are would have had a very
different wartime experience, as discussed in Section 2 – it is reassuring that the coefficient on
mother’s year-of-birth distance is essentially zero: an order of magnitude smaller than the one on
father’s distance. This provides further confidence that the results we find are not linked to parental
cohort effects, although any such effects could only be a confounding factor if they happened to
consistently find their peak precisely 21 years before the midpoint of a war.26
    The specifications in the table assume a linear effect in distance to peak year, but we can also
estimate a more flexible specification with dummies for each number of years of distance. The
results from this alternative are depicted in Figure 5. The first stage effect is essentially monotonic
in distance (as would have been suggested by Figure 2). The reduced form in turn shows that
the effect on sons is being driven essentially by fathers born more than four years away from the
peak, which is reassuring in that we would not expect so much of a difference between 21- and
22-year-olds, as opposed to the contrast between 21 and 16, or 26.27

                                               [FIGURE 5 HERE]


4.2     IV/2SLS Results
Given our exclusion restriction, we can then consider the IV/2SLS results, for causal estimates
of the “intergenerational transmission of war” parameter. This is what we show in Table 3. The
estimate is positive, and statistically significant at the 1% level, across all specifications.28 It is also
very stable, around 0.1, no matter whether the IV is a linear function of father’s distance to peak
year (Column 1), or else a 2nd- or 3rd-order polynomial (Columns 2-3), or even a simple dummy
for whether the father was born within three years of the peak year (Column 4). In short, when
a father has been induced to go to war because he happened to be around peak military age, the
likelihood of his son serving in the next generation’s war goes up by about 10 percentage points.

                                                [TABLE 3 HERE]

   The next few columns further test the sensitivity of the basic result. Column 5 restricts the
sample of sons to those who were between the ages of 16 and 30 at wartime, to make sure that the
  26 Note  that mother and father year of birth are highly correlated with one another, which is unsurprising but entails
that a specification including mother year of birth only would be very hard to interpret. In addition, the mother’s
year of birth could be endogenous to father’s war service, as the war experience may well impact who the individual
chooses to marry.
   27 Figure A5 (Appendix) adds the reduced-form effect estimated using mother’s year of birth We see essentially no

effect, underscoring that the our result is indeed driven by the impact on the likelihood of father’s war service.
   28 Perhaps surprisingly, the raw correlation between having a veteran father and serving in war oneself is negative.

As soon as we start including our control variables, in an OLS context, the coefficient grows larger and becomes
positive, suggesting the omitted variable bias is in fact negative.

                                                          14
result is not driven by individuals outside prime military age. Column 6 further drops observations
where the father was born within a one-year distance from the peak years, to make sure that our
estimate is not overly affected by other shocks that happen to occur for those specific cohorts.
Reassuringly, the estimated coefficient remains very stable across all specifications. Column 7
then includes controls for fathers’ educational achievements. We do not include them in the base-
line specifications because education may be endogenous with respect to war service. That said,
Column 7 shows that the estimate is unaffected by these controls, indicating that pre-determined
socio-economic conditions are not confounding our results.29
    We can also assess the extent to which attrition from the sample could affect our results, with a
simple back-of-the-envelope calculation. As we have seen in Table 1, on average 1.9% of wartime
service members did not return from the four major 20th-century theaters. Let us assume a worst-
case scenario in which every single son of those who died during war service would have been
induced not to serve in future wars, with a “true” β IV coefficient equal to −1. Since in our sample
about 40% of fathers went to war, we could predict that the size of the counterfactual sample would
be 0.76% (0.019 × 0.4) of the sample of sons (assuming that each of the dead fathers would have
had one son, on average). If we combine the coefficient from this counterfactual population with
our estimate of 0.1, we would obtain an effect around 0.092.30 Quite simply, attrition due to death
is far too small to much affect our estimates, even if the opposing effect on the children of dead
soldiers were extremely large.


4.3     External Validity
We now turn to the question of the external validity of our estimates. In particular, since our sample
is not randomly drawn, we want to assess the extent to which our estimates would translate into a
local average treatment effect for the population as a whole.
    For that we rely on the observable demographic characteristics that we have shown, in Section
3.1, to predict the likelihood of living with one’s father. In order to gain intuition, we first estimate,
for each of the demographic variables, the following specification, via IV/2SLS:

                                                 WarServiceict = β 1H ∗ FatherWarServiceict +
                                                                      0
(4)     + β 2H ∗ FatherWarServiceict × Demo
                                       \ ict + f ( FatherYOBict )θ + Xijct γ + ε̃ ijct ,
  29 The  results are also robust to many different ways of clustering the standard errors – by state, father year of birth,
and son cohort, as well as two-way combinations of those. These can be seen in Table A3 in the Appendix. Similarly,
the results do not vary much at all if estimated separately by Census region, as shown in Table A4.
   30 Specifically, −1∗(0.019∗0.4)+.1 ≈ 0.0917. Note that the assumption of an average of one son per dead father is
                      1+(0.019∗0.4)
also a worst-case scenario: put simply, many of them would simply be too young to have many (or any) children. Of
course, our individual estimates of intergenerational transmission are conditional on the son being born, but we will
return to the issue of unborn sons when considering aggregate effects.


                                                            15
where Demo
        \ ict stands for the demographic variable in question, demeaned at the sample mean.
In other words, the coefficient β 1H now captures the intergenerational transmission parameter
evaluated at the sample mean for the demographic variable, while β 2H captures the potentially
heterogeneous effect according to the level of that variable.
    We can use those estimates to project what the effect would be if evaluated at the population
mean of the variable. This is depicted in Figure 6, where the first bar represents, for ease of com-
parison, the baseline intergenerational transmission coefficient estimated in Table 3 (Column 1).
The subsequent shaded bars in turn display the results from estimating the heterogeneous treatment
effect for each of the demographic variables we have previously considered in Section 3.1. The
last bar summarizes all the variables in a multivariate context: we predict for each observation in
the sample the ex ante probability of being in the sample, based on a probit regression, use that
predicted probability in the role of Demoict in a regression like (4), and evaluate the parameter of
interest at the population mean for that probability. (The estimation results underlying these results
are presented in Table A5 in the Appendix.)

                                        [FIGURE 6 HERE]

     The central message from the picture is that, for most variables in question, the estimated
coefficient is rather similar to the baseline effect. For a couple of them, such as age, it is actually
slightly larger – the estimated effect actually increases with age, so that the higher mean age in the
population translates into a bigger effect. This suggests that, if anything, our results may slightly
underestimate the strength of intergenerational transmission in the population.
     We can pursue the intuition behind these depictions in more systematic fashion, by estimating
the intergenerational transmission parameter using inverse probability weighting (IPW) methods
(Kang and Schafer 2007; Solon, Haider, and Wooldridge 2015). To achieve population-consistent
                                                                             1
estimates, these methods weigh each observation in the sample by Pr(Sample       )
                                                                                   , where Pr (Sample)
is the probability of the observation being in the sample as estimated from demographic character-
istics. Intuitively, the idea is to ensure that observations that are “unlikely” contribute more to the
estimation, as they are more comparable to the data points that were left out of the sample.
     In practice, we first estimate, over the full male population of the Census across all years in
our analysis, a probit regression with a dummy for living with father as the dependent variable,
and a set of pre-determined demographic variables on the right-hand side. (Details are available
in Table A6.) We then use the predicted propensity scores in IPW regressions. Note that these
methods are known to be sensitive to near-zero probabilities – the weight on an observation grows
very large as the ex ante probability of it being in the sample approaches zero – as well as model
misspecification. Particularly since there turns out to be a non-trivial number of low-probability
observations in our sample, we will assess robustness using a few alternative approaches.

                                                  16
    The results are in the last four columns of Table 3. Column 8 gives us the baseline IPW
estimate, which is substantially larger than the comparable result in Column 1. This underscores
the message from Figure 6, in that incorporating the information conveyed by the demographic
characteristics on the probability of being in our sample tends to magnify the estimate. As we
remove observations with very low probability, in Columns 9 and 10 (less than 0.5% and less
than 1%, respectively), the coefficient gets smaller, and eventually very close to the estimates
in Columns 1-7. That remains true in Column 11, where we use a broader set of demographic
characteristics to predict Pr (Sample), not limited to those that are predetermined.
    In sum, after taking into account the observable differences between sample and population,
and doing so in a few different ways, we still end up with an estimated effect that is very close to
our baseline. While unobservable differences cannot be ruled out, this evidence suggests that the
baseline estimates represent a good approximation of the treatment effect in the broader population.
Perhaps most importantly, it seems unlikely that they would overestimate the latter.


5       War-by-War Results

5.1       From World War I to Vietnam
Our baseline results represent an average effect over all four major wars. As shown in Figure
A6 in the Appendix, which displays the size of father birth cohorts in our sample, we have more
observations with fathers who served in the more recent wars.31 This means that, in practice, the
baseline results implicitly give more weight to those more recent wars. In doing so, they may mask
important heterogeneities in the strength of the intergenerational transmission over time and across
wars.
    We thus look at patterns of the intergenerational transmission of war service over time, by
estimating IV/2SLS results for each of the major war theaters separately. To estimate the effects
on the relevant population for each war, we use the three censuses following the end of each
(outcome) war, and restrict the sample to sons that were at least age 16 by the end of the war and
at most age 30 by the beginning of it, and to fathers born within ten years of the peak cohort of the
preceding war.
    These patterns are interesting for two reasons: first, they will let us assess whether that inter-
generational transmission changed substantially over the century. Second, and no less important,
they will open a window into the links between the different wars, by considering each war’s effect
on the likelihood of service in the subsequent generation’s war effort.
    31 This
         is largely as a result of the fact that we look at the censuses from the second half of the century, as well as
Census sample sizes increasing over time.



                                                          17
    The results of the exercise are in Table 4. The first two columns show that World War I had
a substantial impact on World War II service, with an estimated parameter for intergenerational
transmission that is considerably larger than the average for the full sample. While the sample size
is small relative to that from subsequent wars – and the standard errors correspondingly large –
we can still conclude that there was a strong intergenerational transmission of war service between
World War I and World War II.32

                                                 [TABLE 4 HERE]

     Note that, as shown by Columns 3-4, the intergenerational transmission parameter is substan-
tially smaller when it comes to the link between World War I and Korea, though still positive and
statistically significant at the 5% level. (All other estimates in the table are significant at the 1%
level.) The small sample issue is even more prominent here, as relatively few Korean War veterans
had World War I-era fathers, given the time elapsed between the two events.
     There is also a significant effect of both World War II and Korea veterans on Vietnam-era
service (Columns 5-8). The intergenerational transmission parameter here is more precisely esti-
mated, and substantially smaller when compared to World War I: of the order of 0.04 for the World
War II-Vietnam link, and 0.015 for Korea-Vietnam. In other words, having a father who served
in World War II or Korea increases the likelihood of a son being a Vietnam veteran by about 4
percentage points and 1.5 percentage points, respectively.
     While the intergenerational transmission parameter thus seems to have decreased over time
through the 20th century, one should keep in mind that it speaks to the individual likelihood of
transmission of the war service experience from fathers to sons. However, the aggregate implica-
tions for any given parameter value will obviously be vastly different if a large-scale war precedes
a smaller-scale one, or vice-versa. It follows that, for a better sense of the quantitative implications
of our results, it is important to benchmark the effect using the scale of the war efforts in question.
     The last line of the table displays the benchmarked results, as the percentage of the total number
of veterans involved in a war, within our sample, that our estimates would ascribe to the previous
generation’s war. Specifically, taking the example of Columns 1-2, we do a back-of-the-envelope
calculation multiplying the estimated coefficient by the share of fathers in our sample who are
World War I veterans, and dividing the resulting figure by the share of sons who are World War II
veterans. For that case, it turns out that about 12% of the latter can be estimated to have served
because their fathers had previously been induced to serve in World War I.
     The effects post-World War I are also very substantial when we benchmark it by the scale of
the war efforts in question, in spite of the decline in the absolute magnitude. This can be seen from
  32 Note that the father year-of-birth control here is linear only, in order to have meaningful variation in the instrument

in the smaller samples.


                                                            18
the fact that a 4 percentage-point estimated effect, when considering the massive scale of World
War II, translates into just under 20% of Vietnam veteran sons in our sample being accounted for
by World War II fathers. Adding the 5% attributable to Korean War fathers, one can wonder how
much harder it would have been for the US government to sustain the relatively unpopular Vietnam
war effort, at least on the scale it reached, in the absence of the boost in numbers coming from the
“Greatest Generation” wars.33
    This latter point underscores a note of caution in interpreting the aggregate numbers. In partic-
ular, the very existence of an important intergenerational transmission mechanism can give rise to
general equilibrium and political economy effects that affect subsequent wars. It follows that the
effects we estimate are not a comparison between, say, a world in which World War II happened,
and fathers served in it, against a world in which it did not: the response by sons of fathers who
did not serve in World War II can be different than what it would have been if no fathers served
in World War II at all. They will be different, for example, in the presence of dynamic incentives
for the US government that we hinted at in the previous paragraph. In short, what we estimate is
the effect of having a father go to war, rather than the father not going to war, in a world where
many fathers did go to war. Our aggregate numbers should be seen as benchmarking the size of the
intergenerational parameter we estimate, rather than as quantitative predictions in their own right.


5.2       Post-Vietnam: All-Volunteer Force
We can also inquire about the effect of Vietnam on the subsequent generation, which we have
hitherto left aside from the analysis because of the aforementioned measurement issues. Bearing
those issues in mind, we should nevertheless note that studying this effect is of additional interest,
because it might be rather different from what came before.
    This is for at least two reasons: first, the one major war in the last quarter of the 20th century
was the relatively brief Gulf War in 1990-1991. Aside from being smaller, it was a rather different
kind of war, as illustrated by the much lower casualty rates displayed in Table 1. Second, but just
as important, the US military was now a fully professional, all-volunteer force, whereas before
the possibility of conscription would likely have affected the choices even of the individuals who
eventually chose to volunteer.
    Table 5 shows, in Columns 1-2, that the first-stage relationship for Vietnam is, if anything,
slightly stronger than the average coefficient in Table 2. However, the reduced-form effect (Columns
3-4) is about an order of magnitude smaller than for the main sample. This still translates into a sta-
  33 Inthe words of Vince Way, Army intelligence sergeant in Vietnam and son of a World War II veteran, as quoted
by Takiff (2003, p.2): “Before I went into service, World War II was huge. It was ingrained in us that it was a grand
and heroic thing that our country did and our fathers did. Military service was grand and heroic – if the country needed
you, you went off to war.”



                                                          19
tistically significant estimated intergenerational transmission (at the 1% level), but its size became
even smaller relative to previous wars, namely of the order of 0.012 (Columns 5-6).34

                                                [TABLE 5 HERE]

    Interestingly, Columns 5-6 also show that, in spite of the smaller intergenerational transmission
parameter linking Vietnam to the Gulf War, the smaller size of the military in the latter era implies
an aggregate effect that is very much on a par with what we report, in Table 4, for the four major
20th century wars. This suggests that the intergenerational transmission mechanism remained as
important as ever in understanding wartime service in the all-volunteer era.


5.3     Aggregate Dynamics
The quantitative benchmarks we have obtained in the previous subsections provide a useful illus-
tration of the continued relevance of the intergenerational transmission of war service. They also
hint at the links between wars across generations, as exposure to a given war induces some de-
scendants of those exposed to join future war efforts. We can exploit those links in greater depth,
by jointly considering the intergenerational transmission of war service and its interaction with
demographic trends, in order to paint a more complete picture of the aggregate dynamics of wars
over time.
    To do that in the simplest possible fashion, we first compute the size of each year-of-birth co-
hort, based on the full Census sample, as opposed to our subsample of matched sons and fathers.35
(This is shown in Figure A7 in the Appendix.) We then obtain for each war, from our pooled sam-
ple, the share of “treated” sons for each year-of-birth cohort (Figure A8) – that is, for any given
year, we compute the fraction of sons, across all Censuses, who were born in that year and whose
father went to the war in question.36
    We use these two pieces of data to generate an estimate of the total number of sons “treated” by
each individual war. The result can be seen in Figure 7. The figure makes clear that different wars
generated vastly different numbers of sons of veterans, in accordance with the number of people
involved in each war, as well as with the size of the cohorts born in the years after. In particular, the
sheer size of World War II, plus the famous “baby boom” that followed, means that it generated
   34 We could also consider the effect of Vietnam veteran fathers in the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq. The estimate

(available upon request) turns out to be insignificant, but due to the sample issues we have discussed, we consider this
result to be relatively unreliable.
   35 For that we look at Censuses starting in 1930, as the year-of-birth data in previous Censuses was not as reliable,

and for each year we take the three subsequent Censuses and average the number of individuals reported to have been
born in that year.
   36 We adjust the figures from the 1950 Census, to account for its unusually low response rate to the questions on

veteran status.


                                                          20
by far the largest “wave” of sons of veterans. The figure also makes clear that the length of an
individual war also matters for the shape of the wave that follows: the sons of Vietnam veterans
are spread out over a wider range of years.

                                          [FIGURE 7 HERE]

   We can then apply our estimated intergenerational transmission effect in order to predict the
evolution over the years of the number of individuals that would potentially be induced to serve by
each war. We impose the following structure for that prediction, for war w started in year tw :

                                           22                       25
(5)                         Ntw   =β ∗w
                                           ∑                  w
                                                  St−τ + 0.75β ∗   ∑       St − τ ,
                                          τ =20                    τ =23

for all t ≥ tw + 20. Ntw is the number of sons induced to serve in year t by war w, St is the
size of the cohort born in year t, and βw is the intergenerational transmission coefficient estimated
for war w, as per Tables 4 and 5.37 We focus attention on the individuals between ages 20 and
25, because estimating the intergenerational transmission separately by age groups shows that the
effect is significant only for individuals within that range (Appendix Table A7). We then introduce
the factor 0.75 for the individuals between 23 and 25, because the age specific regressions show
that the effect over that range is about three-quarters of the effect for 20- to 22-year-olds.
     Figure 8 plots the evolution of Ntw over the years, for all four major wars. We see a massive
effect of World War II, driven essentially by the scale of the war, whereas the effect of World War
I is large mostly because of the strong intergenerational transmission coefficient we estimate for
that war. The smaller size of the demographic waves of potential volunteers induced by Korea and
Vietnam is, by the same token, due to the declining estimate for that coefficient.

                                          [FIGURE 8 HERE]

    The figure displays vertical lines marking the timing (midpoint) of World War II, Korea, Viet-
nam, and the Gulf War. From that we can see that World War II and Korea were in fact well-timed
to seize the wave of potential soldiers induced by World War I. While the peak of the World War
II wave was actually in the mid-1970s, the sheer size of that wave meant that Vietnam could use
a boost of a similar size. The Gulf War, in contrast, was poorly timed in that regard: it came too
late to seize the Korea wave, but too early to fully benefit from the service members potentially
induced by Vietnam.
  37 Specifically,
                the numbers for World War I, World War II, Korea, and Vietnam come from Table 4 (Column 2),
Table 4 (Column 6), Table 4 (Column 8), and Table 5 (Column 6), respectively.




                                                     21
    A few central messages come out of this exercise, even though the specific numbers we present
are obviously based on rather rough back-of-the-envelope calculations.38 First and foremost, it is
clear that the interaction between intergenerational transmission and demographic forces means
that a war can have a substantial impact on the availability of volunteers for future wars. Second,
this impact obviously depends on the scale of the war in question, but also on the distance between
the wars in time. A war that occurs about thirty years after another war – that is, the space of one
generation – would be ideally positioned to enjoy a boost in the number of individuals volunteering.
    Needless to say, in practice wars are not timed deliberately in order to maximize that impact.
Still, it stands to reason that the dynamic links between wars might affect policy calculations: the
greater the individual willingness to fight, the cheaper it is to recruit soldiers, the smaller is the
need to conscript individuals against their will, and presumably the easier it will be to maintain
support from the public for a given war effort.


6       What Drives the Intergenerational Transmission of War?
Our findings establish a causal effect of fathers’ war service experience over their sons’ propensity
to serve in future wars. Still, they beg the question of what drives the intergenerational transmission
of those experiences.
    We can think of the father’s experience potentially affecting the son’s behavior in three distinct
ways. First, war service could have an impact on an individual that affects what he chooses to
transmit to his sons, in ways that increase the utility (or equivalently, reduce the disutility) that
they derive from serving in war. In other words, it could affect preferences or beliefs in a process
of cultural transmission. Second, it could affect the material incentives facing the son, by changing
the set of economic opportunities available to them, which then affects the decision to serve. Third,
it could affect some characteristics of the son that are relevant to service (e.g. age at the time of
war), but not related to cultural transmission or material incentives, in what we may call a purely
demographic channel.
    We now turn to these channels, and to how we can shed light on their empirical relevance in
explaining our results.
    38 In
        particular, a full account of the aggregate impact of a war on future wars would have to incorporate other
possible effects that go beyond the scope of this paper. For instance, we have pointed out that our individual-level
estimates are obviously conditional on the individuals having been born (male) in the first place. It could be, however,
that the decision to have children is affected by war service – say, if individuals who are very traumatized by it are
more likely to choose to remain childless, even conditional on surviving, not to mention those who were killed and did
not get the chance to have more children. This could counteract the individual intergenerational transmission effect.
Similarly, there could be social multipliers affecting how the individual transmission aggregates up, and so on.




                                                          22
6.1        Cultural Transmission
Let us start with the potential effect via preferences and beliefs regarding war service. A key
challenge to empirically assess this channel is the dearth of data with which we could directly
connect beliefs, values, and attitudes, on the one hand, and family history on the other. Specifically,
standard sources of survey data on the former typically do not contain information on father’s year
of birth, which is required to implement our empirical strategy.39
    To make progress, we have to connect the transmission of cultural traits across generations
with its implications for observable behavior. We build this connection around the idea of par-
enting strategies. Psychologists classify the way parents deal with their children according to the
standard Baumrind typology, proposed by Baumrind (1968) and extended by Maccoby and Martin
(1983). It distinguishes parenting styles according to whether they are responsive/unresponsive and
demanding/undemanding, producing the following types: “authoritative” (responsive and demand-
ing), “authoritarian” (unresponsive and demanding), “permissive” (responsive and undemanding),
and “uninvolved” (unresponsive and undemanding) parenting.
    The key insight from the voluminous literature around this typology, as far as our purposes are
concerned, lies in the connection between authoritative parenting and intergenerational transmis-
sion.40 As put by Doepke and Zilibotti (2014, p. 3), this parenting style can be defined in terms
of “parents [molding] their children’s preferences so as to align them with their own,” thereby in-
ducing choices that parents regard as desirable. It thus seems natural to assume that purposeful
cultural transmission across generations would be related with parental strategies, and specifically
with the prevalence of certain styles of parenting.

6.1.1      A Simple Framework

To analyze these connections more systematically, and guide our empirical analysis, we borrow
from the standard framework of cultural transmission developed by Bisin and Verdier (2001). It
will let us think through both what distinguishes the behavior of parents who have been exposed to
a major life experience such as war service, when it comes to that intergenerational transmission,
as well as the ways in which that behavior might be affected by the broader social environment.
    Let us assume, for simplicity, that cultural traits are binary, i ∈ { a, b} – say, “pro-service”
and “anti-service.” Individual preferences are captured by a utility function ui ( x ), which depends
on which trait the individual happens to possess. We assume ui ( x ) is concave and monotonically
increasing, and defined over a compact and convex set of outcomes. For instance, we can think of
x ∈ [0, 1] as the probability of not serving in war – parents would rather not see their children go
  39 For   instance, the General Social Survey (GSS) only asked about it in 1994, thus yielding very small samples.
  40 Authoritative    parenting has also been linked to a broad array of positive outcomes (e.g. Steinberg et al 1992).



                                                            23
to war, but anti-service parents dislike any given probability more than pro-service parents.
    Parents of type i can choose to invest in transmitting traits to their children: they can choose an
investment τ i ∈ [0, 1], which increases the probability Pi that the children will hold the same traits,
paying some convex cost C (τ i ) that is increasing in τ i . The probability may also depend on the
prevalence of trait i in the population, qi , to capture the possibility of what Bisin and Verdier (2001)
call “oblique socialization” (from society at large), in addition to the “direct vertical socialization”
from parents to children.
    Consider parents who have already been exogenously exposed (or not) to war service, so that
their only relevant decision is about cultural transmission. The key point for our purposes is that al-
truistic but “imperfectly empathetic” parents of type i will evaluate the intergenerational transmis-
sion problem according to the following expected utility function (leaving aside intergenerational
discount rates):
                                                                                         
(6)                  −C (τ i ) + Pi (τ i ; qi )ui ( xi ) + (1 − Pi (τ i ; qi ))ui ( x −i ) ,

where x j ≡ argmax x∈X u j ( x ) is the choice that a type-j child will make.

Parental Strategies For simplicity, let us start by assuming that Pi (τ i ; qi ) = τ i , independent
of qi , so that we leave oblique socialization aside in order to focus on the intergenerational trans-
mission within the family. Motivated by our previous discussion about parenting strategies, we
can interpret the investment τ i as capturing authoritative parenting strategies, since it increases
the likelihood that preferences get transmitted. Our central question then becomes: how does war
service affect that process of transmission?
     We conceptualize the shock of being (exogenously) exposed to a major life experience, such as
war service, in the following way: the individual comes out of the experience feeling more strongly
about his preferences – or in terms of the model, the difference between ui ( xi ) and ui ( x −i ) in-
creases. Note that this does not rule out that the experience is actually transformative, in the sense
of the individual switching types: an individual can switch from “anti-service” to “pro-service,” or
vice-versa, as a result of the experience of service, but the experience makes him more convinced
about whatever type he ends up with. In short, all we are assuming is that being exposed to a major
life experience makes one feel strongly about the cultural traits that relate to it.
     It follows immediately from (6) that, all else equal, individuals exposed to war will choose a
higher τ i : an individual exposed to a major life experience will choose to invest more in transmit-
ting to his children his preferences as they relate to that experience.
     We can translate this into the following testable prediction, with respect to the behavior of war
veterans as parents: veteran fathers are more likely to adopt authoritative parenting strategies, in


                                                      24
order to transmit their preferences to their children. This process could in turn affect the behavior
of sons and their choices regarding war service. In particular, to the extent that war service would
on average make individuals more likely to have a “pro-service” attitude, and to the extent that
authoritative parents are more effective role models, this would constitute a cultural mechanism
for the intergenerational transmission of war service.41

Cultural Substitutability Now consider the possibility of interactions between parental deci-
sions and the social environment. In particular, assume that oblique socialization is possible: sons
may acquire traits not only via intergenerational transmission, but also from interacting with others
outside the family. Specifically, let us adopt what Bisin and Verdier (2001) call the “benchmark
cultural transmission technology,” and assume that the probability of the child acquiring the same
trait as a type-i parent is given by:

(7)                                       P i ( τ i , q i ) = τ i + (1 − τ i ) q i ,

where qi is the prevalence of trait i in the population. In other words, parental effort again translates
(linearly) into a probability of direct transmission, but even if it fails (with probability 1 − τ i ) there
is a chance that the child will pick up the trait from others. The chance that this happens in turn
increases with the prevalence of that trait in the broader population.
    With these natural assumptions, we can directly apply Bisin and Verdier’s (2001) Proposition 2
and conclude that direct transmission and oblique transmission will be “cultural substitutes”: direct
transmission will decrease as the prevalence of the trait in the population grows. In our example,
this means that the intergenerational transmission of war service would be weaker in places where
war service is more prevalent.
    This prediction may seem surprising at first, since it runs against a natural intuition that might
have expected the intergenerational transmission of war service to be particularly strong in an
environment where there could well be a community-level tradition of war service. This intuition
turns out to be naive, however: in places where a culture of war service is pervasive, fathers might
feel less of a need to inculcate their sons with those values, as they expect the environment to
do that job. We should thus expect the intergenerational component to be less important in those
environments.42
  41 As  suggestive evidence, Pew Research Center (2011) finds that veterans (from the post-9/11 era) are more likely
than non-veterans to self-describe as “more patriotic than most,” and that very large majorities report that their time in
the military has “helped them mature,” “taught them how to work with others,” “helped build self-confidence,” and that
they “would advise a young person close to them to join the military.” None of that implies a causal relationship, of
course. On parenting styles, it has also been argued that authoritative parenting is advantageous in preparing children
for military environments (Mayseless, Scharf, and Sholt 2003), and also more likely to be adopted by military parents,
relative to civilian parents (Speck and Riggs 2013). This could further stengthen the connection with war service.
   42 As discussed in Bisin and Verdier (2001), there could be transmission technologies that would give rise to com-



                                                             25
    This result is of particular interest because of what it entails in terms of the long-term preva-
lence of cultural traits (Bisin and Verdier 2001, Proposition 1). Specifically, cultural substitution
leads to long-run heterogeneity: if it holds, we should expect cultural values conducive to war
service to be neither ubiquitous nor entirely absent in any given population. This seems consis-
tent with casual observation, but whether there is indeed substitution between intergenerational
transmission and oblique channels is an empirical question.

6.1.2    Evidence

We now turn to the evidence on the two issues flagged by our simple framework: parental strategies
and cultural substitution. Let us address them in order.
    Since the Census does not include questions about parental strategies, we must resort to other
data sources to provide evidence for this particular implication of the cultural transmission mech-
anism. As it turns out, the National Longitudinal Survey of the Youth of 1997 (NLSY97) asks
directly about parenting, as perceived from the standpoint of the young respondents (aged between
12 and 17 as of the survey) regarding their own parents. We can thus investigate whether father’s
war service has an impact on (his children’s perception of) his parental strategies.
    In particular, we create a dummy equal to one if the respondent replies that his (or her) father’s
parenting was “authoritative.” The NLSY97 asks “In general, would you say that he is permis-
sive or strict about making sure you did what you were supposed to do?,” and codes the “Strict”
response as a dummy for “Demanding” parenting; similarly, it asks “When you think about how
your father acts towards you, in general, would you say that he is very supportive, somewhat sup-
portive, or not very supportive?,” and codes “Very Supportive” as a dummy for “Responsive”. The
product of these two dummies constitutes the dummy for “Authoritative” parenting.
    The results are in Table 6. In spite of the relatively small sample size as compared to the Census
data, we find reduced-form evidence that father’s year-of-birth distance to war peak is negatively
related with boys’ perception of an authoritative parenting style (significant at the 1% level).43 The
relationship holds also when we control for a battery of (race and geographic) controls, as well as
the mother’s reported parenting style (Column 3).

                                               [TABLE 6 HERE]

    Columns 2 and 4 in turn display the two-sample IV estimate (Angrist and Krueger 1992) for
the effect of the father’s war service on perceived parenting style. Specifically, we use a first-stage
plementarities instead – for instance, if direct socialization happens only if there is homogeneity between the family
and “role models” drawn from the population.
  43 Because of the small sample size, we choose to include the full sample, instead of restricting it to fathers born

within 10 years of the relevant war peak cohorts. Such restriction would drop about 20% of the sample.


                                                         26
estimate computed from the 1990 and 2000 Censuses, randomly drawing a subsample such that
father cohort sizes match the relative proportion from the NLSY97 sample, to scale the reduced-
form estimates. We see a positive coefficient, implying that a veteran father increases the likelihood
of authoritative parenting by about 1/3 of the sample average.44
    Columns 5-8 show, in contrast, that the results are entirely absent for the girls’ subsample:
fathers’ year of birth distance from war peak has no impact on daughters’ perception of their
parenting style. In other words, it seems as if the effects of war service over parenting style are
essentially restricted to the children for whom the decision regarding war service happens to loom
larger, as is the case for boys even in the more gender-diverse all-volunteer era.
    As for cultural substitution, we need a measure of the prevalence of war service at the commu-
nity level. We construct it by considering, for each individual in our sample, the share of men, in
the individual’s county, who served in one of the four major 20th-century wars. In other words, we
pool together all the censuses in our baseline sample (1950-2000), and compute for each county,
using the entire available male sample (that is to say, not just the subsample for which we can
match fathers and sons), the share of individuals who are war veterans, out of those who report to
live in that county. We label that variable WarVeterans.
    We are ultimately interested in estimating the following specification:

                                           WarServiceicst = β 1C ∗ FatherWarServiceicst +
           + β 2C ∗ FatherWarServiceicst × WarVeteranss + β 3C ∗ WarVeteranss +
                                                                                  0
(8)                                                     + f ( FatherYOBicst )θ + Xicst γ + ˜ε icst ,

where s stands for the county where individual i, born in year c, lives at the time t of the Census.
β 2C will tell us whether the interegnerational transmission is affected by the local prevalence of war
service over time. In particular, β 2C < 0 would correspond to the case of cultural substitutability.
    We estimate (8) using our instrument FYOBdistictst , and its interaction with WarVeteranss ,
as instruments in a 2SLS specification. Needless to say, WarVeteranss is an endogenous variable,
so we refrain from a causal interpretation of the coefficients. We are instead interested in assessing
the possibility of heterogeneity with respect to the local prevalence of war service.
    The results are in Table 7, which reproduces the specification with all controls and the sample
limited to fathers born within 10 years of the peak cohorts (as in Columns 5 and 10 in Table 2, or
Column 1 in Table 3).45 We see that the first-stage relationship is stronger in counties in which
  44 As a contrast, we find no significant effect on the perception of “permissive” parenting, which is the other strategy
that we can presume to be costly (since it is responsive), but not concerned with molding preferences.
   45 Note that here we have fewer observations, because some individuals do not have information on county, as it

is withdrawn to maintain anonymity. The variable is also unavailable for the 1960 Census. Details can be found in
https://usa.ipums.org/usa-action/variables/COUNTY#description section



                                                           27
war service is more prevalent (Column 1), a pattern that holds unaltered upon controlling for
service outside of wartime (Column 2) or for a set of county-level demographic variables and their
interactions with father’s year-of-birth distance. In contrast, however, when it comes to the reduced
form the relationship is actually weaker in those counties (Columns 4-6). Recovering the β 2C
parameter using 2SLS (without controls for ease of interpretation), this translates into a negative
interaction effect, as displayed in Column 7. Given the estimated magnitudes, the intergenerational
transmission would essentially vanish in counties where the prevalence of war service is highest,
which is around 0.4 in our sample.

                                                [TABLE 7 HERE]

    In sum, we have two distinct pieces of evidence that are consistent with the kind of cultural
transmission mechanism we have discussed. First, war service seems to affect parental strategies,
in the direction that one would have expected from the model. Second, we find that, when it comes
to war service, direct and oblique transmission are indeed cultural substitutes: in places where
war service is more prevalent – and presumably, where a culture of war service is stronger at the
societal level – intergenerational transmission from father to son is weaker.
    Of course, parental strategies or oblique transmission affect children’s decisions insofar as they
have an impact on children’s preferences. What exactly is being transmitted could encompass a
plethora of different traits. For instance, it could be that fathers transmit beliefs and attitudes – say,
patriotism, or a sense of civic duty. Alternatively, but relatedly, it could be specific skills that are
acquired as a result of war service – say, handling guns, survival skills, even grit or endurance –
and that enhance one’s ability in war. Or it could even be the case that fathers transmit information
– say, about the risks and potential future benefits associated with war – thereby affecting how
their sons perceive war service. Distinguishing between these different possibilities seems to be a
fruitful topic for future research.46

6.1.3    Culture of War vs Occupational Choice

Our evidence is consistent with war service triggering a mechanism of cultural transmission that
eventually affects the next generation’s decisions regarding war service. On the other hand, it
   46 The different possibilities are vividly illustrated by the personal stories collected in Takiff (2003), from Vietnam

veterans talking about their World War II veteran fathers. A few quotes can convey the ideas of values or attitudes
(“Our family has a tradition that service is a way of life. And there is no greater service you can perform than to serve
your country, particularly in a time of war.”), role models (“In my mind Dad was a hero. As kids growing up in the
fifties, we used to play army all the time, and we’d talk about what our dads had done.”), skills (“I was always around
airplanes and people that flew. So it was a natural progression. That’s what I wanted to do. (...) My dad gave me
training to make sure that I could do everything.”), information (“[My dad] told me: ‘Don’t join the Marines.’ He said
that my chances of dying would be greater there. ‘Go down and talk to the Army recruiter.”’).



                                                           28
seems that most of the traits that one could imagine would increase the likelihood of serving in
war, would also increase the likelihood of military service in general.
    More broadly, it is intuitive to think that individual career choices are affected by one’s family.
As such, might it be that the intergenerational transmission of war is but an example of a more
general phenomenon of intergenerational transmission of professional careers, applied to military
service? Or is it the expression of something specific to war?
    To answer these questions, we can revisit the effect of fathers’ war experience over sons’ choice
of military service, now outside the context of wartime. Fortunately, the Census did ask (in 1980,
1990, and 2000) about veteran status with reference to periods over which there was no major war.
    The IV/2SLS results are displayed in Table 8. Since the information regarding non-wartime
service is available only for the 1980-2000 Censuses, we start by reestimating, for the sake of com-
parison, the intergenerational transmission of war parameter for the four major 20th century wars,
but restricted to those Census years only. This yields the coefficient in Column 1; unsurprisingly,
in light of the declining parameter over the course of the century, the coefficient is smaller than
in the baseline (Table 3), since the Census years in question naturally place greater weight on the
more recent wars. It is nevertheless positive and sizeable, indicating the persistently significant
intergenerational transmission of war service.

                                                 [TABLE 8 HERE]

    But how about the impact of war service on military service outside of war? Column 2 displays
the result considering the available non-wartime periods in the years surrounding the major 20th-
century wars, namely 1954-64, and 1975-80. Remarkably, we estimate a significantly negative
effect: inducing fathers to go to war made their sons less likely to serve in the military outside of
wartime. This effect also holds for each of the two specific sub-periods taken separately (Columns
3 and 4). This is true even though the data show a positive correlation, at the individual level,
between wartime and non-wartime service: individuals who serve in war are more likely to have
served outside of war, as was to be expected from the fact that some people choose to stay in the
military.47
    Columns 5 and 6 then show that there is no effect of an individual’s father’s war service on the
likelihood of that individual having ever served in the military in both wartime and non-wartime,
or of his having ever served at all. This is consistent with the two opposite effects on wartime
and non-wartime essentially canceling each other out when it comes to the broader likelihood of
military service.
   47 Specifically, regressing a dummy for non-wartime service on a dummy for the same individual’s having served

in one of the major wars (as well as birth year fixed effects) produces a positive coefficient of 0.063, with a t-statistic
over 42.


                                                           29
    Last but not least, we see in Column 7 that the negative effect on the likelihood of non-wartime
service holds also for the 1980-1990 period, that is to say, after the all-volunteer force was firmly
established. This means that father’s war service did not induce broader military service over the
period for which the choice of service would have most resembled other types of occupational
choice decisions.
    In sum, we find no evidence that the intergenerational transmission of war service is matched
by an effect of fathers’ war service on the likelihood of military service as such for their sons. This
suggests, rather emphatically, that our key results are not a manifestation of a broader mechanism
of intergenerational transmission of occupational choice. It does leave us with the puzzle of why
war service would induce war service in the next generation, while at the same time having a
negative effect on the likelihood of military service outside of war. We will return to that shortly.


6.2       Material Incentives
Let us now turn to a second possible mechanism: that the experience of war service might affect
individual decisions in ways that change the economic environment facing the subsequent gener-
ation. This could in turn affect the set of economic opportunities available to their children, and
how enlisting for war service compares with whatever outside options are available. In short, it
could affect their material incentives.
    We can check directly whether a father’s war service has an impact on the set of labor market
opportunities available to their children. The most natural factor to consider in that regard is
education, which is a key determinant of those opportunities.
    Table 9 considers whether there is a causal impact of father’s war service on sons’ education.48
We find a clear positive effect, always significant at the 1% level. Columns 1-3 show the results
measuring educational achievement by total years of education, while Columns 4-6 consider the
likelihood of attending college. We find a strong reduced-form effect of father’s year of birth
distance to war peak on both measures (Columns 1 and 4). The IV/2SLS estimates indicate that
the sons of fathers induced to go to war have just under an extra half-year of education (Column
2), and are about 5 percentage points more likely to attend college (Column 5) – a strong effect
compared to a baseline mean of 36%. Columns 3 and 6 show that the effect is slightly stronger if
we limit the sample to the Census years used in Table 8.

                                                 [TABLE 9 HERE]

    This is very much in line with the many policies designed to increase the opportunities for war
veterans to acquire education – best exemplified by the G.I. Bill of 1944 and its many successors
  48 We look at the baseline sample except that restricting it only to individuals at least 25 years-old at the time of the
Census, who presumably have had time to complete their education.

                                                           30
– as well as with the evidence linking human capital accumulation across generations (Currie
and Moretti 2003; Holmlund, Lindahl, and Plug 2011).49 The broader literature has found that
the benefits had a positive impact on educational achievement (Angrist 1993; Bound and Turner
2002), and our sample confirms that result: Columns 7-10 show evidence of a causal effect of
fathers’ wartime service on their own educational achievement.50
    The evidence thus suggests that wartime service had a positive impact on the educational
achievements of those who were induced to serve. This impact, in turn, was transmitted to their
sons, who ended up with higher educational achievements as well.
    We must then conclude that the intergenerational transmission of war service occurred in spite
of the fact that war service actually improved the set of economic opportunities available to the next
generation. In other words, that transmission cannot be understood as the outcome of a channel in
which the sons of veterans are induced to choose war service because of a lower opportunity cost
of foregone options in the labor market.
    In particular, this evidence helps us make sense of the finding that father’s war service has a
negative impact on military service by sons outside of wartime. The comparative economic appeal
of a military career is actually weaker, in light of the better opportunities bequeathed to these sons
in the broader labor market.
    This evidence is further underscored by looking back at a couple of different versions of the
National Longitudinal Survey of the Youth, which ask youngsters about their professional aspira-
tions. Specifically, we merge the 1966 and 1979 surveys, which ask “What kind of work would
you like to be doing when you are 30 years old?” (35 years old, in the 1979 version). We then
consider, out of the sample of young men aged 14-24 at the time of the survey, whether they reply
“Armed Forces” as their preferred answer to that question.
    The results are in Table 10. Column 1 looks at the reduced-form specification for the full
sample, and we see no statistically significant effect. However, this masks a heterogeneous effect,
as evidenced by Column 2: the effect of father’s year-of-birth distance to war peak is negative
(statistically significant at the 10% level) for the youngest individuals, but declines in absolute
value (significant at the 5% level) as age increases. Similarly, Column 3 indicates an average
effect that is negative (significant at the 10% level) for individuals below 20 years of age, while the
effect for those above age 20, as given by the linear combination of the two coefficients, is positive
  49 The  G.I. Bill, officially known as the Servicemen’s Readjustment Act of 1944, included provisions for cash
payments of tuition and living expenses for university, high school or vocational education, for every veteran who had
been on active duty during the war years for at least ninety days and had not been dishonorably discharged. A similar
bill was enacted in 1952 for Korea veterans, and in 1966 the benefits were extended to peacetime veterans as well. In
the post-Vietnam era, the Veterans Educational Assistance Program (VEAP) was introduced in 1976, followed by the
Montgomery G.I. Bill of 1985, which brought benefits to a comparable level to the Korean-era bill.
   50 Quantitatively, the effect we find is quite consistent with the literature – Bound and Turner (2002), for instance,

find an effect in the range of 5-8 percentage points on the likelihood of completing college.


                                                          31
and significant (at the 5% level). Columns 4-6 then translate these results into (two-sample) IV
estimates, which suggest that having a veteran father increases the likelihood that a teenager aspires
to a military career by about 6 percentage points, but in turn decreases that likelihood for young
adults, by a similar amount.

                                        [TABLE 10 HERE]

    In other words, the results are consistent with father’s exposure to war service increasing as-
pirations to a military career. However, as sons get close to completing their education, the effect
is reversed and the sons of veterans end up less likely to see themselves in a career in the armed
forces – consistent, of course, with the findings from Table 8 regarding service outside of wartime.
    We are left with the following, rather plausible picture: war service induces the transmission
of cultural attitudes that positively influence the inclination towards military service. However,
in normal times this would be more than compensated by the fact that veterans’ sons have better
outside options in the labor market as a result of their fathers’ service. It takes a war to trump that
counteracting force, and tip the balance in favor of service.


6.3    Demography
We now briefly consider, as a final possibility, that our results could be partly driven by demo-
graphic factors. We have already argued that we can rule out potential mechanical explanations
involving the specific timing of the wars: our results cannot be explained by cohort effects, such as
there being a large number of veteran sons happening to be of peak age at the time of a subsequent
war, since they are robust to controlling for cohort fixed effects. However, it could conceivably be
the case that the experience of war service would affect decisions related to fertility or marriage
(e.g. Elder 1986, Vandenbroucke 2014), which could in turn have an impact on future patterns of
service.
    One possible mechanism is that war service entails a delay in fertility decisions: war veterans
might choose to have children later, and if the sons of older parents are somehow more likely to
serve in war, part of our effect could be due to that. That said, we can also rule out that any story
predicated on the age of fathers or sons, or on the difference between them, is a meaningful part of
the explanation for our results: we have seen in Table 2 that adding son year-of-birth fixed effects,
which together with Census fixed effects and father year-of-birth controls account for all these
factors, the estimates are essentially unaffected.
    Similarly, explanations that are based on effects of war service on the quality of children via a
demographic channel – say, if there are effects of war service on matching in marriage markets (e.g.
Larsen et al. 2014) – must contend with the same issue that arises in the material incentives channel


                                                  32
we have analyzed: in the data, it seems that a father’s veteran status increased the quality of children
when it comes to labor market opportunities. More generally, any demographic explanation would
have to be consistent with the opposite effects we find for service during and outside of wartime.


7    Concluding Remarks
We have established causal evidence of intergenerational transmission of war service, in the context
of the major US wars in the 20th century: inducing fathers to serve, because of their distance to
peak service age at the time of the war in question, increases the likelihood that their sons will serve
in subsequent wars. While the size of the intergenerational transmission parameter declined over
the century, the smaller scale of later war efforts implies that the effect remained quantitatively
important throughout the period. It thus seems that fighting wars could well help countries in
solving the collective action problem for fighting future wars.
    We presented evidence that a key mechanism behind our key result works through cultural
transmission. In particular, we found an impact of war service on parenting decisions, and a weaker
intergenerational transmission in places where war service is more prevalent, both consistent with a
standard model of cultural transmission. In other words, it seems that our results can be interpreted
as indicative of a culture of war service, transmitted across generations. This provides a vivid
example, in the context of a life-altering decision, of how life experiences can be “inherited”
by future generations, which is at the heart of how cultural traits evolve over time. We should
nevertheless stress that our findings do not imply that cultural transmission is the only channel
through which the intergenerational transmission of war service takes place, and the possibility of
complementary mechanisms remais an open question for future research.
    Our findings also open other promising avenues for future research. On the one hand, there is
the question of what specific traits are being affected and transmitted. Progress in this direction
would be valuable in further establishing the microfoundations underlying the individual decision
over war service. On the other hand, more remains to be learned about how exactly it is that those
individual decisions affect the constraints faced by political leaders when deciding whether to take
their countries to war. Put simply, it would be interesting to understand the extent to which the fact
that war service begets war service could affect whether war begets war.


References
 Angrist, Joshua D. (1990). “Lifetime Earnings and the Vietnam Era Draft Lottery: Evidence
    from Social Security Administrative Records.” American Economic Review 80(3): 313-336.



                                                  33
Angrist, Joshua D. (1993). “The Effect of Veterans Benefits on Education and Earnings.” Indus-
   trial and Labor Relations Review 46(4): 637-652.
Angrist, Joshua D., Guido W. Imbens, and Donald B. Rubin (1996). “Identification of Causal
   Effects Using Instrumental Variables.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 91(434):
   444-455.
Angrist, Joshua, and Alan B. Krueger (1992). “The Effect of Age at School Entry on Ed-
   ucational Attainment: An Application of Instrumental Variables with Moments from Two
   Samples.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 87(418): 328-336.
Angrist, Joshua, and Alan B. Krueger (1994). “Why do World War II Veterans Earn More
   Than Nonveterans?” Journal of Labor Economics 12(1): 74-97.
Baumrind, Diana (1968). “Authoritarian vs Authoritative Parental Control.” Adolescence 3:
   255-272.
Besley, Timothy and Marta Reynal-Querol (2014). “The Legacy of Historical Conflict: Evi-
    dence from Africa.” American Political Science Review 108(2): 319-336.
Bisin, Alberto and Thierry Verdier (2001). “The Economics of Cultural Transmission and the
     Dynamics of Preferences.” Journal of Economic Theory 97(2): 298-319.
Blattman, Christopher and Jeannie Annan (2010). “The Consequences of Child Soldiering.”
     Review of Economics and Statistics 92(4): 882-898.
Blattman, Christopher and Edward Miguel (2010). “Civil Wars.” Journal of Economic Liter-
     ature 48(1): 3-57.
Bound, John and Sarah Turner (2002). “Going to War and Going to College: Did World War
   II and the G.I. Bill Increase Educational Attainment for Returning Veterans?” Journal of
   Labor Economics 20(4): 784-815.
Brown, F. Peter (2014). “Last Vietnam War Draftee Retires After 42 Years In Army.” Western
    Journalism, Nov. 10.
Card, David and Thomas Lemieux (2001). “Going to College to Avoid the Draft: The Unin-
    tended Legacy of the Vietnam War.” American Economic Review 91(2): 97-102.
Carlson, Elwood and Joel Andress (2009). “Military Service by Twentieth-Century Genera-
    tions of American Men.” Armed Forces and Society 35(2): 385-400.
Collier, Paul (2003). Breaking the Conflict Trap: Civil War and Development Policy. World
     Bank Publications.
Currie, Janet and Enrico Moretti (2003). “Mother’s Education and the Intergenerational Trans-
    mission of Human Capital: Evidence from College Openings.” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
    nomics 118(4): 1495-1532.
Dahl, Gordon B., Andreas Ravndal Kostol, and Magne Mogstad (2014). “Family Welfare
    Cultures.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(4): 1711-1752.
Dal Bó, Ernesto, Pedro Dal Bó, and Jason Snyder (2009). “Political Dynasties.” Review of
    Economic Studies 76(1): 115-142.
Dobkin, Carlos and Reza Shabani (2009). “The Health Effects of Military Service: Evidence
   from the Vietnam Draft.” Economic Inquiry 47(1): 69-80.

                                             34
Doepke, Matthias and Fabrizio Zilibotti (2014). “Parenting with Style: Altruism and Paternal-
    ism in Intergenerational Preference Transmission.” Northwestern University (unpublished).
Elder, Glen H. (1986). “Military Times and Turning Points in Men’s Lives.” Developmental
    Psychology 22(2): 233-245.
Erikson, Robert and John H. Goldthorpe (2002). “Intergenerational Inequality: A Sociological
    Perspective.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 16(3): 31-44.
Erikson, Robert S. and Laura Stoker (2011). “Caught in the Draft: The Effects of Vietnam
    Draft Lottery Status on Political Attitudes.” American Political Science Review 105(2):221-
    237.
Faris, John H. (1981). “The All-Volunteer Force: Recruitment from Military Families.” Armed
    Forces and Society 7(4): 545-559.
Giuliano, Paola and Antonio Spilimbergo (2014). “Growing up in a Recession.” Review of
    Economic Studies 81(2): 787-817.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales (2006). “Does Culture Affect Economic
    Outcomes?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20 (2006), 23-48.
Holm, Jeanne (1993). Women in the Military: An Unfinished Revolution. Presidio Press.
Holmlund, Helena, Mikael Lindahl, and Erik Plug (2011). “The Causal Effect of Parents’
   Schooling on Children’s Schooling: A Comparison of Estimation Methods.” Journal of
   Economic Literature 49(3): 615-651.
Humphreys, Macartan and Jeremy M. Weinstein (2008). “Who Fights? The Determinants of
   Participation in Civil War.” American Journal of Political Science 52(2): 436-455.
Jackson, Matthew O. and Massimo Morelli (2011). “The Reasons for Wars: An Updated Sur-
    vey.” In: Chris Coyne (Ed.), Handbook on the Political Economy of War. Elgar Publishing.
Jennings, M. Kent and Gregory P. Markus (1977). “The Effect of Military Service on Political
    Attitudes: A Panel Study.” American Political Science Review 71(1): 131-147.
Kang, Joseph D.Y. and Joseph L. Schafer (2007). “Demystifying Double Robustness: A Com-
   parison of Alternative Strategies for Estimating a Population Mean from Incomplete Data.”
   Statistical Science 22(4): 523-539.
Kasinsky, Renée G. (1976). Refugees from Militarism: Draft-Age Americans in Canada. Trans-
    action Publishers.
Kleykamp, Meredith A. (2006). “College, Jobs, or the Military? Enlistment During a Time of
    War.” Social Science Quarterly 87(2): 272-290.
Larsen, Matthew F., TJ McCarthy, Jeremy Moulton, Marianne Page, and Ankur Patel
    (2014). “War and Marriage: Assortative Mating and the World War II G.I. Bill.” Tulane
    University (unpublished).
Lillard, Dean R. and Jacob Fahringer (2014). “Does Military Service Shorten Lives? The
     Effect of Compulsory Military Service on Smoking Prevalence.” Ohio State University (un-
     published).
Maccoby, Eleanor E. and John A. Martin (1983). “Socialization in the Context of the Family:
   Parent-Child Interaction.” In E. Hetherington (ed.) Handbook of Child Psychology, Vol. 4,
   Wiley, p. 1-103.

                                             35
Malmendier, Ulrike and Stefan Nagel (2011). “Depression Babies: Do Macroeconomic Expe-
   riences Affect Risk Taking?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(1): 373-416.
Maoz, Zeev (2004). “Statesmen, Popular Wisdom, and Empirical Realities in the Study of Con-
   flict and War: Extending the ‘Predictors of War in History and in the State of the World
   Message’.” In: Paul F. Diehl (Ed.), The Scourge of War: New Extensions on an Old Prob-
   lem. University of Michigan Press.
Mayseless, Ofra, Miri Scharf, and Michal Sholt (2003). “From Authoritative Parenting Prac-
   tices to an Authoritarian Context: Exploring the Person-Environment Fit.” Journal of Re-
   search on Adolescence 13(4): 427-456.
Pew Research Center (2011). “War and Sacrifice in the Post-9/11 Era: The Military-Civilian
    Gap.” October 5, 2011, available at: http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/files/2011/10/veterans-
    report.pdf
Rotsker, Bernard (2006). I Want You! The Evolution of the All-Volunteer Force. RAND Corpo-
    ration.
Simon, Rita J. and Mohamed Alaa Abdel-Moneim (2011). A Handbook of Military Conscrip-
    tion and Composition the World Over. Lexington Books.
Singer, J. David and Melvin Small (1974). “Foreign Policy Indicators: Predictors of War in
    History and in the State of the World Message.” Policy Sciences 5: 271-296.
Solon, Gary (1999). “Intergenerational Mobility in the Labor Market.” In: Orley C. Ashenfelter
    and David Card (eds.) Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3A, North Holland.
Solon, Gary, Steven J. Haider, and Jeffrey M. Wooldridge (2015). “What Are We Weighting
    For?” Journal of Human Resources 50(2): 301-316.
Speck, Kimberly and David S. Riggs (2013). “Differences in the Parenting Styles of Military
    and Civilian Mothers.” Third MFRI International Research Symposium on Military and
    Veteran Families.
Stander, Valerie A. and Lex L. Merrill (2000). “The Relationship of Parental Military Back-
    ground to the Demographic Characteristics of 11,195 Navy Recruits.” Naval Health Re-
    search Center, Report 00-14.
Steinberg, Laurence Steinberg, Susie D. Lamborn, Sanford M. Dornbusch, and Nancy Dar-
     ling (1992). “Impact of Parenting Practices on Adolescent Achievement: Authoritative Par-
     enting, School Involvement, and Encouragement to Succeed.” Child Development 63(5):
     1266-1281.
Takiff, Michael (2003). Brave Men, Gentle Heroes: American Fathers and Sons in World War II
    and Vietnam. William Morrow.
Tanielian, Terri and Lisa H. Jaycox (Eds.) (2008). Invisible Wounds of War: Psychological
    and Cognitive Injuries, Their Consequences, and Services to Assist Recovery, Volumes 1-2.
    RAND Corporation.
Vandenbroucke, Guillaume (2014). “Fertility and Wars: The Case of World War I in France.”
   American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 6(2): 108-136.
Van Evera, Stephen (2013). Causes of War: Power and the Roots of Conflict. Cornell University
    Press.
Vazquez, John A. (Ed.) (2000). What Do We Know about War? Rowman & Littlefield Publish-
    ers.

                                             36
Figure 1. Drafted Individuals, by Year and War




Note: The orange bars indicate the number of drafted individuals in any given year. The cumulative
number for each war is given above. Source: Selective Service System (http://www.sss.gov/induct.htm).



Figure 2. War Service Likelihood by Birth Cohort




Note: The graph plots the likelihood that males served in at least one of the big four wars of the 20th
Century. The vertical lines indicate cohorts born 21 years before the midpoint of each war (the “peak
cohorts”). To avoid double counting, for World War I, World War II and Korea veterans we use the
1960 Census and cohorts up to 1935, while for Vietnam veterans we use the 1980 Census for cohorts
born after 1935. Source: U.S. Census data from IPUMS.
Figure 3. The Instrument




Note: The figure plots the value of the instrument across birth cohorts of fathers. The instrument is the
number of years to the closest peak cohort, i.e. 21 years before the war midpoints (1896, 1922, 1931,
1947). It takes value zero for fathers of the peak cohorts, and monotonically increases in the distance to
those cohorts.
Figure 4. Identifying Variation Across Cohorts, Main Regressions




Note: The figure shows the identifying variation across father birth cohorts, from the main regressions
in Table 2. In both graphs, the black dotted line plots the residual variation of the instrument,
conditional on Census fixed effects and a third-order polynomial in father year of birth. The upper graph
jointly plots the residual variation for the father being a war veteran (1st stage, column 2 of Table 2), and
the bottom graph for the son being a war veteran (Reduced Form, column 7 of Table 2). The graph
includes only cohorts with at least 1000 observations in the baseline sample, corresponding to a total
99.2 percent of the sample, which avoids inclusion of prohibitively noisy and uninformative cohorts.
Figure 5. 1st Stage and Reduced Form Effects: Flexible Specification




Note: The figure plots the point estimates and confidence intervals of the reduced form (in red) and the
1st stage (in black) from a flexible specification of the baseline sample, using dummy variables
indicating the distance to the peak cohort. The left y-axis refers to the reduced form, and the right y-axis
to the 1st stage. The graph shows that both effects essentially monotonically decrease in distance from
the peak cohort, and that the ratio between the reduced form and the 1st stage is relatively constant.

Figure 6. External Validity, Predicted Effects at Population Means of Covariates




Note: The first bar represents the baseline IV/2SLS estimate of intergenerational transmission of war
service, from table 3 column 1. The other bars show the predicted effects from table A.3, for the
observable predictors of living with one’s father. They represent the predicted effect at the mean value
of the covariate in the population (full census). The last column (green) refers to the mean likelihood of
living with one’s father, based on the predicted value from a probit regression of all the predictors,
census fixed effects and age fixed effects. It shows that the predicted effect in the population is similar
in magnitude, if not larger. For inverse probability weighted regressions, yielding similar results, see
table 3.
Figure 7. Treated Cohorts




Note: The graph plots the number of “treated” males across birth cohorts, for each war of the previous
generation. It is the product of the estimated number of males born in each cohort from the US
Censuses, times the share of fathers of that cohort that are war veterans in the sample. For the
underlying distributions, see the appendix.



Figure 8. Aggregate Dynamic Effects, Potential War Volunteers




Note: The graph plots the estimated number of potential war volunteers over time, induced by each war
of the previous generation. The calculations are based on the number of treated sons and the estimated
effects of intergenerational transmission. See Section 5.3 for the details. The gray vertical lines refer to
the midpoints of WWII, Korea, Vietnam, and the Gulf War.
                            Table 1. US Wars in the 20th Century

                                     Number of                            Deaths in
                                      service            Deaths         Battle/Theater       Wounded
                                     members              (%)                 (%)              (%)

World War I (1917-1918)              4,734,991           116,516            53,402           204,002
                                                          (2.5%)            (1.1%)            (4.3%)

World War II (1941-1945)             16,112,566          405,399           291,557           670,846
                                                          (2.5%)            (1.8%)            (4.2%)

Korean War (1950-1953)               5,720,000           54,246             36,574           103,284
                                                         (0.9%)             (0.6%)            (1.8%)

Vietnam War (1964-1973)*             8,744,000           90,220             58,220           153,303
                                                         (1.0%)             (0.7%)            (1.8%)

Gulf War (1990-1991)                 2,322,000             1,948             383                467
                                                          (0.1%)           (0.02%)            (0.02%)


Total                                37,633,557          668,329           440,136           1,131,902
                                                          (1.8%)            (1.2%)             (3.0%)

Total (minus Gulf War)               35,311,557          666,381           439,753           1,131,435
                                                          (1.9%)            (1.2%)             (3.2%)

Source: U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. * The Vietnam dates are based, in the absence of a
formal declaration of war, on the Gulf of Tonkin resolution authorizing the use of military force in
Southeast Asia, and on the Paris Peace Accords suspending hostilities. Casualty figures go up to
1975.
                                  Table 2. First Stage and Reduced Form Effects, Main 20th Century Wars

                                                  1st Stage: War Veteran, Father                                 Reduced Form: War Veteran, Son
                                          (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)          (5)           (6)        (7)      (8)       (9)       (10)            (11)

Birth Distance to War Peak, Father      -0.033     -0.029     -0.029      -0.033     -0.033        -0.0028   -0.0038     -0.0035     -0.0032     -0.0032    -0.0031
                                       (0.0002)   (0.0002)   (0.0002)    (0.0002)   (0.0002)      (0.0002)   (0.0002)    (0.0001)   (0.0002)    (0.0002)   (0.0002)
Birth Distance to War Peak, Mother                                                                                                                          -0.0004
                                                                                                                                                           (0.0002)

Observations                          510,653 510,653 510,653 458,181 458,181                         510,653 510,653 510,653 458,181 458,181 383,944
R-squared                                0.20         0.24      0.25        0.23        0.25           0.08       0.08        0.15     0.16        0.16        0.15
Census FE                                Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes             Yes       Yes         Yes      Yes         Yes          Yes
Father Birthyear Control                 Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes             Yes       Yes         Yes      Yes         Yes          Yes
Father Birthyear Polynomial               No          Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes             No        Yes         Yes      Yes         Yes          Yes
Son Birthyear FE                          No           No        Yes        Yes         Yes             No         No         Yes      Yes         Yes          Yes
State FE                                  No           No        No          No         Yes             No         No          No       No         Yes          Yes
Race Controls                             No           No        No          No         Yes             No         No          No       No         Yes          Yes
Sample Restriction, Father                                                 +/-10       +/-10                                           +/-10       +/-10       +/-10
Birthyear                                 No           No        No         year        year            No         No          No      year        year         year
Dependent Variable, Mean                0.417        0.417      0.417      0.449       0.449           0.119     0.119       0.119    0.114       0.114        0.100
Notes: US Census Data from IPUMS, 1950-2000. War Veteran is a dummy indicating if the individual served in at least one of the major wars: World War I,
World War II, Korea, or Vietnam. The sample consists of father cohorts born after 1880 and adult son cohorts no younger than age 16 by the end of the Vietnam
War. Farther birth-year polynomial consist of a third order polynomial in the year of birth of the father. Race controls are dummies for race, as defined in the US
Censuses. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                                                           Table 3. Main Effects, IV/2SLS

                                                                              Dep. Var.: War Veteran, Son
                                                                                                                    External Validity: Inverse Probability
                                                                                                                          Weighted Regressions

                                                                          Son Age     Son Age                              Baseline,   Baseline,
                                                                          is 16-30     + Excl.                               Excl.       Excl.     Baseline,
                                                                           at Time      Peak                                <0.5%        <1%       Excl. <1%
Sample                      Baseline    Baseline   Baseline    Baseline    of War     Cohorts    Baseline       Baseline    Prob.       Prob.        Prob.
                              (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)       (7)            (8)         (9)        (10)        (11)

War Veteran, Father           0.097       0.101      0.099      0.092       0.093      0.108       0.100         0.208       0.140       0.098        0.101
                             (0.006)     (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.008)     (0.006)    (0.008)     (0.006)       (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.012)      (0.015)

High School Graduate, Father                                                                      -0.004
                                                                                                  (0.000)
Went to College, Father                                                                           -0.007
                                                                                                  (0.001)
Years of Education,
Father                                                                                            -0.004
                                                                                                  (0.001)

Observations                 458,181 458,181 458,181 458,181 456,877 350,320 458,181                              458,181 443,098         425,083      350,114
Census FE                      Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes             Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes
Father Birthyear Controls      Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes             Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes
Son Birthyear FE               Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes             Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes
State FE                       Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes             Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes
Race Controls                  Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes             Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes
IV-variable                   Linear      2-Poly.     3-Poly.    Dummy     Linear       Linear      Linear         Linear      Linear      Linear       Linear
Sample Predictors              N/A          N/A         N/A        N/A       N/A         N/A          N/A         Baseline Baseline Baseline Baseline+
Dependent Variable,
Mean                          0.114        0.114       0.114      0.114     0.114       0.119       0.114           0.114       0.103      0.097        0.092
Notes: The sample and variables definitions are the same as Table 2. All samples restricts the father year of birth to +/- 10 years around the peak cohort.
The instrument is: in column 1, it is baseline instrument and the same variable as in Table 2; in column 2, a second order polynomial; in column 3, a third
order polynomial; in column 4, a dummy equal to one if the father is born within three years of a peak cohort, and; in columns 5-7 the baseline linear
instrument. The sample in column 5 restricts the sons to at least age 16 by the end of at least one war, and at most age 30 by the beginning of at least one
war. Column 6 adds the additional sample restriction of dropping fathers who are within one year of a peak cohort. In columns 8-11, observations are
inverse-probability weighted by the likelihood of being in the sample (cohabitation with the father), which is estimated from the full Census data using
Probit regression (see table A6 in the appendix). The baseline predictors (columns 8-10) use pre-determined variables only: second-order polynomial in
age, race dummies, census dummies and high school graduate dummy, from table A6 column 1. In column 11 the predictors are: age dummies (fully
saturated), race dummies, census dummies, poverty status dummy, socio-economic index, unemployment dummy, and in labor force dummy, from table
A6 column 2. The sample size in column 11 is lower due to lack of data on socio-economic characteristics. To deal with the issue of the inverse of near-
zero probabilities, we use propensity-based stratification (Kang and Shafer, 2007), stratifying the probabilities in five percentage point bins, and including
only age dummies with at least twenty observations in order to achieve convergence (dropping in total 182 observations, generally very old individuals).
Column 8 includes observations of all cohabitation probabilities, column 9 excludes observations with less than 0.5% probability of cohabitation, and
columns 10-11 exclude those with less than 1% probability. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                                               Table 4. War-by-War Effects, IV/2SLS

                                                                         Dep. Var.: War Veteran, Son
                                        World War II               Korean War                                Vietnam War
U.S. Census Sample                       1950/60/70                 1960/70/80                                1980/90/00
                                        (1)       (2)             (3)        (4)            (5)             (6)        (7)            (8)

WW I Veteran, Father                  0.280       0.271          0.056       0.059
                                     (0.037)     (0.037)        (0.026)     (0.026)
WW II Veteran, Father                                                                        0.038        0.038
                                                                                            (0.003)      (0.003)
Korea Veteran, Father                                                                                                  0.013        0.014
                                                                                                                      (0.003)      (0.003)

Observations                           59,992      59,992         28,120       28,120          250,220     250,220     218,817       218,817
Census FE                                Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes
Father Birthyear Controls                Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes
Son Birthyear FE                         Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes
State FE                                 No          Yes            No           Yes             No           Yes         Yes           No
Race Controls                            No          Yes            No           Yes             No           Yes         Yes           No
Dep. Var., Mean                         0.138       0.138          0.209        0.209           0.091        0.091      0.065          0.065
Indep. Var. Mean                        0.063       0.063          0.162        0.162           0.474        0.474      0.246          0.246
Total Effect, %                        12.8%       12.4%           4.3%         4.6%            19.8%       19.8%        4.9%          5.3%
Notes: All samples use the baseline instrument, restricting the sample to sons to at least age 16 by the end of the war and at most age
30 by the beginning of it, with fathers within the +/- 10 years window of father YOB distance to war peak cohort. Same control variable
definitions as before, except that the father birth-year control is a linear control and not a polynomial, for meaningful variation in the
baseline instrument. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                        Table 5. The Effects of the Vietnam War on the Gulf War Era


                                           Vietnam Veteran,
Dep. Var.:                                       Father                         Gulf War Era Veteran (90-95), Son
                                         1st Stage 1st Stage             RF            RF          IV/2SLS        IV/2SLS
                                             (1)        (2)              (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)

Birth Distance to Vietnam Peak,
Father                                    -0.039       -0.039          -0.00048       -0.00049
                                         (0.0003)     (0.0003)        (0.00012)      (0.00012)
Vietnam Veteran, Father                                                                               0.0124         0.0127
                                                                                                     (0.0032)       (0.0032)

Observations                             165,241      165,241          165,241        165,241         165,241       165,241
R-squared                                  0.08        0.10             0.02            0.02            N/A           N/A
Census FE                                   Yes         Yes              Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes
Father Birthyear Controls                   Yes         Yes              Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes
Son Birthyear FE                            Yes         Yes              Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes
State FE                                    No          Yes              No              Yes             No           Yes
Race Controls                               No          Yes              No              Yes             No           Yes
IV-variable                                 N/A         N/A              N/A             N/A           Linear       Dummy
Dep. Var., Mean                           0.239        0.239            0.051           0.051          0.022         0.022
Indep. Var. Mean                          4.465        4.465            4.465           4.465          0.239         0.239
Total Effect, %                             N/A         N/A              N/A             N/A           13.4%         13.7%
Notes: US Census data from 2000. All samples use +/- 10 years window of father YOB distance to war peak cohort. All
outcome variables are dummies, equal to one if the son served in the Gulf War era, and zero otherwise. The Gulf War era
refers to the 1990-95 period (not 1990-91), per the census-specified time periods of service. The sons are restricted to be at
most age 30 by the beginning of the time period, and at least age 16 by the end of it. Baseline instrument in IV/2SLS.
Control variables have the same definitions as in Table 4. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                                            Table 6. The Effects on Parenting

                                                              Dep. Var.: Father's Parenting is Authoritative, Dummy
                                                               Boys                                            Girls
                                               RF         RF      IV/2SLS IV/2SLS              RF          RF      IV/2SLS   IV/2SLS
                                               (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)           (5)         (6)        (7)       (8)

Birth Distance to War Peak, Father            -0.012     -0.011                              -0.001     0.001
                                             (0.004)    (0.003)                             (0.004)    (0.004)
War Veteran, Father                                                 0.223      0.192                               0.015     -0.012
                                                                   (0.070)    (0.061)                             (0.072)    (0.067)


Mother's Parenting is Authoritative,
Dummy                                                    0.459                 0.459                    0.434                 0.434
                                                        (0.019)               (0.019)                  (0.020)               (0.020)

Observations                                     2,476       2,476      2,476      2,476        2,241     2,241      2,241      2,241
Child Birthyear FE                                Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes
Father Birthyear Control                          Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes
Race and geographic controls                       No         Yes         No        Yes           No        Yes        No        Yes
Mean Dependent Variable                           0.61        0.61       0.61       0.61         0.55      0.55       0.55       0.55
Notes: National Longitudinal Survey of the Youth 1997 (NLSY97) data. The outcome is a dummy indicating if the father's parenting
style is authoritative at any time during childhood, available for children during age 14-17. Columns 1-4 include boys and columns 5-
7 include girls. The controls are: father year of birth, and dummies for race, region and urban-rural. The IV estimates are based on
two-sample IV (Angrist and Krueger, 1992), where the second-stage use fitted values from a first stage estimated from the 1990/00
Censuses with the sample of father year of birth cohorts sizes proportional to the NLSY97 sample. The first-stage specification is
the same as in Table 2 column 2. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                                         Table 7. Heterogenous Effects, Oblique Transmission

Dep. Var.:                                                                    Father is War Veteran                       Son is War Veteran
                                                                            1st         1st       1st
                                                                                                                 RF         RF          RF      IV/2SLS
                                                                           Stage      Stage     Stage
                                                                            (1)         (2)       (3)            (4)        (6)         (7)        (8)

Father's Birth Distance to War Peak * War Veterans in County               -0.118     -0.116      -0.122        0.015      0.017      0.020
                                                                          (0.009)    (0.011)     (0.011)       (0.007)    (0.008)    (0.008)

Father's Birth Distance to War Peak * Non-War Veterans in County                      -0.003       0.031                   -0.004     -0.014
                                                                                     (0.015)     (0.017)                  (0.011)    (0.012)
Father's Birth Distance to War Peak * % High School Graduates in County                           -0.057                               0.013
                                                                                                 (0.007)                             (0.005)
Father's Birth Distance to War Peak * % Unemployed in County                                      -0.100                               0.044
                                                                                                 (0.039)                             (0.029)
Father's Birth Distance to War Peak * % Not in Labor Force in County                               0.015                              -0.011
                                                                                                 (0.010)                             (0.007)
Father's Birth Distance to War Peak                                        -0.007     -0.008       0.036        -0.006     -0.006     -0.015
                                                                          (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.007)       (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.006)
Father is War Veteran * War Veterans in County                                                                                                    -0.492
                                                                                                                                                 (0.150)
Father is War Veteran                                                                                                                              0.178
                                                                                                                                                 (0.038)

Observations                                                               190,863 190,560 190,560               190,863 190,560 190,560 190,863
R-squared                                                                    0.194       0.193       0.197         0.151     0.151      0.151       N/A
Census FE                                                                     Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
Father Birthyear Controls                                                     Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
Son Birthyear FE                                                              Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
State FE                                                                      Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
Race Controls                                                                 Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
County Controls                                                               Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
Dep. Var., Mean                                                              0.513       0.513       0.513         0.100     0.100      0.100      0.100
Notes: US Census data, 1950-2000, except 1960. All regressions include the country controls include the share of war veterans in the county, from
across the 1950-2000 Censuses, except 1960 for which there is no county identifier available. For columns 2, 3, 6 and 7 the county controls also
include the corresponding county-level variables of the interaction terms. The county variables take values from zero to 1. Column 8 shows the
IV/2SLS estimates, where the instruments are Father's Birth Distance to War Peak and its interaction with War Veterans in County. All the other
controls are the same as in Table 3 and all regressions restricts the father year of birth to +/- 10 years around the peak cohort. Robust standard errors
in parentheses.
                               Table 8. The Effects on Military Service Outside of War
                                                           Non-War        Non-War      Both War &                         Non-War
                                War         Non-War        Veteran        Veteran       Non-War          Never            Veteran
                              Veteran,      Veteran,       1955-64,       1975-80,      Veteran,        Served,           1980-90,
Dep. Var.:                      Son           Son            Son            Son           Son             Son               Son
                              IV/2SLS       IV/2SLS        IV/2SLS        IV/2SLS       IV/2SLS         IV/2SLS           IV/2SLS
                                 (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)             (6)               (6)

War Veteran, Father             0.054         -0.053         -0.040         -0.014        -0.004         -0.006            -0.014
                               (0.007)       (0.005)        (0.003)        (0.004)       (0.002)        (0.008)           (0.007)

Observations                     319,556       319,556       319,556        319,556       319,556        319,556             96,556
Census Samples                  80/90/00       80/90/00      80/90/00       80/90/00      80/90/00      80/90/00             90/00
Census FE                          Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes            Yes                Yes
Father Birthyear Controls          Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes            Yes                Yes
Son Birthyear FE                   Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes            Yes                Yes
State FE                           Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes            Yes                Yes
Race Controls                      Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes            Yes                Yes
Dependent Variable,
Mean                              0.100         0.058         0.014           0.045        0.010          0.853              0.024
Notes: Census data from 1980/90/2000. Baseline instrument in all regressions. In columns 1- 6, the sample includes all three
censuses. The outcome variables are dummies indicating the veteran status for different time periods. In column 1 it is the same as
in Table 3; in column 2 it indicates having served in 1955-64 or 1975-80; in column 3 having served in 1955-1964; in column 4
having served in 1975-1980; in column 5 having served in both a war period and a non-war period; in column (6) never having
served in any period. In column 7, the outcome indicates having served in 1980-1990 and the sample includes the 1990 and 2000
Censuses. Control variables are the same as in Table 3. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                                                  Table 9. The Effects on Education

                                                         Education of Sons                                       Education of Fathers

                                        Years of Education                Went to College              Years of Education     Went to College
                                                                             IV/2SL
                                     RF      IV/2SLS    IV/2SLS       RF         S      IV/2SLS        IV/2SLS    IV/2SLS   IV/2SLS     IV/2SLS
                                     (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)            (7)        (8)       (9)        (10)

Birth Distance to War Peak,
Father                              -0.013                           -0.002
                                   (0.002)                          (0.000)
War Veteran, Father                            0.406      0.443                0.050      0.092         0.595      0.904      0.075      0.086
                                              (0.073)    (0.081)              (0.010)    (0.012)       (0.079)    (0.088)    (0.008)    (0.010)

                                                                    225,92
Observations                       225,924   225,924    197,161       4       225,924    197,161        225,924 197,161 225,924 197,161
                                                                                          80/90/0                  80/90/0               80/90/0
Census Samples                        All        All     80/90/00    All         All         0             All         0        All          0
Census FE                             Yes       Yes         Yes      Yes        Yes         Yes            Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
Father Birthyear Controls             Yes       Yes         Yes      Yes        Yes         Yes            Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
Son Birthyear FE                      Yes       Yes         Yes      Yes        Yes         Yes            Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
State FE                              No         No         Yes      No          No         Yes            Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
Race Controls                         No         No         Yes      No          No         Yes            Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
Dependent Variable, Mean             12.04     12.04       12.22    0.36       0.36        0.38           10.13     10.38      0.19        0.21
Note: US Census Data, 1950-2000. Baseline sample, except that all individuals are at least 25 years old in the Census. Columns 3, 6, 8 and 10
restrict the sample to Census years 1980/90/2000, for comparisons with the results in Table 8. Baseline instrument in IV/2SLS. Control variables
are defined as in Table 2. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                      Table 10. The Effects on Military Aspirations among Young Men

                                                                  Dep. Var.: Occupational Aspiration: Armed Forces
                                                                       RF                                IV/2SLS
                                                            (1)        (2)        (3)             (4)       (5)        (6)

Birth Distance to War Peak, Father                        -0.0009     -0.0023    -0.0017
                                                         (0.0008)    (0.0013)   (0.0010)

Birth Distance to War Peak, Father * Age                              0.0004
                                                                     (0.0002)

Birth Distance to War Peak, Father * Age>=20                                     0.0039
                                                                                (0.0013)

War Veteran, Father                                                                             0.032      0.081      0.059
                                                                                               (0.030)    (0.046)    (0.033)

War Veteran, Father * Age                                                                                  -0.015
                                                                                                          (0.008)

War Veteran, Father * Age>=20                                                                                         -0.134
                                                                                                                     (0.044)

Observations                                               6,355       6,355       6,355         6,355      6,355      6,355
NLS Year FE                                                 Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes
Son Birthyear FE                                            Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes
Father Birthyear Controls                                   Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes
Race and geographic controls                                Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes
Mean Dependent Variable                                    0.018       0.018       0.018         0.018      0.018      0.018
Notes: Pooled data from two datasets, NLS of Young Men 1966 and NLSY 1979 data, males aged 14-24 at the time of the
surveys. The outcome is a dummy indicating if the male's stated occupational desire as an adult is to be in the armed forces,
and zero otherwise. In NLS of Young Men 1966 the survey question is "What kind of work would you like to be doing when
you are 30 years old?" and in NLSY 1979 "What kind of work would you like to be doing when you are 35 years old?" The
Age variable in columns 2 and 5 is the number of years from age 14 of the male at the time of the survey. The Age>=20 in
columns 3 and 6 is a dummy indicating whether the male is at least age 20, and zero otherwise. All samples use +/- 10
years window of father YOB distance to war peak cohort. The father birth-year controls are third-order polynomials in the
father year of birth, and the geographical controls are dummies for region. The IV estimates are based on two-sample IV
(Angrist and Krueger, 1992), where the second-stage use fitted values for War Veteran from a first stage estimated from the
1970/1980 Censuses with the sample of father year of birth cohorts sizes proportional to the pooled NLS samples. The first-
stage specification is the same as in Table 2 column 2. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
