                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              THE GREAT MIGRATION IN BLACK AND WHITE:
   NEW EVIDENCE ON THE SELECTION AND SORTING OF SOUTHERN MIGRANTS

                                         William J. Collins
                                       Marianne H. Wanamaker

                                         Working Paper 21384
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21384


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2015




The authors are grateful for suggestions from Jeremy Atack, Richard Baker, Hoyt Bleakley, John Brown,
Brant Callaway, Kitt Carpenter, Andrew Dustan, Taylor Jaworksi, Tong Li, Robert Margo, Peter McHenry,
Alejandro Molnar, Suresh Naidu, Abigail Wozniak, two anonymous referees, and seminar participants
at the University of Georgia, University of California at Davis, Stanford University, Vanderbilt University,
the ASSA Meetings (2013), the World Congress of Cliometrics (2013), and the Economic History
Association (2013). Ye Gu, Justin Roush, and Shea Sabin provided excellent research assistance.
The authors thank Richard Hornbeck and Dave Donaldson for sharing transport cost data. The Grey
and Dornbush gifts at Vanderbilt University and Office of Research at the University of Tennessee
have provided research support. NSF support (SES 1156085 and 1156057) is gratefully acknowledged.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by William J. Collins and Marianne H. Wanamaker. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Great Migration in Black and White: New Evidence on the Selection and Sorting of Southern
Migrants
William J. Collins and Marianne H. Wanamaker
NBER Working Paper No. 21384
July 2015
JEL No. J10,J61,N32

                                              ABSTRACT

We construct datasets of linked census records to study internal migrants’ selection and destination
choices during the first decades of the “Great Migration” (1910-1930). We study both whites and
blacks and intra- and inter-regional migration. While there is some evidence of positive selection,
the degree of selection was small and participation in migration was widespread. Differences in background,
including initial location, cannot account for racial differences in destination choices. Blacks and
whites were similarly responsive to pre-existing migrant stocks from their home state, but black men
were more deterred by distance, attracted to manufacturing, and responsive to labor demand.


William J. Collins
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University
VU Station B #351819
2301 Vanderbilt Place
Nashville, TN 37235-1819
and NBER
william.collins@vanderbilt.edu

Marianne H. Wanamaker
Department of Economics
University of Tennessee
524 Stokely Management Center
Knoxville, TN 37996
and NBER
wanamaker@utk.edu




A data appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w21384
        At the turn of the twentieth century, real income per worker in the South was less than half
that in the rest of the United States (Easterlin 1960, Mitchener and McLean 1999). When World War
I led to both a labor demand boom in northern industrial centers and the interruption of immigration
from Europe, southern workers moved away from their home region at high rates. This was the start
of the “Great Migration,” which waned during the Great Depression but surged again between 1940
and 1965. By 1970, 35 percent of southern-born black men and 19 percent of southern-born white
men (age 25 and over) were living outside of the South.
        The Great Migration was an important event in the history of U.S. labor market integration,
and it has had long-lasting social ramifications. Social scientists have studied its causes and
consequences for almost 100 years (inter alia, Scroggs 1917, U.S. Department of Labor 1919, Lewis
1931 and recently Hornbeck and Naidu 2014, Collins and Wanamaker 2014, and Black et al. 2015).
Scholars have focused primarily on the inter-regional movement of African Americans. Indeed, the
term “Great Migration” has traditionally been applied solely to black migration to the North. In this
paper, we expand the frame of investigation in two ways to provide additional perspective. First, we
examine the migration decisions of both white and black men. The mass migration of white
southerners was important in its own right and provides a natural comparison for the migration
patterns of blacks. Second, our analysis includes both intra- and inter-regional migrants, whereas
much of the previous literature has focused entirely on the latter. We find that destination choices
within regions, including the South, provide valuable information and a more complete picture of
internal migration patterns during the early decades of the Great Migration.
        In addition to expanding the frame of investigation, we develop new data that provide deeper
insight than previously available into the careers of southern men between 1910 and 1930. The
cross-sectional datasets that inform most quantitative studies of U.S. internal migration in the early
twentieth century have a major limitation: researchers simply cannot observe the same person before
and after migration.1 The absence of ex ante information hinders the study of how individual and
local characteristics influenced both selection into migration and the migrants’ choices of destination.
Furthermore, using ex post measures of migrants’ outcomes or human capital that are available in
cross-sectional data sources may give misleading impressions of their pre-migration status. To
overcome this problem, we create linked census records for more than 26,000 men, providing a
clearer view of the same men before and after the start of the Great Migration. We build the dataset

1
 See Bodnar et al. (1982), Collins (2000), Maloney (2001), Logan (2009), Collins and Wanamaker (2014),
and Black et al. (2015) for examples of research in which migrants are observed before and after moving.



                                                                                                           1
by starting with a sample of southern-resident males, ages 0 to 40, in 1910. We then locate the same
men in the 1930 census manuscripts and transcribe data from the handwritten documents. In 1910,
the younger males in the sample (generally less than age 18) still lived with their parents and
siblings, and the older males were already in the southern labor force. In both cases (for younger and
older men), the dataset contains valuable pre-Great Migration information on personal, household,
and local background.
        For African Americans, the linked census records used here are the same as in Collins and
Wanamaker (2014), which focused on measuring black men’s income gains from inter-regional
migration after accounting for selection. This paper goes beyond Collins and Wanamaker (2014) in
several ways. It studies the selection of both white and black migrants, which required the creation
of a new set of linked census records for more than 20,000 southern white men. In addition, this
paper studies both intra-regional and inter-regional migration patterns, whereas Collins and
Wanamaker (2014) ignored intra-regional movement. Intra-regional flows were large in this period
and worthy of scholars’ attention. Finally, as described below, much of this paper is dedicated to
studying the migrants’ choices of destination and comparing black and white migration patterns
across potential destinations, a topic that is not addressed in Collins and Wanamaker (2014).
        The linked census records allow us to address several important topics in the history of
Americans’ internal migration. First, after documenting the outstanding features of southern black
and white migration patterns and migrant characteristics, we investigate whether the migrants were
strongly selected on the basis of their pre-Great Migration characteristics. Next, we examine how
southern migrants sorted themselves across potential destinations and the extent to which personal
characteristics, such as place of origin and family background, account for black-white differences in
migration patterns. Third, we estimate the migrants’ responsiveness to variation in labor market
opportunities and migration costs across potential destinations, paying particular attention to racial
differences in behavior.
        We find that southern men’s participation in inter-state and inter-regional migration was
widespread in the sense that the migrants’ background characteristics were not much different from
the non-migrants’ characteristics. There is evidence consistent with a degree of positive selection
into inter-state migration among both whites and blacks, as measured by indicators of job status. It is
also clear that farm residents in 1910 were less likely to move than non-farm residents. Yet overall
the differences between migrants and non-migrants were small within race categories.
        In studying the patterns of inter-state migration, we see that there was some overlap in the
most popular destinations for white and black migrants, but there were also notable differences.

                                                                                                         2
About 28 percent of inter-state migrants would have to change their destination to equalize the white
and black distributions over states. Differences in the men’s background characteristics can account
for surprisingly little of the overall black-white differences in destination choice, which leads us to
study differences in responsiveness to economic variables across potential destinations. We find that
black and white men were similarly responsive to pre-existing distributions of state-to-state migrant
stocks, but that black men were more deterred by distance, more attracted to manufacturing centers,
and more responsive to cross-state variation in aggregate labor demand growth, ceteris paribus. A
theme in the Great Migration literature emphasizes racial oppression as a strong, independent
motivation for leaving the South. We find only mixed evidence that black migrants were more
inclined to leave the South than white migrants and no evidence that black migrants moved to non-
southern locations more frequently than they did southern ones, conditional on the states’ economic
characteristics. There is stronger evidence, however, that black migrants moved more frequently
than southern white migrants to the Northeast and Midwest, whereas southern whites moved more
frequently to the West, conditional on the states’ economic characteristics.

                          BACKGROUND ON SOUTHERN MIGRATION
        Despite the sizable regional differences in average income cited above, relatively few
southern-born men left the region before World War I. For perspective, the charts at the top of
Figure 1 use the IPUMS cross-sectional data for each census from 1880 to 1960 (Ruggles et al. 2010)
to depict the cumulative inter-regional migration rate for men born in the South between 1860 and
1919 (that is, the share of southern-born men in each ten-year birth cohort who resided outside the
South at each census date). This spans all the birth cohorts of men in our sample of linked census
manuscripts (1870 to 1910), which is described in detail in the paper’s next section, as well as those
born up to ten years before and after the men in the linked sample. The bottom panel of Figure 1
plots cumulative interstate migration within the South (the share of southern-born men residing
outside their state of birth, but in the South). There is no IPUMS sample for 1890, and we simply
connect 1880 to 1900 for the relevant cohorts. The vertical lines at 1910 and 1930 correspond to this
paper’s main window of analysis, reflecting the structure of the dataset of linked census records and
the first decades of the Great Migration. Throughout the paper, the “southern” states include:
Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, North Carolina, Oklahoma,
South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, and West Virginia. We categorize Delaware, Maryland,
and the District of Columbia as “non-southern.”




                                                                                                          3
        In 1910, prior to the onset of the Great Migration, only 11 percent of black and white
southern-born males in their 30s (the 1870s birth cohort) resided outside the South. For whites, this
is approximately the same level of cumulative inter-regional migration as observed ten years earlier
(in1900) for men at a similar point in the lifecycle (the 1860s birth cohort). Later cohorts of whites
undertook substantially more inter-regional migration: 15 percent of the 1890s birth cohort had left
the South by 1930, and closer to 20 percent had left among those exposed to the World War II boom
(observed in 1950). For blacks, the 1870s birth cohort had a slightly higher rate of cumulative inter-
regional migration by 1910 than the 1860s cohort observed in 1900 (11 compared to 9 percent). That
difference is dwarfed by subsequent changes in black inter-regional migration rates, with nearly one-
quarter of the 1890s birth cohort leaving the South by 1930 and even higher rates for cohorts exposed
to World War II (for example, 36 percent of the 1910s birth cohort observed in 1950).
        The comparatively low rate of inter-regional migration before 1910 does not imply that the
southern labor force was stationary, as there is considerable evidence of mobility within the South
(Wright 1986). The lower panels of Figure 1 indicate that 15 percent of blacks and nearly 20 percent
of whites in the 1870s birth cohort had moved away from their birth state by 1910 but stayed within
the South. In this sense, intra-regional mobility was more common than inter-regional mobility prior
to 1910. In particular, there were sizable flows of southern-born whites into Texas and Oklahoma
and sizable flows of southern-born blacks into Florida, Arkansas, and Mississippi.
        After 1910, flows within the South continued, especially to Texas, Oklahoma, and Florida,
but destinations like California, Ohio, Illinois, Pennsylvania, and New York became much more
prominent than previously. Between 1910 and 1930, Figure 1 shows slight declines in within-South
migration but significant increases in inter-regional migration, reflecting a shift in the relative
attraction of non-southern residence for both blacks and whites.
        Scholars have suggested several reasons for the relatively low rates of African American
migration from the South prior to World War I: low levels of human and financial capital, which
have been found to impede long-distance migration in this and other settings (Logan 2009, Hatton
and Williamson 2002); discrimination by northern employers who readily hired immigrant laborers
from Europe (Myrdal 1944, Collins 1997); and weak integration of northern and southern labor
markets compared to the strong ties between northern and European labor markets, a legacy of mass
migration from Europe that began in the 1840s (Thomas 1954, Wright 1986, Hatton and Williamson
1998, Rosenbloom 2002). Impediments to the mobility of southern agricultural workers also may
have been significant (Ransom and Sutch 1977, Grossman 1989, Naidu 2010).



                                                                                                         4
        Despite sizable inter-state flows of southern whites, the history of their internal migration has
been far less explored than that of African Americans (Akers 1936, Killian 1953, Berry 2000, and
Gregory 2005). Of course, some of the same factors that inhibited blacks’ movement prior to World
War I also may have affected southern whites. But it seems clear that the black and white stories
differ in important ways. Most obviously, whites were not recently removed from slavery, were less
concentrated than blacks in the Cotton Belt, were more likely than blacks to have acquired some
wealth and literacy, and likely faced less discrimination in distant labor markets. For perspective, in
1870 nearly 40 percent of white southern men, age 20 to 60, owned some amount of real property,
compared to less than 5 percent of blacks. Approximately 74 percent of southern whites (over age 9)
could read and write, compared to 15 percent of blacks (Ruggles et al. 2010). However, while
southern whites might have found it easier to afford long-distance moves than blacks (on average),
they also might have found it less attractive. For instance, opportunities to advance in southern labor
markets, whether by ascending the agricultural ladder or moving into skilled non-agricultural work,
may have seemed more plentiful to whites than to blacks. It is also possible that lingering hostility
from the Civil War influenced white southerners’ perceptions of the North.
        If ignorance and poverty inhibited long-distance migration by black and white southerners,
this constraint may have receded with each generation’s educational and economic advances in the
late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries (Higgs 1982, Margo 1984, Margo 1990, Collins and
Margo 2006). In addition, improving transportation and communication networks in the South may
have facilitated migration by lowering the associated costs and uncertainties. Surfaced roads more
than doubled between 1904 and 1914 in the South (U.S. Department of Agriculture 1917). Nearly all
southerners lived in counties with railroad access by 1911 (Atack 2013 and personal
communication). The circulation of northern newspapers, such as the Chicago Defender, increased
in the South during the 1910s (Grossman 1989). Environmental shocks also may have driven some
migration (Higgs 1976, Lange et al. 2009, Boustan et al. 2012, Hornbeck and Naidu 2014). Most
prominently, the boll weevil spread from Texas, where it gained a foothold in the 1890s, to
Mississippi by 1907 and North Carolina by 1919. The weevil disrupted cotton production and
imparted a long-lasting negative productivity shock, perhaps making southern agriculture a less
attractive option than before, at least within the Cotton Belt (Higgs 1976; Lange et al. 2009, Baker
2015). Finally, for African Americans specifically, political disenfranchisement, mob violence, de
jure segregation, and, in general, the ascendance of the Jim Crow regime may have provided a strong
incentive to leave the region (Myrdal 1944, Woodward 1955, Kousser 1974, Tolnay and Beck 1990,



                                                                                                          5
Margo 1990). Taken together, these trends may have yielded a southern labor force circa 1910 that
was more able and more inclined to migrate long distances than ever before.
        Against this backdrop, the exogenous shock of World War I created both a major labor
demand boom in industrial centers, predominantly located in the North, and a temporary halt to
European immigration, which was later reinforced by immigration restrictions. Many industrial
employers recruited southern migrants for the first time, gained experience in hiring, training, and
evaluating them, and established networks to draw on the southern labor supply (Whatley 1990;
Berry 2000; Foote, Whatley and Wright 2003). As is commonly found in studies of migration,
networks of previous migrants helped perpetuate migration patterns in and from the South
(Carrington et al. 1996, Hatton and Williamson 1998, McKenzie and Rapoport 2007). Consequently,
high rates of migration continued long after the impetus of World War I, with major repercussions
for American economic and social history.
        Within this historical setting, our thinking about migration and location choice is guided by
theoretical and empirical work by Sjaastad (1962), Roback (1982), Borjas et al. (1992), Grogger and
Hanson (2011), and Moretti (2011). We suppose that an individual’s location decision depends on
expected income, amenities, and relocation costs (broadly defined), while recognizing that these
expectations may vary across types of workers, by race, skill, or other initial conditions. These
differences across workers may give rise to interesting patterns of selection into inter-state migration
and of sorting across potential destinations, which we explore below. For both selection and sorting,
the dataset of linked census records provides new opportunities for analysis.

             NEW DATA: LINKING MICRO-LEVEL CENSUS RECORDS, 1910-1930
        To construct the linked dataset, we began with the IPUMS sample of manuscript data from
the 1910 Census of Population and selected all southern-resident males between the ages of 0 and 40
(Ruggles et al. 2010). We then attempted to link these men “forward” by locating them in the
handwritten manuscripts of the 1930 Census of Population. We used each individual’s name, place
of birth, and age from the 1910 records as search criteria for location in the 1930 records.2 From an
initial sample of 111,524 individuals, the linking process successfully located 26,829 individuals, a




2
 Our search criteria include a SOUNDEX version of the last name, first three letters of the first name, state of
birth, and birth-year within two years. SOUNDEX is an algorithm used to generate alternative spellings of a
surname. SOUNDEX matches include the exact last name and reasonably close approximations to that name.



                                                                                                               6
24 percent match rate.3 The final sample is 20 percent black. Additional details on the linking
process and the variables available in each census year are provided in the Appendix.
        As mentioned above, the linked data offer several advantages relative to the state-level
aggregates or micro-level cross-sections that have typically supported quantitative studies of the
Great Migration. The key distinction is that we observe the same person both before and after the
onset of the Great Migration’s first big wave. In 1910, we see the younger men in our sample when
they still resided with their family. Therefore, we observe many characteristics about the household
in which they grew up—what their parents did for a living, where they were located, whether they
attended school, their literacy (if older than 9), whether they lived on a farm, and so on. The older
men in our sample (18 and older) in 1910 are observed after they have left their parents, but also after
they have entered the southern labor force. Therefore, we know what kind of job they held in 1910
in addition to whether they were literate, where they lived, whether they owned a home, and so on.
In 1930, we see whether the men have moved since 1910 and, if so, to where. Given the 1910 county
and state identifiers, it is straightforward to merge the linked dataset with 1910 county and state-level
information from Haines (2010), which helps characterize each individual’s local economic and
social environment.
        A major concern for any such dataset is that the linked sample might exhibit selection bias
that interferes with subsequent analyses and interpretations. Fortunately, the men in the linked
sample are similar to those in the randomly selected base sample from 1910. Table 1 reports the
summary statistics for the linked and base samples of blacks and whites separately. Although there
are some small differences, their statistical and economic significance is limited. Similar conclusions
follow when we estimate the probability of being in the linked sample as a function of observable
characteristics, conditional on being in the base IPUMS sample. From that exercise (details of which
are discussed in the Appendix), we conclude that literacy, farming occupations, and West Virginia
residence are statistically significant predictors of being found in the 1930 census manuscripts, but
the practical significance of these increased probabilities is small, generally less than a 3 percent
increase.4

3
  Our linkage rates are similar to those in Long and Ferrie (2013) and Abramitzky, Boustan, and Eriksson
(2012). We deleted cases where more than one individual in 1910 matched to the same individual in 1930.
Match rates for blacks (19 percent) and whites (26 percent) differ, which we believe is partially attributable to
advances in search technology over time. The samples were matched sequentially.
4
  We evaluated the results’ sensitivity to using stricter match criteria by restricting the sample to exact matches
on last name and close matches on first name (Jaro-Winkler distance <0.3). The main results are unchanged.
See the Online Appendix, Section A1.



                                                                                                                  7
        A separate check with the 1930 IPUMS cross-sectional sample of southern-born black men,
age 20 to 60 (to correspond to those 0 to 40 in 1910), reveals that 22 percent resided outside the
South at the time of the 1930 census. This is close to the 20 percent of our matched sample who
resided in the South in 1910 but not in 1930. We do not expect these numbers to be exactly the same
because of interregional migration of men prior to 1910 in the IPUMS cross-section (where migrants
are defined using place of birth information) and sampling variation. The corresponding numbers for
southern-born whites observed outside the South in 1930 are 15 percent and 17 percent. Across all
states, the distribution of inter-state migrants in the linked sample is highly correlated with inter-state
migrants in the 1930 IPUMS sample (0.96 for both the white and black samples), and rarely deviates
by more than 1 percentage point. The correlation is especially high for non-southern destinations,
where pre-1910 migration is less likely to confound the comparisons (Appendix Table A3). Overall,
the results do not suggest that the linked sample is biased in a way that will confound our analyses,
and we take the linked sample to be fairly representative.

                                        MIGRANT SELECTION
        Patterns of migrant selection are important for both sending regions (for example, whether
the region tends to lose highly skilled workers) and receiving regions (for example, whether migrants
are likely to assimilate quickly and whether they are substitutes or complements for the area’s native
workers). The linked dataset is especially well suited to characterize selection into migration because
it has such detailed background information on the men in 1910. These characterizations, in turn,
provide a better basis than previously available for understanding the origins and consequences of the
Great Migration, even though assessing the full range of possible implications from selection, such as
the wage impact on sending and receiving areas (Boustan 2009), is beyond this paper’s scope.
        In this section, we focus on characterizing who migrated and whether there are clear
differences between migrants and non-migrants in terms of their background characteristics. We
start by classifying all men in the linked sample into three mutually exclusive categories: “non-
migrants” (who resided in the same state in 1910 and 1930), “within-South migrants” (who changed
state of residence within the region), and “inter-regional migrants.” Between 1910 and 1930, a large
fraction of the men in the linked sample (35 percent of whites and 39 percent of blacks) had left their
1910 state of residence, with roughly even splits between “within-South” and “inter-regional”
migration.
        Table 2, column 1 reports the white men’s average characteristics in 1910, before the start of
the Great Migration, including their literacy rates, school attendance, occupational income and


                                                                                                          8
education scores, farm status and homeownership rates. The figures are tabulated separately by 1930
migration category. The second column reports differences in characteristics between the migrant
categories and the non-migrant category, and the third column reports the differences that remain
after controlling for age and county-of-origin fixed effects.5 In practice, the county-level fixed
effects in column 3 absorb local push factors, such as boll weevil destruction, and control for
selection that derives from differences in place-of-origin characteristics (which is included in the
simple comparison in column 2).6 The next three columns repeat the tabulations for the sample of
black men. Although this is very basic information about the migrants and non-migrants, none of it
can be inferred from census cross-sections, and in this respect the linked manuscript data are crucial.
        If ability or productivity were positively correlated with migration, then we would expect
migrants to have better outcomes than non-migrants in terms of human capital, occupational status,
or family background before leaving the South. While discrimination in the South slowed black
men’s economic and educational progress, there was considerable variation in literacy, education,
occupation, property ownership, and other measures in 1910. For whites and blacks, there is some
evidence of positive selection into inter-regional migration on the basis of 1910 literacy (panel A),
but the differences are quantitatively small at 1 to 4 percentage points. They are statistically
insignificant after controlling for age and place of origin. This contrasts with some of the previous
literature’s suggestion of strongly positive migrant selection in the early twentieth century based on
census cross sections that observe migrants ex post (for example, Tolnay 1998). The discrepancy
suggests that migrants might have improved their literacy after leaving the South, or that census
enumeration of literacy might have been regionally biased. More generally, this raises concern
regarding the practice of using ex post migrant characteristics from cross sections to make inferences
about selection into migration. As linked historical datasets become more common, scholars may be
able to avoid this measurement problem.
        For an alternative view of educational background, we examined school attendance in 1910
and found small differences in attendance rates between the migrant categories (panel B), with or
without controls. From this perspective, migrant selection on the basis of formal education seems

5
  “The “adjusted differences” are coefficients on migration category dummies (expressed relative to the non-
migrant category) from regressions with age (𝛾! ) and county-of-origin (𝜃! ) fixed effects: 𝑌! = 𝛼 + 𝜎𝑆𝑀! +
𝜌𝑅𝑀! + 𝛾! + 𝜃! + 𝑒!   , where SM is a dummy for within-South migrants and RM is a dummy for inter-regional
migrants. Y variables are the 1910 characteristics (for example, literacy, occupation score, etc.).
6
  For example, if individuals tend to migrate from particularly affluent locations, we would infer positive
selection in column 2 but not necessarily in column 3. Both perspectives are useful. Changes in coefficients
between columns 2 and 3 are driven primarily by the inclusion of county fixed effects, not age effects.



                                                                                                           9
rather weak in the early decades of the Great Migration. We note, however, that in comparison to
studies of migration in more recent decades (Borjas et al. 1992, Vigdor 2002, Grogger and Hanson
2011), which are often motivated by the Roy model (1951), our metric for educational attainment is
fairly crude. We cannot follow such studies without better data for quality-adjusted educational
attainment and variation in returns to education (by race) across locations in the early twentieth
century, which to our knowledge does not exist.
         Among those old enough to report occupations in 1910 (panels C and D), there is somewhat
stronger evidence of positive selection on the basis of pre-Great Migration labor market outcomes.
To the extent that better skills, ability, or motivation translated into better occupational standing
before World War I, the occupational data provide a more sensitive indicator of selection than
literacy alone. Individual income was not reported in the 1910 census, and so we first examine a
modified version of the “occupational income score” (panel C).7 This is a commonly used IPUMS
variable that assigns an income to each detailed occupation category based on the median income
observed in that occupation in the 1950 census (Ruggles et al. 2010). Pre-war occupational scores
for “within-South” and “inter-regional” white migrants are 5 to 10 percent higher than for non-
migrants. For blacks, most group differences are slightly smaller in magnitude than for whites, but
the point estimates are consistent with positive selection.8
         In panel D, we assign a race-specific “education score” to each detailed occupation in 1910
based on the average educational attainment of southern workers in the corresponding occupation
categories in the 1940 census (Ruggles et al. 2010), which was the first census to inquire about
educational attainment. The goal is simply to provide an alternative characterization of occupational
status that is connected to formal educational attainment rather than income. Again, there is some
evidence of positive selection into migration, approximately one-tenth of a grade, but the differences
are small and statistically insignificant after controlling for age and initial location.



7
  Given the difference in status for tenant farmers relative to farm owners, we further adjusted the occupation
score for farmers based on their home ownership. Home ownership is not reported in the 1950 microdata
sample, the year on which occupation scores are originally based. Therefore, for farmers who reported owning
(renting) their homes, we multiplied median farmer income in 1950 (the IPUMS-defined occscore) by the ratio
of median income among farmer-owners (farmer-renters) in the 1960 IPUMS sample to median income of all
farmers in the 1960 sample, restricting the 1960 sample to southern residents. This adjusted occscore is
analyzed in the third panel of Table 2.
8
  For reference, a standard deviation in the occupation income score variable is 12.0 for whites and 7.3 for blacks
(Panel C of Table 2). A standard deviation in the occupation education score variable is 1.75 for whites and 0.93 for
blacks (Panel D).



                                                                                                                  10
        In summary, our measures of skill—whether based on occupational or educational
information—are generally consistent with a limited degree of positive selection for both whites and
blacks in the early decades of the Great Migration. The differences across migrant groups are
quantitatively small, however, and thus the degree of migrant selection from this perspective seems
rather weak.
        Table 2, panel E examines selection on the basis of farm status in 1910. From this
perspective, there are notable differences. For both whites and blacks, those who lived on farms in
1910 were less likely to migrate out of the state than others. In the “unadjusted” columns, the farm-
status difference between the migrant groups and the non-migrant group is between 7 and 11
percentage points (whites and blacks). The addition of age and county-of-origin controls reduces the
gap relative to non-migrants for white inter-regional migrants and for both categories of African
Americans migrants, but non-trivial differences remain, especially for whites. Thus, it appears that
an agricultural background tended to hinder long-distance migration, even when comparisons are
based on within-county variation.
        Owner-occupied housing status, which is examined in table 2’s last panel, is of particular
interest because it is the only census variable in 1910 that reflects household assets (ownership of
real property). In general, household wealth may facilitate long-distance migration, but in this
historical context homeownership may also indicate a prior decision to settle down in a particular
area or, for young men in our sample (residing with their parents in owner-occupied housing), it may
reflect an expectation to inherit or receive a parental gift of local property (Abramitzky et al. 2013).
Among whites, residing in owner-occupied housing in 1910 is associated with substantially less
long-distance migration (between 3 and 7 percentage points), even after adjustments for age and
county of residence. African Americans were far less likely than whites to own their homes, and the
pattern with respect to migration is different. Inter-regional black migrants were somewhat more
likely to reside in owner-occupied housing in 1910. If the negative coefficients for whites are
interpreted as indicators of relatively strong local attachments among property owners and their
children, then it would appear that black property owners and their children did not share such strong
attachments.
        Overall, migration in the linked dataset does not conform to a simple characterization in
terms of negative or positive selection. Migrants held jobs in 1910 with higher occupation scores
than non-migrants on average, which is consistent with positive selection. But these differences were
not large. Moreover, differences across migrant groups in terms of literacy, school attendance, or
occupational-education scores were small or non-existent. Farm residence was the most robust

                                                                                                       11
(negative) predictor of subsequent migration for whites and blacks, a finding that is consistent with
our expectations but novel in the sense that, to our knowledge, no previously constructed dataset
could observe the pre-migration farm status of individual men in this period. We interpret the overall
results as a reflection of remarkably broad participation in internal migration. The differences
between migrants and non-migrants in the early decades of the Great Migration appear less salient
than the increased volume and new directions of migration. This leads us to investigate further
where the migrants moved and why they decided to move there.


                    OVERVIEW OF MIGRATION PATTERNS AND SORTING
        The linked dataset provides new opportunities for studying and comparing migrant sorting
patterns, both as a function of individual and place-of-origin characteristics and as a function of labor
market conditions and migration costs across space. In addition, the linked data allow us to be more
specific about when people moved (between 1910 and 1930) than is possible with census cross-
sections, where prior location is known only at the time of birth and migration could have occurred at
any time afterwards.
        Table 3 provides summary statistics of the migration patterns in the linked dataset, including
the propensity to migrate (panel A) and distance and direction of migration (panel B). The table’s
third column reports simple black-white differences. The fourth column reports coefficients on a
black indicator variable from regressions that control for state-of-origin fixed effects. As mentioned
above, between 1910 and 1930, a large fraction of the men in the linked sample left their 1910 state
of residence, with approximately an even split of migrants between “within-South” and “outside
South” destinations. Among those who left the South, the Midwest was the most common
destination for both whites and blacks, but black inter-regional migrants moved relatively strongly
into the Northeast (compared to whites), whereas whites moved relatively strongly into the West.9
Detailed state-to-state migration patterns are reported in the Online Appendix.
        Panel B of Table 3 reports measures of distance travelled based on the latitude and longitude
of the center of each individual’s 1910 and 1930 county of residence. In the full sample, average
migration distances, including zeros for those who did not change counties, are similar across the
9
  The most common destination counties for inter-regional black migrants were Cook County (Chicago), IL;
Philadelphia, PA; Wayne (Detroit), MI and New York, NY. White inter-regional migrants most frequently
relocated to Los Angeles, CA; Cook (Chicago), IL; Wayne (Detroit), MI and Summit (Akron), OH. Intra-
regional black migrants moved most frequently to Shelby County (Memphis), TN; Duval (Jacksonville), FL;
Hamilton (Chattanooga), TN; and Chatham (Savannah), GA. White inter-regional migrants relocated most
frequently to Oklahoma City, OK; Shelby (Memphis), TN; Jefferson (Birmingham), AL; and Dallas, TX.



                                                                                                        12
black and white samples, with or without controls for state-of-origin. It is clear, however, that
conditional on migrating, whites moved farther than blacks on average, both within the South (322
versus 266 miles) and when leaving the South (696 versus 577 miles) (also see Tolnay et al. 2005).
Controlling for state-of-origin amplifies the large difference in distance travelled by inter-regional
migrants (column 4). The average black male moved northward and eastward (positive changes in
latitude and longitude), whereas the average white male moved northward and westward, though not
as far north as blacks. Among white inter-regional movers, the migrants to the West strongly
influence the average change of longitude, and black-white differences in east-west mobility patterns
are striking, even when controlling for state of origin.10
        For the sake of concise description and to facilitate discrete-choice modeling, we focus on the
migrants’ choice of state. Fifty-one percent of inter-state migrants in our sample chose non-urban
locations, and therefore focusing solely on migrants to cities would omit a large share of the sample,
distort the ex ante set of destination choices, and generally mischaracterize the period’s internal
migration patterns. Moreover, because the multinomial logit model, described below, estimates a
large number of coefficients for each potential destination, working at the county- or city-level would
be computationally prohibitive.
        Figure 2 maps the distribution of inter-state southern migrants across destinations between
1910 and 1930. Continuing pre-1910 migration trends, migrants within the South tended to favor
Texas, Oklahoma, and Florida, with Texas and Oklahoma being particularly important destinations
for whites. In addition, and breaking with pre-1910 patterns, black migrants frequently chose
locations in the industrial North; Pennsylvania, Illinois, Ohio, and New York all received more
southern black migrants after 1910 than did any southern state. Pennsylvania was the most common
destination for blacks, and it drew heavily from Virginia, Georgia, and South Carolina. Southern
white migrants were also drawn strongly to Ohio and, to a lesser extent, Illinois. But California also
emerged as a major destination for whites, drawing heavily from the 1910 residents of Texas,
Oklahoma, Arkansas, and Kentucky.
        Although there was a substantial degree of overlap in black and white migration flows, there
were also notable differences among the most frequently chosen locales. Only Ohio and Illinois rank
among the top five destination states for both groups, and in some cases the black-white differences


10
  Figure A1 in the Online Appendix graphs scatterplots of changes in latitude and longitude, separately for
southern whites and blacks. The main visual impression is one of strong northward movement for blacks but a
much more diffuse pattern for whites.



                                                                                                         13
are quite large (for example, California and Pennsylvania). A dissimilarity index provides a simple
way to summarize the magnitude of black-white differences in the migrants’ location choices. It
indicates the share of migrants that would have to choose a different location for the distribution of
                                                                            !   !   !!       !!
choices to be the same across race categories. The index is calculated as       !!! !    −        where i
                                                                            !                !

denotes a state, 𝑏! (𝑤! ) is the number of black (white) men moving to state i and 𝐵 (𝑊) is the total
number of black (white) men in the sample. From this perspective, approximately 28 percent (index
value of 0.28) of black or white inter-state migrants would have to choose a different destination for
the black and white post-migration distributions to be equivalent.

     BACKGROUND CHARACTERISTICS AND DIFFERENCES IN BLACK AND WHITE
                                      MIGRATION PATTERNS
        Because black and white men differed in their observable characteristics and starting
locations circa 1910, it is natural to ask whether such differences can account for black-white
differences in migration patterns. We take two different approaches to this question. First, looking
deeper into the summary statistics reported in Table 3, we estimate a series of ordinary least squares
(OLS) regressions that include a race indicator variable and a rich set of background variables, such
as age, literacy, industry of employment (or father’s industry of employment), place of origin, and so
on. Comparing “unadjusted” black-white migration differences to those “adjusted” for background
characteristics, we find that the background characteristics generally cannot account for the
differences in migration outcomes. In fact, adding control variables tends to widen, not narrow,
some black-white differences in migration choices. For the sake of brevity, these results and
additional details are provided in Online Appendix, Section A4.
        Second, similar in spirit to the above but with a sharper focus on the actual choice of
destination, we estimate multinomial logit models to characterize the location choices of inter-state
migrants as a function of race and background characteristics. The multinomial framework treats
each state as a potential destination, with the caveat that we combined some less populous states to
facilitate estimation. For the subsample of individuals age 17 and under in 1910, the model includes
indicator variables for race, father’s literacy and industry of employment, own school attendance,
place in the family’s birth order, owner-occupied housing status, state of origin, and city size. For
those 18 and older in 1910, the list of independent variables is similar, but includes own literacy and
industry of employment (rather than father’s) and marital status, but omits school attendance and
birth order. Section A4 of the Online Appendix provides more details.



                                                                                                            14
           Using the model’s parameter estimates, the importance of black-white disparities in
observable characteristics is revealed by comparing two counterfactual migration distributions in
which men have the same characteristics except for race. Specifically, we take the full sample of
white and black men and predict destination choices when all are assigned “black” status and then
again when all are assigned “white” status, such that the differences across the two sets of predictions
are attributable only to differences in race as all other personal attributes are equivalent across
samples (StataCorp 2009). For each man, this procedure estimates probabilities of choosing each
state under white and black model parameters; the probabilities are averaged to get the predicted “all
white” or “all black” counterfactual distributions of migrants across states. If differences in
background characteristics largely explained black-white differences in destination choice, then the
value of the dissimilarity index between the all black and all white counterfactual distributions would
be substantially less than the index value based on the actual distributions. In practice, however,
recalculating the dissimilarity index between the “all black” and “all white” counterfactual
distributions yields an index value of 0.27. From this perspective, only a small portion of black-
white differences in destination choice, on net, can be accounted for by the background
characteristics available in the census. Underlying the dissimilarity index results, we see that
background characteristics are helpful in narrowing the black-white difference in migration to some
states (most notably California), but they widen the black-white difference in other states (such as
Illinois and Missouri), such that the overall index changes little.11
           In sum, we find that there was substantial overlap in black and white migration patterns, but
black-white differences in migration patterns were economically significant and generally were not a
reflection of the migrants’ background characteristics. Observationally similar southern men circa
1910 tended to make different migration decisions depending on their race. This finding leads us to
focus on how strongly (and how differently) white and black migrants responded to variation in the
costs and benefits of relocating to each potential destination. Conditional logit models are
particularly useful for studying such issues.

                      CONDITIONAL LOGIT MODEL OF DESTINATION CHOICE
           Suppose that individual i chooses to migrate to state j if
                                 𝑈(𝑋!" ) > 𝑈 𝑋!" , ∀  𝑘 ∈ 1, . . . . , 𝐽   𝑎𝑛𝑑  𝑗 ≠ 𝑘,
where U(.) represents utility over a vector Xik, which contains variables that reflect the expected

11
     The state-specific results are illustrated in the Online Appendix, Figure A3.



                                                                                                       15
income, amenities, and migration costs for individual i in potential destination k. If the utility over
each state choice includes a random component with an Extreme Value Type I distribution, the
probability of choosing any particular state is represented by:
                                                 !"# !!!"
                               𝑃 𝐷! = 𝑗 =      !                  ,            ∀𝑗 ∈ [1,2, . . . 𝐽]   (1)
                                               !!! !"#  (!!!" )

where Di is the location choice of individual i. This is the familiar conditional logit framework for
discrete choice described in McFadden (1974), applied to a setting in which migrants choose
destinations (Davies et al. 2001, Vigdor 2002, and Wozniak 2010). As cited earlier in the paper, our
interpretation of the model in this setting is strongly influenced by previous research on the
economics of migration and location choice (Sjaastad 1962, Roback 1982, Borjas et al. 1992,
Grogger and Hanson 2011, and Moretti 2011).
        Maximum-likelihood estimates of 𝛾  describe how differences in economic characteristics
across potential destination states are correlated with the choices of inter-state migrants. Note that in
conditional logit models, any variable that does not vary across potential destinations for individual i,
such as an individual-specific variable or place-of-origin-specific variable, falls out of the estimating
equation and is not identified. Coefficients on destination-specific characteristics and on interactions
between destination characteristics and individual-specific attributes can be identified (for example,
interactions of labor demand and race).
        We estimate the conditional logit model with the sample of inter-state migrants. We do not
include non-migrants in the analysis because doing so poses conceptual problems with key variables
such as “distance” and “migrant stock” and with the treatment of “home” as a potential destination
choice. Since this section of the paper is primarily concerned with describing the migrants’ choices
of destinations rather than their selection into migration, we believe that concentrating on the
migrants simplifies the analysis and the interpretation of variables in a way that is helpful.12
        Several variables comprise Xij, starting with those that may have influenced expected
employment opportunities and earnings. We construct a measure of post-1910 labor demand growth
(𝐵! ), following Bartik (1991). In Bartik’s specification, employment growth in each state is predicted
by multiplying the size of the 1910 labor force in each industry in each state (ejl) by a 1910-1930


12
  We use the multinomial logit where the emphasis is on individual-specific variables and the conditional logit
where the emphasis is on destination-specific variables. A model that combines individual and destination-
specific variables in the same framework, as implemented in Stata’s asclogit command, can be estimated
successfully only after stripping out nearly all the personal background variables. We have also explored
nested logit models in which the census regions and the home state serve as nests.



                                                                                                            16
nationwide employment growth rate in that industry (gl), and then summing across industries within
states.
                                                      !
                                           𝐵! =             𝑒!" ×  𝑔!
                                                      !!!

The Bartik-style measure gauges total employment growth in each state without utilizing ex post
state-specific labor force growth rates, which are endogenous to migration. We also estimate
specifications that include the percentages of the 1910 labor force employed in agriculture and
manufacturing separately rather than the Bartik measure, which combines information over all
industries. In the specifications with agriculture and manufacturing employment variables, we also
include a control variable for state population size because larger states are likely to attract more
migrants all else equal.
          Xij also includes race-specific income estimates for each state circa 1910. These measures
combine state-level estimates of real income per worker from Mitchener and McLean (1999) with
race-specific adjustment factors for each state that are calculated from the 1940 census microdata
(the first census year with wage data).13 In essence, the output-per-worker benchmark in each state
circa 1910 is scaled up or down depending on the ratio of black or white men’s wages to all wages in
that state in the 1940 census. The Online Appendix provides more detail.
          Variables related to the cost of migration are also in Xij. We calculate the log distance from
each individual’s county of residence in 1910 to each potential destination state to capture relocation
costs that are proportional to (log) distance. In addition, we calculate the share of all people born in
person i’s home state who resided in state j in 1910, separately by race, using the 1910 IPUMS
(Ruggles et al. 2010). These pre-1910 migration rates help account for the influence of pre-existing
and race-specific relationships between states including, but not limited to, networks that facilitate
migration by providing a cultural home and assistance with finding employment and housing.
          A regional dummy variable for “Non-South” captures the influence of region-specific
amenities, some of which may have differentially influenced decisions of black and white migrants,
such as more secure civil rights or less rigid social segregation. The coefficient reflects migration
above or below what would be expected on the basis of the economic variables included in Xij. This


13
  Implicitly, we assume that black and white men’s wages relative to state averages were not strongly affected
by the migration itself. The best relevant evidence is from Boustan (2009), which finds a modest negative
effect (approximately 7 percent) of southern migrants on black wages in the North between 1940 and 1970,
when the volume of migration was larger than before 1930. On this basis, we expect that migration between
1910 and 1930 had relatively small effects on overall wage levels.



                                                                                                           17
is a simple way to test whether areas outside the South were especially attractive to southern
migrants, conditional on other X variables. Of course, identifying this border effect relies upon the
sample’s inclusion of both intra-regional and inter-regional migrants, and identifying a race-specific
border effect relies upon having both white and black migrants. The theme of escaping the South is
prominent in many narrative descriptions of African Americans’ motives for inter-regional migration
(for example, Wilkerson 2010), but others have noted that racial oppression long preceded the onset
of the Great Migration (Higgs 1976 and Vickery 1977). Whether areas outside the South were
especially attractive to black migrants and whether that influence can be detected after controlling for
economic conditions are open empirical questions. In subsequent analysis, we estimate separate
coefficients for the Northeast, Midwest, and West (rather than treating the Non-South as a single
region) or with a full set of destination fixed effects.
        The baseline analysis also includes a variable for each state’s level of urbanization to see
whether migrants were drawn to highly urbanized states for reasons that are not captured by other
independent variables. Robustness checks with different specifications and functional form
assumptions are discussed below and in further detail in the Online Appendix.


                                  CONDITIONAL LOGIT RESULTS
        The baseline results are presented in Table 4. Columns 1 to 3 pertain to the sample of white
men, columns 4 to 6 pertain to black men, and columns 7 to 9 pool the samples and report
coefficients on X variables interacted with a race dummy variable (black=1) to highlight differences.
Models in columns 3, 6, and 9 include destination-state fixed effects. The presence of state fixed
effects limits the set of coefficients we can identify to those that vary across individuals within
potential destinations, which means we cannot identify most of the X variables’ coefficients in this
specification. Nonetheless, because distance and migrant-stock variables do vary within destination
categories across individuals, their coefficients are identified, and the specification provides a useful
robustness check.
        A positive logit coefficient indicates that an increase in that variable for a particular state is
associated with an increase the probability of migration to that state. Interpreting the magnitude of
logit coefficients is not straightforward, and therefore we present some counterfactuals to illustrate
the results. For reference, marginal effects for each variable for each destination state and race are
reported in the Online Appendix (Tables A6 and A7).
        Across all specifications and both races, migrants responded negatively to distance and
positively to pre-existing stocks of migrants from the same state. Black migrants appear to have been

                                                                                                             18
more strongly deterred by distance than whites, and this difference is statistically significant even
when controlling for pre-existing migrant stocks and destination fixed effects. The relatively strong
response to distance may reflect southern blacks’ lower average levels of wealth and educational
attainment, which could affect their access to information about distant opportunities and their ability
to finance long-distance travel. It is noteworthy, however, that splitting the black sample into literate
and illiterate men (in 1910) does not reveal a statistically significant difference in their migration
behavior with respect to distance (Online Appendix, Table A8), nor does splitting the sample by
1910 home-ownership status. For perspective on the magnitude of the distance coefficients in
columns 1 and 4 of Table 4, the results suggest that if southern migrants had been located one
standard deviation farther away from Ohio (all else held constant), then the share of migrants going
to Ohio would have declined by 3 percentage points for whites and 4 percentage points for blacks,
relative to a base of 8 and 7 percentage points respectively.14 The average “marginal effect” over all
destination states (equally weighted) is -1.15 percentage points for whites and -1.43 points for blacks
for a one-standard deviation change in log distance. The empirical importance of distance suggests
that improvements in transportation and information networks played an important role in facilitating
internal migration and integrating U.S. labor markets.
        The black and white coefficients on the pre-existing migrant stock variable are positive,
similar across specifications, and not statistically different from one another in columns 7 to 9. Thus,
responsiveness to migrant networks measured in this manner did not distinguish blacks’ migration
behavior from that of whites. However, blacks and whites’ pre-existing migrant stocks were
distributed differently. Therefore, networks might still have been an important determinant of
differences in flows.15 The results are fairly similar in specifications with destination fixed effects
(columns 3 and 6), suggesting that the migrant stock coefficients in other specifications are not
simply picking up destination-specific unobservables that had drawn previous migrants. For some

14
   These figures are calculated as the difference between the predicted share of migrants choosing Ohio in our
base regression and, given the parameter estimates, the predicted share choosing Ohio when distance to Ohio is
increased by one standard deviation (0.64 in log points). Since the model is non-linear, the effect is different
for every state.
15
   Stuart and Taylor (2014) use data on place of birth (1916-36 birth cohorts) and place of residence (after
1976) from Medicare and Social Security records to examine the role of local networks in black and white
inter-regional migration, primarily in the post-1940 period. They find that networks were more important for
black inter-regional migrants from the Deep South than for white inter-regional migrants from the Great Plains
or the Deep South. Although all results point towards networks being important for blacks, their results
contrast with ours regarding the comparison of blacks and whites. Whether the contrast is due to our relatively
rough proxy for networks or differences in econometric methods, sample coverage, definitions of migrants, or
changes over time will require more research. Also see Chay and Munshi (2012) on migration networks.



                                                                                                             19
states, especially those that had relatively small stocks of previous southern migrants, plausibly sized
changes in the migrant-stock variable do not imply large changes in the predicted flow of migrants
between 1910 and 1930. For example, in California, increasing the black migrant-stock variable’s
value to equal that of whites (within each state of origin) would raise California’s share of black
migrants from 1.8 to 1.9 percent. This accounts for little of the sizable racial difference in migration
to California (5 percentage points). However, in some other states, the implications of scaling up the
stock of previous migrants are larger. Increasing the black variable’s value to equal that of whites for
Texas would raise Texas’s share of black migrants from 3.8 to 7.8 percent (compared to a share of
10.3 percent for whites). The average marginal effect of a one standard-deviation change in pre-
existing migrant stock over all states is 0.45 percentage points for whites and 0.33 points for blacks.
        The results in columns 1 and 4 of Table 4 indicate that white and black migration was
strongly correlated with exogenous variation in aggregate labor demand growth. The positive
response to this variable is no great surprise because booming labor markets are commonly cited as
motivation for long-distance migration and, in general, large states tend to have large changes in
employment and, therefore, attract large shares of migrants. It is interesting that black men appear to
have been highly responsive to this signal relative to white men (column 7), perhaps reflecting the
relative importance of finding employment quickly upon arrival or extra weight given to this signal
as a correlate of changing employment opportunities for blacks specifically (that is, relative to
previous discriminatory practices in northern and western labor markets). For perspective on the
coefficient, if Tennessee’s labor demand had grown one standard deviation faster, the estimates
suggest that its share of black migrants would have increased by 5 percentage points relative to a
base of 5 percent; for whites, the predicted increase is 2 percentage points relative to a base of 4
percent. Given a one-standard-deviation change in labor demand, the average marginal effect over
all potential destination states is 1.10 percentage points for whites and 2.27 points for blacks.
        In columns 2, 5, and 8, we enter separate variables for manufacturing and agricultural
employment shares in 1910, rather than aggregate employment growth, to provide a different
perspective on the economic characteristics of states that may have influenced migration patterns.
Black men were inclined to select states with high levels of manufacturing employment, but
disinclined to select agricultural states, all else the same. It is notable that the coefficient on
manufacturing is positive even when a “Non-South” dummy variable, urban share, and average
income are included as independent variables in the specification. In other words, the positive
manufacturing coefficient for blacks suggests that the sector itself was an important determinant of
black migration patterns. For white men, both the manufacturing and agricultural coefficients are

                                                                                                       20
negative in column 2, suggesting that they tended to seek residence in states with higher levels of
employment in “other” industries, such as construction, mining, trade, transportation, and services.
         We also estimate models that distinguish among parts of the South that were differentially
affected by the spread of the boll weevil. We defined three groups of states depending on their
cotton intensity and the boll weevil’s time of arrival. We considered states “cotton intensive” if at
least 20 percent of total crop value came from cotton production in 1910 (Haines 2010). Based on
the map from Hunter and Coad (1923), we coded Texas, Arkansas, Louisiana, and Mississippi as
“early boll weevil” states. They were cotton intensive and received the boll weevil prior to our
window of observation (before 1910). We coded Alabama, Georgia, South Carolina, North Carolina,
and Oklahoma as “late boll weevil” states. They were cotton intensive and received the boll weevil
after 1910, within our window of observation. The third group is comprised of Tennessee, Kentucky,
Virginia, West Virginia, and Florida, which were not cotton intensive.16
         If the weevil imparted a long-lasting negative productivity shock that is not captured by
control variables and was not neutralized by cotton price changes or the redistribution of economic
activity to other crops or sectors, then we would expect to see less migration to cotton-intensive
places in our sample, ceteris paribus. We find that relative to states where cotton was less important
(the omitted category), blacks and whites were both less likely to move to cotton-intensive states
(with the exception of blacks in specification B), consistent with a negative and persistent
productivity shock across cotton-producing regions.17 Coefficients are more negative for the “late”
boll weevil states than for the “early” boll weevil states, but the differences between “late” and
“early” state groups are not statistically significant.
         In Table 4, the coefficients on the average income variable, which varies by destination state
and race, are positive but somewhat weaker in specifications that include controls for industrial
composition. The coefficients in columns 1 and 4 imply that a one-standard-deviation increase in
income in Pennsylvania would have raised its share of white migrants by about 2.6 percentage points
and its share of black migrants by about 1.7 percentage points, relative to base shares of 3 and 8
percent respectively. Columns 7 and 8 suggest that white migrants were more responsive than blacks
to variation in pre-war income. It is possible that whites, perhaps because they had higher levels of
16
   Results change only slightly if we shift Tennessee (where cotton was 15 percent of crop value) into the “late
boll weevil” category. Note that states were not neatly divided according to the boll weevil’s presence in
1910. Our coding is approximate and based on visual inspection of Hunter and Coad’s map (1923).
17
   Results are reported in the Online Appendix, Table A5. When the data are pooled, black-white differences in
attraction to the early and late boll weevil states are statistically insignificant. Results are qualitatively similar
when samples are restricted to 1910 farm residents (not shown).



                                                                                                                   21
education or access to more information, were better informed than blacks about wages in distant
states and, therefore, more responsive to the existing variation. But again, there is no evidence that
literate blacks were more responsive than illiterate blacks to variation in average income (Online
Appendix, Table A8). Another possibility is that the estimates of race-specific income circa 1910 are
a better proxy for whites’ expected earnings opportunities after 1910 than for blacks.
        For both white and black men in columns 1, 2, 4, and 5 of Table 4, the coefficient on the
Non-South variable is negative. Taken at face value, neither white nor black southern migrants were
especially attracted to the Non-South, conditional on other X variables.18 There is some concern that
controlling for pre-existing migrant stocks may absorb some of the attraction of regional amenities to
the extent that previous migrants responded to those same amenities. However, omitting the
migrant-stock variable from the specifications in columns 4 and 5 has little effect on the Non-South
coefficient for black migrants (not shown). In columns 7 and 8, the coefficients on Non-South
interacted with race (black=1) are not statistically significant, which again runs counter to some of
the literature’s emphasis on the idea that black migrants were especially motivated to escape the
South (beyond that which is embedded in the other X variables).19
        A more nuanced picture emerges by separately estimating coefficients for Northeast,
Midwest, and West (expressed relative to South), instead of just “Non-South.” Estimates of these
coefficients are located in Table 5. Black migrants were significantly more attracted to the Northeast
and Midwest than whites conditional on the other X variables, but they were significantly less likely
to move to the West. Thus, the “Non-South” variable in Table 4 tends to mask substantial
unexplained differences in blacks’ and whites’ choices of sub-region outside the South. These
residual differences in migration might reflect differences in labor market discrimination, civil
liberties, or social norms across northern and western locations after 1910, a hypothesis that merits
further research. In this interpretation, white migrants serve as a control group to capture the
influence of unobserved, race-neutral subregional characteristics, so that black-white differences
might then be interpreted as evidence of race-specific factors that vary over subregions. Note that for


18
   Vigdor (2002) finds that black migrants to cities were more likely to choose non-southern locations in the
1940 census cross-section. His conditional logit framework differs from ours in several ways. He uses census
cross-sections in 1940 and 1970, a different set of covariates, cities as destination choices, and a sample of
interstate migrants who resided in cities in 1940 (omitting interstate migrants who do not reside in cities).
19
   In a specification that expresses variables in levels rather than logs, the coefficients on “Non-South” are
consistent with the hypothesis that blacks were more attracted to the North than whites, but the coefficient for
blacks is still non-positive (the white coefficient is larger in magnitude and negative). See the Online
Appendix, Table A4.



                                                                                                              22
blacks (columns 3 and 4) the coefficients for Midwest and Northeast are still negative (expressed
relative to the South), but they are smaller in magnitude than the negative coefficients for whites.
        Returning to Table 4’s results, in columns 1 and 4, the coefficient on “urban” is negative for
white men but positive for black men. The coefficients suggest small effects on migration patterns.
Raising Mississippi’s urban share by one standard deviation (22 percentage points) would raise its
share of black migrants by only 0.5 percentage points, relative to a base of 3.5 percent. Because
urbanization is highly correlated with manufacturing and agricultural employment, we do not
emphasize the coefficient on urban in columns 2 and 5.
        In sum, the paper’s earlier analysis found that it was not possible to account for differences in
white and black migration patterns with the individuals’ background characteristics. Instead, the
different patterns must have resulted from differences in perceived opportunities and migration costs
across space (X) and differences in how men responded to those opportunities and costs (𝛾). To
gauge how much of the black-white differences in destination choice can be accounted for by
distance and migrant stock variables, we apply the parameters of the black conditional logit model
with destination fixed effects to all men in the sample (black and white), and then apply the
parameters of the white model to all men.20 This yields two counterfactual distributions of migrants
with the same underlying X values. The dissimilarity index of the two counterfactual distributions is
approximately 0.20, substantially less than the unadjusted index value of 0.28. From this
perspective, equalizing the migrant-stock and distance variables across black and white migrants
reduces the dissimilarity index by about one fourth. The remaining differences in migration patterns
reflect differences in race-specific wages across states (absorbed by race-specific destination fixed
effects) and model coefficients (the  𝛾’s), which are difficult to interpret definitively. Nonetheless,
we believe that additional research could isolate and test specific hypotheses and interpretations (for
example, whether the pattern of black-white differences in destination fixed effects correlates with a
measure of local labor market discrimination, perhaps following Sundstrom 2007).

                                               CONCLUSIONS
        To study migration patterns during the first decades of the Great Migration, we built a new
dataset of over 26,000 southern men that we linked from the 1910 to the 1930 census. The dataset is

20
  Note that distance and migrant stock variables differ by race across destinations, and their coefficients are
identified in the conditional logit model with destination fixed effects. The “all white” and “all black”
counterfactuals are estimated with a pooled sample, thus the same underlying distributions of distance and
migrant stock variables.



                                                                                                                  23
novel in that it observes the same men before and after the start of the Great Migration. The scope of
analysis is novel in that it includes both white and black southerners and it incorporates information
about those who moved within the South as well as those who left the region.
        First, we study selection into inter-state and inter-regional migration. There is some evidence
of positive selection into migration among both whites and blacks in terms of occupational status,
and it is clear that non-farm residents (in 1910) were more likely to move across state and regional
lines than farm residents. Overall, however, the differences between migrants and non-migrants
were small within race categories, even for those moving inter-regionally. In this sense, participation
in internal migration by southern men was remarkably widespread after 1910.
        Second, we examine migration patterns between origins and destinations and ask whether
individual and local background characteristics account for differences in black and white migration
choices. Although there was substantial overlap in black and white migrants’ choices of destinations,
there were also notable differences. In OLS and multinomial logit frameworks, we find that on net a
surprisingly small amount of the black-white differences in migration patterns can be accounted for
by differences in background characteristics. In other words, to the extent that black and white
migration patterns differed, those differences were not, in general, a simple reflection of where the
men started geographically or their personal circumstances circa 1910. Rather, observationally
similar men made different location choices depending on their race.
        Third, given the findings above, we measure black and white migrants’ responsiveness to
variation in the characteristics of potential destinations. Black and white men were similarly
responsive to pre-existing migrant stocks, but black men were more deterred by distance than whites,
more attracted to manufacturing centers, and more responsive to variation in labor demand growth.
Conditional on the potential destination states’ characteristics, we find only mixed evidence that
black migrants were more likely than whites to leave the South. There is, however, interesting
variation across areas outside the South, with blacks sorting more strongly than whites into the
Midwest and Northeast and whites sorting more strongly into the West, conditional on state
characteristics. Variation in the characteristics of potential destinations, such as distance and pre-
existing stocks, can account for a non-trivial portion of the black-white dissimilarity index in
destinations, but a larger portion is associated with racial differences in responsiveness to the
destinations’ characteristics and in destination fixed effects. These differences invite further
research.
        The paper’s findings rely heavily on the linked dataset of census records for southern males
from 1910 to 1930, and it is our hope that other scholars will find this dataset to be useful. We have

                                                                                                         24
endeavored to keep the analyses focused on a set of fundamental questions about the nature of
internal migration in this period, but it is not difficult to imagine extensions that look at finer levels
of geographic detail, exploit more information on the migrants’ outcomes, or link to other historical
or administrative datasets. More generally, it is clear that this kind of dataset holds great promise for
historical research on migration (for example, Ferrie 2005, Abramitzky et al. 2012), and new
technologies and initiatives are likely to make them far more common and accessible in the future.
Lying just beyond the scope of this paper, there is much that remains to be learned about migration
during the Great Depression, the growth of black ghettos and suburbanization of whites, the
interaction of migration and intergenerational mobility, and much more. All these topics are ripe for
reassessment as new datasets that follow individuals over time are brought to light.


                                               APPENDIX

         For each male, age 0 to 40, in the 1910 IPUMS sample (Ruggles et al. 2010), we ran two
searches in the 1930 census manuscripts: one with exact last name and one with a SOUNDEX
version of the last name. In both cases, we conditioned on the first three letters of the first name (or
less, if shorter than three letters in length), exact state of birth, age within two years, race and gender.
We counted any individual with a unique match in the exact last name or SOUNDEX search as a
successful match. We then eliminated all duplicate matches (that is, two different individuals in 1910
linked to the same individual in the 1930 census).
         From the 1930 census, we extracted detailed location of residence as well as information on
literacy, employment, occupation, industry, and veteran status. Individual and household-level
variables available in the linked sample are detailed in Table A1. The availability of some variables
depends on an individual’s age at the time of enumeration. And although some variables are
technically “available” for all age groups, they are practically missing (e.g., occupation for 0-9 year
olds).
         The characteristics of males in the matched sample are compared to those of the entire 1910
IPUMS sample in Table 1 of the main text. There, we concluded that the differences are not
economically significant and are unlikely to bias the study of migration patterns. Here, we also
provide estimates of a linear probability model of being found in 1930 (out of those in the original
IPUMS sample), conditional on observable 1910 characteristics. The results are located in Table A2
and largely echo the conclusions from Table 1 in the main text. Specifically, we estimate the
probability of being located in the 1930 manuscripts separately by race and three age categories: 0-9,



                                                                                                             25
10-18, and 19 to 40. The age groupings correspond to the availability of school attendance, literacy,
and farming occupation information in the 1910 data. We observe a slightly increased probability of
being found for literate individuals, farmers, and residents of West Virginia, conclusions highlighted
in discussion of Table 1, as well. On the other hand, home ownership is a statistically insignificant
predictor of sample inclusion conditional on other factors observable in 1910. In each case, the
enhanced probability of being located in the 1930 manuscripts is small: 0.78-2.4 percentage points in
the case of literacy and 2.0-2.9 percentage points for farming occupations. Residence in West
Virginia in 1910 raises the probability of being located in 1930 by as much as 5.5 percentage points,
but for a relatively small number of men (6.2% of white males in the sample lived in West Virginia
in 1910).
        In Table A3, we compare the 1930 characteristics of inter-regional migrants in the linked
sample to those in the 1930 IPUMS sample. The matched sample’s inter-regional migrants are
individuals with a southern state of residence in 1910 and a non-southern residence in 1930. IPUMS
migrants, on the other hand, are individuals with a southern place of birth and a non-southern
residence in 1930. Thus, individuals who migrated out of the South prior to 1910 will not be
included in our sample but will be included in the IPUMS sample. We cannot correct for these
fundamental sample differences.21 Nonetheless, the differences across samples are small even when
they are statistically significant. The most notable exception is the share of white migrants in owner-
occupied housing in the linked sample (38%) relative to the 1930 cross-sectional sample (33%). As
mentioned in the main text, when comparing destination shares in the linked and cross-sectional
datasets (separately for black and white inter-state migrants), the correlation in migration patterns is
high. With inter-regional destination states grouped as in Table A3, the correlation is over 0.98 for
both whites and blacks.




21
  We focus on inter-regional migrants for comparison because the relatively high rate of within-South migration
prior to 1910 is likely to confound comparisons for within-South migrants across the datasets.



                                                                                                                  26
               Table A1: Variable Availability, 1910-1930 Linked Sample of Census Records

                                                                         1910                               1930
                                                       Ages 0-9      Ages 10-18*      Ages 19-40           All Ages

Race                                                       x               x                x                   x
Owner-Occupied Housing Status                              x               x                x                   x
Value of Home/Rent Paid                                    x               x                x                   x
Farm Residence Status                                      x               x                x                   x
School Attendance                                          x               x                x                   x
Literacy                                                                   x                x                   x
Marital Status                                                             x                x                   x
City Population                                            x               x                x                   x
Industry of Employment                                     x               x                x                   x
Father’s Industry of Employment                            x               x
Occupation                                                 x               x                x                   x
Father’s Occupation                                        x               x
Employment Status                                          x               x                x                   x
Father’s Employment Status                                 x               x
State of Residence                                         x               x                x                   x
County of Residence                                        x               x                x                   x
State of Birth                                             x               x                x                   x
Age                                                        x               x                x                   x
Veteran Status                                                                                                  x
 Notes and sources: The table reports data availability for 1910 and 1930 observations in the linked sample of census
 records, which is described at length in the paper’s main text. Some variables (e,g, father’s industry of employment
 in 1930) are occasionally available for unchecked age groups, but usually such information is missing. (Observing
 father’s industry would require co-residence with father in 1930.) In general, variable definitions are consistent
 across years. We use the IPUMS variable occ1950 and ind1950 for 1910 and coded the 1930 variables into the same
 categories. *For marital status in this column, availability pertains to ages 12 -18, rather than 10-18.




                                                                                                                    27
        Table A2: Estimated Probability of Inclusion in Matched Sample, By Age Group and Race
                                       White Males                            Black Males

                           Age 0 to 9      10 to 18        19 to 40       Age 0 to 9    10 to 18        19 to 40
Homeownership              -0.0091         -0.017          -0.0014        0.0012        0.0044          0.001
                           (0.005)         (0.007)         (0.004)        (0.010)       (0.010)         (0.007)
School Attendance                          0.0143                                       -0.0061
                                           (0.009)                                      (0.011)
Literacy                                   0.024***        0.017***                     0.0078*         0.0081***
                                           (0.004)         (0.003)                      (0.004)         (0.003)
City Population
     City pop. <=25,000    0.0094          -0.016          0.0028         0.0056        -0.016          0.0041
                           (0.008)         (0.010)         (0.007)        (0.012)       (0.014)         (0.010)
      City pop. >25,000    0.0077          0.0019          0.0050         0.018         0.016           0.0067
                           (0.012)         (0.013)         (0.008)        (0.018)       (0.020)         (0.012)
Father is Farmer/          0.020***        0.010           0.029***       0.0044        -0.0041         0.029***
Individual is Farmer†      (0.007)         (0.009)         (0.006)        (0.010)       (0.013)         (0.009)
State of Residence (1910)
                Alabama 0.011               0.014            -0.003       -0.025        0.0063           -0.038
                            (0.015)         (0.018)          (0.014)      (0.021)       (0.023)          (0.018)
                Arkansas 0.015              0.036*           0.0017       -0.0033       -0.014           -0.016
                            (0.015)         (0.018)          (0.014)      (0.025)       (0.028)          (0.022)
                  Florida -0.014            0.028            -0.042**     -0.017        -0.0050          -0.0053
                            (0.021)         (0.025)          (0.018)      (0.028)       (0.031)          (0.022)
                 Georgia -0.0021            0.017            -0.0012      -0.013        -0.012           -0.027
                            (0.014)         (0.017)          (0.013)      (0.020)       (0.022)          (0.017)
               Kentucky -0.035*             -0.0098          -0.014       -0.0088       0.0025           -0.036
                            (0.016)         (0.019)          (0.014)      (0.022)       (0.024)          (0.019)
               Louisiana -0.00010           0.025            -0.0058      0.016         0.005            -0.017
                            (0.017)         (0.020)          (0.016)      (0.020)       (0.023)          (0.018)
             Mississippi 0.016              0.021            0.014        0.031         0.037            -0.0090
                            (0.014)         (0.017)          (0.013)      (0.022)       (0.024)          (0.02)
          North Carolina -0.036*            0.0011           0.010        0.0019        0.0063           -0.012
                            (0.018)         (0.021)          (0.016)      (0.020)       (0.023)          (0.019)
              Oklahoma -0.012               0.011            -0.018       -0.035        -0.00070         -0.0026
                            (0.012)         (0.015)          (0.011)      (0.021)       (0.024)          (0.018)
          South Carolina 0.011              0.0072           0.016        0.040         0.029            -0.0044
                            (0.013)         (0.016)          (0.012)      (0.032)       (0.034)          (0.025)
              Tennessee 0.019               0.017            -0.025       -0.027        0.016            -0.026
                            (0.014)         (0.017)          (0.013)      (0.038)       (0.044)          (0.032)
                    Texas 0.026             0.0046           -0.016       -0.0061       0.016            -0.022
                            (0.014)         (0.016)          (0.013)      (0.025)       (0.027)          (0.021)
           West Virginia 0.028              0.055***         0.041***     0.068         -0.11            -0.037
                            (0.015)         (0.018)          (0.013)      (0.060)       (0.069)          (0.037)
N                           25,791          19,565           32,716       9,214         7,331            11,665
Adjusted R2                 0.0060          0.0032           0.0031       0.0017        0.00050          0.0025
Notes and sources: The linked sample is created by taking the 1910 IPUMS sample of white and black men, age 0-
40, who reside in the South and searching for these men in the 1930 census manuscripts. The text contains details
on sample construction. The IPUMS data are from Ruggles et al. (2010). Omitted categories in the regressions are
No City (City Population) and Virginia (State of Residence). The model also includes age fixed effects (not shown).



                                                                                                                  28
Statistical significance is indicated at the 99% (***), 97.5% (**) and 95% (*) level. †Indicator for father’s farming
occupation (ages 0-18) or self (ages 19+).




                                                                                                                    29
     Table A3: Comparison of Linked and Full Samples, Southern Migrants to the Non-South, 1930

                                             Black migrants                            White migrants

                                       Linked      IPUMS                          Linked     IPUMS
                                     sample of      sample                      sample of     sample
                                      migrants        of                         migrants       of
                                      (resided     migrants                      (resided    migrants
                                      in South     (born in    p-value of        in South    (born in   p-value of
                                      in 1910)      South)     difference        in 1910)     South)    difference
Distribution of state of residence (1930)
   Arizona                                 0.01       <0.01          0.77           0.02        0.03          0.12
   California                              0.03        0.04          0.81           0.14        0.15          0.36
   Colorado                                0.00       <0.01          0.05           0.02        0.02          0.38
   Connecticut/Rhode Island                0.01        0.01          0.57          <0.01       <0.01          0.79
   Delaware                               <0.01       <0.01          0.93          <0.01       <0.01          0.56
   D.C./Maryland                           0.07        0.08          0.33           0.05        0.06          0.08
   Idaho/Oregon/Washington                <0.01       <0.01          0.42           0.05        0.05          0.23
   Illinois                                0.14        0.15          0.75           0.09        0.08          0.71
   Indiana                                 0.04        0.04          0.63           0.06        0.07          0.00
   Iowa                                    0.01        0.00          0.13           0.01        0.01          0.60
   Kansas                                  0.02        0.02          0.88           0.05        0.03          0.00
   Maine/NH/Vermont                        0.00        0.00            ---         <0.01       <0.01          0.03
   Massachusetts                          <0.01       <0.01          0.08           0.01        0.01          0.51
   Michigan                                0.10        0.08          0.10           0.06        0.06          0.30
   Minnesota                              <0.01       <0.01          0.40           0.01       <0.01          0.04
   Missouri                                0.08        0.06          0.03           0.08        0.07          0.07
   Montana/Wyoming                         0.00       <0.01          0.53           0.01        0.01          0.96
   Nebraska                               <0.01       <0.01          0.78           0.01        0.01          0.31
   Nevada/Utah                            <0.01        0.00          0.02          <0.01        0.01          0.33
   New Jersey                              0.06        0.08          0.10           0.02        0.02          0.69
   New Mexico                             <0.01       <0.01          0.32           0.03        0.03          0.41
   New York                                0.12        0.13          0.45           0.05        0.04          0.24
   North/South Dakota                      0.00       <0.01          0.66          <0.01       <0.01          0.60
   Ohio                                    0.14        0.12          0.14           0.17        0.17          0.95
   Pennsylvania                            0.15        0.17          0.08           0.06        0.05          0.54
   Wisconsin                               0.01       <0.01          0.25           0.01        0.01          0.12
Personal characteristics (1930)
   Mean age                                35.7        36.3          0.05            36.4        36.8         0.06
   In owner-occupied housing               0.18        0.18          0.71            0.38        0.33         0.00
   Literate                                0.95        0.95          0.94            0.99        0.99         0.17
   Veteran                                 0.13        0.11          0.12            0.18        0.18         0.44
Job characteristics (1930)
   Farmer                                  0.01        0.01          0.06            0.09        0.09         0.10
   Employed                                0.84        0.82          0.06            0.91        0.90         0.10
Notes and sources: The IPUMS sample includes all southern-born black males observed outside of the South in the
1930 census. The text contains more details on the construction of the linked sample of census records. Values of


                                                                                                               30
“0.00” in the above table represent true zeroes. Values between 0.00 and 0.05 are represented as “<0.01”. Data are
from Ruggles et al. (2010) and the linked dataset of census records described in the text.




                                                                                                                 31
                                          REFERENCES
Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson. “Europe’s Tired, Poor, Huddled
Masses: Self-Selection and Economic Outcomes in the Age of Mass Migration.” American Economic
Review 102, 5 (2012): 1832-56.
Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson. “Have the Poor Always Been Less
Likely to Migrate? Evidence from Inheritance Practices during the Age of Mass Migration.” Journal
of Development Economics 102 (2013): 2-14.
Akers, Elmer. Southern Whites in Detroit. Ann Arbor, MI: Manuscript, 1936.
Atack, Jeremy. “On the Use of Geographic Information Systems in Economic History: The American
Transportation Revolution Revisited.” Journal of Economic History 73, 2 (2013): 313-38.
Bartik, Timothy J. Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies? Kalamazoo:
W.E. Upjohn Institute, 1991.
Berry, Chad. Southern Migrants, Northern Exiles. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 2000.
Baker, Richard B. “From the Field to the Classroom: The Boll Weevil’s Impact on Education in
Rural Georgia.” Unpublished working paper, 2015.
Black, Dan A., Seth G. Sanders, Evan J. Taylor, and Lowell J. Taylor. “The Impact of the Great
Migration on Mortality of African-Americans: Evidence from the Deep South.” American Economic
Review 105, 2 (2015): 477-503.
Bodnar, John, Roger Simon, and Michael P. Weber. Lives of Their Own: Black, Italians, and Poles in
Pittsburgh, 1900-1960. Champaign, IL: University of Illinois Press, 1982.
Borjas, George J., Stephen G. Bronars, and Stephen J. Trejo. “Self Selection and Internal Migration
in the United States.” Journal of Urban Economics 32, 2 (1992): 159-85.
Boustan, Leah Platt. “Competition in the Promised Land: Black Migration and Racial Wage
Convergence in the North, 1940-1970.” Journal of Economic History 69, 3 (2009): 755-82.
Boustan, Leah Platt, Matthew E. Kahn, and Paul W. Rhode. “Moving to Higher Ground: Migration
Responses to Natural Disasters in the Early Twentieth Century.” American Economic Review:
Papers and Proceedings 102, 3 (2012): 238-44.
Carrington, William J., Enrica Detragiache, and Tara Vishwanath. “Migration with Endogenous
Moving Costs.” American Economic Review 86, 4 (1996): 909-30.
Chay, Kenneth, and Kaivan Munshi. “Black Networks after Emancipation: Evidence from
Recronstruction and the Great Migration.” Unpublished working paper, 2012.
Collins, William J. “When the Tide Turned: Immigration and the Delay of the Great Black
Migration.” Journal of Economic History 57, 3 (1997): 607-32.
Collins, William J. “African-American Economic Mobility in the 1940s: A Portrait from the Palmer
Survey.” Journal of Economic History 60, 3 (2000): 756-81.
Collins, William J. and Robert A. Margo. “Historical Perspectives on Racial Differences in
Schooling in the United States.” In Handbook of the Economics of Education: Volume 1, edited by E.
Hanushek and F. Welch, 107-54. New York, NY: North-Holland, 2006.
Collins, William J. and Marianne H. Wanamaker. “Selection and Income Gains in the Great
Migration of African Americans.” American Economic Journal: Applied 6, 1 (2014): 220-52.


                                                                                                   32
Davies, Paul S., Michael J. Greenwood, and Haizheng Li. “A Conditional Logit Approach to U.S.
State-to-State Migration.” Journal of Regional Science 41, 2 (2001): 337-60.
Easterlin, Richard A. “Interregional Differences in Per Capita Income, Population, and Total Income,
1840-1950.” In Trends in the American Economy in the Nineteenth Century, 73-140. National
Bureau of Economic Research, Conference on Research in Income and Wealth. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1960.
Ferrie, Joseph P. “History Lessons: The End of American Exceptionalism? Mobility in the United
States since 1850.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 19, 3 (2005): 199-215.
Foote, Christopher L., Warren C. Whatley, and Gavin Wright. “Arbitraging a Discriminatory Labor
Market: Black Workers at the Ford Motor Company, 1918-1947.” Journal of Labor Economics 21, 3
(2003): 493-532.
Gregory, James N. The Southern Diaspora: How the Great Migrations of Black and White
Southerners Transformed America. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2005.
Grogger, Jeffrey and Gordon H. Hanson. “Income Maximization and the Selection and Sorting of
International Migrants.” Journal of Development Economics 95, 1 (2011): 42-57.
Grossman, James R. Land of Hope: Chicago, Black Southerners, and the Great Migration. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1989.
Haines, Michael R. and Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research. Historical,
Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United States, 1790-2002 [computer file].
ICPSR02896-v3. Ann Arbor, MI: ICPSR [distributor], 2010.
Hatton, Timothy J. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. The Age of Mass Migration: Causes and Economic
Impact. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998.
Hatton, Timothy J. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. “What Fundamentals Drive World Migration?”
NBER Working Paper 9159. Cambridge, MA, 2002.
Higgs, Robert. “The Boll Weevil, the Cotton Economy, and Black Migration 1910-1930.”
Agricultural History 50, 2 (1976): 335-50.
Higgs, Robert. “Accumulation of Property by Southern Blacks Before World War I.” American
Economic Review 72, 4 (1982): 725-37.
Hornbeck, Richard and Suresh Naidu. “When the Levee Breaks: Black Migration and Economic
Development in the South.” American Economic Review 104, 3 (2014): 963-90.
Hunter W. D. and B. R. Coade. The Boll Weevil Problem: Farmers’ Bulletin No. 1329. Washington,
D.C.: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 1923.
Killian, Lewis M. “The Adjustment of Southern White Migrants to Northern Urban Norms.” Social
Forces 32, 1 (1953): 66-69.
Kousser, J. Morgan. The Shaping of Southern Politics: Suffrage Restriction and the Establishment of
the One-party South, 1880-1910. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1974.
Lange, Fabian, Alan L. Olmstead, and Paul W. Rhode. “The Impact of the Boll-Weevil 1892-1932.”
Journal of Economic History 69, 3 (2009): 685-718.
Lewis, Edward E. The Mobility of the Negro: A Study in the American Labor Supply. New York:
Columbia University Press, 1931.



                                                                                                    33
Logan, Trevon. “Health, Human Capital and African American Migration before 1910.”
Explorations in Economic History 46, 2 (2009): 169-85.
Long, Jason and Joseph Ferrie. “Intergenerational Occupational Mobility in Britain and the U.S.
Since 1850.” American Economic Review 103, 4 (2013): 1109-37.
Maloney, Thomas N. “Migration and Economic Opportunity in the 1910s: New Evidence on
African-American Occupational Mobility in the North.” Explorations in Economic History 38, 1
(2001): 147-65.
Margo, Robert A. “Accumulation of Property by Southern Blacks Before World War I: Comment
and Further Evidence.” American Economic Review 74, 4 (1984): 768-76.
Margo, Robert A. Race and Schooling in the South 1880-1950: An Economic History. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1990.
McFadden, Daniel. “Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behavior.” In Frontiers in
Econometrics, edited by P. Zarembka, 105-42. New York: Academic Press, 1974.
McKenzie, David and Hillel Rapoport. “Network Effects and the Dynamics of Migration and
Inequality: Theory and Evidence from Mexico.” Journal of Development Economics 84, 1 (2007): 1-
24.
Mitchener, Kris James and Ian W. McLean. “U.S. Regional Growth and Convergence, 1880-1980.”
Journal of Economic History 59, 4 (1999): 1016-42.
Moretti, Enrico. “Local Labor Markets.” In Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 4B, edited by Orley
Ashenfelter and David Card, 1237-313. Amsterdam: North Holland, 2011.
Myrdal, Gunnar. An American Dilemma: The Negro Problem and Modern Democracy. New York:
Harper & Brothers Publishers, 1944.
Naidu, Suresh. “Recruitment Restrictions and Labor Markets: Evidence from the Postbellum U.S.
South.” Journal of Labor Economics 28, 2 (2010): 413-45.
Ransom, Roger L. and Richard Sutch. One Kind of Freedom: The Economic Consequences of
Emancipation, Second Edition. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2001 [1977].
Roback, Jennifer. “Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life.” Journal of Political Economy 90, 6
(1982): 1257-78.
Rosenbloom, Joshua L. Looking for Work, Searching for Workers: American Labor Markets during
Industrialization. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2002.
Roy, A. D. “Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings.” Oxford Economic Papers 3, 2 (1951):
135-46.
Ruggles, Steven, J. Trent Alexander, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Matthew B. Schroeder, and
Matthew Sobek. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0 [Machine-readable database].
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota, 2010.
Scroggs, Wm. O. “Interstate Migration of Negro Population.” Journal of Political Economy 25, 10
(1917): 1034-43.
Sjaastad, Larry A. “The Costs and Returns of Human Migration.” Journal of Political Economy 70,
October (1962): 80-93.




                                                                                                  34
StataCorp. “Post-Estimation Commands for Multinomial Logit.” Stata Base Reference Manual:
Release 11. College Station, TX: StataCorp LP, 2009.
Stuart, Bryan A. and Evan J. Taylor. “Social Interactions and Location Decisions: Evidence from
U.S. Mass Migration.” Unpublished working paper, 2014.
Sundstrom, William A. “The Geography of Wage Discrimination in the in the Pre-Civil Rights
South.” Journal of Economic History 67, 2 (2007): 410-44.
Thomas, Brinley. Migration and Economic Growth. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press,
1954.
Tolnay, Stewart E. “Educational Selection in the Migration of Southern Blacks, 1880-1990.” Social
Forces 77, 2 (1998): 487-514.
Tolnay, Stewart E. and E.M. Beck. “Black Flight: Lethal Violence and the Great Migration, 1900 to
1930.” Social Science History 14, 3 (1990): 347-70.
Tolnay, Stewart E., Katherine Curtis White, Kyle D. Crowder, and Robert M. Adelman. “Distances
Traveled During the ‘Great Migration’: An Analysis of Racial Differences Among Male Migrants.”
Social Science History 29, 4 (2005): 523-48.
U.S. Department of Agriculture. Public Roads Mileage and Revenues in the Southern States, 1914.
USDA Bulletin No. 387, Office of Public Roads and Rural Engineering. Washington, DC, 1917.
U.S. Department of Labor. Negro Migration in 1916-17. Washington D.C.: GPO, 1919.
Vickery, William E. The Economics of Negro Migration, 1900-1960. New York, NY: Arno Press,
1977.
Vigdor, Jacob L. “The Pursuit of Opportunity: Explaining Selective Black Migration.” Journal of
Urban Economics 51, 3 (2002): 391-417.
Whatley, Warren. “Getting a Foot in the Door: ‘Learning,’ State Dependence, and the Racial
Integration of Firms.” Journal of Economic History 50, 1 (1990): 43-66.
Wilkerson, Isabel. The Warmth of Other Suns: The Epic Story of America’s Great Migration. New
York, NY: Random House, 2010.
Woodward, C. Vann. The Strange Career of Jim Crow, Third Revised Edition. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1974. (Original work published 1955.)
Wozniak, Abigail. “Are College Graduates More Responsive to Distant Labor Market
Opportunities?” Journal of Human Resources 45, 4 (2010): 944-70.
Wright, Gavin. Old South, New South: Revolutions in the Southern Economy since the Civil War.
New York, NY: Basic Books, 1986.




                                                                                                  35
         Table 1: Comparison of Linked and Base Sample Characteristics, Southern Males 1910

                                           White Males                             Black Males
                                    Matched Full              p-value       Matched Full               p-value
                                    sample   IPUMS            of diff.      sample    IPUMS            of diff.
                                             sample                                   sample
Panel A: Distribution of state of residence (percentages)
  Alabama                         6.5         6.5             1.00          9.8          10.3          0.23
  Arkansas                        6.4         6.1             0.09          5.0          4.9           0.61
  Florida                         2.1         2.3             0.09          4.0          3.8           0.43
  Georgia                         7.5         7.5             0.99          13.5         13.9          0.48
  Kentucky                        10.8        10.4            0.14          3.2          3.0           0.44
  Louisiana                       4.7         5.2             0.01          8.2          8.7           0.26
  Mississippi                     4.2         4.1             0.74          12.9         12.2          0.14
  North Carolina                  7.9         7.6             0.14          8.9          8.0           0.03
  Oklahoma                        8.0         8.1             0.84          1.5          1.7           0.31
  South Carolina                  3.5         3.6             0.28          11.0         10.2          0.10
  Tennessee                       8.6         8.6             0.86          5.3          5.5           0.54
  Texas                           16.2        16.8            0.02          9.3          9.0           0.60
  Virginia                        6.9         7.0             0.57          6.8          7.9           0.01
  West Virginia                   6.9         6.2             0.00          0.7          1.0           0.04
Panel B: Personal characteristics (percent, except age variables)
 Attending school (age 0-20) 82.9             81.8        0.04              62.3         62.4          0.94
 In owner-occupied housing       52.4         48.8        0.00              22.4         23.9          0.05
 Literate (age 10-20)            91.8         90.1        0.00              62.4         62.6          0.86
 Literate (age 10-40)            92.6         91.2        0.00              65.7         65.6          0.91
 Father is farmer (age 0-20)     60.9         59.0        0.00              63.4         63.3          0.30
 1910 city population
       Not in city               70.0         69.4        0.09              74.5         73.2          0.05
       City pop. <=25,000        20.4         20.8        0.25              16.3         17.3          0.07
       City pop. >25,000         9.6          9.8         0.31              9.2          9.5           0.53
  Min age                        0            0           --                0            0             --
  Max age                        40           40          --                40           40            --
  Median age                     16           15          0.00              16           15            0.08
  Mean age                       17.1         16.8        0.01              17.0         16.7          0.06
  St. dev.                       11.1         11.5        0.00              11.2         11.3          0.50
Notes and sources: The linked sample is created by taking the 1910 IPUMS sample of white and black males, age 0-
40, who reside in the South and searching for these men in the 1930 census manuscripts. The text and Appendix
describe sample construction in detail. The IPUMS data are from Ruggles et al. (2010). A variance-ratio test is used
to compare sample standard deviations and a Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed-rank test is used to compare sample
medians. All others comparison of means are done with standard t-tests.




                                                                                                                  36
               Table 2: Selection into 1910-1930 Migration on Basis of 1910 Characteristics

                                                White males                                   Black males
                                                Difference                                   Difference
                                   Sample                       Adjusted        Sample                        Adjusted
                                                 vs. non-                                     vs. non-
                                   average                      difference      average                       difference
                                                 migrants                                     migrants
 A. Literacy rate (N=14,761 white and 3,702 black)
    Non-migrants                 0.924                                           0.650
    Within-South migrants        0.925        0.001              -0.000          0.653          0.003            -0.008
                                             (0.006)             (0.006)                       (0.021)          (0.026)
    Inter-regional migrants      0.936       0.013**             -0.004          0.684         0.035*            0.008
                                             (0.006)             (0.006)                       (0.020)          (0.024)

 B. School attendance rate (age 6 to 15) (N=6,587/1,705)
    Non-migrants                  0.828                                          0.613
    Within-South migrants         0.823         -0.006           -0.005          0.612          -0.006           -0.013
                                               (0.013)           (0.015)                       (0.031)          (0.046)
    Inter-regional migrants       0.838         0.010            -0.003          0.655          0.043            0.035
                                               (0.013)           (0.015)                       (0.026)          (0.036)
 C. Occupation income score, in hundreds of 1950 dollars (N=11,960/3,259)
    Non-migrants                 16.3                                     12.3
    Within-South migrants        17.3        1.00***       0.80***        13.4                 1.07***           0.53*
                                             (0.325)       (0.292)                             (0.384)          (0.315)
    Inter-regional migrants      18.2        1.86***       0.81***        13.2                  0.85**           0.65*
                                             (0.379)       (0.285)                             (0.357)          (0.357)
 D. Occupation education score (N=11,834/3,239)
    Non-migrants                10.77                                             7.90
    Within-South migrants       10.87       0.104**               0.079           8.04         0.131**           0.082
                                            (0.047)              (0.048)                       (0.054)          (0.067)
    Inter-regional migrants     10.92      0.148***               0.062           8.02        0.120***           0.025
                                            (0.053)              (0.050)                       (0.041)          (0.042)
 E. Farm origin (N=21,367/5,462)
    Non-migrants                0.610                                            0.592
    Within-South migrants       0.530           -0.080***       -0.083***        0.521        -0.071***         -0.029
                                                  (0.012)         (0.009)                       (0.021)        (0.019)
     Inter-regional migrants        0.500        -0.11***       -0.071***        0.502        -0.090***        -0.033*
                                                  (0.013)         (0.010)                       (0.019)        (0.017)
 F. Homeownership rate (N=21,367/5,462)
    Non-migrants              0.543                                              0.222
    Within-South migrants     0.472     -0.071***               -0.056***        0.200          -0.022           -0.004
                                          (0.010)                 (0.010)                      (0.015)          (0.016)
    Inter-regional migrants   0.505     -0.038***               -0.037***        0.251         0.030**           0.007
                                          (0.011)                 (0.010)                      (0.015)          (0.016)
Notes and sources: “Adjusted differences” are regression coefficients that measure differences in 1910 characteristics
among inter-regional, intra-region, and non-migrant categories (where non-migrants are the base category), controlling for
age and county-of-origin fixed effects. Non-migrants are defined as residing in the same state in 1910 and 1930; within-
South migrants left their state-of-origin but remained in the South. Literacy is recorded for those who are age 10 and over;
school attendance is examined for 6 to 15 year olds. Occupational income and education scores are conditional on labor
force participation in 1910. The standard deviation for occupation income score (occupation education score) is 12.0 (1.75)
for whites and 7.3 (0.93) for blacks. Statistical significance is indicated at the 99% (***), 95% (**) and 90% (*) level.




                                                                                                                    37
Standard errors, clustered by county of origin, are in parentheses. Data are from the sample of linked census records, as
described in the text and Appendix.




                                                                                                                    38
                   Table 3: Migration Pattern Summary Statistics, by Race: 1910-1930
                                                                                     Unconditional       Conditional
                                                                                     Black-White         Black-White
                                                    White             Black           Difference          Difference
Panel A: Migration propensities (shares)
 No state-to-state migration                         0.65              0.61            -0.037***          -0.058***
                                                                                         (0.008)            (0.008)
 Within-South migrants                               0.18              0.19              0.0088           -0.018***
                                                                                         (0.006)            (0.006)
 Inter-regional migrants                             0.17              0.20             0.028***           0.075***
                                                                                         (0.006)            (0.006)
   South-to-Northeast migrants                         0.03              0.08           0.050***           0.050***
                                                                                         (0.003)            (0.003)
   South-to-Midwest migrants                           0.09              0.11           0.016***           0.049***
                                                                                         (0.005)            (0.005)
   South-to-West migrants                              0.05              0.01          -0.037***          -0.024***
                                                                                         (0.003)            (0.003)
Panel B: Geographic characteristics of migration
 Distance travelled (miles)
   Full sample                                219.8                    210.7               -9.06              3.67
                                                                                          (5.56)             (5.76)
   Within-South migrants                            321.8              266.0           -55.81***          -41.70***
                                                                                          (9.27)             (9.43)
   Inter-regional migrants                          695.7              576.7           -119.0***          -232.9***
                                                                                         (19.15)            (19.83)
 Change in latitude, home to destination (degrees)
  Full sample                                 0.69                     1.38              0.69***           0.60***
                                                                                         (0.046)           (0.047)
   Within-South migrants                             -0.09             0.47              0.56***           0.23***
                                                                                         (0.116)           (0.109)
   Inter-regional migrants                           3.96              6.20              2.23***           0.56***
                                                                                         (0.138)           (0.130)
 Change in longitude, home to destination (degrees)
  Full sample                                -0.90                     0.30              1.21***           1.09***
                                                                                         (0.102)           (0.106)
   Within-South migrants                             -0.51             0.20              0.71***           1.34***
                                                                                         (0.220)           (0.213)
   Inter-regional migrants                           -4.88             1.42              6.30***           6.20***
                                                                                         (0.472)           (0.540)
Notes and sources: The last column reports regressions coefficients that compare black and white migration patterns
controlling for state-of-origin fixed effects. The “full sample” includes non-migrants (defined as those who do not
leave the state-of-origin). South-to-Northeast includes 1930 residents of the Northeast census regions and also
Delaware, Maryland, and Washington, DC. Latitude differences are positive for south-to-north migration. Longitude
differences are positive for west-to-east migration. Standard errors, clustered by county of origin, are in parentheses.
Data are from the linked sample of census records, as described in the text and Appendix.




                                                                                                                     39
                                               Table 4: Migrant Sorting, Conditional Logit Coefficients
                                (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)             (5)            (6)             (7)            (8)
                                                                                                                     Pooled,         Pooled,              (9)
                                                                                                                 coefficients on   coefficients        Pooled,
                                                                                                                       race          on race       coefficients on
                              White          White        White         Black          Black          Black        interaction     interaction           race
                               (A)            (B)          (C)           (A)            (B)            (C)             (A)             (B)           interaction
                                                                                                                                                         (C)
Cost variables
   Log distance              -1.27***      -1.23***     -1.56***      -1.78***        -1.73***       -1.84***      -0.512***        -0.500***        -0.275***
                             (0.0278)      (0.0285)     (0.0339)      (0.0728)        (0.0738)       (0.0900)       (0.0759)         (0.0772)          (0.093)

   Migrant stock             0.193***      0.201***     0.182***      0.193***       0.198***        0.157***      -0.000375         -0.00330          -0.0256
                             (0.00799)     (0.00877)    (0.0137)      (0.0251)       (0.0252)        (0.0312)       (0.0257)         (0.0265)         (0.0336)

Labor market variables
   Log average income        1.40***        1.10***                   0.556***        0.0478                       -0.848***         -1.05***
                             (0.0859)       (0.0955)                   (0.139)        (0.180)                        (0.159)          (0.201)

   Log labor demand          0.436***                                 0.789***                                      0.352***
                             (0.0180)                                 (0.0377)                                      (0.0413)

   % Manufacturing                        -0.0259***                                 0.0101**                                       0.0360***
                                           (0.00284)                                 (0.00494)                                      (0.00560)

   % Agriculture                          -0.0271***                                -0.0281***                                      -0.000976
                                           (0.00280)                                 (0.00614)                                      (0.00667)

Region and other control variables
   Non-South                 -0.452***     -0.412***                  -0.415***       -0.291**                       0.0369           0.121
                              (0.0465)      (0.0474)                    (0.126)        (0.127)                       (0.134)         (0.136)

   Urban                   -0.00842***    -0.0151***                 0.00587***     -0.0111***                     0.0143***         0.00404
                             (0.00108)     (0.00172)                  (0.00182)      (0.00360)                     (0.00214)        (0.00400)

   Log population                          0.503***                                  0.879***                                       0.376***
                                           (0.0207)                                  (0.0396)                                       (0.0451)

Pseudo R2                      0.21            0.21         0.26           0.26            0.26           0.29           0.22           0.22             0.27
N                             7,498           7,498        7,498          2,114           2,114          2,114          9,612          9,612            9,612
Notes and sources: The sample includes inter-state migrants from the linked dataset of census records. Columns 1-3 include white men. Columns 4-6 include
black men. Columns 7-9 report interaction terms from a pooled regression with each regressor interacted with a race dummy (1=black). Specifications A and B

                                                                                                                                                           40
differ in the inclusion/exclusion of labor demand, log population, % manufacturing and % agriculture variables only. Specification C includes potential
destination state fixed effects. Distance refers to county of resident in 1910 to population-weighted center of each potential destination state. Migrant stock refers
to the share of persons born in state i who are residing in state j in 1910 (calculated with IPUMS, Ruggles et al. 2010). The labor demand variable follows Bartik
(1991) and uses 1910 industry composition at the state level to form a weighted average of national-level industry-specific growth rates. Log average income
combines information from Mitchener and McLean (1999) and the 1940 census microdata (Ruggles et al. 2010), as described in the text and Appendix. Non-
South equals one for destination states outside the South, including Maryland, Delaware, and Washington, DC. Percent of labor force in manufacturing and
agriculture, percent urban, and total population in 1910 are from Haines (2010). Standard errors, clustered at the county of origin, are in parentheses. Statistical
significance is indicated at the 99% (***), 95% (**) and 90% (*) level.




                                                                                                                                                                   41
            Table 5: Migrant Sorting, Conditional Logit Coefficients on Regional Indicators

                                       (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)
                                                                                           Pooled,      Pooled,
                                                                                         coefficients coefficients
                                                                                           on race      on race
                                     White         White        Black         Black      interaction interaction
                                      (A)           (B)          (A)           (B)           (A)          (B)

Regional Indicators (South is omitted)
  Northeast                    -1.70***         -1.87*** -1.02***          -1.14***      0.684***      0.733***
                               (0.100)          (0.105)  (0.172)           (0.177)       (0.200)       (0.208)
    Midwest                       -0.830***     -0.928*** -0.513***        -0.456***     0.318**       0.472***
                                  (0.0573)      (0.0622) (0.130)           (0.136)       (0.142)       (0.151)
    West                          1.054***      1.224*** -0.0580           0.381*        -1.11***      -0.843***
                                  (0.0807)      (0.0863) (0.215)           (0.219)       (0.227)       (0.233)
Pseudo R2                         0.24          0.24        0.26           0.26          0.25          0.25
                                  7,498         7,498       2,114          2,114         9,612         9,612
N
Notes and sources: See “notes and sources” to Table 4. All regressions also include corresponding covariates
reported in Table 4, with the exception of the “Non-South” indicator. Regional definitions follow standard census
regions with the exception of Delaware, Maryland, and Washington DC, which we classify as “Northeast” rather
than “South.”
                  Figure 1: Inter- and Intra-Regional Migration of Southern-Born Men,
                                 by Race and Birth Cohort, 1880 to 1960


                           White, Out of South                          Black, Out of South
             .4




             .3




             .2




             .1




             0
              1880 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1880 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960

                             Birth cohorts
                           White, Within1860s
                                         South             1870s        Black, Within
                                                                                1880sSouth
             .4                        1890s               1900s                1910s



             .3




             .2




             .1




             0
              1880 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1880 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960

                             Birth cohorts
                                       1860s               1870s                1880s
                                       1890s               1900s                1910s



Notes and sources: The figure plots the share of southern-born men in each cohort who reside outside their state of
birth, either “Out of South” or “Within South.” The South is defined as elsewhere in the paper (excluding Delaware,
Washington DC, and Maryland). Plots are based on state-of-birth and state-of-residence from the 1880-1960
IPUMS cross-sections (Ruggles et al. 2010). There is no sample for 1890. Cohorts are observed at most six times,
corresponding to ages 0-9, 10-19, and so on. Year of birth is defined as year-of-observation minus (age+1). The




                                                                                                                43
1860s birth cohort is first plotted for 1880 (at ages 10-19). Vertical lines at 1910 and 1930 indicate the timeframe
examined using the linked dataset.




                                                                                                                       44
               Figure 2: Distribution of Inter-state Migrants in Linked Sample, 1910-1930




Notes and sources: The maps show the share of inter-state migrants choosing each destination state, separately by
race. The shares add to 100 percent for each race category. Data are from the linked sample of census records, as
described in the text and Appendix.




                                                                                                                    45
