                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            ACADEMICS AS ECONOMIC ADVISERS:
                            GOLD, THE ‘BRAINS TRUST,’ AND FDR

                                           Sebastian Edwards

                                         Working Paper 21380
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21380


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2015




I am grateful to María Carolina Arteaga for her assistance. I thank Alvaro García Marín for his help
with the data. A previous version circulated as “Economists did not soil their hands: FDR, gold and
the ‘Brains Trust’.” I have benefited from comments by seminar participants at Duke’s Center for
the History of Political Economy. I thank the following colleagues for very helpful comments and
suggestions: Craufurd Goodwin, Barry Eichengreen, Michael Bordo, Eric Rauchway, Doug Irwin,
George Tavlas, and Brad De Long. As always, conversations with Ed Leamer have been illuminating.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Sebastian Edwards. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Academics as Economic Advisers: Gold, the ‘Brains Trust,’ and FDR
Sebastian Edwards
NBER Working Paper No. 21380
July 2015
JEL No. B2,B22,B26,E31,F31,N12,N22

                                             ABSTRACT

In this paper I revisit the period leading to the abandonment of the gold standard by the U.S. in 1933.
I analyze what the important players – and in particular FDR and the members of the advisory group
known as the “Brains Trust” – thought about the gold standard. My conclusion is that during the primary
and presidential campaigns, neither Roosevelt nor his inner circle had a strong view on gold or the
dollar. They did believe in the need to experiment with different policies in order to get the country
out of the slump. Tinkering with the value of the currency was a possible area for experimentation;
but it was an option with a relatively low priority, lower than implementing a public works program,
and passing a bill that included crops allotment. Until inauguration day FDR’s views on the gold standard
were ambivalent and noncommittal; he was neither a diehard fan of the system, nor was he a severe
critic.


Sebastian Edwards
UCLA Anderson Graduate School of Business
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C508
Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
sebastian.edwards@anderson.ucla.edu
                                                           1


         1. Introduction
The abandonment of the gold standard in April 1933 is generally considered to be the turning
point in the Great Depression.1 As a consequence of the devaluation of the dollar the country
experienced large capital inflows that were monetized by the Federal Reserve. This resulted in
higher credit and helped generate an expansion in aggregate demand and, more importantly, a
reduction in unemployment. The centrality of the devaluation is clearly captured in the following
two quotes. According to Romer (1992, p.781, emphasis added):

         “Monetary developments were a crucial source of the recovery of the U.S. economy from
         the Great Depression… The money supply grew rapidly in the mid- and late 1930s
         because of a huge unsterilized gold inflow to the United States… [T]he largest inflow
         occurred immediately following the revaluation of gold mandated by the Roosevelt
         administration in 1934.”
In his Nobel Lecture, Robert Mundell said that if the gold standard had been abandoned earlier,
world history would have changed drastically: “Had the price of gold been raised in the late
1920s… there would have been no Great Depression, no Nazi revolution and no World War II.”2

A number of historians and economists have argued that the devaluation was a deliberate policy
conceived during the 1932 primary campaign by FDR and his close advisers – a group known as
the “Brains Trust.”3 In his 1952 memoirs, former president Herbert Hoover made this point
clearly (Hoover 1952, p. 279):

         “Both Secretary [of the Treasury Ogden] Mills and I were confidentially informed early
         in the campaign that some of Mr. Roosevelt advisers proposed an abandonment of the
         gold standard or devaluation, and the substitution of a ‘managed currency’ as an overall
         method of raising prices and wages…”
The word “confidentially” is fundamental to understand the dynamics of this episode. If
devaluing the USD was indeed part of FDR’s economic program, he would not have publicized
it or discussed it with the press. The sheer hint of devaluation would have created a stampede and
financial panic, and a major drain in gold reserves. That is, if it was seriously considered, the

1
  As will be seen in Section 7 of this paper, it is not straightforward to determine the exact day the U.S. got off gold.
What is clear, however, is that the USD was officially devalued on January 31, 1934. For a discussion on possible
dates for having abandoned the standard, see Rauchway (2015).
2
  Mundell (2000), p. 230. Other scholars that have emphasized the role of the devaluation include Eichengreen and
Sachs (1986), Eichegreen (1992), Bernanke (2000), Bernanke and James (1991), Temin (1991), and Irwin (2012). It
is not possible to do justice to the copious literature on the Great Depression; see, however, Bordo, Choudhri and
Scwhartz (2002), Bordo and Kydland (1995), Meltzer (2003), De Long (1990), Obstfeld and Taylor (1997), and
Calomiris and Wheelock (1998). Friedman and Schwartz (1963) continues to be the basic study on monetary policy
during this period.
3
   See the discussion in Tugwell (1977), pp. 12-16. H. Parker Willis, the senior monetary theorist at Columbia’s
Business School was among those that believed that the members of the Brains Trust were “encouraging Roosevelt
in fantasies about easy money” and devaluation (See Tugwell 1977, p. 12). See also Kemmerer (1944), p. 123.
                                                        2


plan would have been kept under wraps, and would have been known only to a very small
number of people.

In this paper I revisit the period leading to the abandonment of convertibility, and I make an
effort to set the record straight on what the important players – and in particular FDR and the
members of the “Brains Trust” –thought about the gold standard. My conclusion is that during
the primary and the presidential campaigns, neither Roosevelt nor the members of his inner
circle had a strong view on gold or the dollar. They did believe in the need to experiment with
different policies in order to get the country out of the slump, and tinkering with the value of the
currency was a possible area for experimentation; but it was an option with a rather low priority,
certainly lower than implementing a massive public works program, creating the Civilian
Conservation Corps (CCC), and passing an agricultural bill that would implement a crops
allotment system.4 FDR close advisers believed that the gold standard generated cycles of
deflation and inflation, but there was no formal plan to implement a devaluation, neither were
there any studies that examined in detail what would be the possible consequences of abandoning
the gold standard.5 Moreover, my analysis of different archives, documents, diaries, memoranda,
correspondence, and memoirs suggests that FDR and his main advisers did not understand fully
how a devaluation of the dollar was supposed to work; in particular, there was no clear notion of
how it could affect trade flows. I also show that during the period under analysis – all of 1932
and the first two months of 1933 – George F. Warren, the Cornell professor who would achieve
great notoriety in the second half of 1933, had limited influence on Roosevelt’s thinking on the
currency.6 Until Inauguration Day (March 4th 1933) FDR’s views on the gold standard were
ambivalent and noncommittal; he was neither a diehard fan of the system, nor was he a severe
critic.

What adds interest to this story is that the U.S. was not “forced” off the gold standard, as the
United Kingdom in 1931. It is true that during the early months of 1933 there were substantial
gold outflows, and that much of this was the result of foreign withdrawals, but in April 1933 the
stock of monetary gold exceeded $4 billion, amply meeting the Federal Reserve’s “cover ratio.”
Moreover, the outflows were not the result of a negative current account. They responded to
uncertainty about how the incoming Administration was going to handle the banking crisis that



4
  See Lindley’s (1933) classical study of the first year of the Roosevelt administration. Barber (1996) provides an
analysis of the relationship between FDR and economists during his four administrations. His analysis shows that
professional economists joined the administration in larger numbers in 1934, after the dollar had been devalued.
See Steil (2013) for an analysis of Harry Drexler White’s contributions to policy design during this period.
5
  Irving Fisher believed in abandoning gold and adopting a “compensated dollar” but he was not close to Roosevelt
– see the detailed discussion below. George F. Warren, as will be discussed, did advocate a devaluation of the USD,
but, as noted below, until mid-1933 he didn’t have much influence over FDR. This changed in mid-July, as discussed
in Section 7. For a detailed discussion of Warren’s plan see, for example, Sumner (2001).
6
  As I show below, until July 1933 Warren met FDR only twice, and both times as part of large groups. I thank Eric
Rauchway for helping me clarify this issue.
                                                      3


had taken a turn for the worst during the weeks before inauguration.7 Political instability,
including the assassination attempt on the President-elect on February 15, also contributed to
uncertainty.8

My interest in this paper is on the period leading to the abandonment of the gold standard on
April 19 1933. For this reason, the many and important events that took place between that date
and the adoption of the Gold Act on January 30 1933 – including FDR’s gold buying program –
are only discussed briefly in Section 7.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 I provide some information on the
state of the economy in 1932. This serves as background for the analysis that follows. In Section
3 I deal with the formation of the Brains Trust, and I discuss the qualifications, experience and
training of its senior members. Section 4 concentrates on the primary and presidential
campaigns. I discuss the position of the Brains Trust with respect to gold, inflation, “reflation,”
prices, and the dollar. The analysis focuses on the “compensated dollar,” including Irving
Fisher’s distinction between policies aimed at “correction” and those geared at “safeguarding”
price stability. In Section 5 I discuss the nature of FDR’s assurances regarding the gold standard
during the campaign, and I analyze an important (but little known) speech delivered just days
before the election (the Covenant Speech). Section 6 deals with the transition, the preparations
for the London Economic and Monetary Conference, and with the question of whether to
“stabilize the exchanges.” Section 7 contains a brief rendition of what happened between March
4 1933 and January 31 1934, when the dollar was officially devalued. Section 8 has the
conclusions. There is also a Data Appendix.

        2. Background: The economy in 1932
From today’s perspective it is difficult to imagine the depth of the Great Depression. Between
1929 and 1932, Gross Domestic Product (GDP) measured in current dollars declined by almost
50%, production of durable goods, including automobiles, dropped by 81%, and the value of
agricultural production was down by an astonishing 63%. During the same period employment
declined by almost 50% – that is, one out of every two people that in July 1929 had a job had lost
it by March 1932 –, and the number of unemployed surpassed 15 million people. Those that still
had jobs were earning much less than during 1929: according to the Federal Reserve, average
wages had declined by 67%, and cash income in the rural sector had gone down by more than
70%.9




7
  See Wigmore (1987) and Temin and Wigmore (1990) for a discussion on foreigners’ role in the decline of gold
reserves.
8
  At the time the Twentieth Amendment had been passed but was not in effect yet. Thus, Roosevelt took over on
Sunday March 4, 1933.
9
  These data compare, for each variable, the peak and the trough throughout the cycle. The data are from
“Historical Statistics of the United States: Colonial Times to 1957,” and from Sachs (1934).
                                                         4


One of the most destructive aspects of the crisis was the generalized decline in prices. Between
mid-1929 and mid-1932 the index of wholesale prices went down by approximately 70%; during
the same period the cost of living declined by 40%. Things were particularly bad in the
agricultural sector, where the prices of some crops were so low that it was not worth it to harvest
them. Between 1919 and 1932 the average value of an acre of land for farming declined by
almost 60%; the average price of cattle dropped by 63%, and that of hogs by almost 80%. The
price of a dozen eggs went from 41.3 cents in 1919 to only 14.2 cents in 1933 – a decline of
66%. A bushel of wheat that in 1919 had commanded $1.53 was sold at 13.5 cents in 1932. And
the price of cotton, the commodity that Roosevelt would monitor throughout his first presidency,
experienced a decline from 35.34 cents per pound in 1919, to 6.52 cents in 1932 – a reduction of
82%.10

As soon as he was sworn in as President, FDR pointed out that he wanted to see a price of cotton
above 10 cents a pound by the end of 1933. In May, however, his goal became more ambitious,
and he announced that the objective of his economic policy was to return agricultural prices to
their 1926 level. For wheat that was $1.22 per bushel, while for cotton it meant 12.5 cents per
pound, almost double of what it had been during 1932. Throughout 1919-1932 prices of
manufactured goods and of inputs used in the agricultural sector also declined, but by much less
than those of agricultural commodities. 11

Figure 1 contains monthly data from1915 through 1940 for the quantity of money (M2), the
monetary base (or high powered money), the stock of monetary gold, and the multiplier (See the
Appendix for data sources). The April 1933-January 1934 period is shaded. The story that
emerges from these graphs is well known and forms part of the “received wisdom” on the Great
Depression.12 Although the monetary base increased by 18.3% between September 1929 and
April 1933, the stock of M2 money declined by 34.7% during the same period. The reason for
this drop was the collapse of the multiplier. Although the stock of monetary gold remained flat,
at approximately $4.1 billion, it experienced significant month to month variations in 1931,
1932, and early 1933. Figure 1 also shows the relaxation in monetary conditions after the
January 1934 (official) devaluation of the dollar. As may be seen, this was the result of the
increase in base money, which, in turn, was the consequence of large gold inflows; the multiplier
remained essentially flat. Finally, this figure also captures the change in monetary policy stance
in 1937, when the Federal Reserve began to sterilize monetary inflows.

In Figure 2 I present weekly data on the USD/Sterling and USD/French Franc spot exchange
rates between 1921 and 1936. Both rates are in the form of “dollars per unit of foreign currency.”


10
   As always, the base year makes a big difference in comparisons. In 1919, and mostly as a result of the Great War,
agricultural prices peaked around the world. That is why, as noted below, when talking about the goal for higher
prices FDR mentioned 1926, and not 1919.
11
   These data are from various tables in “Historical Statistics of the United Sates: Colonial Times to 1957,” U.S.
Department of Commerce, 1960.
12
   Friedman and Schwartz (1963). See, also, Meltzer (2003).
                                                           5


As before, the transition period between April 1933 and January 1934 is shaded. This figure
captures much of the history of global currencies during these years, including: (a) the return of
Britain to gold in May 1925; (b) the re-pegging of the Franc to gold (at a much depreciated level)
in late 1926; (c) the devaluation of the USD in April 1933; (d) the period of a “managed”
currency between April 1933 and January 1934; (e) the adoption of the new dollar gold parity in
January 1934; and (e) devaluation of the French Franc in October 1936.

In Figure 3 I present monthly data on the wholesale and consumer price indexes from 1910
through 1940. In Figure 4 I display data for four of the most important components of the
wholesale price index for 1923-1940. The data in Figure 3 show the rapid increase in prices
during the Great War, followed by a long and acute disinflation. It also confirms that prices
began to increase in 1933-34 after the U.S. abandoned the gold standard. The data in Figure 4, on
the other hand, show that the decline in prices was anything but uniform; farm and food prices
declined much more acutely than prices of manufactured goods, metals, and services.

         3. The Brains Trust
In March 1932, Sam Rosenman and Basil “Doc” O’Connor, two of Roosevelt’s long-time
associates, decided to put together a small group of advisers to assist the Governor gather
information for speeches and press conferences. The Democratic convention was approaching
quickly, and it looked as if FDR was going to get the two thirds of the votes required for the
nomination. During the earlier parts of the primary campaign Roosevelt had assailed the
Republican administration for letting the economic situation deteriorate markedly and for
allowing unemployment grow to 15 million people. What he hadn’t done, however, was make
many specific policy proposals on how to get the country out of the depression; most of his
statements were considered to be general and without much forward looking content. Now that
he had the largest number of delegates the press was scrutinizing every one of his statements.
They were looking for inconsistencies, platitudes, and knowledge gaps. Ernest Lindley, an
influential reporter who followed the campaign closely, and had written an early biography of
Roosevelt, thought that the candidate “ought to say more than he had been saying about what has
to be done.”13 Walter Lippmann wrote that FDR was “a pleasant man who, without any
important qualifications for the office, would very much like to be President.”14 And a New York
Times editorial compared President Hoover’s specific plans for getting out of the crisis with
what the editorialist considered to be the Governor’s collection of generalities: “The contrast
between the two leaps to the eye of every reader. Mr. Hoover is precise, concrete, positive.
Governor Roosevelt is indefinite, abstract, irresolute…”15

The first member recruited for the advisory group – which would soon be known as the “Brains
Trust” – was Raymond Moley, a 46 year old law professor at Columbia University. Trained as a
13
   Cited in Tugwell (1968), p.94. Lindley later wrote a classical book on the first year of the Roosevelt
administration. See Lindley (1933). See, also, Lindley (1931).
14
   The New York Herald Tribune, January 8, 1932.
15
   “Hoover and Roosevelt,” The New York Times, May 24, 1932.
                                                         6


political scientist, Moley was an expert in the administration of criminal justice. He had advised
Roosevelt on New York state judicial issues and had been Director of the state’s Commission on
the Administration of Justice. Moley was a gifted writer and had a remarkable capacity for
synthesizing complex issues into a few memorable phrases. Two of his many contributions to the
campaign were drafting the “Forgotten Man” speech and coming up with the term “New Deal.”16
The second member of the Brains Trust was Rexford G. Tugwell, a 41 year old economics
professor at Columbia. Tugwell earned a Ph.D. in economics from the University of
Pennsylvania, and was convinced that modern management techniques could bring generalized
prosperity. He believed, however, that if left on its own modern industry would fall in the traps
of “overproduction.” In order to avoid wasteful situations, some sort of planning was of essence.
After visiting the Soviet Union in the late 1920s he became an even stronger believer in the
merits of economic planning. Although he was a tenured professor at Columbia, he was not a
member of the Graduate School, and his teaching was confined to undergraduates. Years later he
would write that talking about economics with Roosevelt was like teaching the rudiments of the
discipline to college freshmen.17

The third recruit was Adolf A. Berle, Jr., also a professor of law at Columbia. He graduated from
Harvard Law School at age 21, and briefly worked at Louis D. Brandeis’s law firm in Boston. It
was from Brandeis that Berle got his dislike for large banks, trusts, and financiers. In contrast to
Brandeis, however, Berle thought that large corporations should be regulated, and not broken up
into smaller units. In 1919, at age 24, he was appointed Acting Chief of the Russian Section of
the American Delegation at Versailles. In 1932 he co-authored an influential book on the modern
corporation that showed, in a systematic way, how economic power had become concentrated in
America, and how difficult it was to govern companies when ownership and control were not in
the same hands. This book, which is still in print, provided one of the early treatments of what
we know today as the “principal agent problem” (Berle and Means, 1932).

As the presidential campaign unfolded, three new members joined the advisory group as
somewhat informal Brains Trust “associates”: Robert K. Straus, a graduate of Harvard’s
Business School, General Hugh Johnson, a lawyer that for many years had worked for financier
and FDR supporter Bernard M. Baruch, and Charles W. Taussig, a successful businessman that
in 1932 was President of the American Molasses Company and the Sucrest Corporation (he was
a nephew of respected Harvard professor and trade expert Frank Taussig). As the campaign
moved forward other professionals wrote memoranda and gathered information for the Brains
Trust. Although they were not full members of the mythical group, they made important


16
   On the origins of the Brains Trust and on how the group got its name see the memoires by Moley (1939) and
Tugwell (1968). For a historical analysis that puts the Brains Trust in context – and for a detailed timeline – see
Schlesinger (1957).
17
   Tugwell (1968), p. 73-82. In 1946 Tugwell joined the University of Chicago as chairman of its curriculum on
planning. During his tenure at Chicago he had very limited contact with the members of the famed Department of
Economics.
                                                         7


contributions to the campaign. The list included Joseph McGoldrick, James W. Angell, Schuyler
Wallace and Howard Lee McBain. Of these, only Angell was a professional economist. Not one
of these advisers was paid for his services.

Until that time no presidential candidate had ever conveyed a group of academics to provide
technical advice on campaign and policy issues.18 As a result, Raymond Moley and his associates
attracted immediate attention (and criticism) from the press. They were followed, and “reporters
besieged [them]… for a word”; at times they were treated with respect, while at others they were
ridiculed.19 FDR referred to them as “my privy council,” and in more than one occasion the press
called them, rather derisively, “the professors.” 20
When recruiting the Brains Trust, FDR was not interested in theoreticians or great thinkers. He
wanted smart people able to analyze and summarize vast amounts of data and put them in
historical perspective. He also wanted individuals with a literary bent that would help him find
the right turn of phrase and coin catchy terms for his speeches and public addresses. At some
level, then, it may be argued that the members of the Brains Trust came on board as “high-grade
research assistants.”21 It didn't take too much time, however, for the trio to prove its value and to
gain significant influence over the candidate. Even before the Democratic Convention in August
1932, they had helped FDR define key aspects of his program, including the agricultural
allotment system that was to become the core of the AAA. As Schlesinger (1957, p. 400) points
out, it was soon clear to FDR that Berle and Tugwell were “continuously fertile in ideas, and
neither was constrained by the past or intimidated by the future”. H.G. Wells made the following
remarks after meeting Berle: “He began to unfold a view of the world to me that seemed to
contain all I had ever learned and thought, but better arranged and closer to reality.”22

From early on, the meetings between the Brains Trust and FDR were productive and helped him
clarify concepts and draft policies. Schlesinger (1957 p. 401) described the gatherings in Albany
as follows: “Moley urbanely steering the discussion, Tugwell and Berle flashing ahead with their
ideas… and always Roosevelt, listening, interrupting, joking, needling, and cross-examining,
absorbing the ideas and turning them over in his mind.” According to Lindley (1933, p. 25)
when the Brains Trust met with the governor “the conversation roamed over the whole field of
economics: the causes of the depression, the methods [and policies] of relieving it, the main
points of attack.” After a few weeks in the job, it was clear to anyone that saw them in action –
18
   An interesting question – and one that is beyond the scope of this paper – is comparing the Brains Trust to “The
Inquiry,” the group set up by Woodrow Wilson in 1917 to advise him on how to handle the forthcoming peace
process. The Inquiry was much larger, and it mostly worked in secret. Many of its members were, as in the case of
the Brains Trust, associated to Columbia University.
19
   Time magazine, July 3, 1933, quoted by Tugwell (1952) in the introduction to his revised New Deal diaries in
Namorato (1992), p. 376.
20
   Moley (1939, p. 21-22).
21
   I thank Craufurd Goodwin for suggesting that I tackled the question of whether the Brains Trusters were
considered to be mere assistants, or policy advisers. The term “high-grade research assistant” is Lindley’s. See
Lindley (1933, p. 23).
22
   Quoted in Schlesinger (1957, p. 400).
                                                         8


including to the members of the press that followed the candidate anywhere he went – that the
members of the Brains Trust were not mere assistants; they were real – and very influential –
advisers to the Governor of New York and democratic frontrunner.

The Brains Trust sphere of influence, however, was strictly confined to ideas and policy advice;
they played no role in the purely political aspects of the campaign. Lindley (1933, p. 413)
consigns that one day after the Convention FDR made things clear to his inner circle: Jim Farley
was appointed national chairman and was in charge of getting him elected; Ray Moley was put in
charge of policies, issues, and speeches. Responsibilities were kept separate. Farley put things
succinctly to Moley: “Issues aren’t my business. They are yours and his [FDR’s]. You keep out
of mine, and I keep out of yours.”23

        4. Gold, the Brains Trust, and the 1932 primary and presidential campaigns
In early 1932 none of the three senior members of the Brains Trust had strong views on the gold
standard or on the value of the dollar. Rex Tugwell, the only professional economist in the
group, was not a monetary theorist, nor was he what we call today a macroeconomist. His fields
were industrial organization, planning – to which he sometimes referred to as “scientific
management” –, and agricultural economics.24 His knowledge on the subjects of money, gold
and exchanges came from the fact that in 1925 he had published (jointly with Thomas Munro
and Roy E. Stryker) a college textbook based on his lectures at Columbia’s famous year-long
course on Contemporary Civilization. In a 1952 introduction to his New Deal diaries Tugwell
wrote this regarding his (lack of) expertise on monetary policy:25
        “I told [the Governor] what I knew and thought which was little enough, except that I
        was prepared with a satisfactory precis, having written an elementary economic text
        whose relevant passages I could display.”

He then stated that although the textbook was co-authored, he had been in charge of the chapters
on money, gold, and exchanges. He then candidly added: “I wrote the financial and monetary
passages, having them checked by my friend and senior colleague at Columbia, E.E. Agger,
whose field it was.”26
In addition to American Economic Life, by 1933 Tugwell had written or edited eight books. In
none of them there is any mention of money, gold, or exchanges. Nor is there any reference to
these subjects in the five articles that he had published, until 1933, in some of the world’s top
academic journals in economics – the American Economic Review, and the Journal of Political
Economy.27 In later writings Tugwell came back to the fact that neither he nor the other members

23
   Lindley (1933, p. 413).
24
   See Tugwell’s 1952 introduction to his revised New Deal diaries. Reproduced in Namorato (1992, p. 291).
25
   Tugewell (1952), reproduced in Namorato (1992), p. 299.
26
   Tugewell (1952, footnote 8), reproduced in Namorato (1992, p. 299).
27
   Tugwell was a prolific writer, and many of his pieces were published in the popular press. In 1925 he became a
contributing editor of The New Republic. For his complete bibliography until 1959, see Sternsher (1964).
                                                 9


of the Brains Trust knew much about gold or exchanges: “We were not monetary theorists, and
we said so repeatedly.”28 Then he added that “I had told him [FDR] frankly that my own
knowledge of monetary theories came only from dealing with them as a part of the courses I
taught, and since the others were not more expert, I wondered why he discussed… [monetary
policy] with us.”29
        4.1 Rex Tugwell’s “American Economic Life”

In American Economic Life the issue of money and the gold standard is addressed for the first
time in section 6 of Chapter 16. It is then tackled again in Chapter 17. Chapter 16 is titled
“Industrial Coordination and Control,” and the section on monetary conditions is titled “Money,
Shifting Levels of Prices, and their Stabilization.” Chapter 17 is “The Relation of the Financial
Organization to Industry,” and is divided into six sections: “The Place of the Financial
Organization,” “Media of Exchange,” “Bank Credit,” “Money and Prices,” “The Collection and
Allocation of Prices,” and “The Old Banking System and the New.”

The most basic material is in Chapter 17, where a simple exposition of the quantity theory is
provided (pp. 335-337), the difference between money and credit is explained (pp. 334-335), and
the institutional organization of the Federal Reserve System is presented (pp. 339-342). The
discussion on gold is limited, and no detailed explanation of the mechanics of the gold standard
is provided. The chapter does mention that money is backed partially by bullion, but it doesn’t
delve into the relation between gold flows and the external accounts.

The discussion in Chapter 16 is rather more sophisticated, and concentrates on price variability
and uncertainty under the gold standard. Tugwell et. al. write (p. 319, emphasis added):

        “[O]ur dollars, being constituted as they are, shift in value. That is to say that although
        they are nominally based on a fixed standard, they actually will buy more goods at one
        time than at another... [I]t is a constant source of uncertainty that the dollar shrinks and
        expands in purchasing power… This may seem a strange phenomenon at first. But it is
        directly consequent upon the fact that we have adopted gold as the standard of money and
        that the dollar has been made equal in value to 23.22 grains of it.”
Uncertainty, the authors say, “makes it almost impossible to plan exactly any distance ahead.”
As a possible solution to this “constant source of uncertainty,” Tugwell and associates present
Irving Fisher’s “compensated dollar” proposal that would peg the value of the dollar to a basket
of goods (commodities) instead of pegging it to gold. They write: “This dollar… would at least
not forever shift in its power to purchase other commodities and would therefore bring about a
necessary stabilization of the general price level…”30 Tugwell and coauthors end the section
with a guarded endorsement of Fisher’s compensated dollar plan (p. 320):

28
   Tugwell (1968), p. 98.
29
   Tugwell (1968), p.165.
30
   Tugwell, Munro and Stryker (1925), p. 320.
                                                         10


         “We think that no one can say whether such a plan for stabilization would operate
         successfully. The arguments for it seem to outweigh those against it; and on the whole it
         seems to promise more than could possibly be lost by trying it.”

Eight years later Tugwell still believed that a compensated dollar could help generate a more
predictable environment that would allow firms plan ahead. In January 1933, as he worked with
the President-elect on how to deal with intergovernmental debts, the stabilization of the
exchanges, and the upcoming London Conference, Tugwell wrote in his diary: “My view is that
we ought to go off gold in international exchange so that we can manage [the currency]
internally.”31 And in his memoirs he stated that he “had long been converted to Fisher’s
commodity dollar – that is one having the general backing of many commodities besides gold.”32
         4.2. Irving Fisher’s “compensated dollar”

Irving Fisher first sketched the idea of a commodity dollar in his 1911 book The Purchasing
Power of Money.33 Two years later, in a long article in the Quarterly Journal of Economics, he
provided the first detailed presentation of the proposal. In the introductory paragraph to this
article Fisher says that the goal of the scheme “is rendering the gold standard more ‘stable’ by
virtually increasing the weight of the gold dollar so as to compensate for losses of purchasing
power.”34 Under the proposal, dollar coins would cease to circulate and would be replaced by a
“virtual gold dollar” with a variable gold content. Although Fisher’s discussion is based on the
hypothetical case when there are positive inflationary pressures – a situation that calls for
“increasing the weight of the gold dollar” –, the argument is perfectly symmetrical for a period
of deflationary forces; this would call for decreasing the weight of the gold dollar (or devaluing
the currency). The article has two lengthy appendixes. The first is aimed at dispelling the notion
that this system would encourage speculation in gold, and the second contains an example of
how the gold content of the dollar would have evolved between 1896 and 1911 under this
program.

In the years that followed, Fisher worked strenuously on refining the plan, and in 1920 he
published a 305 pages book titled Stabilizing the Dollar. The subtitle illustrates clearly Fisher’s
policy objectives: “A plan to stabilize the general price level without fixing individual prices.”
Most of the technical details are confined to an 88 page appendix (Appendix I). Appendix II is
devoted to answering the criticisms that the proposal had generated since its inception in 1911.
And in Appendix IV he lists a number of authors, some of them very prominent, whom
according to him were precursors of the compensated dollar idea. As time passed, Fisher was
able to convince some members of Congress to support his plan, and in late December 1922 the
House of Representatives Committee on Banking and Currency held hearings on a bill sponsored

31
   Tugewell (1933), reproduced in Namomoto (1992), p. 60.
32
   Tugwell (1968). P.98.
33
   The proposal is sketched in Chapter 13, Section 5. Fisher writes in the “Suggestions to Readers” that this chapter
will appeal mostly to “currency reformers.” The term “compensated dollar” doesn’t appear in this book.
34
   Fisher (1913, p. 213)
                                                            11


by Congressman T. Alan Goldsborough from Maryland. Although the bill never got out of
Committee, Fisher was not discouraged; he continued to work on the issue, and in his books The
Money Illusion (1928), and Booms and Depressions (1932) he devoted long passages to the
plan.35

Fisher criticism of the gold standard was based on the idea that since gold was both a medium of
exchange and a commodity, its value would permanently fluctuate.36 Let         be the relative price
of gold in terms of a basket of goods. This price will vary according to supply and demand
conditions. Supply is mostly determined by mineral availability, new discoveries, and mining
costs in different parts of the world. Total demand, on the other hand, depends on both the
demand for monetary uses and the demand for other purposes. Let be the price of gold in
dollars, or exchange rate. If is the price level – expressed as dollars per basket of goods – then,
it follows that:37

         (1)
If the dollar price of gold      is fixed at, say, $20.67 per ounce (as had been the case in the U.S.
since 1834), the price level would move in strict proportionality with the relative price of gold.
With a fixed , the variance of the price index would be,                  , a high number, given the
volatility of the relative prices of commodities.

Fisher’s proposal was that instead of being pegged to gold, the currency value should be linked
to a basket of goods, as a way of stabilizing the price level.38 A direct implication of this
proposal is that the price of gold in terms of dollars would cease to be a fixed number, and
would fluctuate frequently. At the conceptual level, the idea was that                         , in
which case, and according to equation (1),                : the price level would be stabilized.

Fisher’s concrete policy suggestion was to adjust according to the discrepancy between the
observed price index (with some lag) and the index in the base year:
         . In most of his examples the factor of proportionality , which he calls “adjustment,” is


35
   The Bill was designated as H.R. 11788, 67 Congress, Second Session. Congressman Goldsborough introduced a
slightly revised Bill in 1924, H.R. 494, 68 Congress, First Session. Its fate was the same as the first bill. The hearings
provide important information of Fisher’s own thinking and on how other economists, politicians and civic leaders
reacted to the proposal.
36
   This, of course, was not an original criticism. It had been made by a number of economists, including Jevons and
Marshall.
37
   This assumes that the baskets of goods in the right hand side and left hand side are the same. This is a specific
version of the purchasing power parity (PPP) proposition, and assumes a unitary pass-through. This equation does
not appear in Stabilizing the Dollar. Patinkin (1993) uses a very similar expression in his discussion of Fisher’s
currency reform proposals.
38
   Of course, Fisher realized that an alternative to his proposal was to stabilize the price of gold relative to goods,
and discusses this possibility in several of his writings. This could be attempted, for example, by the main
producers of gold who could form a cartel. In fact a proposal along these lines had been made by a South African
academic, Professor R.A. Lehfeldt. Controlling , however, was less practical than frequently adjusting .
                                                           12


set equal to one.39 Fisher suggested that the change in would be capped by a predetermined
value, say 1% per quarter. If, for instance,                     was 3%, it would then take three
quarters to go through the exchange rate adjustment required to stabilize the price level. An
important feature of Fisher’s proposal is that there would be a 1% spread between the selling and
buying (or mint) price of gold. He called this spread a “brassage,” and its purpose was to
discourage speculation.

In Appendix I of Stabilizing the Dollar, Fisher presented a diagram that showed the actual
evolution of the wholesale price level between 1990 and 1919, and the much more stable price
index that, according to him, would have prevailed if his scheme had been in place – see Figure
5. As may be seen, until 1915 the hypothetical price index shows remarkable stability in
comparison to actual prices – in fact, in every single month it is within 4% of parity. While in
January 1915, the observed index was almost 140, the simulated index is only 104. After the war,
and mostly due to the cap on the bi-monthly adjustment in the price of gold, the hypothetical
index increases significantly; but still, at its peak, in 1918, it is approximately one half of the
actual index.40

In Booms and Depression Fisher calls a large and once-and-for-all, adjustment in the price of
gold a “correction,” and he distinguishes it from the repeated manipulation of required to
maintain prices stability, which he calls “safeguard.” This is an important distinction: price
stability may be “safeguarded” through small and frequent changes in the price of gold , in a
way that is not very different from the “crawling peg” exchange rate regime adopted in the
1960’s, 1970s, and 1980s by a number of developing countries, including Brazil, Chile and
Colombia. It also has some similarities to the “exchange rate targeting” monetary policy
followed by the Monetary Authority of Singapore since the late 1990s. The key in all of these
cases is that the changes in are small – as noted, Fisher himself thought that an upper bound
for adjusting would be 2% per quarter –, and frequent.

A “correction” in contrast requires a (very) large change in ; if the situation is one of deflation,
this means a large devaluation. For instance, in late 1932, a straight forward application of
Fisher’s partial equilibrium simulation would have indicated that a price of gold of $32.25 was
needed in order to achieve the 1926 price index goal. Many economists, including Tugwell, as
we will see, were leery of devaluations of this magnitude. In particular, they thought that they
could unleash a sequence of repeated and increasingly large “corrections,” and a rapid
inflationary process. There were also unknown secondary effects, including possible changes in

39
   In every one of Fisher’s writings on the subject, and in all the criticism of his plan, the issue of what type of price
index is to be used (wholesale vs consumer, for instance) is very central. This was, to a large extent, due to the
newness of index numbers, and to the fact that many people didn’t understand and/or trust them.
40
   This simulation is based on a number of assumptions regarding the pass-through from to , the adjustment
lag, the width of the “brassage,” and the long run trend in the general price index. Fisher discusses them, as well as
alternative assumptions, in Section 9 of Appendix I of Stabilizing the Dollar (p. 183).
                                                          13


    that could feed back into prices in an unpredictable fashion. In addition, large changes in
could generate – as indeed they did after January 1934 – serious legal problems stemming from
the fact that the majority of private and public long term debts were indexed to the price of gold
through the so called “gold clause.” In a December 16 1932 letter to Ray Moley, Fisher wrote:
“Personally, I would like to cut loose from the gold standard, but it is not an easy matter both
because of the absolute necessity of gradually changing the price of gold and of the
complications of the gold clause contracts.”41

In Stabilizing the Dollar Fisher pointed out that his proposal was compatible with the quantity
theory, and he emphasized that the mechanism through which the compensated dollar would
impact the price level would be increases and decreases in the quantity of money. In later
writings he added that in order for the scheme to work properly it would require the intervention
(or, in his words, “the good will”) of the Federal Reserve.42 This point, which may seem almost
anecdotal, becomes important when Fisher’s compensated dollar is compared to George F.
Warren’s gold buying plan, the program that dominated America’s policy towards gold and the
dollar in the second half of 1933. After explaining their basic equation, Warren and Pearson
(1935, p. 94) write that their analysis “has no relationship to the formula         … No one of
[our]… factors correspond to any factor in               .”

Given Tugwell’s endorsement of the “compensated dollar,” it would have been logical for him to
seek Fisher’s advice or, at least, his comments on the monetary situation. This, however, was not
the case. On January 14 1933 – after the election and before inauguration – Tugwell wrote in his
diary:43

         “Irving Fisher has tried to see me a number of times this Summer and Fall. Except for
         one occasion… I have managed to avoid him. However, last night he caught me fairly at
         dinner at the Cosmos Club and proceeded to try to pump me as to my views and impress
         me with his. I do not believe in outright inflation. Our policy has been shaped toward a
         pragmatic handling of prices.”

And in his memoirs Tugwell points out the he became very concerned when he found out that
Fisher had “made his way uninvited to Albany and spent some time with Roosevelt.” Tugwell
thought that Fisher was overbearing. He wrote that the Yale professor had “become something of



41
   The Raymond Moley Papers, The Hoover Institution, Box 107.
42
   Notice that Fisher published his original 1913 paper before the creation of the Fed. Interestingly, in Appendix II
of Stabilizing the Dollar, Fisher argues that his proposal is so general that it should be supported by those that
believe in the quantity theory (as himself), and also by those that reject the quantity theory (pp. 215-217). On the
need to rely on “the good will” of the Federal Reserve, see the Hearings for Bill H.R. 1488, House of
Representatives, Congress of the United States (1922), p. 27-28. See, also, Fisher (1928), p. 192-193. See Patinkin
(1993) for a criticism of Fisher’s plan that centers on the tension between the compensated dollar and the
equation of exchange.
43
   Tugwell (1935), reproduced in Namorato (1932 p. 60).
                                                          14


a fanatic, and Roosevelt always enjoyed talking to fanatics. The impression this visit made [on
FDR] was one we knew would have consequences.”44

In addition, by 1932 Fisher’s reputation had been damaged by his prognostications about the
stock market. At a dinner organized by the Purchasing Agents Association on October 15 1929,
he said that stock prices had reached “what looks like a permanently high plateau.” He then took
issue with the views of Roger W. Babson, a successful financier and public man who had
predicted a significant market retreat. Fisher said “I do not feel that there will soon, if ever, be a
fifty or sixty-point break below present levels such as Mr. Babson has predicted.” Fisher ended
his allocution by saying that he expected “to see the stock market a good deal higher than it is
today, within a few months.”45

In the final analysis, when it came to actual policy – as opposed to conceptual or textbook
discussions –, the members of the Brains Trust wanted to avoid any measures that could generate
inflation, including a currency “correction” á la Fisher. In August of 1932, Adolf Berle wrote a
memo to the Governor where he said that “[a]s a matter of ideal economics a ‘managed
currency’ might be a good thing. But we have not got as yet the political machinery for that
purpose in sight. Witness the bonus agitation; and the several drives on the currency when there
is not a treasury surplus… The conclusion is that… [i]t is not the time to support inflation.” 46

Tugwell comes back to this point in the 1952 introduction to his revised New Deal diaries: “I
was an ardent believer in a stable currency and was therefore violently opposed to inflation as a
continuing policy.”47 And in his memoirs he recalled a conversation with FDR on monetary
policy: “I knew it was fashionable to speak [about]… ‘reflation’; that might not sound so
dangerous to some people, but we ought not to fool ourselves: it meant cheap money, no better
than greenbacks or freely coined silver.”48
         4.3 Experimentation as a policy principle

FDR was not as fearful about inflation as his advisers. If a moderate amount was required to
achieve his two fundamental goals – increasing agricultural prices and reducing unemployment –
he was willing to live with it.49 But he was certainly not an “inflationist” in the sense of William
Jennings Bryan. More than anything, Roosevelt was an “experimenter.” He liked to consider –
and sometimes try – different methods and tools, and see if they would produce the desired

44
   Tugwell (1968), p. 98.
45
   The New York Times, October 16, 1929.
46
   The “bonus agitation” refers to the demand by World War I veterans to be paid a promised bonus. Berle (1973),
p. 55-56.
47
   Tugwell (1935), reproduced in Namorato (1992) p. 301. Emphasis added.
48
   Tugwell (1968), p. 158.
49
   Lindley (1933, p. 36). Interestingly, in his 379-page biography of Roosevelt published in 1931, Lindley doesn’t
mention “inflation” or “gold” as policy issues or concerns. This is particularly telling, since the purpose of that book
was to explain to the American public the views and policy inclinations of the Governor of New York, a politician in
the ascendant who was likely to play a prominent role in the national scene.
                                                         15


outcome. “He liked to elaborate possibilities, play with alternatives, and suggest operating
improvements.”50 His desire to experiment came clearly out in the Oglethorpe Speech:51

         “The country needs and, unless I mistake its temper, the country demands bold, persistent
         experimentation. It is common sense to take a method and try it: If it fails, admit it
         frankly and try another. But above all, try something. The millions who are in want will
         not stand by silently forever while the things to satisfy their needs are within easy reach.”
This wish to experiment, of course, extended to monetary issues. In February 1933, Moley was
acting as an intermediary in negotiations between the President-elect and Senator Carter Glass, to
whom Roosevelt had offered the post of Secretary of the Treasury. Moley writes in his 1939
memoirs: “I didn’t know the exact nature of the President-elect’s monetary plans. But I knew his
experimental, tentative, and unorthodox temperament.”52

The idea of experimenting meant that most options had to be kept open and on the table for as
long as possible, and that no commitment was to be made with respect to one policy or another.
This was indeed the situation with respect to gold and the value of the dollar. Almost one month
before inauguration, Tugwell consigned the following thought to his diary, after attending a
policy meeting:53
         “The issue which seemed most important was the question of the maintenance of the gold
         standard… This is a question, of course, that is deeply troubling to the country as a
         whole… I have taken the position that the President [elect] ought not to commit himself
         too deeply on either side of it until the necessities of the case have a chance to dictate
         their own policies... [T]his matter ought to remain for the moment in a flexible state…
         [W]e ought to be prepared to consider all kinds of improvised ways of meeting the
         exigent situations which I feel we are apt to find ourselves in during the next few
         months.”

In the matter of what type of “experiments” to undertake once FDR was in power, Tugwell and
Berle called for planning and massive public works, even if it meant an unbalanced budget in the
short run. Both, however, were reluctant to use (a large) devaluation as a way of dealing with
deflation. In his 1968 memoir Tugwell writes about the discussions during the campaign on
future policies (Tugwell 1968, p. 97, emphasis added):



50
   Tugwell (1968), p. 58. Emphasis added.
51
   Delivered on May 22, 1932. The Public Papers and Addresses of Franklin D. Roosevelt,” Vol 1, 1938, pp. 639-647,
emphasis added. This speech was drafted by Ernest Lindley.
52
   Moley (1939), p. 121. Emphasis added.
53
   Emphasis added. Of course, not everyone agreed with this view. In the same entry to the diary Tugwell writes
that Walter Stewart, an adviser on issues related to intergovernmental debts, believed that FDR “ought to say
what his intention is with respect to this question very publicly.” The entry is from Tugwell’s 1933-35 diary, edited
by Namorato (1992, p. 77).
                                                         16


         “I argued… [that] there was no escaping the conclusion that if anything really remedial
         was to be done, it must start with a massive enlargement of buying power furnished by
         federal funds…. Such a program might have the same eventual result as the devaluation
         of the dollar being advocated by Irving Fisher…”

Tugwell was also insistent on the need for “relative prices” to be realigned. Deflation had moved
many prices out of line with each other, and planning of some sort – probably along the lines of
the future NRA – could bring prices in different sectors back into equilibrium. Only then, he
though, it made sense to talk about “reflation.” Just before the presidential election Tugwell told
the Governor that the “real trouble was lack of correspondence, of fair relationship among prices,
and a general lifting would not cure that.”54 In a paper written with R.S. Strauss in August 1932,
Tugwell came back to relative prices and their misalignment: “It is not the collapse of prices but
the collapse of some prices and the rigidity of others which has resulted in the present untenable
predicament.”55
The Democratic Party platform, drafted by A. Mitchell Palmer, who had been Attorney General
during the Wilson administration, also left open the possibility of currency experimentation. This
was done by the right choice of words: instead of pledging support for the gold standard, or an
unchanged value of the dollar, it talked about the need to maintain a policy of “sound money.”
Walter Lippmann referred to the platform as having Wilsonian values, and noted that it “starts
with a declaration for drastic economy and a sound currency. It does not contemplate a currency
inflation in the spirit of Bryanism or an expansion of governmental activity to create a new social
order.”56 On July 30 FDR reaffirmed the party’s policy stance on money in a radio address, when
he said: “A sound currency [is] to be preserved at all hazards, and an international monetary
conference called, on the invitation of our government, to consider the rehabilitation of silver and
related questions.”57

Tugwell, who in spite of not being a monetary theorist was a solid economist, was concerned that
maintaining “sound money,” however vague the term was, and remonetizing silver, were
contradictory policies.58

In his 1939 memoir Moley writes repeatedly of his efforts to push back on those who wanted
FDR to follow an “internationalist” policy and give the exchanges a priority during the first
months of the administration. He writes that he “would lean heavily on… Rex Tugwell and
Adolf Berle, who agreed with me in opposition to traditional internationalism…” And he adds
that it was important to let everyone know “that Roosevelt was likely to be no Herbert Hoover or

54
   Tugwell (1968, p 158), emphasis in the original. This view, Tugwell would recognize more than thirty years later,
neglected the fact that a general price level hike would help dilute the real value of debts, whose burden had
greatly increased since 1929 as a result of deflation (Tugwell 1968, p, 158-159).
55
   Raymond Moley’s papers, The Hoover Institution. Box 107.
56
   Lippman (1932), p. 309.
57
    “The Public Papers and Addresses of Franklin D. Roosevelt,” Vol 1, 1938, Item 132 p
58
   Tugwell (1968, p. 378).
                                                        17


Henry Stimson on foreign affairs. It was a warning that the New Deal rejected the point of view
of those who would make us parties to a political and economic alliance with England and
France…”59 As it turned out, and as it will be discussed in Section 6, it was not possible to keep
the new President away from international issues. Even before he was inaugurated he had to deal
with the intergovernmental debts crisis and had to decide what the American position would be
in the London Economic and Monetary Conference that had been conveyed for the first half of
1933.

Beatrice Bishop Berle, Adolf’s wife, kept a diary where she wrote down her views on what was
going on in the campaign, and where she tracked her husband’s thoughts and activities. Mrs.
Berle’s diary is, indeed, an invaluable source for unearthing the granularity of this intense period.
On October 16 1932 she wrote: “F.D.R. it seems… does not consider the gold standard as the
basis for all sound economic life. He is flirting with the idea of a managed currency.”60 A day
later, however, on October 17, Adolf Berle wrote a Memorandum for the files where he stated “I
gathered that the governor would rather stay on the gold standard than not. But he is not
undertaking to say now what the policy will be.”61

These two entries capture clearly the state of affairs in October 1932: no one knew – not even
FDR – what to do regarding the gold standard. Ideas were muddled and it seemed that anything
was possible. What is clear, however, is that contrary to what Herbert Hoover and others argued,
by Election Day there was no grand (or small, for that matter) plan to take the country off gold
and debase the dollar.

         5. The Covenant Speech
Herbert Hoover barely campaigned during the first nine months of 1932. He believed that his
post was at the White House, dealing with the nation’s many problems. He also believed that
voters would understand that the Depression was the result of external forces and that he had
done everything possible to ameliorate its effects. In October, there was a new wave of bank
failures and prices fell once again. Reelection didn’t look so clear after all, and the President
decided to campaign aggressively and to go on the attack.

In his memoirs Hoover wrote: “Secretary Mills and I determined to smoke out in the campaign
the whole devaluation-managed currency and fiat money issue.” On October 4th, in what he
considered to be his “campaign launch,” the President gave, in Des Moines, a speech, where he
explained the importance of the gold standard, stated how close the nation had been to a terminal
crisis, and remarked with vehemence that if Roosevelt was elected the country would move
towards a chaotic future. He said: “Going off the gold standard is no academic matter
[presumably a reference to ‘the professors’ of the Brains Trust].” He then referred to the gold
clause on contracts – a clause that Congress would repeal on June 5 1933 – and said “our people

59
   Moley (1939), p. 71 and pp. 78-79. Emphasis added.
60
   Berle (1973), p. 72.
61
   Berle (1973), p. 73.
                                                    18


have long insisted upon writing a large part of their long-run debtor documents as payable in
gold.” Hoover then stated that in February the nation had been two weeks away from being
unable to “hold to the gold standard… [and] to meet the demand of foreigners and our own
citizens for gold.” He then said that his “administration kept a cool head and rejected every
counsel of weakness and cowardice… We determined that we would stand up like men, and
render the credit of the United States government impregnable.”62

A few days later Hoover was back on the offensive and in Indianapolis he said that “the
Democratic candidate has yet to disavow the [idea]… to issue greenback currency…” And on
October 31st he said in New York that “fiat money is proposed by the Democratic party as a
potent measure for relief from the depression”. But this path, he warned, would produce “one of
the most tragic disasters to… the independence of man.”63
In view of these attacks, the Roosevelt campaign decided to follow a two part strategy. First,
Senator Carter Glass, a venerable figure who was known for his orthodoxy in monetary affairs,
was recruited to give a radio speech on the subject of gold and money. Second, it was decided
that the candidate himself would respond directly to Hoover’s attacks a few days before the
elections.

Glass’s speech was a masterful piece of oratory. It opened with references to Hans Christian
Andersen, Karl Grimm, and Aesop. The old Senator then moved to the history of monetary
policy in the United States, and to what he called Hoover’s “ingratitude” towards him and other
members of Congress that had stood by the President during the crisis. He argued that the
Democratic Party had always supported stability, gold, and low inflation. He then criticized
Secretary of the Treasury Ogden Mills for allowing thousands of banks to fail. He closed with a
reference to his party’s platform and he assured his listeners that the Roosevelt administration
would pursue the policies of sound money.64
Immediately after Hoover’s first attack, FDR’s advisers began to think of how the candidate
could best respond to the accusations that he was going to lead the country to inflation,
devaluation and perdition. Adolf Berle wrote in his diary:65

        “[We were drafting] a speech answering Hoover at Des Moines. We decided to eliminate
        the gold standard part, because the financial district already made that argument; also
        because the Governor said. ‘I do not want to commit to the gold standard. I haven’t the
        faintest idea whether we will be on the gold standard on March 4th or not; nobody can
        foresee where we shall be.’ I gather that the government would rather stay on the gold
        standard than not. But he is not undertaking to say now what the policy will be.”


62
   Hoover (1952), 280-283.
63
   Hoover (1952), 284.
64
   The complete speech was reproduced in the New York Times on November 2 1932, pp. 12-13.
65
   Berle (1973), p. 73. Emphasis added.
                                                         19


On November 4 1932, at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, Roosevelt replied to Hoover’s claim
that he was a “devaluationist.” He opened by praising Senator Carter Glass for his “magnificent
philippic.” He then forcefully denied that he would tinker with the value of gold. He said “the
President is seeing ‘rubber dollars.’ But that is only part of his campaign of fear.” The most
important part of FDR’s speech was reaffirming a point made by Senator Glass in his radio
address. The Senator had said that the fact that the government sold gold-denominated debt to
the American people implied a solemn promise, indeed a covenant that the debt would be
honored as issued. Roosevelt reiterated that this was indeed the case: there was a covenant
between each U.S. government and the American people. He then reminded his listeners that the
Democratic platform declared that sound currency had to be preserved at all hazards, and
repeated what he had said on June 30: “Sound money is an international necessity; not a
consideration for one nation alone. That is, I want to see sound money in all the world… Sound
money should be maintained at all regards.”66
To some, this speech is the ultimate example of a cunning politician’s doublespeak; he pledged
support to sound money and not to the gold standard. Further, when referring to the covenant
implicit in the gold clause, he said it in a way that could be interpreted as being a statement by
Senator Glass, and not by him. This, indeed, was Hoover’s interpretation. But there is another
reading. The Covenant Speech was sincere, and the decision to avoid a pledge to maintain the
gold standard was not because of the Governor’s maliciousness, but it reflected, as Adolf Berle
pointed out in his diary, FDR’s genuine doubts and hesitations. He plainly didn’t know what to
do. Be it as it may, it is interesting to note that five years later, when the first volumes of FDR
speeches and public papers were published, the Covenant Speech was not included. Indeed,
today it is difficult to find a complete version of what the candidate said on the verge of the
elections.

           6. The transition: Rumors and more rumors
On November 8 1932 Franklin Delano Roosevelt was elected president by a landslide. He had
promised to focus on domestic problems and to relegate international issues to a secondary
plane; he had also committed himself to follow “sound money” policies. For many, including for
Senator Carter Glass, this meant that the gold standard would be maintained at any cost. To
others, the gold issue continued to be on the table, and devaluing the dollar was not completely
ruled out; what to do would depend on the circumstances.

During the transition Ray Moley’s role and influence grew significantly. According to
Schlesinger (1957, p. 450), “Moley was now functioning more than ever as his [FDR’s] alter ego
– a whole cabinet rolled into one, trying to heard all major issues of both domestic and foreign
policy.” Some members of Congress, such as Huey Long, thought highly of him, while others
were concerned about his increasing power. As Schlesinger reports (1957, p. 451), Sam Rayburn
of Texas quipped “I hope we don’t have any god-damned Rasputin in this Administration.” In

66
     “Text of Governor’s Roosevelt Speech at Brooklyn Rally,” The New York Times, November 5, 1932, p. 10.
                                                     20


November 1932, Ray Moley’s transition from a “high-grade research assistant” to one of the
most influential presidential advisers in the history of the U.S. was complete.
        6.1 Views on gold in early 1933

During the transition, supporters and detractors of the gold standard continued to put pressure on
the President-elect. In a November 1932 memorandum, Tugwell wrote that “[w]hatever stance
Governor Roosevelt takes, he can be sure that half of the economists will be on his side, and half
will be against it. There can be no bitterer academic dispute than the dispute that has been raging
over what can and should be done about the fallen price level. The plain truth of the matter
seems to be that very little is really known about monetary problems, and opinion seems to be as
much matter of temperament and moral upbringing as of rational thought process.”67

Irving Fisher was not the only critic of the gold standard; there were many others. For example,
in 1922 a number of economists and practitioners submitted statements to the House of
Representative in support of the Goldsborough bill on the compensated dollar. One of the most
prominent was James Harvey Rogers, a Yale Professor who in the second half of 1933 would
become a key adviser to Roosevelt, and who would play a central role in drafting the Gold Act of
1934.68 In 1931 Rogers published a book titled America Weights her Gold, where he argued that
“among the most illuminating anomalies of our so-called advanced civilization is the gold
standard. To the rationally inclined, that the weight of anything should be chosen and continued
to be used as the standard of value is strange enough. That it should be the weight of a substance
which at the time of its choosing was usable only for ornament is even stranger.”69 Rogers met
once with FDR before inauguration. The conversation, nevertheless, did not go very far.
However, in the second half of 1933 Rogers would become an assiduous visitor to the White
House, and his views became increasingly influential.

At the political level, Henry Wallace, the editor of the popular publication on agricultural issues
Wallace’s Farmer, was a severe critic of the gold standard and a key supporter of the Fisher
plan. In 1933 Wallace became Secretary of Agriculture, and Rex Tugwell’s direct boss –
Tugwell was named Assistant Secretary in the Department of Agriculture. Henry Morgenthau,
Jr., a friend and neighbor of FDR in Dutchess County, who in March was appointed Governor of
the Farm Relief Administration and who eventually replaced an ailing Will Woodin as Secretary
of the Treasury, was also a critic of the gold standard. Morgenthau believed that uncoupling the
value of the dollar from gold was a requisite to increase agricultural prices and, in that way,
bring relief to farmers. His main concern was not gold itself, but relative prices; for him the goal
of policy – and a required step towards recovery – was increasing the price of agricultural
products relative to manufacturing goods. Morgenthau’s views had significant support in
Congress, especially among those that favored the remonetization of silver. The Committee on

67
   The memo was co-authored with Robert Strauss. Raymond Moley’s papers, The Hoover Institution. Box 107.
68
   In 1922 Rogers was at Cornell. In 1932 he was the Sterling Professor of Economics at Yale.
69
   Rogers (1931), p. 209.
                                                     21


the Nation, a private group financed by William Randolph Hearst and Henry Ford, among others,
also supported the abandonment of gold and financed a number of books and pamphlets on the
subject of gold.

But neither Fisher nor Rogers were the staunchest academic detractors of the traditional
monetary system. The title of the “chief critic” went to George F. Warren, who was very close to
Henry Morgenthau, and a member of the Committee on the Nation. This is what Herbert Hoover
wrote in his memoirs about Warren: “Roosevelt… had fallen into the hands of George F.
Warren, a professor of agronomy at Cornell University… His academic guarantee was that
devaluation…would raise prices and wages.” As it happened, starting in July of 1933 the United
States’ policies towards gold and the currency were highly influenced by Warren’s theory that
linked, in a rather mechanical way, the price of gold to the price of agricultural products.
According to his analysis – undertaken with statistician Frank A. Pearson, and based on centuries
of data examination –, if the price of gold (in terms of dollars) was increased through a
devaluation, there would be an almost instantaneous and proportional increase in agricultural
prices.70 Roosevelt, the experimentalist, the man who loved to épater le bourgeoise, the president
who had promised to take care of the forgotten man from the rural states, decided to try out
Warren’s theory during the second half of 1933. The move was controversial and created great
uncertainty. But not only that, its results were questionable and led Keynes to make his famous
quip that “the recent gyrations of the dollar have looked to me more like a gold standard on the
booze than the ideal managed currency of my dreams.”71

In early 1933, the gold standard also had a number of prominent defenders. For them it was
essential that the U.S. had a monetary system based on a metallic standard; this was the only way
to maintain stability and avoid future inflation. The best-known and respected supporter of gold
was Edwin W. Kemmerer, a banking professor at Princeton, who had helped found the central
banks of many Latin American countries and was known as the “Money Doctor.” A letter drafted
by him and signed by ten members of the Princeton faculty stated that maintaining the gold
standard was essential for regaining “public confidence and… [for] an orderly and enduring
economic recovery.”72

Other respected academics that supported the gold standard included Princeton’s Frank Fetter,
Columbia’s H. Parker Willis, and Harvard’s Joseph Schumpeter, who believed that there was
very little, if anything, that policymakers could do to fight the Great Depression; he was
particularly skeptical about the possibilities of an active monetary policy response. In 1933
Schumpeter wrote that there was a strong “presumption against the remedial measures which
work through money and credit… [P]olicies of this class are particularly apt to keep, and add to

70
   Warren and Pearson (1933, 1935). During 1933 and 1934, many criticisms of the Warren-Pearson theory were
published. See, for example, Pasvolsky (1933). For a recent defense of Warren’s theories and policy
recommendations, see Sumner (2013).
71
   The New York Times, December 31 1934.
72
   “Attack on Inflation made at Princeton,” The New York Times, December 7, 1933, p. 2.
                                                         22


maladjustment, and to produce additional trouble…” Schumpeter’s Harvard colleague S.E.
Harris had a similar view. In November 1933 – that is, after the gold embargo, but before the
Gold Act – he wrote that “the abandonment of the gold standard seems to have been a doubtful
measure.” He then added that the gold embargo “resulted in shattered confidence… [and] gave
the government the courage to experiment with fatal high cost policies…”73

The Federal Reserve, not surprisingly, strongly supported the gold standard. This was, in
particular, the view of the members of the Open Monetary Policy Committee (OMPC), the
instance in charge of making policy decisions, including changing the discount rate and deciding
on the timing and magnitude of open market operations. From time to time the Chairman of the
Board – Eugene Meyer until May 1933 – would make public pronouncements in support of the
monetary system that had prevailed since the early years of the Republic. George L. Harrison,
the President of the powerful New York Federal Reserve Bank, and a disciple of Benjamin
Strong, also supported the gold standard strongly, and made repeated statements to that effect.74
According to Metzler (2003, p. 450), “[George] Harrison, [Eugene] Black, [Adolph] Miller, and
others at the Federal Reserve… favored a gold standard policy for the United States.”75 As
pointed out by Friedman and Schwartz (1963) and Metzler (2003), among others, during most of
this period the Federal Reserve System was largely inactive – the exception being the purchases
of $ 1 billion of government paper during April-August 1932. This passive policy stance was, to
some extent, the consequence of the OMPC’s concern about safeguarding the nations gold
reserves – the so-called “free gold” problem.

A number of academics, including Jacob Viner, who in early 1934 would become an adviser to
the Treasury, had intermediate or mixed views regarding the gold standard. Viner thought that it
had become highly unstable, but he did not think that there was an obvious replacement for it. In
his 1932 Harris Lecture, Viner said that “it seems wise policy for countries still on the gold
standard to exploit more fully its possibilities of service before abandoning it as utterly
incorrigible. But the gold standard has rightly been put on the defensive, and only substantial
assurance of better performance in the future than in the past will entitle it a new lease of life.”76
Viner and many of his Chicago colleagues were highly pragmatic and critical of the way in

73
  This article was written in 1933 and published in 1933. See, Schumpter (1934), pp. 20-21. Emphasis in the
original. Harris would go on to become a convinced Keynesian. In 1936 he published the best book on the
devaluation published around that time.
74
   Between May 1933 and November 1934 Eugene Black was Chairman. From that date until January 1948 the
Chairman was Marriner Eccles.
75
   Awalt (1969, fn.4) points out that in June 1932, Adolph C. Miller, a Fed Board member since 1914, discussed the
possibility of putting in place a gold embargo. In both of his memoirs Moley says that the idea of using the “Trading
with the Enemy Act” as legal authority to declare the March 6 banking holiday originated with Miller. Interestingly,
during the first half of 1933 FDR met repeatedly – and often alone – with Miller. There is no evidence, however,
that he had any influence on FDR’s views on the gold standard or on the devaluation of the dollar. Indeed, and as
pointed out above, the general sense at the time was that Miller was a supporter of the standard. It should be
added that Tugwell doesn’t mention Miller in any of his memoirs or diaries. Berle mentions him only once, in
connection with the outbreak of World War II.
76
   Viner (1932), p. 39.
                                                      23


which the Federal Reserve had acted since the mid-1920s. They argued vehemently that a central
bank had to pursue a countercyclical policy in order to smooth economic activity through time,
and avoid major cyclical gyrations.77

Keynes was another critic of the traditional gold standard. Indeed, in 1924 he wrote what has
become a famous quote: “In truth, the gold standard is already a barbarous relic.”78 In A Tract on
Monetary Reform he also said that “in the modern world of paper currency and bank credit there
is no escape from a ‘managed’ currency, whether we wish it or not…”79 However, Keynes views
evolved, and by late 1932 they were much more nuanced. In 1933, he devoted Chapter V of The
Means to Prosperity to the possible adoption of a new gold standard and to the creation of an
“international note issue” linked to gold (a precursor of his Bancor from the 1940s).80 He wrote
that the “notes would be gold-notes and the participants would agree to accept them as the
equivalent of gold. This implies that the national currencies of each participant would stand in
some defined relationship to gold. It involves, that is to say, a qualified return to the gold
standard.”81

Keynes’ plan implied adopting a new type of monetary system (still based on gold) with greater
flexibility to undertake countercyclical policies. More importantly, his “international notes”
would greatly increase worldwide liquidity, and reduce central bankers’ apprehensions about
“free gold.” Keynes also believed that a once and for all depreciation of “national currencies” –
notice the plural – would help increase “loan-expenditure,” as central banks would be “be
satisfied with a smaller reserve of international money.”82 A key question, and one that would
dominate the London Conference in June 1933, was at what rates the new parities should be set
and currencies stabilized.

In many ways, Keynes 1933 proposal for a “qualified return to the gold standard” was similar to
James P. Warburg’s plan for a “modernized gold standard” – a proposal informally known to
FDR advisers as “the rabbit.” Warburg’s program, developed in early 1933 in preparation for the
London Economic and Monetary Conference, was based on the idea of reducing, in every




77
   See the “Recommendation of Twenty-Four Economists,” released on January 31, 1932. The complete
recommendation is reproduced as Appendix I in Wright (1932), pp. 161-163. In mid-1933 a smaller group of
Chicago economists made a more specific proposal for reforming the monetary system, which they sent to the
Secretary of Agriculture Henry A. Wallace. This scheme received the name of the “Chicago Plan.” Surprisingly,
Viner was not among the sponsors of this more detailed Chicago plan. See Tavlas (1997).
78
   Keynes (1924), p. 172.
79
   Keynes (1924), p. 170.
80
   Chapter IV contains Keynes proposal for the World Economic Conference. See the discussion below. This
pamphlet put together (somewhat) revised versions of four articles that Keynes published in The Times of London
in March 1933.
81
   Keynes (1933), p. 30. Emphasis added.
82
   Keynes (1933), p. 20
                                                       24


country, the gold “cover ratio.”83 The goal of both the Warburg and Keynes schemes was to
“relieve the anxieties of the world’s Central Banks, so as to free their hands to promote loan-
expenditure and thus raise prices and restore employment.”84 Interestingly, while in Keynes’
1924 Tract there are several laudatory references to Irving Fisher and his “compensated dollar”
plan, in the 1933 The Means to Prosperity there is no reference to either of them.
As the debate on gold dragged on in seminar rooms and in the pages of newspapers and
magazines, the members of the Brains Trust continued to labor away. Among other things they
had to deal with a deluge of letters to the President-elect with all type of proposals on what to do
to bring the crisis to an end. A large number of suggestions had to do with the agricultural sector;
other focused on the banking system, which looked increasingly weak; and yet other had to do
with the currency and with ways to bring deflation to an end. Some of the proposals made sense,
and some were based on fantasy. Among the most interesting suggestions in Ray Moley’s
archives is a letter from financier and FDR friend René Leon, who recommended looking into
the 1917 Trading with the Enemy Act to determine whether the President had the legal power to
limit gold outflows.85 Among the more intriguing suggestions was Irving Fisher’s proposal for
issuing indexed money.86
During these transitional months the members of the Brains Trust continued to be skeptical about
the merits of devaluation. In a comprehensive memorandum written to the President-elect on
January 26 1933 Adolf Berle wrote that “[t]he theory is that inflation of the currency [another
name for devaluation] will raise prices. Historically it does not do that for a long while.” He then
added that since a stepwise devaluation usually did not work, governments tried a second and a
third correction. “Generally, a third shot creates a panic; there is flight from the currency,
everybody wanting to turn their dollars into property… You [FDR] put it accurately when you
said that the activity resulting from inflation was the activity of fear.”87

On November 17 1932, FDR met with Professor H. Parker Willis, the monetary theorist from
Columbia who, as noted, was a strong supporter of the gold standard. The conversation dealt
with the international monetary system and the upcoming London Conference. Two days later,
Willis wrote to Senator Carter Glass, summarizing the meeting. His account captures, once more,
the fact that the President-elect did not have a clear idea on what he wanted to do about gold or
exchanges. Parker Willis wrote: “[T]he President-elect… discussed at some length various


83
   Warburg, the heir of a prominent banking family, was an unpaid adviser to the government during the
preparations for the London Conference. He attended the Conference as a member of the American delegation.
On his plan, see Warburg (1934), Appendix A, pp. 237-257.
84
   Keynes (1933), p. 30.
85
   Indeed, this piece of legislation was invoked on March 6 to declare the banking holiday, and declare a gold
embargo. Awalt (1969) and Moley (1939) have pointed out that Fed Board member Adolph Miller came up with
the idea independently.
86
   Raymond Moley’s papers, The Hoover Institution. Box 107.
87
   Raymond Moley’s papers, The Hoover Institution. Box 102.
                                                        25


problems concerning international relations [term then used for global economics issues]… but
he expressed very little definite opinion…”88
        6.2 The London Economic and Monetary Conference

On November 13, barely five days after the election, FDR was informed by President Hoover
that the U.S. was about to face a major international crisis. The intergovernmental debt
moratorium in place since mid-1931 had expired in June. On November 10 the United Kingdom
and France informed the U.S. government that they were unable to make the payment scheduled
for December 15, and requested an extension of the moratorium. In the weeks that followed the
President and the President-elect met two times, and their representatives began around the clock
discussions on what to do. Hoover wanted to appoint a committee formed by members of
Congress and of the administration to consider further debt relief. FDR, on the other hand,
believed that debtors had to make the payments as scheduled. Behind these positions were deep
disagreements on what the U.S. foreign policy ought to be. Hoover was an “internationalist,”
while FDR believed that his government had to give priority to domestic policies and get
recovery going before any substantial initiative regarding debt was launched.89
The intergovernmental debts problem was complicated by two additional issues moving in
parallel: the U.S. and the European nations were working on disarmament, and an Economic and
Monetary Conference had been convened to discuss policy coordination and the recovery.
Hoover and the Europeans wanted all three issues – debts, disarmament, and economics – to be
discusses jointly, and they argued that the Conference should begin, at the latest, in April 1933.
The President-elect and his team (including the members of the Brains Trust), on the other hand,
believed that the three problems had to be approached separately and that the Conference should
take place much later during the year. 90 They didn’t want to be distracted with foreign affairs
questions during the first few months of the administration, and they wanted time to understand
the issues to be discussed at the conference, including the possible return of the United Kingdom
to the gold standard, and how to deal with the fact that France had been accumulating gold
reserves at a very rapid clip.91 After long negotiations and much wrangling, FDR’s views
prevailed and the London Conference was scheduled for June 1933. It was supposed to be a long
meeting with delegations from almost every country in the world and a very broad agenda.

88
   Both the Willis letter and Rogers’ memorandum were attached by Tugwell to his Revised Diary. Tugwell (1952),
as reproduced in Namorato (1992, p. 368-372).
89
   These two positions reflected different interpretations on the causes of the depression. For Hoover, the main
cause was a succession of external shocks; returning to prosperity, thus, required an active stance regarding world
economic affairs. FDR, on the contrary, believed that the depression was the domestic policy mistakes.
90
   Not everyone in FDR’s circle agreed with these views. The seasoned diplomat Norman Davis, for example,
pushed for an early Conference that would address the broadest possible set of issues.
91
   As noted, the United Kingdom and a number of countries linked to sterling went off gold on September 21, 1931.
A number of countries followed during in the months to come: Denmark, Norway and Sweden on September 29;
Finland on October 12; Canada on October 19; and Japan on December 13, 1931. Four Latin American countries
went abandoned the gold standard even before the U.K.: Argentina (12/1929), Brazil (10/1030), Mexico (7/1931)
and El Salvador (10/1931).
                                                        26


        6.3 Stabilizing the exchanges

As soon as a date for the London Conference was set, FDR asked the members of the Brains
Trust to work on it. Moley was in charge of coordinating a team that included Treasury experts,
banking advisers, some members of Congress, as well as officials from the Federal Reserve.92
The request to work on the Conference, which among other things meant meeting with foreign
delegations, came on top of other assignments, such as thinking about policies to provide
immediate relief to debtors, especially in the agricultural sector, and helping the President-elect
assemble the Cabinet.

On January 13 1933, Tugwell wrote in his diary that he had met Herbert Feis, a senior adviser to
the Secretary of State, about the preparatory negotiations for the London Conference:93 “He
[Feis] said that things are going well… This is contrary to press reports… The press has it that
the British reluctance about currency stabilization is hampering everything. It may be; but we,
also, might meet them by going off gold, I suppose. It’s worth considering at any rate.” 94 The
key words in this entry – “might,” “I suppose,” “worth considering” – capture, once again, the
doubts that Tugwell and his colleagues continued to have with respect the whole gold question.

Feis was not particularly impressed by FDR’s advisers: “My first talks with the assorted
members of the Brain Trust (sic)… left me puzzled. Their knowledge of foreign affairs seemed
to be slighter than their assurance.”95 This view was quite generalized among those that worked
on the preparations for the London Conference. Frederick Leith-Ross, a senior economic adviser
to the British government, and an expert on the gold standard and global finances who in early
1933 participated in the first phase of the negotiations, had this to say about the Brains Trust:96

        “[T]he President seemed to rely more on a coterie of personal advisers… than on his
        ministers… These personal advisers were mostly professors and were locally known as
        the ‘Brains Trust’… The principal of the Brains Trust with whom I had to deal was
        Professor Moley, who had been a professor of Criminology at a girls’ college… [Moley]
        was free of prejudices and ready to appreciate arguments put to him but almost
        completely lacking in detailed knowledge of many of the questions that we discussed…
        With him were Dr. Feis (who had attended the Preparatory Committee at Geneva), Mr.
        Tugwell and Mr. Taussig, all competent economists but with little experience in finance.”


92
   Moley was the only person to accompany FDR to his first meeting with Hoover, where they discussed the end of
the moratorium and the upcoming London Conference. In that first meeting, held on November 22, Hoover was
with his Secretary of The Treasury, Ogden Mills, who had been a classmate of FDR’s at Harvard and was his
neighbor in Hyde Park. Roosevelt and Mills disliked each other intensely.
93
   Feis went on to write a valuable memoir of his experiences during this period, when he was involved as an
adviser to both Secretaries Henry Stimson and Cordell Hull. Feis (1966).
94
   Tugwell 1935) as reproduced in Namorato (1992, p. 59).
95
   Feis (1966), p. 1.
96
   The “girl’s college” quip refers to the fact that Moley’s official university appointment was at Barnard College.
Leith-Ross (1969), p. 165.
                                                       27


Leith-Ross went on to consign that more often than not his American counterparts didn’t quite
know what to think or what position to take regarding the gold standard: “I remarked at the time
[April-May 1933] that they sometimes gave me a restful interlude by embarking on an economic
controversy between themselves which made me wonder whether we were engaged on inter-
governmental negotiations or attending a debating society.”97

One of the key issues to be addressed at the London Conference was the “stabilization of the
exchanges.” The idea was to stabilize currency values for at least the duration of the Conference,
as a prelude for a possible return to the international gold standard. Because of the importance of
Great Britain in the world economy, this discussion implied mostly – but not exclusively – at
what rate to stabilize the pound sterling. Keynes proposal for the Conference – contained in
Chapters IV and V of The Means to Prosperity –, was based on the idea that every country
would adopt his “qualified gold standard” with fixed exchange rates, greater monetary flexibility,
and the ability by central banks to facilitate massive “loan-expenditures.”98
Almost everyone thought that stabilizing the pound was a step in the right direction, but the
question was at what rate? Between May 1925, when Britain returned to the gold standard, and
September 1931, when it went off gold, sterling had been fixed at its historical level of 4.86
dollars per pound.99 In early February 1933, when negotiations on the London Conference
intensified, the market rate was $3.40 per pound, implying a depreciation of sterling of 30% from
par. This, according to the American negotiators, gave the sterling area countries an unfair
competitive advantage in world markets. Stabilization was to occur, they argued, at a
significantly stronger value for the British currency.

Moley believed that the stabilization of exchanges was important, but that negotiations on this
issue – and on the tariff, for that matter – should not distract the incoming administration from
the need to get domestic recovery going. In his 1966 memoirs he writes: “It seemed to me that…
the stabilization of British and French currencies could not have much to do with the primary
need for recovery in the United States. Further, coming to terms on these issues would take
months, while the restoration of public confidence by vigorous domestic measures would
produce results at home almost immediately.” (Moley 1966, p.53).

FDR’s closest advisers believed that different countries deserved different degrees of
consideration at the London Conference and during negotiations on intergovernmental debts. On
November 15, only two days after FDR found out about the impending debt crisis, Adolf Berle
sent a long memorandum to Raymond Moley, where he wrote that the French were not “entitled
to much consideration. The drive on the American gold last summer suggests that the Quai

97
   Leith-Ross (1968), pp. 166.
98
   Keynes plan for the Conference would evolve into his Bretton Woods plan. See Steil (2013) for a fascinating
account of the interaction between Keynes and Harry Dexter White in 1944.
99
   Strictly speaking, until September 1931 the pound was tied to gold, and so was the USD. Consequently, both
currencies had a fixed exchange rate between themselves (they exhibited minimal fluctuations within the “gold
points”).
                                                      28


D’Orsay would not have been wholly sorry to see the United States go off the gold standard,
permitting payment of the American debt in depreciated dollars instead than in gold.”100

The British believed that stabilization was fundamental, but didn’t quite know at what rate it was
appropriate to do it. This view is aptly summarized by Leith-Ross (1968, p 168) in his memoirs:
“While we did not question the desirability of the eventual return to a stabilized exchange rate,
we felt that more experience was needed before we could decide what precise rate we would be
able to maintain.” During the months to come, the question of at what level to stabilize the
exchanges continued to be a dominant one. At some point in early April, Professor Oliver
Sprague, a Treasury adviser that had been FDR’s economics teacher at Harvard and a former
consultant at the Bank of England, suggested stabilizing it at $3.65; a few days later Moley
talked of $3.85.101 And in early June, Leith-Ross pointed out that recent fluctuations in the
currency market made the decision very difficult. “Sterling which not long ago had been worth
less than $3.20 was now fetching over $5.20.”102
The question of at what level to stabilize the exchanges is directly related to whether the
currency is “in line with fundamentals,” or if, on the contrary, it is misaligned (overvalued or
undervalued). Nowadays this type of analysis has become routine, and is periodically performed
by the multilateral institutions (IMF, World Bank), central banks, and investment banks. In the
late 1920s and early 1930s technical analyses on these issues were mostly confined to purchasing
power parity calculations. Indeed, this method had been used by Cassel and Keynes when
looking at the interwar situation in Europe.103 Interestingly, there are no discussions in the Brains
Trust diaries, correspondence, or memoires along these lines. Indeed, in the early 1930s the
economics profession did not focus on probable exchange rate misalignment when discussing the
possibility that the U.S. would go off gold. Most of the discussion emphasized the monetary side,
tending to play down the trade implications of the problem. In addition, there were very few (if
any) detailed analyses on how devaluation would affect the balance of trade, and through this
channel gold flows. This is, to some extent, surprising, given that Alfred Marshall had published
in 1923 his Money, Credit and Commerce, with its detailed discussion of the role of elasticities
in international trade.104

Analyzing in detail whether the dollar was misaligned in the early 1930s is well beyond the
scope of this paper. However, and in order to have some notion about orders of magnitude, in
Figure 6 I display the evolution of two monthly trade-weighted real exchange rate indexes for the
USD for this period – RER4 and RER5. The RER4 index includes the currencies of the United
Kingdom, Canada and France; the RER5 adds Italy and Switzerland. These indexes have a base
of 1913=100. The Figure captures, clearly, the effects of a number of shocks and policy

100
    Berle (1973), p. 80.
101
    See Raymond Moley’s Diary for 1933. The Raymond Moley Papers, Hoover Institution, Box 1.
102
    Leith-Ross (1968), p. 168.
103
    Cassel (1922), Keynes (1924).
104
    The development of the formal Marshall-Lerner condition was still ten years away.
                                                 29


decisions on the U.S. real exchange rate. In particular, it is possible to see the consequences of
the suspension of the gold standard during the Great War, the return to the gold standard by the
sterling area countries (the U.K. and Canada) and Switzerland in 1925, the return to gold by
Germany in 1924, and by France and Italy in 1926. The devaluation of sterling in September
1931 is captured by the positive spike in the RER during that month; and the devaluation of the
dollar in 1933-34 by a spike in the opposite direction in both indexes. The devaluation of the
French and Swiss Francs are also clearly captured by the data.

In Figure 7 I present data on the evolution of the current account balance over GDP for 1919-
1937. As may be seen, in every year between 1919 and 1933 the U.S. ran a current account
surplus. These were very large in the years immediately following the Great War, reflecting the
very high prices of agricultural commodities. After 1923 the surpluses hover around 0.5% of
GDP.

Figures 6 and 7 show two things: (a) In late 1932 the RER indexes for the USD were between
12% and 16% higher than in 1913. That is, the dollar was approximately 14% stronger than it
had been just before the war. (b) In 1931, 1932 and 1933 the U.S. was still experiencing a current
account surplus; this was true in spite of the fact that, as pointed out by Wigmore (1987) and
Temin and Wigmore (1990), foreign central banks and foreign investors withdrew significant
amounts of gold during that period. However, it is important to stress that although there were
significant week to week fluctuations in gold flows, the overall contribution of the current
account to the stock of bullion was positive in 1931 and 1932. Taken together these two facts
suggest that the USD may have been slightly overvalued at the time. This would have called for
a small correction in the exchanges relative to the pre war levels. However, neither the RER data
nor the current account information indicates that a massive correction of the exchanges was
needed from a purely “fundamentals” point of view.
       6.4 No one knew where FDR stood

During the 1932 campaign the general sentiment among the population had been that in spite of
its shortcomings the gold standard was the best system America could have. However, as
Inauguration Day approached and the Depression deepened, sentiments among some began to
change. Moley characterized the situation in the weeks before inauguration as follows:

       “[A] source of trouble in [early] 1933 was the growing talk in Congress, in the press and
       in semi-private talk that the gold value of the dollar would be reduced. For the first time
       in history, talk of a cheaper dollar was not the monopoly of populistic farmers…. This
       time it came from urban politicians, college professors and even some of the more
       prominent businessmen…”

Instability was also fueled by some of the incoming members of the Cabinet. For instance, on
January 31, Henry Wallace, just appointed as the next Secretary of Agriculture, said: “The smart
thing to do would be to go off the gold standard a little further than England has.” In an effort to
                                                     30


straighten things up, George L. Harrison, the President of the New York Federal Reserve Bank,
contributed to the unease. On January 31 he issued a statement stating that devaluation would not
solve the deflation and would create serious dislocations.105 This uncertainty, plus the perilous
state of banks of all sizes and from all over the nation, resulted in increasing withdrawals of gold
from the banking system. It was not only big financiers and speculators, but also run-of-the-mill
middle class families that were concerned about the future and their savings. In addition, foreign
central banks and investors withdrew large amounts of bullion during the early weeks of 1933.106

In the middle of this upheaval FDR didn’t appear to have a strong view on what to do, or how to
handle the situation. If anyone would know this, it was Moley, who saw Roosevelt for several
hours every day. According to him, “in the midst of all the talk of “reflation” by dollar
manipulation, no one knew where the President-elect stood.” (Moley 1966, p. 135).

In late February, just a few days before inauguration, the Brains Trust’s views on the dollar and
the gold standard had not changed from what they had been during the primary and presidential
campaigns. That is to say, Moley, Tuwell and Berle did not have a strong or definitive position
on these matters. They continued to waver and doubt; they still believed in the merits of
experimentation and of leaving all options open; at times they looked at the “compensated
dollar” scheme with sympathy, and at others they strongly criticized those that believed that most
problems stemming from the Depression could be cured by the simple manipulation of the price
of gold. To put it simply, on March 4th, the day Franklin Delano Roosevelt was to take over as
President, there was no concrete or definitive plan for taking the U.S. off gold and devaluing the
dollar. Worst yet, the incoming administration had no plan of its own for saving the banking
system, which was about to collapse.107 It seemed that in many ways FDR and his team were
taking the ideas of experimenting and improvising a bit too far.

        7. A note on what came later
On Inauguration Day the Brains Trust was effectively disbanded. Ray Moley became Assistant
Secretary of State, and for a few months he continued to be FDR’s confidant. He would meet
with the President every morning, while FDR was still in bed. Rex Tugwell became Assistant
Secretary in the Department of Agriculture and immediately immersed himself in efforts to pass
the AAA with its controversial crops allotment provision. Adolf Berle decided to stay in New
York and continued to practice law. He would occasionally write to FDR and they would
sometimes meet for a chat, but during the First New Deal Berle had no government obligations.




105
    The New York Times, January 31, 1933. See also Hoover (1952), p. 200.
106
    Wigmore (1987).
107
    As noted, Awalt (1969) provides a fascinating blow-by-blow account of how the emergency policy that saved
the banking system was put together by members of the incoming and outgoing administrations. According to him,
the rescue plan was mostly based on ideas developed by Arthur A. Ballantine, Herbert Hoover’s able Under
Secretary of the Treasury.
                                                       31


Formally, this paper should end with the dissolution of the Brains Trust, but doing so would
mean leaving too many things dangling, and a good suspenseful story without a proper end. The
purpose of this Section, thus, is to briefly go over the gold-related events that occurred between
inauguration and the official devaluation of the dollar on January 31 1934.108 At that time the
price of gold was set at $35 per ounce, a price that prevailed until August 1971 when President
Richard Nixon closed the Treasury’s “gold window” and the dollar was once again devalued.
        7.1 The gold embargo

On March 4, 1933, the day Franklin D. Roosevelt was inaugurated as president, the nation was
facing the third banking crisis of the Great Depression. Trouble had begun two weeks earlier in
Detroit, when on February 14 the Guardian National Bank, an institution controlled by Henry
Ford and one of the largest banks in the Midwest, had been closed by regulators. The crisis
spread rapidly throughout the nation. Fearing for their savings, the public withdrew hordes of
currency and gold from banks, both small and big.
In the early hours of March 6, less than 36 hours after moving into the White House, the new
President signed Presidential Proclamation No. 2039 declaring a national bank holiday. The
reason given for this drastic measure was in line with the Trading with the Enemy Act. The
proclamation stated that the government’s goal was to “prevent the export, hoarding, or
earmarking of gold or silver coin or bullion or currency.”109 During the days that followed
officials of the incoming and outgoing administrations drafted legislation aimed at closing
insolvent banks and reestablishing confidence in the nation’s financial system. On Thursday
March 9 the Emergency Banking Act was approved by both houses of Congress, and on Monday
March 13, banks deemed to be healthy began to open. Two days later, the president signed
Executive Order N. 6073, “Relative to the Reopening of Banks.” Among other provisions it
stated that “until further order, no individual, partnership, association or corporation, including
any banking institution, shall export or otherwise remove… any gold coin, gold bullion or gold
certificates.” 110

Very early in the morning of March 6 (at 1 AM or so), and immediately after the bank holiday
was announced, Secretary of the Treasury Will Woodin told The New York Times that it was
“ridiculous and misleading to say that we are off the gold standard… We are definitely on the
gold standard. Gold merely cannot be obtained for several days.”111
On March 6 the front page of The New York Times illustrated the gravity of the situation. An
eight columns headline announced the bank holiday. Some of main stories’ titles were:
“Roosevelt puts embargo on gold,” “Prison for gold hoarder,” and “City scrip to be ready today

108
    The title of this section is taken from the last chapter of Rexford Tugwell’s 1968 memoirs.
109
    “The Public Papers and Addresses of Franklin D. Roosevelt,” Vol. 1, p. 24.
110
    “The Public Papers and Addresses of Franklin D. Roosevelt,” Vol. 1, p. 55. That same day Senator Thomas
introduced his amendment to the AAA in the Senate.
111
    See Friedman and Schwartz (1963), p. 462-63, for an interpretation along these lines.
                                                       32


or tomorrow to replace currency.” Buried among this news, on the leftmost column, there was a
story from Germany titled “Hitler bloc wins a Reich majority.” See Figure 8.

On March 13, when many banks reopened, something extraordinary happened: the public re-
deposited massive amounts of currency in their banks. Many analysts credited FDR’s First
Fireside Chat, delivered on Sunday March 12, for the return of confidence. Gold, however, was
returned to the banking system at a slower pace than currency. On April 5, and as a response to
the slower return of bullion, the president signed Executive Order No. 6102 ordering the public
to sell all gold holdings to the Federal Reserve; from that point onward the holding of gold in
excess of $100 was prohibited. The Order, however, contemplated three exceptions, and stated
that some exports of gold would be allowed by the Treasury.112 Surprisingly, during the days that
followed, global currency markets remained calmed and the dollar was stable.
        7.2 We are off gold

On April 18, immediately after the Easter holiday, the dollar came under significant pressure,
and, for the first time since the embargo, broke through the “gold points,” making the export of
gold profitable. A number of banks applied, immediately, for export licenses. The next day,
President Roosevelt decided to stay in the White House living quarters throughout the morning.
He had a slight cold and wanted to prepare for a press conference he had called for that evening.
At 9 A.M. he had breakfast with Secretary of the Treasury Will Woodin, Budget Director Lewis
Douglas, Postmaster General (and old associate and political adviser) Jim Farley, and Ray
Moley. When the Secretary of the Treasury walked in, the President looked at him and said:113
“Mr. Secretary, I have some very bad news for you.”

Woodin, whose face had been wreathed in smiles, became somber, as he didn’t know what the
news could be. FDR continued:
“I have to announce to you the serious fact that the United States has gone off the gold standard.”
The Secretary opened his eyes wide, threw up both of his hands, and said:
“My heavens! What, again?”




112
   “The Public Papers and Addresses of Franklin D. Roosevelt,” Vol. 1, p. 111.
113
   FDR’s appointments’ diary and, more importantly, the White House usher’s log allow us to know who he met
every day during his presidency. According to these documents, in the morning of April 19, 1933, FDR “remained at
house” with a “slight cold.” The list of those that had breakfast with him on that day is also in this log. See,
http://www.fdrlibrary.marist.edu/daybyday/daylog/april-19th-1933/. Excerpts of the press conference related to
the banking and gold situation may be found in “The Public Papers and Addresses of Franklin D. Roosevelt,” (1938),
Volume 2, pp. 137-141. There are a number of sources and versions of this breakfast meeting, including one by
FDR himself. What follows is mostly based on Roosevelt (1934), pp. 61-62, and on the New York Times article
“Roosevelt traces bank crisis in book,” April 12, 1934 (p.3).
                                                        33


In 1966, when commenting on this meeting, Ray Moley wrote that the episode and, in particular,
Woodin’s reaction, “well expressed the difficulty of fixing with exactness the date when the
United States abandoned the gold standard.”114

In 1934, the President wrote that “many useless volumes could be written as to whether on April
20 [1933] the United States actually…abandoned the gold standard.” He then added: “In one
sense we did not, because the legal gold content of the dollar was unchanged and because the
government and the banks retained all gold as the basis for currency. On the other hand, gold
here in the United States ceased to be a medium of exchange.”115

At first, everyone – and maybe even the President – thought that the gold embargo would be a
temporary measure that would be lifted once healthy banks were back in full operation and the
concern about gold had eased. But any hope of lifting the embargo, and reestablishing full
convertibility under the old gold standard, was ditched when in early May it became clear that
the Senate would only pass the Agricultural Adjustment Act (AAA) if it contained some
inflationary measures. After intense negotiations led by Ray Moley, FDR was able to convince
Senate leaders to change the proposed legislation from one that mandated him to take immediate
action to one that gave him some options. The result was the so-called Thomas Amendment,
named after Oklahoma’s senator Elmer Thomas. The policy options given to the President were
four: (1) reducing the gold content of the dollar by up to 50%; (2) issuing up to three billion
dollars in “greenbacks”; (3) accepting payment for foreign debt in silver (up to $200 million);
and (4) allowing the Reserve Banks to undertake up to three billion dollars in open market
operations. In 1939 Moley wrote that by acquiescing to the Thomas Amendment, FDR accepted
the inevitable: the United States would abandon the gold standard and the USD would be
devalued.
In 1938, five years after these events, Roosevelt came back to this issue. On the occasion of the
release of the first volumes of his Public Papers the President wrote:116

        “While many of the acts of the administration up to this time [April 19-20, 1933] were
        emergency measures, they indicate, nevertheless, a consistent pattern as yet roughly
        formed, but designed for the purposes of gaining for the American dollar freedom –
        freedom at home from the threat of instability and freedom abroad for the beginning of a
        new realignment to the other currencies of the world.”
If the members of the Brains Trust did not participate in any way in the decision to abandon the
gold standard in April 1933, did any other economist – or economists – advise the President to
this effect? Once again Moley, the only person that met with FDR almost daily during the first
six months of his presidency, provides an informed perspective:


114
    Moley (1966), p. 298.
115
    The New York Times, “Roosevelt traces bank crisis in book,” April 12, 1934 (p.3)
116
    “The Public Papers and Addresses of Franklin D. Roosevelt,” (1938), Volume 2, p. 144
                                                        34


        “A great deal has been written and said about Roosevelt’s belief at that time [March-
        April 1933] in the idea of Professor George F. Warren of Cornell, that prices could be
        regulated from time to time by changes in the value of gold. I heard nothing from
        Roosevelt about the Warren theory in those days in the spring, but later, in August, he
        began to toy with the idea of using it to raise prices, which had lagged in midsummer
        after the early rise.”117

This assertion is confirmed from an analysis of the White House visitors’ log. George F. Warren
did not see President Roosevelt one-to-one until July 24, 1933, when they had a brief meeting at
12:05 PM. They met again (twice) on the 8th of August. Warren and FDR would meet a total of
21 times between July and January 1934, a period when, as already noted, the Cornell professor
did exercise a tremendous influence on the President’s thinking about gold and the dollar, and
was able to convince him to put in place the “gold buying program.”118 The same source shows
that during the first half of the year the President did not meet with Professor James Harvey
Rogers, the man that, jointly with Warren, would be very influential on monetary issues during
the second half of 1933. Their first meeting was on July 12 at 5:30 PM. FDR’s uncle, the banker
Frederic Delano, also attended that meeting.
        7.3 Roosevelt’s “bombshell,” the gold buying program, and the Gold Act

On June 2 the government sold, for the first time in almost fifteen years, debt without a clause
explicitly stating that these were gold-denominated obligations. On June 5 Congress issues a
Joint Proclamation abrogating the clause that linked debts to the (official) price of gold, for all
future and past, public and private, contracts.

On June 3 the London World Economic Conference was officially opened. In the weeks that
followed the U.S. delegation, which was headed by the Secretary of State Cordell Hull, slowly
made progress on all fronts under discussion. In particular, a preliminary agreement was reached
with the British and the French for stabilizing currency values during the duration of the
conference. This was viewed as a prelude for a more permanent stabilization plan and, even, for
an eventual return to the international gold standard (possibly at new parities and possibly, as
Keynes had suggested, with hew “rules of the game”).

On July 3, however, all hopes for an agreement were shattered when Secretary Hull received a
long cable from the President informing him that he would not agree to any attempt to peg the
value of the dollar. The cable stunned every delegate, and came to be known as “Roosevelt’s



117
   Moley (1966), p. 304. He makes a similar point in his earlier memoirs, Moley (1939), p. 161
118                                                              th
   According to Warren’s diary, he saw FDR briefly on March 4 , when Roosevelt read the proclamation, which
was already written to him. During that meeting a number of people – including FDR’s son James and Moley –
were present. Roosevelt saw Warren again on April 12, when he visited the White House with a delegation from
the Committee for the Nation. Warren’s diary entries for this period are in the Box 28, Folders 17 and 18 of his
papers, held at the Cornell University Library.
                                                         35


bombshell.” Two days later the President held a press conference where he explained his
decision as follows:119

         “The whole question comes down to the word ‘stabilization.’ We have a very different
         thought about the definition of the word than do some of the Continental countries… We
         are not ready to export gold… and we are not ready to go along on the creation of some
         stabilization fund which might obligate us to export gold.”

The markets reacted instantaneously. That week the USD lost 8.1% with respect to the pound,
and 9.4% relative to the French Franc. The official price of gold, however, remained fixed at its
historical level – set in 1834 – of $20.67 per ounce.

In early August, Administration lawyers began to explore the possibility of the government
buying – on consignment – newly minted gold at a price that exceeded the official parity.
Original discussions revolved around a price of $28 per ounce.120 On August 29, 1933, the plan
was announced through Executive Order No. 6261. This plan, which was the brainchild of
Professor George F. Warren, moved the U.S. closer to an official devaluation of the USD in
terms of gold. As explained by FDR himself, the price to be paid for newly minted goal was to
be “equal to the best price obtainable in the free gold markets of the world.”121 On October 22,
the President announced, during his Fourth Fireside Chat, that he was expanding the gold buying
program. He said that the “United States must take firmly in its own hands the control of the gold
value of our dollar.”122 He then described the expanded policy as follows:

         “I am authorizing the Reconstruction Finance Corporation to buy gold newly minted in
         the United States at prices to be determined from time to time after consultation with the
         Secretary of the Treasury and the President. Whenever necessary to the end in view we
         shall also buy or sell gold in the world market.”

During the months that followed prices paid for gold increased steadily from $29.01 per ounce
on October 21, to $31.96 on October 30, $33.32 on November 11, and $34.06 on December 30,
1933.

On January 15, 1934, when the price paid by the RFC for gold was $34.06, the President sent a
message to Congress requesting legislation to “organize a sound and adequate currency
system.”123 Two weeks later, on Tuesday January 30, Congress passed the Gold Reserve Act of
1934, giving the President authority for setting a new official price of gold. The next day FDR
issued Presidential Proclamation No. 2072, fixing the price of gold at $35 an ounce. The long
journey to a new parity had reached its destination. The new parity remained in place until
August 15, 1971.

119
    “The Public Papers and Addresses of Franklin D. Roosevelt,” Vol. 1, pp. 268-269.
120
    Acheson (1965), pp. 177-178.
121
    “The Public Papers and Addresses of Franklin D. Roosevelt,” Vol. 1, p. 352.
122
    “The Public Papers and Addresses of Franklin D. Roosevelt,” Vol. 1, p. 426.
123
    “The Public Papers and Addresses of Franklin D. Roosevelt,” Vol. 2, p. 426
                                               36


       8. Concluding remarks
President Roosevelt did not take the US off the gold standard because he was convinced that this
was the best course of action, or because he had a comprehensive and detailed plan on what to do
in the international arena. FDR took the US off gold because he ran out of options. He had
almost no alternative but to do what he did. What is interesting is that he did run out of options
so quickly: the final banking crisis had exploded only days before he took over, and the Senate’s
decision that go for inflation gathered tremendous force in early April. The banking crisis forced
him to put in place the gold embargo on March 6, and the Senate actions forced him to go along
with the Thomas Amendment on April 18. Given the circumstances, one may argue that he never
had a fighting chance for maintaining the country on the gold standard.

What is remarkable from today’s perspective is that this whole program was undertaken with,
basically, no input from professional economists. Of course, Rex Tugwell was there, but as
pointed out repeatedly throughout this paper, his expertise on monetary issues was (very)
limited. FDR would occasionally talk to bankers – including his uncle Fred Delano –, and
journalists with some knowledge on financial matters, but these were not real experts. As noted,
during the campaign he met (once) with Irving Fisher, and after the election he had a
conversation with James Harvey Rogers and H. Parker Willis, but none on these meeting was a
profound strategy session. Occasionally FDR would talk to the top echelon of the Federal
Reserve System – Eugene Meyer, Eugene Black, Adolph Miller, and George Harrison –, but
once again there was no detailed plan discussed in these meetings. During the first six months of
his presidency he also met twice with George F. Warren, the Cornell professor who, as noted,
would become so influential after June 1933. On these two occasions, however, Warren was with
a large group of people, and didn’t have an opportunity to discuss in detail his plan with the
President. This would happen later in the year, when on the suggestion of Henry Morgenthau, Jr.,
Warren would meet often, and many times alone, with the President.

The fact of the matter is that there was no team of economists assigned to analyzing the “gold
problem” and coming up with concrete and detailed suggestions. This paucity of professional
advice continued during 1933 and all the way to the passing of the Gold Act of January 1934. It
is true that, as noted above, starting in mid-July 1933 he met frequently with Professors Warren
and Rogers, but these meetings were ad-hoc and unstructured – they often took place early in the
morning while the President was still in bed –, and not a single in-depth study on the
consequences of the devaluation was presented to the President. After October 22 these early
meetings were mostly to determine the RFC price for gold for that particular day.

The absence of able and qualified advisers was commented by Walter Lippmann after FDR
stunned the London Conference with his “bombshell” letter. In a dispatch from London dated
July 4 1933 Lippmann wrote:
       “Mr. Roosevelt cannot have understood how completely unequipped are his
       representatives here [in London] to deal with the kind of project he has in mind. For one
                                                          37


           thing, they do not know what is in his mind. For another, there is not among them a
           single man who understands monetary questions sufficiently to debate them.”124

FDR’s personality had a lot to do with the absence of qualified advisers. He didn’t like to be told
what was right or wrong; he liked even less to be told what to do. And although his formal
training in economics was quite basic, he was convinced that he knew better, and could
determine what was best for the nation. As Tugwell put it, FDR “had learned not to take
intellectuals too seriously.”

But, there is another side to the story. In order to work as advisers, economists have to be
interested in applied work and in policy issues. At the time, however, very few academics
thought that they should be engaged in practical matters. They lived in an ivory tower, and they
liked it. In 1966, more than thirty years after the U.S. had abandoned the gold standard, Adolf A.
Berle, Jr., wrote to Ray Moley and commented on their work for Roosevelt during that magical
year when, jointly with Rex Tugwell, they were known as the Brains Trust: “At that time
academic economists did not soil their hands with practical questions. Application of their
science is almost entirely a post-New Deal phenomenon.”125




124
      The New York Herald Tribune, July 4, 1933. Emphasis added.
125
      Letter from Berle to Moley, dated February 2 1966. Reproduced in Berle (1973), p. 79.
                                                          38




DATA APPENDIX
Series           Source                                                                 Notes
High Powered     Milton Friedman & Anna J. Schwartz, 1963, "A Monetary History of
Money            the United States, 1867-1960," NBER Books, National Bureau of
                 Economic Research, Inc, number frie63-1, October. Table B-3. C. 1.
Money Stock      "A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960," NBER Books,
                 National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, number frie63-1, October.
                 Table B-3. Computed as the sum of Currency Held by Public (column
                 1) and Total Deposits in Commercial Banks (column 2).
Gold Stock       Federal Reserve Board, "Banking And Monetary Statistics", and
                 "Federal Reserve Bulletins". Accessed through NBER Macro History
                 Database, series M14076b
U.S. Dollar      "Foreign Exchange". The New York Times (Accessed through ProQuest      Holidays completed with
                                                                                        information for the
per Sterling     Historical Newspapers).
                                                                                        London exchange from
Pound in         "Money Market." Times. The Times Digital Archive.                      The Times
NYC
U.S. Dollar      "Foreign Exchange". The New York Times (Accessed through ProQuest      Holidays completed with
                                                                                        information for the
per French       Historical Newspapers).
                                                                                        London exchange from
Franc in NYC     "Money Market." Times. The Times Digital Archive.                      The Times.

U.S.             Jan 1923- Aug 1927: Federal Reserve Bulletin, October 1927 (revised
Wholesale        index numbers of wholesale prices, pp, 699)
Price Index      Sep 1927- Jan 1932: Federal Reserve Bulletin, March 1932 (revised
(1926=100)       index numbers of wholesale prices, pp, 199)
                 Oct 1932- Oct 1944: Federal Reserve Bulletin, April 1933-October
                 1944 (Wholesale prices)
                 Accesed through Fraser (https://fraser.stlouisfed.org/)
CPI U.S.A.       Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers: All Items (1982-
                 1984=100). Federal Reserve Economic Data, Federal Reserve Bank of
                 St.Louis.
Exchange         Global Financial Data
Rates (other)
Wholesale        Global Financial Data
Prices (other)
Real             Constructed using data described above
Exchange
Rates
Current          U.S. Department of Commerce: “The Balance of International
account          Payments of the United States” (Several Issues), and “Historical
balance          Statistics of the United States from Colonial Times to 1957”
                                                                                       39


                         MONEY_STOCK                                                                          HIGH_MONEY
60                                                                            25


50                                                                            20


40                                                                            15


30                                                                            10


20                                                                                5


10                                                                                0
     16   18   20   22   24   26   28   30    32   34    36   38   40                  16    18    20   22   24   26   28   30    32    34    36   38   40



                         GOLD_STOCK                                                                           MULTIPLIER
25                                                                                7


20                                                                                6


15                                                                                5


10                                                                                4


 5                                                                                3


 0                                                                                2
     16   18   20   22   24   26   28   30    32   34    36   38   40                  16    18    20   22   24   26   28   30    32    34    36   38   40


                                                        Figure 1: Monetary conditions, 1910-1940




                                    .10                                                                                                      6.0

                                    .09                                                                                                      5.6

                                    .08                                                                                                      5.2

                                    .07                                                                                                      4.8

                                    .06                                                                                                      4.4

                                    .05                                                                                                      4.0

                                    .04                                                                                                      3.6

                                    .03                                                                                                      3.2

                                    .02                                                                                                      2.8
                                             21    22    23   24   25   26   27       28    29    30    31   32   33   34    35    36

                                                                         FRANCSPOT                 NYSPOT

                Figure 2: Dollar-Sterling and Dollar-French Franc exchange rates, Weekly, 1921-1936
                                             40


32


28


24


20


16


12


 8
      10   12     14    16    18   20   22   24   26     28     30   32   34   36     38    40

                                   CPI_USA_FED            WPUSAM


                  Figure 3: CPI and WPI Price Indexes, 1910-1940




120

110

100

 90

 80

 70

 60

 50

 40
           1924        1926    1928     1930      1932        1934   1936      1938        1940

                                        FARM             FOOD
                                        METALS           HOUSING



Figure 4: Components of the Wholesale Price Index, Monthly 1923-1940
                      41




Figure 5: Fisher’s compensated dollar simulation
                                                                        42



130
       Fed is founded                                                                                                     World War II ends
                                                            U.K. off gold

             U.S. embargoes gold exports
120                                                                                FDR elected


                            End of gold embargo                                              France off gold

110
                                              U.K. goes back to gold




100


 90                                                                   U.S. off gold


                                       France back to gold standard
 80                                                                                                World War II begins
                                         End of World War I

      Great War begins                                      Official devaluation of USD to $35 per oz of gold            IMF begins operations
 70
             1915               1920             1925                  1930                1935                1940      1945             1950

                                                     RER5_1913                              RER4_1913
  Figure 6: Trade Weighted Real Exchange Rate for the Dollar, 1910-1950: 1913=100




                                                             CA/GNP
                   5

                   4

                   3

                   2                                                                                             CA/GNP

                   1

                   0
                                       1923
                         1919
                                1921


                                              1925
                                                     1927
                                                              1929
                                                                     1931
                                                                            1933
                                                                                    1935
                                                                                           1937
                                                                                                  1939




                 -1

        Figure 7: Current Account Balance as Percentage of GDP, 1919-1940
                        43




Figure 8: Front Page, New York Times, March 6, 1933
                                                44


                                           References

Acheson, D. (1965). Morning and Noon. Houghton Mifflin.

Awalt, F. G. (1969). Recollections of the Banking Crisis in 1933. Business History Review,
43(03), 347-371.

Barber, W. J. (1996). Designs within Disorder. Cambridge Books.

Berle, Jr., A. A., & Means, G. C. (1932). Modern corporation and private property.

Berle, Jr., A. A. (1973). Navigating the Rapids 1918–1971: From the Papers of Adolf A. Berle
        (New York, 1973).

Bernanke B. (2000). Essays on the great depression. Princeton University Press.

Bernanke, B., & James, H. (1991). “The gold standard, deflation, and financial crisis in the Great
      Depression: An international comparison.” In Financial markets and financial crises (pp.
      33-68). University of Chicago Press.

Bordo, M. D., Choudhri, E. U., & Schwartz, A. J. (2002). “Was expansionary monetary policy
       feasible during the great contraction?” An examination of the gold standard constraint.
       Explorations in Economic history, 39(1), 1-28.

Bordo, M. D., & Kydland, F. E. (1995). “The gold standard as a rule: An essay in exploration.”
       Explorations in Economic History, 32(4), 423-464.

Calomiris, C., & Wheelock, D. (1998). “Was the Great Depression a watershed for American
      monetary policy?”. In The defining moment: The great depression and the American
      economy in the twentieth century (pp. 23-66). University of Chicago Press.

Cassel, G. (1923). Money and foreign exchange after 1914. Constable.

Eichengreen, B. (1992). Golden fetters: the gold standard and the Great Depression, 1919-1939.
      Oxford University Press.

Eichengreen, B., & Sachs, J. (1985). “Exchange rates and economic recovery in the 1930s.” The
      Journal of Economic History, 45(04), 925-946.

Eichengreen, B., & Uzan, M. (1990). “The 1933 World Economic Conference as an Instance of
      Failed International Cooperation.” Department of Economics, UCB.

Feis, H. (1966). Characters in Crisis. Boston, Toronto: Little1, Brown, and Company.

Fisher, I. (1911). The purchasing power of money. New York.
                                                  45


Fisher, I. (1913). “A Compensated Dollar.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 27, 385-397.

Fisher, I. (1920). Stabilizing the dollar: A plan to stabilize the general price level without fixing
        individual prices. Macmillan.

Fisher, I. (1928). The money illusion. Adelphi Company.

Fisher, I. (1932). Booms and depressions: some first principles. New York: Adelphi Company.

Friedman, M., & Schwartz, A. J. (1963). A monetary history of the United States, 1867-1960.
      Princeton University Press.

Fusfield, D.R. (1956). The Economic Thought of Franklin D. Roosevelt and the Origins of the
       New Deal. New York: Columbia University Press.

Harris, S.E. (1934). “Higher prices,” in The economics of the recovery program,” Edited by D.V.
        Brown, et. Al. Whittlesey House

Hoover, H. (1952). The memoirs of Herbert Hoover: The Great Depression. Macmillan.

Irwin, D. A. (2012). “Gold sterilization and the recession of 1937–1938.” Financial History
       Review, 19(03), 249-267.

Kemmerer, E. W. (1944). Gold and the Gold Standard: The Story of Gold Money, Past, Present
     and Future. Ludwig von Mises Institute.
Keynes, J. M. (1924). A Tract on monetary reform. McMillan.

Keynes, J. M. (1933). The means to prosperity. McMillan.

Lippman, W. (1932). Interpretations, MacMillan

Lippman, W. (1932). “Governor Roosevelt’s candidacy,” The New York Herald Tribune,
      January 8, 1932.

Lippman, W. (1933). “The conference should adjourn” The New York Herald Tribune, July 4,
      1933.

Lindley, E. K. (1931). Franklin D. Roosevelt: a career in progressive democracy. The Bobbs-
       Merrill company.

Lindley, E. K. (1933). Roosevelt’s revolution, first phase. Viking.

Leith-Ross, F. (1968). Money talks: fifty years of international finance: the autobiography of Sir
       Frederick Leith-Ross. Hutchinson.

Marshall, A. (1923). Money, trade and commerce. MacMillan.
                                                46



Meltzer, A. H. (2003). A History of the Federal Reserve, Vol. 1 Chicago.

Moley, R. (1939). After seven years. Harper & Bros.

Moley, R. (1966). The First New Deal. Harcourt.

Moley, R. The Raymond Moley Papers, Hoover Institution Archives.

Mundell, R. A. (2000). “A reconsideration of the twentieth century.” American Economic
      Review, 327-340.

Namorato M.C. Editor. (1992). The Diary of Rexford G. Tugwell: The New Deal, 1932-1935
      Edited by (No. 136). Greenwood Pub Group.

New York Times, The. (1932-1934), Several issues.

Obstfeld, M., & Taylor, A. M. (1997). “The great depression as a watershed: international capital
       mobility over the long run” (No. w5960). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Pasvolsky, L. (1933). Current monetary issues. Brookings Institution

Patinkin, D. (1993). “Irving Fisher and his compensated dollar plan.” Available at SSRN
       2129231, 1-34.

Rauchway, E. (2015), The Money Makers, Basic Books

Rogers, J. H. America weighs her gold. Yale University Press.

Romer, C. D. (1992). “What ended the great depression?” The Journal of Economic History,
      52(04), 757-784.

Roosevelt, F.D. (1934), On our way, The John Day Company

Roosevelt, F.D. (1938) The Public Papers and Addresses of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, Vols. 1
      and 2. Random House

Sachs, A. (1934), “National Recovery Administration policies and the problem of economic
       planning,” in America’s Recovery Program, Edited by A.A. Berle et. Al. Oxford
       University Press, 1934.
Salter, A. S. B. (1933). Recovery: Revised edition. Bell.

Schlesinger, A. M. (1957). The age of Roosevelt (Vol. 1). 3 vols. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

Schumpeter, J. (1934), “Depression,” in The economics of the recovery program,” Edited by
     D.V. Brown, et. Al. Whittlesey House
                                                47



Steil, B. (2013). The battle of Bretton Woods: John Maynard Keynes, Harry Dexter White, and
        the making of a new world order. Princeton University Press.

Sternsher, B. (1964). Rexford Tugwell and the New Deal. Rutgers University Press

Sumner, S. (2001). Roosevelt, Warren, and the Gold-buying Program of 1933. Research in
      Economic History, 20, 135-172.

Tavlas, G. S. (1997). “Chicago, Harvard, and the doctrinal foundations of monetary economics.”
       Journal of Political Economy, 153-177.

Temin, P. (1991). Lessons from the great depression. MIT Press Books, 1.

Temin, P., & Wigmore, B. A. (1990). The end of one big deflation. Explorations in Economic
       history, 27(4), 483-502.

Tugwell, R. G., Munro, T., & Stryker, R. E. (1925). American economic life and the means of its
      improvement. MacMillan

Tugwell, R. G. (1968). The Brains Trust. Viking Adult.

Tugwell, R. G. (1977). Roosevelt's Revolution: The First Year-a Personal Perspective.
      Macmillan.

Tugwell, R. G. (1992, 1952, 1932-1935). The Diary of Rexford G. Tugwell: The New Deal,
      1932-1935 Edited by M.C. Namorato (No. 136). Greenwood Pub Group.

United States. Bureau of the Census. (1960). The Statistical History of the United States, from
       Colonial Times to 1957.

Viner, J. (1932). “International Aspects of the Gold Standard, in Gold and Monetary
        Stabilization” Lectures on the Harris Foundation Q. Wright ed., Chicago, Univ. of
        Chicago Press.

Warburg, J. P. (1934). The money muddle. Knopf.

Warren, G. F. “The George F. Warren Papers,” Division of Rare and Manuscript Collections,
      Carl A. Kroch Library, Cornell University.

Warren, G. F., & Pearson, F. A. (1933). Prices. Wiley.

Warren, G. F., & Pearson, F. A. (1935). Gold and Prices. Wiley.

White House appointments diary, 1933-1934
      http://www.fdrlibrary.marist.edu/daybyday/daylog/april-19th-1933/.
                                              48



Wigmore, B. A. (1987). Was the Bank Holiday of 1933 Caused by a Run on the Dollar?. The
     Journal of Economic History, 47(03), 739-755.

Wright, Q. (1932). Gold and monetary stabilization. University of Chicago Press.
