                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
                   SOURCES OF INACTION IN HOUSEHOLD FINANCE:
                  EVIDENCE FROM THE DANISH MORTGAGE MARKET

                                       Steffen Andersen
                                       John Y. Campbell
                                     Kasper Meisner Nielsen
                                       Tarun Ramadorai

                                       Working Paper 21386
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21386

                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                             July 2015, Revised July 2019

An earlier version of this paper was circulated under the title “Inattention and Inertia in
Household Finance: Evidence from the Danish Mortgage Market.” We thank the Sloan
Foundation for financial support. We are grateful to the Association of Danish Mortgage Banks
(ADMB) for providing data and facilitating dialogue with the individual mortgage banks, and to
senior economists Bettina Sand and Kaare Christensen at the ADMB for providing us with
valuable institutional details. We thank Sumit Agarwal, Joao Cocco, John Driscoll, Xavier
Gabaix, Samuli Knüpfer, David Laibson, Tomasz Piskorski, Tano Santos, Antoinette Schoar,
Amit Seru, Susan Woodward, Vincent Yao, and seminar participants at the Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve/GFLEC Financial Literacy Seminar at George Washington University, the
NBER Summer Institute Household Finance Meeting, the Riksbank-EABCN Conference on
Inequality and Macroeconomics, the American Economic Association 2015 Meeting, the Real
Estate Seminar at UC Berkeley, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Copenhagen Business
School, Columbia Business School, the May 2015 Mortgage Contract Design Conference, the
NUS-IRES Real Estate Symposium, Chicago Booth, the European Finance Association 2015
Meeting, the FIRS 2016 Meeting, the Imperial College London-FCA Conference on Mortgage
Markets, Cass Business School, the Banca d’Italia, Wharton, Boston College, Stanford, the 2017
Conference on the Econometrics of Financial Markets, Bocconi, and Lugano for many useful
comments, and Josh Abel and Federica Zeni for excellent and dedicated research assistance. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21386.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Steffen Andersen, John Y. Campbell, Kasper Meisner Nielsen, and Tarun Ramadorai.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Sources of Inaction in Household Finance: Evidence from the Danish Mortgage Market
Steffen Andersen, John Y. Campbell, Kasper Meisner Nielsen, and Tarun Ramadorai
NBER Working Paper No. 21386
July 2015, Revised July 2019
JEL No. G11,G21

                                          ABSTRACT

We build an empirical model to decompose delays in mortgage refinancing into time-dependent
inaction (a low probability of responding to a refinancing incentive in a given quarter) and state-
dependent inaction (a psychological addition to the financial cost of refinancing). We estimate the
model on high-quality administrative panel data from Denmark, where mortgage refinancing
without cash-out is unconstrained. Middle-aged and wealthy households exhibit state-dependent
inaction; but older, poorer, and less-educated households exhibit strong time-dependent inaction
and thereby achieve lower savings. We use the model to understand frictions in the mortgage
channel of monetary policy transmission.

Steffen Andersen                                 Kasper Meisner Nielsen
Department of Finance                            Hong Kong University
Copenhagen Business School                       of Science and Technology
Porcelænshaven 16A, 1                            Clearwater Bay
DK-2000 Frederiksberg                            Hong Kong
Denmark                                          nielsen@ust.hk
san.fi@cbs.dk
                                                 Tarun Ramadorai
John Y. Campbell                                 Imperial College London
Morton L. and Carole S.                          London SW7 2AZ
Olshan Professor of Economics                    United Kingdom
Department of Economics                          t.ramadorai@imperial.ac.uk
Harvard University
Littauer Center 213
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
john_campbell@harvard.edu




A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w21386
1         Introduction

A pervasive …nding in studies of household …nancial decision-making is that households respond
slowly to changing …nancial incentives. Inaction is common, even in circumstances where market
conditions are changing continuously, and actions often occur long after the incentive to take them
has …rst arisen. Well known examples include participation, saving, and asset allocation decisions in
retirement savings plans, and portfolio rebalancing in response to ‡uctuations in risky asset prices.2
In this paper we study mortgage re…nancing— a particularly important decision given the size of
mortgages relative to household budgets— with a view towards shedding light on the underlying
structural determinants of inaction. We do so in Denmark, an environment uniquely suited to
analyzing these questions, using a large panel of high-quality administrative data.

        One standard explanation for inaction is that there are …xed costs of taking action, so that
households do so only when the bene…ts are su¢ ciently large. (S; s) models of optimal inaction in
the presence of …xed costs have been a staple of the economics literature since the 1950s. They
have been used to model many di¤erent decisions, including those by …rms to change their prices
(Caplin and Spulber 1987, Caballero and Engel 1991, Caplin and Leahy 1991) and decisions by
households to switch health insurance plans (Handel 2013).            These models are sometimes called
“state-dependent”because …nancial incentives determine whether or not an action is taken.

        In the case of mortgage re…nancing, monetary …xed costs justify an inaction range until the
interest rate saving reaches an optimal threshold that triggers re…nancing. Inaction beyond this
point can be explained by psychological costs of re…nancing that shift the threshold, widening
the inaction range.        These psychological costs could re‡ect the value of time spent executing
a re…nancing, possibly augmented by behavioral present bias that makes households reluctant to
incur current time costs for the sake of future bene…ts (Laibson 1997, O’Donoghue and Rabin 1999).

        As an initial step to evaluate this state-dependent approach, we calculate an optimal re…nancing
    2
    See for example Agnew, Balduzzi, and Sunden (2003), Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Metrick (2002, 2004), and
Madrian and Shea (2001) on retirement savings plans, and Anagol, Balasubramaniam, and Ramadorai (2018), Bilias,
Georgarakos, and Haliassos (2010), Brunnermeier and Nagel (2008), and Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini (2009a) on
portfolio rebalancing.


                                                      1
threshold for each household-quarter in our data, using a model recently proposed by Agarwal,
Driscoll, and Laibson (ADL 2013). We show that households commonly fail to re…nance despite
having potential interest rate savings greater than the ADL threshold. This …nding of pervasive
slow re…nancing is consistent with results reported by Agarwal, Rosen, and Yao (2016) and Keys,
Pope, and Pope (2016) in US data.3

       Is this evidence consistent with a purely state-dependent model of household re…nancing in-
action? In a static setting where each household is observed only once, unobserved psychological
re…nancing costs can explain any pattern of re…nancing behavior.               Since re…nancing depends on
the distribution of thresholds, this distribution can be backed out directly from the data, but the
model implies no further restrictions. In a dynamic setting where households are observed repeat-
edly, however, a state-dependent model of inaction with …xed, unobserved re…nancing costs does
restrict behavior. The model predicts that no household will ever re…nance for the …rst time at an
incentive (an interest saving relative to its household-speci…c threshold) that is lower than one it
faced at an earlier period; and after a …rst-time re…nancing, a household will never re…nance at a
di¤erent incentive, or fail to re…nance at a higher incentive, than the one that triggered the initial
re…nancing. These restrictions are far from satis…ed by household behavior in our panel data.

       To relax these restrictions, one needs a model in which household behavior varies over time.
Standard discrete-choice models, such as the logit and probit models, specify that an action is
taken if a random shock is large enough that a linear combination of household characteristics and
the shock exceeds a …xed threshold. If a new shock is drawn for each household in each period, then
the decisions of a given household need not be tightly related across di¤erent periods. Models of
this sort can be extremely ‡exible if the distribution of shocks is allowed to vary across households
and over time; but for this very reason, they can sometimes be di¢ cult to interpret in terms of a
plausible economic model of household behavior.

       An alternative explanation for inaction is that households monitor their …nancial circumstances
   3
    We verify that our results are not sensitive to the parameterization of the ADL optimal re…nancing model or to
our decision to use the ADL model as the rational re…nancing benchmark. We also compare the ADL threshold to
the recommendations of …nancial advisors and to the decisions of prompt Danish re…nancers.



                                                        2
intermittently rather than continuously. Empirical models of this phenomenon generally specify
time intervals of constant duration during which households take no action, or a constant probability
of taking action in any one period, as in the well-known Taylor (1980) and Calvo (1983) models
of …rms’ price-setting decisions.         Importantly, in these models the length of inactive periods is
una¤ected by the …nancial incentives to act; hence, these are known as “time-dependent” models.
Time-dependence can be microfounded if households have information-gathering costs— …xed costs
of gathering information and evaluating the incentives to act (Du¢ e and Sun 1990, Gabaix and
Laibson 2002, Reis 2006a,b, Abel, Eberly, and Panageas 2007).4

       The time-dependent speci…cation is simple and tractable.               However, a pure time-dependent
model cannot explain why re…nancing responds to the interest saving; and even a time-dependent
model with a re…nancing threshold determined by monetary …xed costs implies, counterfactually,
that the interest saving no longer a¤ects re…nancing behavior once it exceeds that threshold.

       We therefore estimate a new empirical model of mortgage re…nancing that nests state-dependent
and time-dependent models of inaction. Our model incorporates both a psychological re…nancing
cost that widens the inaction range, as in a state-dependent model, and a constant probability
of considering a re…nancing in any period, as in a time-dependent model. In addition, we allow
random shocks to a¤ect household choice in each period, but to discipline this ‡exibility, we specify
that the distribution of these shocks is constant across households and over time. In our baseline
model we assume that the psychological re…nancing cost is the same for all households with the same
observable demographic characteristics, but in an extension of the model we allow for unobserved
heterogeneity in psychological re…nancing costs.

       The resulting model can separately identify state-dependent and time-dependent sources of in-
action, even though we observe neither households’ observations of data nor their psychological
costs of taking action. To understand how this is possible, …rst consider a baseline model in which
psychological re…nancing costs depend solely on observed household characteristics. In this case,
   4
     An alternative to a …xed cost of gathering information is a cost that increases in the content of the information,
as in the “rational inattention”models of Sims (2003), Moscarini (2004), Woodford (2009), and Mat¼     ejka and McKay
(2015). Veldkamp (2011) and Caplin (2016) survey this literature.



                                                          3
state-dependent and time-dependent sources of inaction have di¤erent e¤ects on household behavior
in a single cross-section of re…nancing incentives. State-dependent inaction reduces re…nancing at
incentives below the (household-characteristics speci…c) threshold, but it has no e¤ect on re…nanc-
ing at su¢ ciently high incentives. However, time-dependent inaction lowers the probability that
households re…nance at all levels of incentives.

   Now consider a model that also allows unobserved heterogeneity in psychological re…nancing
costs.   State-dependent and time-dependent inaction can no longer be separately identi…ed in a
single cross-section, but they can when household behavior is observed over time.        A household
that monitors mortgage markets continuously but has a large unobserved psychological re…nancing
cost will rarely re…nance at a low incentive, but will reliably do so at a high incentive. A household
with a low probability to even consider re…nancing, on the other hand, will have a low re…nancing
propensity that is relatively insensitive to the level of incentives it faces. A large one-time decline
in interest rates will trigger a rapid re…nancing response from households of the …rst type, but a
delayed response from households of the second type.

   Estimating the model on the Danish data, we document how demographic characteristics alter
the prevalence of state- and time-dependent inaction manifested in slow mortgage re…nancing.
We …nd that psychological re…nancing costs are hump-shaped in age and generally increasing in
measures of socioeconomic status, with a particularly large e¤ect on …nancially wealthy households.
This pattern is consistent with the idea that such costs re‡ect, at least in part, the unmeasured value
of time spent on mortgage re…nancing. By contrast, older households with lower education, income,
housing wealth, and …nancial wealth are less likely to consider re…nancing, regardless of the …nancial
incentive to do so; their slow re…nancing is well described by a time-dependent model. Overall, we
…nd that state-dependent and time-dependent inaction a¤ect di¤erent types of households.

   These …ndings can guide further work modeling household …nancial behavior.           The fact that
older, less educated, and poorer households follow time-dependent re…nancing rules suggests that
for them, information-gathering costs are important. Middle-aged households with higher income
and wealth, however, behave as if their time is valuable and they will allocate it only to activities



                                                   4
with a high payo¤. Household …nance models should accommodate heterogeneity of this sort.

   In addition to providing insights into the sources of inaction in household …nance, our work
has implications for the transmission of monetary policy through the mortgage re…nancing chan-
nel. Consider for example a one-time decline in interest rates to a lower level that then remains
unchanged. In a model with time-dependent inaction, the interest rate decline has delayed e¤ects
on re…nancing, because some households react only with a lag. Over time, however, in a pure
time-dependent model, all households with re…nancing incentives above the optimal threshold do
re…nance. In contrast, in a model with pure state-dependent inaction, the interest rate decline gen-
erates an instantaneous re…nancing wave by the subset of households whose re…nancing incentives
move above the higher threshold de…ned by their psychological re…nancing costs. However there is
no further re…nancing predicted by the pure state-dependent model after the initial period. We
show how these predictions play out in the Danish data using a series of counterfactual, partial
equilibrium simulations from our model.

   A note on the data is in order. Our empirical work analyzes a comprehensive administrative
dataset on re…nancing decisions in Denmark between 2009 and 2017. The Danish mortgage system
is ideal for our purpose because, while it is similar to the US system in that long-term …xed-rate
mortgages are common and can be re…nanced without penalties related to the level of interest rates,
it di¤ers in two ways that facilitate our analysis.

   First, Danish households are free to re…nance their mortgages whenever they choose to do so,
even if their home equity is negative or their credit standing has deteriorated, provided that they do
not “cash out”by extracting home equity. Danish borrowers can add the …xed costs of re…nancing
to their mortgage balance without triggering the cash-out restriction, so re…nancing does not require
liquid …nancial assets and is not a¤ected by borrowing constraints. In the US mortgage system,
by contrast, households are constrained from re…nancing when they have negative home equity or
impaired credit scores, and it is di¢ cult to accurately measure these constraints. These features
of the Danish mortgage system allow us to study household re…nancing behavior without having to
control for the additional constraints that restrict re…nancing in the US.



                                                      5
      Second, the Danish statistical o¢ ce provides us with accurate administrative data on household
demographic and …nancial characteristics at each point in time, for all mortgage borrowers including
both re…nancers and non-re…nancers. This allows us to measure the prevalence of time-and state-
dependent slow re…nancing across demographic groups. This again stands in contrast with the
US system, where it is challenging to measure borrower characteristics continuously. These are
reported only at the time of a mortgage application in the US, through the form required by the
Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA), and hence one cannot directly compare the characteristics
of re…nancers and non-re…nancers at a point in time using these data.



1.1      Related literature

Almost all previous research on mortgage re…nancing has studied US data. Slow mortgage prepay-
ment and risk created by random time-variation in prepayment rates were the main preoccupations
of a large literature on the pricing and hedging of US mortgage-backed securities in the years before
the global …nancial crisis of the late 2000s.5       Since the …nancial crisis, there has been interest
in the extent to which slow re…nancing— caused either by household inaction or by re…nancing
barriers— has reduced the e¤ectiveness of expansionary US monetary policy (Auclert 2016, Agarwal
et al. 2015, Beraja et al. 2017, Di Maggio et al. 2016). Two exceptions to the US focus of the
re…nancing literature are Miles (2004) and Bajo and Barbi (2016), which study the UK and Italy
respectively.    Badarinza et al (2016) advocate more generally for an international comparative
approach to household …nance.

      Within the US re…nancing literature, many papers have tried to overcome the limited data
available on re…nancing constraints and the characteristics of non-re…nancing households. Agarwal,
Rosen, and Yao (2016) and Keys, Pope, and Pope (2016) use a number of ingenious techniques to
handle these problems, combining available data to impute household variables that they cannot
observe such as current creditworthiness and demographic characteristics. Keys, Pope, and Pope
(2016) and Johnson, Meier, and Toubia (2015) also study pre-approved re…nancing o¤ers that
  5
   See for example Schwartz and Torous (1989), McConnell and Singh (1994), Stanton (1995), Deng, Quigley, and
Van Order (2000), Bennett, Peach, and Peristiani (2001), and Gabaix, Krishnamurthy, and Vigneron (2007).

                                                     6
eliminate re…nancing constraints, but these are relatively infrequent and thus samples are small.6 In
the aftermath of the global …nancial crisis, the US government tried to relax re…nancing constraints
through the Home A¤ordable Re…nance Program (HARP), but the e¤ectiveness of this program
remains an outstanding research question (Agarwal et al. 2015, Tracy and Wright 2012, Zandi and
deRitis 2011, Zhu 2012).

      Our work is also related to a broader literature on the di¢ culties households have in managing
their mortgage borrowing.       Campbell and Cocco (2003, 2015) specify models of optimal choice
between FRMs and ARMs, and optimal prepayment and default decisions, showing how challenging
it is to make these decisions correctly.       Chen, Michaux, and Roussanov (2013) similarly study
decisions to extract home equity through cash-out re…nancing, while Khandani, Lo, and Merton
(2013) and Bhutta and Keys (2016) argue that households used cash-out re…nancing to borrow too
aggressively during the housing boom of the early 2000s. Bucks and Pence (2008) provide direct
survey evidence that ARM borrowers are unaware of the exact terms of their mortgages, speci…cally
the range of possible variation in their mortgage rates, and Woodward and Hall (2010, 2012) and
Bhutta, Fuster, and Hizmo (2018) argue that borrowers pay excessive mortgage fees because they
do not shop for lower-cost mortgages.

      A recent literature has explored ways to combine time-dependent and state-dependent inaction.
Nakamura and Steinsson (2010) estimate a “CalvoPlus” model of …rms’price-setting which incor-
porates both elements. Some recent theoretical papers have characterized optimal behavior when
households have both action costs and information-gathering costs (Alvarez, Lippi, and Paciello
2011, Abel, Eberly, and Panageas 2013). Optimal policies are complicated in this situation, and
typically involve both discrete periods of inactivity and inaction ranges. The two types of costs
have interacting e¤ects, because the bene…t of gathering information is reduced when the action
that would exploit the information is itself costly; and the optimal threshold for taking action in a
particular period, having gathered information, may be lower when an agent knows that considering
action in the future will incur a new information-gathering cost.           Structural estimation of such
  6
   Earlier attempts to control for constraints and measure re…nancer and non-re…nancer characteristics include
Archer, Ling, and McGill (1996), Campbell (2006), Caplin, Freeman, and Tracy (1997), LaCour-Little (1999), and
Schwartz (2006).


                                                      7
models is challenging, although Alvarez, Guiso, and Lippi (2012) make some progress using data in
which households’observations of …nancial conditions are directly measured.

    The organization of our paper is as follows.       Section 2 explains the Danish mortgage system
and household data.     Section 3 summarizes the deviations of Danish household behavior from a
benchmark model of rational re…nancing.        Section 4 sets up our econometric model with both
time-dependent and state-dependent inaction, estimates the model empirically, and interprets the
cross-sectional patterns of coe¢ cients. This section also assesses the robustness of our results to the
mortgage sample and the speci…cation of the optimal re…nancing threshold, and uses our model to
ask how plausible modi…cations to the mortgage system might a¤ect re…nancing behavior. Section
5 concludes.   An online appendix (Andersen, Campbell, Nielsen, and Ramadorai 2019) provides
many supporting details.




2     The Danish Mortgage System and Household Data

2.1    The Danish mortgage system

The Danish mortgage system is similar to the US system in o¤ering long-term …xed-rate mortgages
without prepayment penalties, but it has a number of design features that di¤er from the US
model (Campbell 2013, Gyntelberg et al. 2012, Lea 2011). In this section we brie‡y review the
funding of Danish mortgages and the rules governing re…nancing.          Online Appendix A provides
some additional details on the Danish system.

    A. Mortgage funding

    Danish mortgages, like those in some other continental European countries, are funded using
covered bonds: obligations of mortgage lenders that are collateralized by pools of mortgages. These
bonds are currently issued by seven mortgage banks, who operate in a highly competitive market
and charge very similar mortgage rates and administration fees. While mortgages on various types



                                                   8
of property are eligible as collateral for mortgage bonds, mortgages on residential property dominate
most collateral pools.

       Danish mortgage banks act as intermediaries between investors and borrowers. Investors buy
mortgage bonds which are issued by the mortgage banks and backed by a pool of mortgages, while
borrowers take out mortgages from the banks. All lending is secured, and once banks initially screen
borrowers, they have no further in‡uence on mortgage rates, which are entirely determined by the
market. Borrowers pay the coupons on the mortgage bonds, as well as a fee to the mortgage bank
to compensate for administrative costs and the bank’s credit exposure. This fee is roughly 70 basis
points on average, and depends on the loan-to-value (LTV) ratio on the mortgage, but is otherwise
independent of household characteristics. Borrowers’retail banks work with the mortgage banks
to arrange mortgage issuance and settle monthly payments.

       Under this system mortgage payments, including prepayments, ‡ow directly to covered bond
investors.     As a result, prepayments do not a¤ect the cash ‡ows received by mortgage banks,
except through their e¤ect on fee receipts on account of contract termination.                    If a borrower
defaults, however, the mortgage bank must replace the defaulted mortgage in the pool that backs
the mortgage bond. This ensures that investors are una¤ected by defaults in their borrower pool
so long as the bank remains solvent. In e¤ect, bond investors bear interest rate and prepayment
risk, while mortgage banks retain credit risk.7

       Traditionally the Danish system has been dominated by …xed-rate mortgages, although adjustable-
rate mortgages have become more popular in the last 15 years.                 Badarinza, Campbell, and Ra-
madorai (2016) report that the average share of adjustable-rate mortgages in Denmark was 45% in
the period 2003–13, with a standard deviation of 13%. At the beginning of our sample period in
2009, the adjustable-rate mortgage share was roughly 40%.

       B. Re…nancing

       Fixed-rate mortgage borrowers in Denmark have the right to prepay their mortgages without
   7
    Banks’credit risk exposure is reduced by the fact that Danish mortgages, like those in other European countries
and in some US states, have personal recourse against borrowers.


                                                        9
incurring penalties.     As in the US, re…nancing fees increase with mortgage size but do not vary
with the level of interest rates. However the prepayment system in Denmark also di¤ers from the
US system in several important respects.

       An important feature is that the Danish mortgage system imposes minimal barriers to any
re…nancing that does not “cash out”(in a sense to be made more precise below). Danish borrowers
can re…nance their mortgages to reduce their interest rate and/or extend their loan maturity, without
cashing out, even if their homes have declined in value (i.e., even when they have negative home
equity). Related to this, re…nancing without cashing out does not require a review of the borrower’s
credit quality.8 Moreover, re…nancing costs do not need to be paid up front, but can be added to
mortgage principal as part of a re…nancing, without being counted as a cash-out. These features of
the system imply that all mortgage borrowers, including those whose credit quality has deteriorated,
can bene…t from a decline in interest rates, even in a weak economy with declining house prices and
consumer deleveraging.

       Mortgage banks have incentives to re…nance mortgages in this way because, as previously men-
tioned, they do not receive mortgage cash ‡ows but do bear credit risk; and re…nancing to take
advantage of lower interest rates reduces the risk of default by lowering mortgage payments and
relieving household budgets. Retail banks, similarly, have incentives to advise their customers to
re…nance because they earn fees for arranging the transaction. This structure reduces re…nancing
frictions that have been identi…ed in the US market arising from imperfect competition in mortgage
origination (Agarwal et al. 2015).

       The mechanics of re…nancing in Denmark are as follows. A mortgage bank, working on behalf
of a borrower, repurchases mortgage bonds corresponding to the mortgage debt, and delivers them
to the mortgage lender. This repurchase can be done either at market value or at face value. It
is advantageous to repurchase bonds at market value if interest rates have risen since mortgage
   8
    Denmark does not have a system of continuous credit scores like the widely used FICO scores in the US. Instead,
there is what amounts to a zero/one scoring system that can be used to label an individual as a delinquent borrower
(“dårlig betaler”) who has unpaid debt outstanding. A delinquent borrower would be unlikely to obtain a mortgage,
but a borrower with an existing mortgage can re…nance, without cashing out, even if he or she has been labeled as
delinquent since the mortgage was taken out.



                                                        10
origination, but in an environment of declining interest rates such as the one we study, it is cheaper
to repurchase bonds at face value as in a US re…nancing.9

       An important point is that mortgage bonds in Denmark are issued with discrete coupon rates,
historically at integer levels and more recently at 50-basis point intervals. Market yields, of course,
‡uctuate continuously. Danish mortgage bonds can never be issued at a premium to face value,
since this would allow instantaneous advantageous re…nancing, and normally are issued at a discount
to face value; in other words, the market yield is somewhat above the discrete coupon at issue. This
implies that to raise, say, DKK 1 million for a mortgage, bonds must be issued with a face value
which is higher than DKK 1 million. Re…nancing the mortgage in an environment of falling rates
requires buying the full face value of the bonds that were originally issued to …nance it. Therefore
the interest saving from re…nancing in the Danish system is given by the spread between the coupon
rate on the old mortgage bond (not the yield on the mortgage when it was issued) and the yield on
a new mortgage.

       Similarly, re…nancing increases mortgage principal because new bonds must be issued at a dis-
count to repurchase the old ones.            However, such a transaction does not count as a cash-out
re…nancing provided that the market value of the newly issued mortgage bonds is no greater than
the face value of the old mortgage bonds plus any re…nancing costs that have been borrowed as
part of the re…nancing.

       Importantly, this increase in mortgage principal has a much smaller impact on Danish borrowers
than it would do in the US mortgage system. Danish borrowers have the option to pay o¤ their
mortgage at market value or face value (an option that survives even in the event of default); and
at mortgage origination market value is below face value, so market value is the relevant measure of
the burden of the debt. The higher face value becomes relevant only in the event that interest rates
decline far enough for borrowers to consider a second re…nancing. In that event, the re…nancing
   9
     In a rising interest-rate environment, the option to repurchase bonds at market value is a valuable feature of the
Danish mortgage system. It prevents “lock-in” by allowing homeowners who move to buy out their old mortgages
at a discounted market value rather than prepaying at face value as is required in the US system. It also allows
homeowners to take advantage of disruptions in the mortgage bond market by e¤ectively buying back their own debt
if a mortgage-bond …re sale occurs.



                                                          11
incentive will once again be the spread between the coupon rate on the mortgage bond and the
currently prevailing yield.10

       Cash-out re…nancing does require su¢ ciently positive home equity and good credit status. For
this reason, cash-out re…nancing has been less common in Denmark in the period we examine
since the onset of the housing downturn in the late 2000s.              In our dataset 26% of re…nancings
are associated with an increase in mortgage principal of 10% or more, enough to classify these as
cash-out re…nancings with a high degree of con…dence. In the paper we present results that include
these re…nancings, but in section 4.5 we show that our results are robust to excluding them.



2.2       Danish household data

A. Data sources

       Our dataset covers the universe of adult Danes in the period between 2009 and 2017, and
contains both demographic and economic information about this population. We derive data from
four di¤erent administrative registers made available through Statistics Denmark.

       We obtain mortgage data from the Danmarks Nationalbank, which in turn obtains the data
from mortgage banks through the Association of Danish Mortgage Banks (Realkreditrådet) and
the Danish Mortgage Banks’ Federation (Realkreditforeningen). The data are annual and cover
all mortgage banks and all mortgages in Denmark.11 We have personal identi…cation numbers for
borrowers, identi…cation numbers for mortgages, and information on mortgage terms (principal,
outstanding principal, coupon, annual fees, maturity, loan-to-value, issue date, etc.)

       We obtain demographic information from the Danish Civil Registration System (CPR Regis-
teret). These records cover the entire Danish population and include each individual’s personal
  10
    We are grateful to Susan Woodward for discussions on this point.
  11
    The data use agreement requires us to merge data from all mortgage banks and does not allow us to study
variation across banks. The Danish mortgage market is competitive and o¤ers virtually homogeneous products,
with minimal rate variation across banks. Consequently, we believe that bank-speci…c e¤ects are not of …rst-order
importance for our inferences.



                                                       12
identi…cation number (CPR), as well as their name, gender, date of birth, and marital history
(number of marriages, divorces, and history of spousal bereavement). The records also contain a
unique household identi…cation number, as well as CPR numbers of each individual’s spouse and any
children in the household. We use these data to obtain demographic information about mortgage
borrowers.

   We obtain income and wealth information from the Danish Tax Authority (SKAT). This dataset
contains total and disaggregated income and wealth information by CPR numbers for the entire
Danish population. SKAT receives this information directly from the relevant third-party sources,
because employers supply statements of wages paid to their employees, and …nancial institutions
supply information to SKAT on their customers’ deposits, interest paid (or received), security
investments, and dividends. Because taxation in Denmark mainly occurs at the source level, the
income and wealth information are highly reliable.

   Some components of wealth are not recorded by SKAT. The Danish Tax Authority does not
have information about individuals’holdings of unbanked cash, the value of their cars, debt owed
to private individuals, de…ned-contribution pension savings, private businesses, or other informal
wealth holdings. This leads some individuals to be recorded as having negative net …nancial wealth
because we observe debts but not corresponding assets, for example in the case where a person has
borrowed to …nance a new car.

   Finally, we obtain the level of education from the Danish Ministry of Education (Undervis-
ningsministeriet). This register identi…es the highest level of education and the resulting professional
quali…cations. On this basis we calculate the number of years of schooling.

   B. Sample selection

   Our sample selection entails linking individual mortgages to the household characteristics of
borrowers. We de…ne a household as one or two adults living at the same postal address. To be
able to credibly track the ownership of each mortgage we additionally require that each household
has an unchanging number of adult members over two subsequent years. This allows us to identify



                                                  13
2,698,011 Danish households overall in 2009 (the number of households increases slightly over time,
to 2,884,184 in 2017).

       To operationalize our analysis of re…nancing, we begin by identifying households with a single
…xed-rate mortgage. This is done in four steps, year-by-year. First we identify households holding
any mortgages in a given year, leaving us with, for example, 960,159 households in 2009. Second, to
simplify the analysis of re…nancing choice, we focus on households with a single mortgage observed
in two consecutive years, leaving us with 641,786 households in the 2009–2010 consecutive year
period. Third, we focus on households with …xed-rate mortgages, as these are the households
who have …nancial incentives to re…nance when interest rates decline. This leaves us with 330,350
households holding a single …xed-rate mortgage which we can track in the 2009-2010 consecutive
year period. Following this approach to data construction, our …nal sample has 2,376,815 household
observations across the eight years. Finally, we expand the data to the quarterly frequency using
mortgage issue dates reported in the annual mortgage data, giving us a total of 9,351,183 household-
quarters during which we can study re…nancing decisions.12

       We observe a total of 378,421 re…nancings across the eight years, i.e., a re…nancing rate of
approximately 4%. Of these re…nancings, 113,333 were from …xed-rate to adjustable-rate mortgages,
and 265,088 from …xed-rate to …xed-rate mortgages (or in a small minority of cases, to capped
adjustable-rate mortgages which have similar properties to true …xed-rate mortgages). We treat
both types of re…nancings in the same way and do not attempt to model the choice of an adjustable-
rate versus a …xed-rate mortgage at the point of re…nancing.13

       Collectively, our selection criteria ensure that the re…nancings we measure are undertaken for
economic reasons. Re…nancing in our sample occurs when a household changes from one …xed-rate
mortgage to another mortgage (whether it is …xed- or adjustable-rate) on the same property. Mort-
  12
     This is less than the number of yearly observations times four, because some households re…nance from a …xed-
rate mortgage to an adjustable-rate mortgage, and drop out of the sample in subsequent quarters in the year. Our
imputation of quarterly re…nancings will be incorrect if a mortgage re…nances twice in the same calendar year (since
only the second re…nancing will be recorded at the end of the year), but we believe this event to be exceedingly rare.
  13
     The comparison of adjustable- and …xed-rate mortgages is complex and has been discussed by Dhillon, Shilling,
and Sirmans (1987), Brueckner and Follain (1988), Campbell and Cocco (2003, 2015), Koijen, Van Hemert, and Van
Niewerburgh (2009), Johnson and Li (2014), and Badarinza, Campbell, and Ramadorai (2017) among others. We
verify in section 4.5 that our results are robust to excluding re…nancings from …xed- to adjustable-rate mortgages.

                                                         14
gage terminations that are driven by household-speci…c events, such as moves, death, or divorce,
are treated separately by predicting the probability of mortgage termination, and using the …tted
probability as an input into our models of optimal re…nancing. This approach di¤ers from that of
the US prepayment literature, which seeks to predict all mortgage terminations regardless of their
cause.




3     Deviations from Rational Re…nancing

3.1      The optimal re…nancing threshold

A household should re…nance when its incentive to do so is positive. We write the incentive as Iit ,
to indicate that it depends on the characteristics of household i and the household’s mortgage at
time t. In the Danish context the incentive is the coupon rate on the mortgage bond corresponding
to the current mortgage Citold , less the interest rate on a new mortgage Yitnew , less a threshold level
Oit , which again depends on household and mortgage characteristics:



                                      Iit = (Citold    Yitnew )   Oit .                              (1)


    Optimal re…nancing of a …xed-rate mortgage, given …xed costs of re…nancing, is a complex
real options problem. The optimal re…nancing threshold Oit takes the …xed cost of re…nancing into
account, and captures the option value of waiting for further interest-rate declines. To measure Oit ,
for our main analysis we adapt a formula due to Agarwal, Driscoll, and Laibson (ADL 2013). (In
section 4.5 we verify that our results are not sensitive to this speci…c formulation of the threshold, by
recomputing the threshold using the approach of Chen and Ling (1989)). The ADL model assumes
that mortgages have an in…nite maturity with principal declining at an exogenous constant rate,
that mortgages may be re…nanced multiple times, that mortgage borrowers are risk-neutral with
respect to re…nancing proceeds, and that the mortgage interest rate follows an arithmetic random



                                                      15
walk. The last assumption approximates the behavior of the long-term interest rate in standard
term structure models, because substantial predictability in long-term interest rate changes would
imply highly pro…table trading strategies in long-term bonds which are ruled out by such models.

   ADL’s closed-form solution for the re…nancing threshold Oit is:

                                          1
                               Oit =           [    it   + W ( exp(                      it ))] ;                             (2)
                                          it
                                          r
                                              2( +            it )
                                 it   =                              ;                                                        (3)
                                                                                    (mit )
                                 it   = 1+         it (       +          it )                :                                (4)
                                                                                mit (1     )



Here W (:) is the Lambert W -function, and               it   and               it   are two household-speci…c inputs to the
formula, which in turn depend on interpretable marketwide and household-speci…c parameters. The
marketwide parameters are , the discount rate; , the volatility of the annual change in the interest
rate; and , the marginal tax rate that determines the tax bene…t of mortgage interest deductions.
Although the Danish tax system is progressive, the tax bene…t of mortgage interest deductions is
applied at a …xed tax rate, consistent with ADL’s assumptions.                                      We calibrate these parameters
using a mixture of the recommended parameters in ADL and sensible values given the Danish
context, setting   = 0:0074; = 0:33; and           = 0:05.

   An important household-speci…c parameter is mi;t , the size of the mortgage for household i at
time t. This determines (mi;t ), the monetary re…nancing cost. We establish from a sample of
price lists obtained from Danish mortgage banks, and from conversations with these banks, that
the total DKK monetary cost of re…nancing is well approximated by


                         (mi;t ) = 3000 + max(0:002mi;t ; 4000) + 0:001mi;t :                                                 (5)


The …rst two terms correspond to bank handling fees in the range DKK 3; 000                                     7; 000 (about US$
450   1; 050) and the third term represents the cost incurred to trade mortgage bonds to implement
the re…nancing. For extremely large mortgages, the third term may not increase directly with the

                                                          16
size of the new mortgage (as there are signi…cant incentives for wealthy households to shop, and
variation across banks in their “capping”policies) so we additionally winsorize (mi;t ) at the 99th
percentile of (5), a value just below DKK 10; 000 (about $1,500).                                         This additional winsorization
does not make a material di¤erence to our results.

       The remaining household-speci…c parameter is                           i;t ,     the expected rate of decline in the real
principal of the mortgage for reasons other than rate-reducing re…nancing.                                             Following ADL we
de…ne      i;t   as
                                                                         Yi;told
                                           i;t   =         +                                  +    t:                                     (6)
                                                     i;t
                                                               exp(Yi;told Ti;t )         1
The three terms in this expression are the exogenous mortgage termination hazard                                              i;t
                                                                                                                                    , the rate
of nominal principal paydown, and the in‡ation rate                                t.    We estimate          i;t   at the household level
using additional data in an auxiliary regression. Mortgage termination can occur for many reasons,
including the household relocating and selling the property, experiencing a windfall and paying
down the principal amount, or simply because the household ceases to exist because of death or
divorce. (We infer these events from the register data, and of course, exclude re…nancing from
the de…nition of mortgage termination.) Without seeking to di¤erentiate these causes, we use all
households with a single …xed-rate mortgage and estimate, for each year in the sample,


                                    i;t   = p(Termination) = p( 0 zit +                       it   > 0);                                  (7)


where      it   is a standard logistic distributed random variable, using a vector zit of household charac-
teristics.14

       The remaining variables in (6) are Yitold , the yield on the household’s pre-existing (“old”) mort-
gage; Ti;t , the number of years remaining on the mortgage; and                                    t,   the in‡ation rate. We calculate
the yield on the old mortgage using mortgage bond yields in 10-year maturity bands.15 We set                                                 t

  14
     Online Appendix Table B1 reports the estimated coe¢ cients, and Figure B1 shows a histogram of the estimated
mortgage termination probabilities, with a dashed line showing the position of the ADL suggested “hardwired”level
of 10% per annum. The mean of our estimated termination probabilities is 11.4%, larger than the median of 8.1%
because the distribution of termination probabilities is right-skewed. The standard deviation of this distribution is
10.1%.
  15
     That is, in each quarter, for mortgages with 10 or fewer years to maturity, we use the average 10 year mortgage


                                                                    17
equal to realized consumer price in‡ation over the past year, a standard proxy for expected in‡ation
that varies between 2.0% and 3.0% during our sample period.

    Figure 1 plots the ADL threshold level in basis points associated with each …xed cost in DKK.
The …gure shows that the ADL threshold is a concave function of …xed costs, but becomes roughly
linear at high levels of …xed costs. The level and slope of the function are considerably greater for
smaller mortgages, and slightly greater for older mortgages with shorter remaining time to maturity,
because …xed costs are more important relative to interest savings for these mortgages. This implies
that for any given mortgage, the threshold rises over time as principal is paid down and remaining
maturity declines; hence, the incentive to re…nance declines over time if the interest rate remains
unchanged. This e¤ect is small for new mortgages (and for most of the mortgages in our sample),
but it becomes increasingly important as mortgages age. In section 4.5 we discuss the sensitivity
of the threshold to the parameters we have assumed.

    We note two minor limitations of the ADL formula in our context.                     First, it gives us the
incentive for a household to re…nance from a …xed-rate mortgage to another …xed-rate mortgage.
Some households in our sample re…nance from …xed-rate to adjustable-rate mortgages, implying
that they perceive a new ARM as even more attractive than a new FRM. We do not attempt to
model this decision here but simply use the ADL formula for all initially …xed-rate mortgages and
re…nancings, whether or not the new mortgage carries a …xed rate. We verify in section 4.5 that
our results are robust to excluding FRM-to-ARM re…nancings.

    Second, the ADL formula ignores the fact, unique to the Danish system, that re…nancing may
increase the mortgage principal balance because the coupon on the new mortgage bond is lower than
the market yield.      Because Danish households have the option to pay o¤ a mortgage at market
value, which is below face value immediately after a re…nancing, this increase in the mortgage
principal has no economic e¤ect except in the event that interest rates decline in the future to the
point where the household considers re…nancing the new mortgage. The value of the re…nancing
bond yield to compute incentives, and for remaining tenures between 10-20 years (greater than 20 years) we use the
average 20 year (30 year) bond yield. These 10, 20, and 30 year yields are calculated as value-weighted averages of
yields on all newly issued mortgage bonds with maturities of 10, 20, and 30 years, respectively.



                                                        18
option attached to the new mortgage is determined by the new mortgage bond coupon, and is lower
than that assumed by the ADL formula whenever that coupon is lower than the current market
yield, in other words, whenever the mortgage principal increases.                 In section 4.5, we bound the
magnitude of this e¤ect by comparing the ADL model with an alternative model due to Chen and
Ling (1989) that excludes subsequent re…nancings entirely.



3.2       Re…nancing and incentives

Table 1 summarizes the characteristics of Danish …xed-rate mortgages, and households’ propen-
sity to re…nance them. As mentioned earlier, we have over 9.3 million quarterly observations of
household mortgages. The average mortgage has an outstanding principal of DKK 983,000 (about
$147,000), just over 23 years to maturity, and a loan-to-value ratio of 60%. These characteristics
are fairly stable over our sample period, although principal and loan-to-value ratios do increase
somewhat in later years.

      The average re…nancing rate in our sample is 4% per quarter, and among these, 70% are re…-
nanced to …xed-rate mortgages, and 30% to adjustable-rate mortgages. The incentive to re…nance,
calculated using coupon rates on outstanding mortgage bonds in relation to current mortgage yields
less the threshold estimated from the ADL formula (1) from the previous section, is negative for
56% of the household-quarter observations and positive for the remaining 44%. The re…nancing
rate is much lower at negative incentives (1.3%) than at positive incentives (7.6%).

      Figure 2 illustrates the cross-sectional distribution of incentives and re…nancing activity in
greater detail.16 The top panel of the …gure is a histogram of incentives, treating each household-
quarter as a separate observation. The distribution of incentives is centered slightly to the left of
zero, but with a long right tail, including some incentives well above 2%. The frequency of re…nanc-
ing at each incentive is superimposed on this histogram: it rises from a low level in the neighborhood
of a zero incentive, peaks at an incentive around 1.25%, and declines at higher incentives.
 16
      Online Appendix Table B2 reports year-by-year quantiles of this distribution.




                                                         19
   The second panel of Figure 2 is a histogram of incentives at which re…nances occur, treating each
re…nancing as a separate observation. The increase in the re…nancing rate at positive incentives,
shown in the top panel, shifts the histogram in the second panel to the right relative to the histogram
in the top panel.     Most re…nances occur at modest positive incentives, but about 18% occur at
negative incentives and others at large positive incentives.

   The third panel of Figure 2 illustrates the tendency for re…nancing to be substantially delayed
relative to the …rst date at which a household has a positive incentive to re…nance. The …gure plots
the Kaplan-Meier survival curve for mortgages with positive incentives, taking account of censoring
caused either by a return to a negative incentive, or by the end of the sample period. The …gure
shows that even four years after a positive incentive is reached, about half of mortgages have still
failed to re…nance.

   Figure 3 illustrates the dynamics of re…nancing in relation to re…nancing incentives. The top
panel is a bar chart that shows the number of re…nancings in each quarter. Our sample includes
three large re…nancing waves, in 2010, 2012, and 2014–15, and a smaller re…nancing wave in 2016–17.
Between these waves there were quiet periods in 2011, 2013, and late 2015.

   The components of each bar are shaded to indicate the coupon rate of the re…nancing mortgage,
with high coupons shaded pale blue and low coupons shaded dark blue, from 6% or above at the
high end to below 3% at the low end. Unsurprisingly the higher coupons tend to re…nance earlier
in our sample period.

   The bottom panel of Figure 3 plots the Danish mortgage interest rate (measured as the minimum
average weekly mortgage rate during each quarter) as a solid line declining over the sample period
from almost 5% to below 2%, with upticks that align with the quiet periods of low re…nancing
activity. The horizontal colored lines in this panel show the average ADL re…nancing thresholds
for mortgages with each coupon rate from 6% to 2.5%. Taken together, the top and bottom panels
of the …gure show that each re…nancing wave is dominated by mortgages for which the interest rate
has already passed the ADL threshold. This is another way to see that Danish mortgage borrowers
do not respond promptly to positive ADL re…nancing incentives.


                                                  20
3.3    Taking account of heterogeneous re…nancing thresholds

The evidence reported so far could be consistent with a pure state-dependent model in which
households have heterogeneous unobserved re…nancing thresholds. If we had a single cross-section
of mortgage re…nancing, we could never reject such a model.       The observed re…nancing rate by
ADL incentive in the top panel of Figure 2 would tell us the fraction of households at each ADL
incentive level that have a positive incentive relative to their own unobserved threshold, but the
model would not place any restrictions on the data.

   Because we observe households over time, we can use the dynamics of re…nancing to show
that a pure state-dependent model is inadequate to explain Danish household behavior. Panel B
of Table 1 reports summary statistics by household.      Of the 614,811 households in our dataset,
almost 50% never re…nance, 40% re…nance once, 9% re…nance twice, and 1% re…nance three or
more times. Once a single re…nancing has been observed, the pure state-dependent model has two
strong implications that contrast with graphical evidence shown in Figure 4.

   First, a household that re…nances should never do so at an ADL incentive that is lower than the
highest incentive it has previously experienced. For the 50% of households that re…nance at least
once in our dataset, the top panel of Figure 4 shows the histogram of the di¤erence between the
incentive at the re…nancing date and the highest previous incentive. This di¤erence is frequently
negative (35% of observations), implying that households could have got better rates by re…nancing
earlier. This …nding is particularly striking since the downward trend in interest rates during our
sample period implies that increases in re…nancing incentives are more common than declines.

   Second, a household that has re…nanced once should always re…nance again when the same ADL
incentive is reached. For the 10% of households that re…nance at least twice in our dataset, the
middle panel of Figure 4 shows the distribution of the di¤erence between the incentive at second
re…nancing and the incentive at …rst re…nancing.      This distribution is extremely dispersed, with
a standard deviation of 327 basis points, contrary to the point mass at zero implied by a pure
state-dependent model.



                                                21
   The pattern in the middle panel cannot be explained by short delays in household re…nancing
decisions. The bottom panel of Figure 4 shows the Kaplan-Meier survival curve after a mortgage
that has been re…nanced once reaches the ADL incentive that previously triggered re…nancing. It
is common for mortgages to go several years without re…nancing in these circumstances.



3.4     Household characteristics and the costs of slow re…nancing

How do observable household characteristics a¤ect re…nancing behavior?         In Online Appendix
Table B3 we provide a comprehensive set of descriptive statistics for all households with a …xed-
rate mortgage. In our full sample, 25% of all households consist of a single member, and 63% are
married couples. The remainder are cohabiting couples. 41% of households have children living
in the household. In each year an average 1% of households got married and 4% experienced the
birth of a child.

   We have direct measures of …nancial literacy, de…ned as a degree in …nance or economics, or
professional training in …nance, for at least one member of the household. 6% of households are
…nancially literate in this strong sense. A larger fraction of households, 16%, have members of their
extended family (including non-resident parents, siblings, in-laws, or children) who are …nancially
literate.

   The table also compares household characteristics between re…nancing and non-re…nancing
households (measured in January of each year). Re…nancers are more likely to be married and to
have children, and less likely to be single. They are also more likely to be experiencing important
life events such as marriage or the birth of a child. Our two measures of …nancial literacy are also
higher for re…nancing households.

   In our empirical analysis we use demeaned ranks of age, education, income, …nancial wealth,
and housing wealth rather than the actual values of these variables. Online Appendix Table B4
reports selected percentiles of the underlying distribution for all households, and separately for
re…nancing and non-re…nancing households. A comparison of ranked variables across re…nancers


                                                 22
and non-re…nancers shows that re…nancers are younger and better educated, and have higher income
and housing wealth but lower …nancial wealth. We …nd similar patterns when we look separately
at households with positive and negative ADL re…nancing incentives in Online Appendix Table B5,
or when we estimate logit re…nancing models that include all demographic variables simultaneously
with re…nancing incentives.

   Older and less educated households with lower income and housing wealth re…nance less often.
As a way to quantify the ex post costs of this behavior in our sample period, we follow households
through the sample and compare the interest savings realized from households’actual re…nancing
decisions with those that would have been realized by an optimal strategy of re…nancing at the
ADL threshold in each quarter. We call the di¤erence between these two savings “missed”interest
rate savings, a measure of the cost of slow re…nancing along the particular path that interest rates
followed in our sample. The procedure allows households to re…nance multiple times if it would
have been optimal to do so. Savings are calculated as a percentage of mortgage principal, in DKK,
and as a percentage of household income and then averaged across households. Results are reported
in Online Appendix Table B6.

   As a percentage of mortgage principal, we estimate an average of 55 basis points of realized
savings across all households in all years of our sample, but 98 basis points of optimal savings
implying 43 basis points of missed savings. Missed savings average DKK 2; 700 per year and 58
basis points of household income.

   On average, missed savings are substantial and positive in all quarters of our sample. This is
true despite the fact that, along a path of declining interest rates, delayed re…nancing can result
in a lower interest rate after re…nancing and hence an ex post bene…t at the end of our sample
period. While some households do pay lower rates at the end of the sample than they would have
if they had re…nanced optimally, this is not the case on average— which may not be surprising in
light of the fact that almost 50% of households in our sample do not re…nance at any time during
our sample period.

   When we sort households into quintiles by ranked variables we …nd that older people, less


                                                23
educated people, and people with lower income and housing wealth realize smaller savings and
miss greater savings as a percentage of their mortgage principal. In contrast, people with greater
…nancial wealth have slightly lower realized savings and considerably greater missed savings as a
percentage of mortgage principal, possibly connected to their higher opportunity costs of paying
attention to the mortgage re…nancing decision.          Missed savings can be a substantial fraction of
income for some groups: for example, they average 86 basis points of income for households in
the lowest education quintile and 118 basis points of income for households in the lowest income
quintile.

    Figure 5 summarizes these patterns graphically. The …gure plots re…nancing e¢ ciency, de…ned
as the ratio of realized savings to optimal savings in DKK, across quintiles of the distribution for age,
education, income, …nancial wealth, and housing wealth.          Re…nancing e¢ ciency is hump-shaped
in age with a peak around 75% at roughly the 25th percentile of age in the sample, and a decline
among older households to about 60%. It increases with education, income, and housing wealth
from about 50% to about 75%, and is fairly ‡at around 70% in relation to …nancial wealth. These
estimates support the concern expressed by Miles (2004), Campbell (2006), Agarwal, Rosen, and
Yao (2016), and Keys, Pope, and Pope (2016) that the mortgage re…nancing decision is challenging
for some people. We now estimate a structural re…nancing model to gain greater insight about the
nature of this challenge.




4     A Model of Slow Re…nancing

4.1    A mixture model of re…nancing behavior

A. State-dependent inaction: re…nancing with psychological costs

    Consider a model of mortgage choice in which the probability that a household i re…nances its
…xed-rate mortgage at time t (the event yit = 1) depends on the household’s perceived re…nancing
incentive, its responsiveness to the incentive, and a standard logistic distributed stochastic choice


                                                   24
error    it   following Luce (1959).

      The re…nancing probability of the household i at time t can be written as


                            pi;t (yi;t = 1 j zit ; '; i ; ) = p(exp( )I (zit ; '; i ) +     it   > 0):                   (8)


Here zit is a set of household and mortgage characteristics at time t.                            The parameter vector '
and the household-speci…c scalar            i   interact with those characteristics to determine the level of the
re…nancing incentive I .           The scalar parameter                  governs the household’s responsiveness to the
incentive; for simplicity we do not allow this parameter to vary across households.

      We model the re…nancing incentive using the ADL model from the previous section, with one
important change. The re…nancing cost (mit ), which in the rational model depends only on the
size of the mortgage mit , is now replaced by:


                                         (mit; zit ; ') = (mit ) + exp('0 zit + i );                                     (9)


where
                                                                          2
                                                           i     N (0;        ):                                        (10)

Here observable characteristics zit add a psychological component to the re…nancing cost through the
term '0 zit : The e¤ect of household characteristics captures a great deal of the observed heterogeneity
in re…nancing behavior. However, there still may be heterogeneity related to unobservables, and
                                                                                                         2
this is captured by the random variable                i       which has cross-sectional variance            .   The modi…ed
re…nancing incentive I (zit ; '; i ) is given by equations (1)-(7), replacing (5) with (9).

      For given     i,   this speci…cation implies that the likelihood contribution of each household choice
is:
                                 Lit ('; i ; ) =      [2yi; t       1][exp( )I (zit ; '; i )] ;                         (11)

where         (:) is the inverse logistic function,            (x) = exp(x)=(1 + exp(x)). This model of household
choice underlies the commonly used logit regression.


                                                                  25
              2
       When       > 0,   i   is random, and in this case we have a model with random coe¢ cients. Estima-
tion of such a model can be undertaken using maximum simulated likelihood (MSL) methods. The
essential idea of MSL methods is to evaluate the likelihood for random draws of                  i    for each house-
hold from the proposed distribution of          i,   and then to average these simulated likelihoods. So each
likelihood evaluation involves H extra evaluations, where H is the number of random draws from
the distribution. Advances in computational power, and clever ways of drawing random sequences
to ensure good coverage of the intended density with minimal H, make it feasible to undertake MSL
for a problem such as ours.17

       B. Time-dependent inaction: a mixture model

       To capture the phenomenon of time-dependent inaction, we use a mixture model.18 We assume
that households can be in one of two states which we call “awake” and “asleep”. In each period
a household is asleep with probability wit and awake with probability 1                  wit , where 0 < wit < 1.
Awake households re…nance with the probability given above in equation (8). Asleep households
re…nance with zero probability, which can be captured numerically by altering (8) to have a large
negative re…nancing incentive.

       The probability that a household is asleep in any period is modeled by

                                                           exp( 0 zit )
                                             wit ( ) =                    :                                     (12)
                                                         1 + exp( 0 zit )

The likelihood contribution for household i is a …nite mixture of proportions:


                    Lit ( ; '; i ; ) = wit ( )Lasleep
                                               it     ('; i ; ) + (1      wit ( ))Lawake
                                                                                   it    ('; i ; ):             (13)
  17
     Standard references include Gouriéroux and Monfort (1996), Train (2009), and Cameron and Trivedi (2005).
Gaudecker, Soest and Wengström (2011) and Handel (2013) are recent applications of the methods that we employ.
  18
     Mixture models have a long history in statistics since Pearson (1894). A recent survey is presented in McLachlan
and Peel (2000). Two applications where mixture models are used to uncover decision rules are El-Gamal and Grether
(1995) for Bayesian updating behavior, and Harrison and Rutström (2009) for models of decision-making under risk.




                                                          26
This leads to the household log likelihood function over our sample speci…ed as:

                                                   XX
                              ln L( ; '; i ; ) =            ln (Lit ( ; '; i ; )) :                      (14)
                                                   t    i



   This framework models deviations from rational re…nancing using two parameter vectors                  and
                        2
', a scalar parameter       that governs the variance of      i   in equation (14), and a scalar parameter .
The parameter vector        captures the demographic determinants of the probability that a house-
hold is awake and responding to re…nancing incentives in a given period. The parameter vector
' determines whether particular demographic characteristics are associated with higher or lower
                                                                   2
psychological re…nancing costs. The scalar parameter                   captures unobserved permanent hetero-
geneity in household psychological re…nancing costs. Finally, the scalar parameter               determines
the responsiveness of households in each period to the modi…ed re…nancing incentive. One inter-
pretation of this parameter is that it re‡ects unobserved household-level shocks to the re…nancing
threshold, which are uncorrelated both across households and over time.

   In any cross-section these parameters determine a set of curves, each of which relates the re-
…nancing frequency for a household with a given set of demographic characteristics to the ADL
re…nancing incentive at a point in time. The model implies that each curve has a logistic form,
close to zero for highly negative incentives and positive for highly positive incentives. The height
of the curve for highly positive incentives measures the probability that the given type of household
is awake. The horizontal position of the point where the curve reaches half this height measures
the increment to the ADL threshold implied by the average psychological re…nancing costs for this
                                                                                                    2
type of household. The slope of the curve at this point is governed by the parameters                   and ,
which for simplicity we do not allow to vary with household demographics.

   Together, the model’s parameters govern household behavior over time and tell us the relative
importance of time-dependent and state-dependent inaction in explaining failures to re…nance. For
                                      2
example, if the parameters ' and          are estimated to be zero, then there are no psychological costs
of re…nancing. In this case every household will eventually re…nance whenever they face a positive
ADL incentive to do so, implying that the problem is time-dependent inaction. If on the other hand

                                                       27
the parameters    imply that households are always awake, then households will re…nance whenever
they reach the threshold determined by their particular psychological re…nancing costs, implying
that state-dependent inaction is the cause of re…nancing failures.     In the former case, a modest
decline in interest rates will eventually induce all households to re…nance, whereas in the latter case
a sizeable interest rate movement is required for some households to overcome the psychological
costs that inhibit re…nancing.



4.2    Comparing alternative speci…cations

We …rst explore the relative importance of the various elements of our model.         Table 2 reports
parameter estimates for a series of models with an increasing number of parameters. We do not
report standard errors for the estimated parameters, since all coe¢ cients are statistically signi…cant
at the 1% level or less. Instead, we summarize the …t of each model using a pseudo R2 statistic
based on the log likelihood of the model relative to Model 4, the model which includes both state-
dependent and time-dependent inaction, restricted to be the same for all households and time
periods.

   All models include the parameter , and in Model 1, this is the sole parameter. The estimate of
  in Model 1 is   1:35, indicating that each 1 basis point change in the incentive in the neighborhood
of a zero incentive increases the re…nancing probability by only 6 basis points. The relative …t of
this model is very poor, since it implies a re…nancing rate that is too high on average and varies
little with re…nancing incentives.

   Model 2 adds a scalar psychological re…nancing cost ', equal for all households, to this basic
model. The …t of the model improves somewhat but the estimate of             is still very low and the
estimated ' = 6:13 is unreasonably high, implying a psychological re…nancing cost of 457,602
DKK, or approximately $69,000.

   Model 3 eliminates ' but adds a scalar parameter        governing the probability that households
are asleep, which is equal for all households. The estimated magnitude of         = 2:38 implies that


                                                  28
92% of households are asleep in any given quarter. In this model,           is estimated to be 1.30 implying
a 92 basis point response of the re…nancing probability to the incentive around zero for the 8% of
households who are awake. This model …ts considerably better than Model 2, another indication
that time-dependent inaction is important to explain Danish household behavior.

   Model 4 includes both ' and            parameters in addition to     .     The …t of the model further
improves, and the estimated parameters appear sensible. Estimated ' = 2:44 in this model implies
a more realistic psychological cost of 11; 439 DKK, or approximately US$ 1; 716. From Table 1,
44% of the household-quarter observations are above the ADL threshold. Augmenting the ADL
threshold by 11,439 DKK implies that only 12% of household-quarters are above the augmented
threshold. The estimated magnitude of           implies that 84% of households are asleep each quarter.
Finally,    of 0.75 implies a 47 basis point response of the re…nancing probability to the incentive
around zero for the 16% of households who are awake.

   Model 5 adds unobserved heterogeneity in psychological re…nancing costs by estimating a free
             2
parameter        using the MSL method. While this parameter, like all others in the table, is statistically
signi…cant at the 1% level, the improvement in pseudo R2 is modest, at 0.7%.

   Models 6 through 9 explore the importance of adding time e¤ects and mortgage age e¤ects to
the reference Model 4. These can be added either to the psychological re…nancing cost ' or to the
asleep probability . Model 6 adds time e¤ects to ', and Model 7 also adds mortgage age e¤ects
to '. Model 8 instead adds time e¤ects to , and Model 9 also adds mortgage age e¤ects to .

   Models 6 and 8 show large gains in pseudo R2 from adding time e¤ects, implying that the
re…nancing waves illustrated in Figure 3 are not simply the result of interest rate declines pushing
households across …xed thresholds, but also result from shifts over time in household responses to
incentives. However, the improvement in explanatory power is considerably greater in Model 8, at
4.1%, than in Model 6, at 2.9%. In other words, the intuitive procedure of including time e¤ects
in the time-dependent element of the model— the probability that households are asleep— delivers
a superior …t.



                                                     29
       Mortgage age e¤ects also contribute to explanatory power, and again the …t is superior when
these e¤ects are added to the asleep probability          rather than the psychological re…nancing cost '.
Model 9, the best model considered so far, has a pseudo R2 of 5.2%.

       Further gains in explanatory power are obtained by adding demographic variables. Model 10
adds demographic covariates to both ' and , increasing the pseudo R2 to 6.9%. Model 11 adds
                     2
a free parameter         to Model 10, estimating the model using the MSL method. The improvement
in pseudo R2 is extremely small at 0.1%. Given the computational burden of estimating random
coe¢ cients models and the negligible improvement in …t, we drop unobserved heterogeneity in
psychological re…nancing costs from further consideration and proceed with Model 10 as our base
case.

       The magnitudes of the estimated parameters in Model 10 are sensible.                   For the reference
household in the last quarter of the sample, the estimated ' implies psychological re…nancing costs
of 12; 768 DKK or roughly US$ 1; 914;             implies that 96% of reference households are asleep in
this quarter; and        implies a 57 basis point response response of the re…nancing probability to the
incentive around zero for reference households who are awake.19



4.3       Properties of our baseline model

We now explore in detail the ability of our baseline model (Table 2, Model 10) to …t the Danish data.
Figure 6 shows the sample distribution of incentives, together with the observed sample re…nancing
probability at each incentive level.        As previously discussed, most incentives are negative, but
there is a substantial fraction of positive incentives. The observed re…nancing probability increases
strongly around the zero level, peaking at an incentive slightly above 1%. Very few observations
have positive incentives greater than this, so the observed sample re…nancing probability at high
incentive levels is based on limited data and is correspondingly noisy.
  19
    The reference household is an unmarried couple without children, and with no …nancial literacy in the household
or the extended family, living in Copenhagen with median age, education, income, wealth and housing wealth, and
with a recently issued mortgage.



                                                        30
   Figure 6 also shows our model’s predicted re…nancing probability, and the estimated average
probability that households in each incentive bin are awake.       The model-predicted re…nancing
probability captures the overall cross-sectional pattern of re…nancing quite well, although it un-
derpredicts re…nancings with extremely negative incentives and overpredicts re…nancings with ex-
tremely positive incentives, both areas in which the data are sparse. The …gure also shows that the
probability that households are awake is somewhat noisy across bins, but averages about 10% for
households with negative incentives, rises to 15% for households with low positive incentives, and
declines to about 7% for households with high positive incentives.     This pattern is the result of
demographic variation in the population at each incentive level, as incentives do not directly enter
our speci…cation for the probability that households are awake.

   Figure 7 shows the estimated cross-sectional distribution of re…nancing costs and their impli-
cations for the interest savings that induces re…nancing.     The left side of the …gure measures
re…nancing costs in DKK, while the right side reports the implications of these costs for the posi-
tion of the interest threshold. The top left panel shows …nancial re…nancing costs varying from a
little over DKK 3; 000 to the upper winsorization point just below DKK 10; 000, with a mean of
DKK 5; 850. The top right panel reports the distribution of the corresponding ADL re…nancing
threshold, varying from about 50 to about 250 basis points, with a mean of 83 basis points and
standard deviation of 37 basis points.

   The middle left panel of Figure 7 shows the psychological re…nancing costs in DKK, varying
from almost zero to about DKK 30; 000 with a mean of 10; 400. Unsurprisingly, these costs lead
to large increases in the threshold that triggers re…nancing, as shown in the middle right panel
of Figure 7.   Threshold increases have a mean that is comparable to the ADL threshold, but a
standard deviation that is almost twice as large. Finally, the bottom panels of Figure 7 show the
distributions of total re…nancing costs and the total threshold that triggers re…nancing. The total
threshold is shifted to the right and spread out by the psychological re…nancing costs, with a mean
of 146 basis points and a standard deviation of 60 basis points.

   A striking pattern documented in Online Appendix Table B7 is that households’ ADL re…-



                                                31
nancing thresholds are almost uncorrelated with their psychological re…nancing costs in DKK, but
are strongly positively correlated with the increments to the re…nancing threshold caused by those
psychological re…nancing costs. The correlation between the ADL threshold and the psychological
re…nancing cost is      0:02, but the correlation between the ADL threshold and the psychological
increment to the re…nancing threshold is 0:87. The reason for this pattern is that re…nancing costs
in DKK have a larger impact on the re…nancing threshold for smaller, older mortgages as illustrated
in Figure 1. Households with these mortgages therefore tend to have both higher ADL thresholds
and higher increases in the thresholds caused by their psychological re…nancing costs.

   Turning to time-dependent inaction, the top panel of Figure 8 reports the cross-sectional distrib-
ution of the probability that households were asleep in a typical quarter of our sample (using sample
average time e¤ects and mortgage age e¤ects). There is strong time-variation in this distribution
as shown in the bottom panel of Figure 8 using a box-whisker plot. Quarters with high re…nancing
activity are explained by the model not as the result of declines in interest rates that move many
households over their re…nancing thresholds, but as the consequence of time …xed e¤ects that imply
a lower probability that households are asleep in those quarters.20 Over the whole sample, the av-
erage probability that a household is asleep is 87%, with a standard deviation of 5% (that includes
both cross-sectional variation and variation over time for a given household).

   Cross-sectionally, there is a strong negative correlation between the probability that a household
is asleep and psychological re…nancing costs measured in monetary units. The correlation is                  0:66
in a typical quarter (using sample average time e¤ects and mortgage age e¤ects for the asleep
probability), as reported in Online Appendix Table B7 and illustrated in Figure B10.21                       The
reason, as we discuss in greater detail below, is that younger households with higher socioeconomic
status are more likely to be awake but also have higher psychological re…nancing costs in DKK.
  20
     While time e¤ects are not the focus of our paper, we have veri…ed using Google Trends that internet search
activity for Danish re…nancing terms moves closely with the re…nancing rate (Online Appendix Figure B8) and
inversely with the cross-sectional average probability that households are asleep in each quarter (Online Appendix
Figure B9). It is also possible that social interactions, of the sort measured by Maturana and Nickerson (2017),
contribute to the time e¤ect.
  21
     Online Appendix Table B8 estimates a restricted model in which the coe¢ cient vectors ' and are proportional
to one another, strengthening the negative correlation between the probability that a household is asleep and its
psychological re…nancing costs. This model has a pseudo R2 statistic of 6.4%, 0.5% lower than the baseline model.



                                                       32
Thus time-dependent and state-dependent inaction are strongest for di¤erent types of households.

       A caveat is that this negative correlation disappears when we measure the psychological incre-
ment to the re…nancing threshold.            The correlation is only        0:002 between the probability that
a household is asleep and the psychological threshold increment. The discrepancy arises because
young households with high socioeconomic status tend to have larger mortgages whose re…nancing
thresholds are less sensitive to the level of re…nancing costs in DKK.



4.4       Cross-sectional variation in the determinants of slow re…nancing

We now turn to a more detailed analysis of the mapping between Danish households’demographic
characteristics, their probability of considering a re…nancing, and their psychological re…nancing
costs. Table 3 reports estimates of all the demographic e¤ects in our baseline model. Inspection
of the coe¢ cients on dummy variables in Table 3 shows that some demographic characteristics are
associated with faster re…nancing through both channels. Financial literacy of the household or the
family has this e¤ect, consistent with recent work highlighting the bene…cial impacts of …nancial
education on a range of household …nance decisions (see, e.g., Haliassos, Jansson, and Karabulut,
2019), as do life events such as getting married or having children.22                  On the other hand, there
are also characteristics that move people closer to the rational benchmark in one dimension but
further away in the other.         For example, married couples are more likely to be awake but have
higher psychological re…nancing costs than unmarried couples, while immigrants have the opposite
pattern.

       Table 3 also reports the coe¢ cients on ranked variables: age, education, income, …nancial wealth,
and housing wealth.         Previous literature has suggested that such variables may have nonlinear
e¤ects. For example Agarwal, Driscoll, Gabaix, and Laibson (2009) report nonlinear e¤ects of age
on many …nancial decisions, with …nancial sophistication increasing among younger people as they
  22
   The positive e¤ect of life events on re…nancing is surprising to the extent that life events raise the value of time.
However, life events can induce households to reconsider and alter their …nancial strategies, as when married couples
merge their bank accounts or new parents buy life insurance, and this may also stimulate re…nancing.



                                                          33
gain experience, and decreasing among older people perhaps because of cognitive decline. We have
tried two di¤erent ways to model such nonlinearities, either using a piecewise linear function with a
kink at the median (achieved by adding the absolute value of the demeaned rank to the regression),
or using a quadratic function (by adding twice the squared demeaned rank, a normalization that
allows direct comparison of the coe¢ cients in the two speci…cations). We …nd qualitatively similar
results with either method and report the quadratic speci…cation in the paper.

   To understand the implied marginal e¤ects of ranked variables, Figure 9 plots the variability in
the estimated probability of being asleep, the estimated psychological costs of re…nancing in DKK,
and the estimated psychological increment to the re…nancing threshold, as functions of the ranked
variables. The …gure is based on a two-step procedure in which the full model is used to estimate
re…nancing probability, and then the …tted re…nancing probability is regressed on the demographic
variables, including dummy variables, but excluding mortgage characteristics.        This procedure
implies that the e¤ects of mortgage age and size covariation with demographic characteristics are
attributed to those characteristics, rather than holding mortgage variables constant as demographic
characteristics vary. It therefore conveys a more accurate impression of how implied behavior varies
cross-sectionally in our model.

   The top panel of Figure 9 shows that older households are more likely to be asleep, while
households with higher education, income, …nancial wealth, and housing wealth are all less likely
to be asleep. These patterns imply that a time-dependent model of inaction is consistent with the
lower re…nancing e¢ ciency of older households and those with lower socioeconomic status that was
illustrated in Figure 5.

   The cross-sectional patterns are very di¤erent for psychological re…nancing costs in DKK, shown
in the middle panel of Figure 9. Middle-aged people have higher psychological re…nancing costs than
younger or older people. Households with higher education, income, …nancial wealth, and housing
wealth all have somewhat higher psychological re…nancing costs, helping to explain the negative
correlation between these costs and the probability that a household is awake. The bottom panel
of Figure 9 plots the psychological increment to the re…nancing threshold rather than the costs that



                                                 34
generate that increment. The cross-sectional patterns are similar in this panel.

       One plausible interpretation of these patterns is that some of the psychological DKK re…nancing
costs estimated by our model correspond to the value of time spent planning and executing a
re…nancing, since the monetary value of time is likely higher for middle-aged people and for people
with higher income and wealth. This interpretation can also explain the result shown in Table 3
that psychological DKK re…nancing costs are higher for families with children.23



4.5       Robustness

In this section we verify that our results are not sensitive to our choice of mortgage sample, to
the parameterization of the ADL optimal re…nancing model, or to our decision to use the ADL
model as our rational re…nancing benchmark.                 We also compare the ADL threshold with the
recommendations of Danish …nancial advisers, and with the behavior of those Danish households
who re…nance early in their cohort. Finally, we examine the robustness of our results to the logistic
functional form assumed in our stochastic choice model.

       A. Alternative mortgage samples

       Online Appendix C replicates Table 3 and Figures 4–6 and 8, excluding all cash-out and maturity
extension re…nancing from our sample. Online Appendix D excludes households that re…nance from
an FRM to an ARM from the sample, as strictly speaking, the ADL formula applies to FRM-to-
FRM re…nances. Online Appendix E restricts the mortgage sample to include only mortgages with
principal value above DKK 250,000 and remaining maturity of at least 20 years. These larger and
longer-maturity mortgages have re…nancing thresholds that are less sensitive to parameter inputs
and the choice of re…nancing model. In all of these cases, our model delivers similar results to those
reported in the paper.
  23
    An alternative behavioral interpretation of the middle panel of Figure 9 could be that households think of
mortgage savings in proportional terms, and wait to re…nance until the interest savings exceed the rational threshold
by a given amount, regardless of the size of their mortgage. But under this interpretation all the lines in the bottom
panel of Figure 9 should be ‡at— which is approximately true for education, but not for any of the other lines in the
…gure.


                                                         35
       B. Alternative parameter choices for the ADL model and behavioral re…nancing model

       We have explored the sensitivity of the ADL threshold to changes in the assumed parameters.
Online Appendix Figure F1 shows that a 50% reduction in the assumed interest-rate volatility
lowers the threshold by about 20 basis points on average, while Figure F2 shows that a 50% reduction
in the household’s discount rate         lowers it by less than 10 basis points. These changes are small
enough to have very little impact on our conclusions about household behavior. Unsurprisingly,
when we repeat our analysis with these two parameter modi…cations, in Online Appendices G and
H, we obtain similar results to those in the paper.

       Online Appendix I assumes a constant mortgage termination probability of 10%, rather than
using the estimated mortgage termination probability for all households. This input to the ADL
model a¤ects the position of the optimal re…nancing threshold, but does not a¤ect the estimates
greatly.

       Online Appendix J allows demographic characteristics to a¤ect the parameter                    that governs
household responsiveness to incentives. Results in these cases are again similar to the base case.
We have also considered a model in which households are more likely to be awake when interest
rates cross discrete “round number”thresholds, but have not found any evidence of such e¤ects.

       C. Alternative model of optimal re…nancing

       In a more ambitious exercise, we recompute optimal re…nancing thresholds using the approach
of Chen and Ling (CL 1989), which di¤ers from the ADL approach in several substantive ways.24
The CL model treats mortgages as having a …nite maturity, with an early prepayment that occurs
(in the absence of re…nancing) at a known future date. The short-term interest rate is assumed to
follow a geometric Brownian motion, and a term structure model is used to derive the corresponding
  24
     The ADL and CL models are similar in one important respect: they both assume that mortgage borrowers are
risk-neutral with respect to re…nancing proceeds. We are not aware of any threshold models that allow for borrower
risk aversion. Risk aversion would likely reduce the re…nancing threshold (since re…nancing today locks in an interest
saving as opposed to waiting for a potentially larger but risky saving tomorrow), which would increase our estimates
of psychological re…nancing costs. However, if interest rates are positively correlated with household income, it is
possible that delaying re…nancing would insure income risk, in which case risk aversion could increase the threshold
and lower our estimates of psychological re…nancing costs.



                                                         36
mortgage rate.

       Most importantly, in the CL model re…nancing can only occur once, rather than multiple times.
Our application of the ADL model ignores the fact that under Danish rules, a re…nancing today
reduces the value of future re…nancing opportunities by increasing mortgage principal; but the
CL model makes future re…nancing impossible, and so (setting aside other di¤erences between the
two models), the di¤erence between the CL and ADL thresholds provides an upper bound on the
magnitude of this e¤ect.

       The CL model does not deliver an analytical formula for the optimal re…nancing threshold, so we
use numerical simulations to derive thresholds corresponding to a large number of mortgages with
given parameters (including candidate psychological re…nancing costs), and interpolate thresholds
for other mortgages.

       Online Appendix K discusses the CL model and our implementation of it in greater detail,
and compares the CL and ADL re…nancing thresholds in our sample.                     We …nd that the average
di¤erence between the ADL and CL thresholds is 18 basis points, the median di¤erence is 14 basis
points, the standard deviation of the di¤erence is 35 basis points, and the interquartile range runs
from      9 to 39 basis points. The CL and ADL thresholds have a cross-sectional correlation of 0.85.
Importantly, the di¤erences between the two thresholds are large only for mortgages with lower
principal and shorter maturities; these mortgages have high re…nancing thresholds whose exact
values are sensitive to assumptions, but for this very reason they do not play an important role in
our analysis because both the CL and ADL models imply that they should not be re…nanced.25

       Online Appendix L replicates Table 3 and Figures 4–6 and 8 using CL thresholds in place of
ADL thresholds. Online Appendix M repeats this exercise for the smaller sample of mortgages,
already considered in Appendix E, that have principal value above DKK 250,000 and remaining
  25
    Among mortgages with high principal and long maturity, the correlation between the ADL and CL thresholds
is much lower. This is because such mortgages di¤er primarily in their exogenous termination probability, which is
modeled as a constant hazard by ADL and as a shift in a known future termination date by CL. A higher termination
probability raises the ADL re…nancing threshold, but lowers the CL threshold by reducing the value of the option to
wait for lower mortgage rates in the future. Appendix K discusses this phenomenon in greater detail. It does not
a¤ect our empirical results because both the ADL and CL thresholds for mortgages of this sort are small relative to
the thresholds that trigger household re…nancing in our data.


                                                        37
maturity of at least 20 years.    There are some shifts in the curves relating ranked variables to
psychological costs of re…nancing measured in DKK, but no other changes worthy of note.

   D. Reconciliation with …nancial advice and prompt re…nancing behavior

   We complement the CL analysis with two further reality checks on the ADL re…nancing thresh-
old. First, we verify that the shape of the ADL threshold illustrated in Figure 1 is broadly consistent
with the recommendations of Danish …nancial advisers. A typical recommendation from the real
estate advisory …rm Bolius Boligejernes Videncenter (see https://www.bolius.dk/omlaegning-af-dit-
realkreditlaan-17799/) is to re…nance when a) the di¤erence between the old and the new coupon is
at least 150 basis points, b) the outstanding principal is at least DKK 250,000, and c) the remaining
time to maturity is at least 5 to 10 years. Mortgages with large outstanding principal and/or long
remaining maturity are recommended to re…nance at a lower coupon di¤erential. In our sample
period, the di¤erence between the yield and the coupon on new mortgages is on average 36 basis
points, implying from condition a) that re…nancing is advantageous when the di¤erence between
the old coupon and the new yield is 114 basis points. In comparison the median household in our
sample has an ADL threshold of 75 basis points. While this is 39 basis points lower, we note that
the average mortgage in our sample has greater outstanding principal (DKK 926,000) and a longer
time to maturity (23 years) than the mortgage contemplated by Bolius.

   Second, we check the relationship between the empirically measured incentives of prompt re…-
nancers and the ADL threshold. To ensure that we pick up individuals who respond promptly to
incentives, we conduct this exercise for loans issued in the last quarter of 2009 or later. We do so to
avoid misclassifying sluggish households from early loan cohorts as prompt re…nancers during our
sample period.

   For each cohort of issued loans, we de…ne individuals as prompt re…nancers if they are in the
…rst few percent of households to re…nance in a given loan cohort. We vary this percentage cuto¤,
picking the …rst 2.5%, 5%, and 10% of households to re…nance. We measure the average incentive
for each such household, the interest saving relative to the ADL threshold, in the …rst quarter in



                                                  38
the time series in which the percentage cuto¤ is hit.26

       When we average across loan cohorts using weights proportional to the number of loans issued
in each cohort, we …nd that prompt re…nancers classi…ed with a 2.5% cuto¤ have a weighted average
incentive of 24 basis points; the 5% cuto¤ yields 49 basis points, and a 10% cuto¤, 64 basis points.
This simple exercise produces average incentives for prompt re…nancers that are quite small, which
is consistent with the ADL formula approximately capturing the rational re…nancing threshold in
the Danish institutional setting. Online Appendix N provides more details about this exercise.

       E. Functional form of the stochastic choice model

       Finally, we explore the e¤ect of functional form misspeci…cation on our parameter estimates.
Online Appendix O uses a probability distortion, analogous to that used in behavioral …nance
models, to alter the assumed logistic distribution of the stochastic choice error.                 We estimate
our model on data simulated from the misspeci…ed model.                 We …nd that symmetric probability
distortion has minimal e¤ect on any of the parameters of our model, while an asymmetric distortion
is picked up by our estimation procedure as an increase in the unconditional average probability
that households are asleep and the unconditional average psychological re…nancing cost. However,
in no case does functional form misspeci…cation have any major e¤ect on the parameter estimates
that capture cross-sectional variation in time-dependent and state-dependent inaction, which are
the main concern of our paper.



4.6       Applying the model

In this section we use our model to explore the e¤ects on re…nancing of various plausible alterations
to the mortgage system in a hypothetical simulation. We consider a random sample of mortgage
  26
    An example might make this easier to understand. The …rst loan cohort that we consider has an issue date of
2009Q4 and contains 7,554 loans. In this cohort, 47 loans re…nance in 2010Q1, 73 in 2010Q2, 398 in 2010Q3, 503 in
2010Q4, and so on. The …rst quarter in which the 5% cuto¤ for prompt re…nancing is exceeded is 2010Q3, in which
5.2% of all loans in the 2009Q4 cohort are re…nanced. Thus, households in the 2009Q4 cohort who re…nanced their
mortgages in 2010Q3 are classi…ed as “prompt”re…nancers, and we calculate their average incentives in that quarter
to be 8 basis points.



                                                       39
borrowers drawn from the Danish population at the start of our re…nancing sample period in the
…rst quarter of 2010. We lower the interest rate from the actual level by 172 basis points, a decline
chosen to give 90% of the sample positive re…nancing incentives relative to the ADL threshold. We
…x the interest rate at this low level for three years, and track re…nancing behavior over time in
various alternative scenarios.

   As a …rst exercise, we calculate the e¤ects of di¤erent components of our model on aggregate
re…nancing rates and the re…nancing e¢ ciency of di¤erent types of borrowers. The top panel of
Online Appendix Figure B11 shows cumulative aggregate re…nancing rates in a fully rational model
with automatic re…nancing at the ADL threshold, a pure state-dependent model with rational
re…nancing at the threshold augmented by our estimated psychological re…nancing costs, a pure
time-dependent model in which information-gathering costs lead to rational re…nancing at the ADL
threshold only by households that are awake, and …nally our baseline model.           Unsurprisingly
the cumulative re…nancing rate for the fully rational model reaches 90% in the …rst quarter and
stays there, while the cumulative re…nancing rate in the state-dependent model with augmented
thresholds is lower at just above 60% but has the same time pattern.         A pure time-dependent
model, by contrast, has a smoothly rising cumulative re…nancing rate, and our model has the same
time pattern at a lower level.

   We also calculate the re…nancing rates of di¤erent groups of borrowers as a fraction of the ra-
tional re…nancing rates for the same groups. This is closely related to the measure of re…nancing
e¢ ciency illustrated in Figure 3, although for simplicity we do not calculate interest savings. These
re…nancing e¢ ciency measures can be calculated at any period of the simulation, and Online Appen-
dix Figure B11 reports results two years after the initial interest rate decline. Among households
grouped by age, state-dependent inaction lowers the re…nancing e¢ ciency of middle-aged households
relative to younger and older households, while time-dependent inaction lowers the re…nancing e¢ -
ciency of older households. In our full model the e¤ect of time-dependent inaction dominates, just
as we saw in the data in Figure 5. Among households grouped by income, state-dependent inaction
lowers the re…nancing e¢ ciency of higher-income households, while time-dependent inaction lowers
the re…nancing e¢ ciency of poorer households. Again, time-dependent inaction dominates in both


                                                 40
the simulation and the data.

   In Figure 10 we consider three modi…cations of the Danish mortgage system designed speci…cally
to improve the re…nancing e¢ ciency of older and poorer households. These are compared with our
baseline model of the current Danish mortgage system and with fully rational re…nancing at the
ADL threshold. The …rst modi…cation (labeled R) rebates the …xed component of the mortgage
re…nancing fee (DKK 3; 000) and removes the caps on the fees to make the mortgage re…nancing
fee proportional. This eliminates the tendency of smaller mortgages (which are disproportionately
held by older and poorer households) to have higher ADL thresholds.       The second modi…cation
advertises re…nancing opportunities (lowers information-gathering costs) in such a way that one-
half of all households who were asleep are woken up. The third modi…cation combines these two
policies.

   The top panel of Figure 10 shows that waking households up is a much more powerful way to
increase aggregate re…nancing rates. This may not be surprising given the large size of the interest
rate reduction we are considering, which is su¢ cient to give 90% of households an incentive to
re…nance relative to the ADL threshold.    The second and third panels similarly show that wak-
ing households up— reducing time-dependent inaction— is the best way to improve the re…nancing
e¢ ciency of older and poorer households, although re…nancing rebates do have a larger e¤ect on
poorer households as one would expect.

   These …ndings are relevant for the literature on the mortgage re…nancing channel of monetary
transmission (Auclert 2016, Agarwal et al. 2015, Beraja et al. 2017, Di Maggio et al. 2016). Ex-
pansionary monetary policy stimulates the economy in part by lowering mortgage rates, which in
turn increases household consumption. However, in a …xed-rate mortgage system lower mortgage
rates relieve the budgets only of households that re…nance their mortgages.      Such budget relief
is persistent, and therefore should stimulate consumption roughly one-for-one for households that
have either no binding borrowing constraints (permanent income consumers) or …xed and binding
borrowing constraints. To the extent that budget relief relaxes borrowing constraints by permitting
households to extract home equity, or to increase uncollateralized borrowing, the e¤ect on consump-



                                                41
tion may initially exceed the e¤ect on budget relief. Re…nancing failures by poorer households limit
the passthrough from declining mortgage rates to consumption, and particularly do so to the extent
that poorer households are more likely to face borrowing constraints that can be relaxed by budget
relief.    Policies to mitigate such re…nancing failures— by reducing information-gathering costs or
even re…nancing mortgages automatically— therefore have the potential to increase the e¤ectiveness
of monetary policy stimulus during economic downturns.




5         Conclusion

In this paper we have documented slow mortgage re…nancing behavior among Danish households.
The Danish context is particularly advantageous for studying this type of household behavior be-
cause the Danish mortgage system places no restrictions on re…nancing that does not involve cash-
out, so households that pass up opportunities to substantially reduce their mortgage costs are not
constrained, but are making mistakes in managing their …nances. In addition, the Danish statistical
system allows us to measure the demographic and economic characteristics of households in great
detail.

    We distinguish between time-dependent and state-dependent models of slow re…nancing.           A
time-dependent model has a reduced probability of re…nancing at any incentive, while a state-
dependent model increases the threshold that triggers re…nancing, equivalent to the addition of
psychological costs to the direct …nancial costs of re…nancing. We demonstrate that while a pure
state-dependent model can …t any observed behavior in a single cross-section of the data, it imposes
strong restrictions in a panel that are rejected in the data. We therefore build a model which allows
for both sources of inaction to a¤ect re…nancing decisions.

    We …nd that older households and those with lower education, income, housing wealth, and
…nancial wealth are all strongly a¤ected by time-dependent inaction, whereas the psychological
re…nancing costs that create state-dependent inaction are greatest for middle-aged households and
those with high …nancial wealth. The cross-sectional variation in psychological re…nancing costs


                                                  42
is consistent with the view that these costs may in part capture the high value of time for certain
households.   Time-dependent slow re…nancing is the primary reason why older households and
those with lower socioeconomic status achieved low interest savings from re…nancing during our
sample period, relative to the savings achievable with an optimal re…nancing strategy.

   One might be concerned that these patterns are sensitive to the ADL formula we have used
as our rational benchmark for re…nancing. To address this concern, we have shown that Danish
households who re…nance promptly (in the …rst few percent of households whose old mortgages
carry the same interest rate) do so at interest savings similar to the ADL threshold. We have also
recomputed all thresholds using an alternative model of optimal re…nancing due to Chen and Ling
(1989), and obtain similar results.   Our conclusion is that while di¤erent assumptions can have
noticeable e¤ects on optimal re…nancing thresholds, they cannot make a large enough di¤erence
to account for the slow re…nancing rates observed in the Danish data or to substantially alter the
cross-sectional patterns in time- and state-dependent re…nancing that we document.

   Both our methodology and our …ndings have relevance beyond the context of this paper. We
believe that the mixture model we have used to estimate time-dependent slow re…nancing is a
promising econometric method for estimating the prevalence of behavioral biases in the population,
and a useful alternative to the competing-risks proportional hazard framework of Deng, Quigley,
and Van Order (2000) for modeling heterogeneous prepayment behavior.         Our …ndings reinforce
concerns that …nancial capabilities deteriorate late in life (Agarwal, Driscoll, Gabaix, and Laibson
2009) and that poorer households make worse …nancial decisions (Campbell 2006, Calvet, Campbell,
and Sodini 2009b, Badarinza, Campbell, and Ramadorai 2016), contributing to inequality of wealth
(Piketty 2014, Bach, Calvet, and Sodini 2015, Campbell 2016). Finally, our results imply that the
e¤ect of expansionary monetary policy on household consumption is weakened in economies with
predominantly …xed-rate mortgages, not only by barriers to re…nancing that may result from low
credit scores and house prices, as emphasized by Agarwal et al. (2015), Beraja et al. (2017), and Di
Maggio et al. (2016), but also by the slow reaction of many households to re…nancing opportunities.




                                                43
  References

Abel, Andrew B., Janice C. Eberly, and Stavros Panageas, 2007, “Optimal Inattention to the
    Stock Market”, American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 97, 244–249.
Abel, Andrew B., Janice C. Eberly, and Stavros Panageas, 2013, “Optimal Inattention to the
    Stock Market with Information Costs and Transactions Costs”, Econometrica 81, 1455–1481.
Agarwal, Sumit, Gene Amromin, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Tomasz Piskorski, Amit Seru, and
    Vincent Yao, 2015, “Mortgage Re…nancing, Consumer Spending and Competition: Evidence
    from the Home A¤ordable Re…nancing Program”, NBER Working Paper 21512.
Agarwal, Sumit, John Driscoll, and David Laibson, 2013, “Optimal Mortgage Re…nancing: A
    Closed Form Solution”, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 45, 591–622.
Agarwal, Sumit, John Driscoll, Xavier Gabaix, and David Laibson, 2009, “The Age of Reason:
    Financial Decisions Over the Life Cycle and Implications for Regulation”, Brookings Papers
    on Economic Activity 2, 51–101.
Agarwal, Sumit, Richard J. Rosen, and Vincent Yao, 2016, “Why Do Borrowers Make Mortgage
    Re…nancing Mistakes?”, Management Science 62, 3494–3509.
Agnew, Julie, Pierluigi Balduzzi, and Annika Sunden, 2003, “Portfolio Choice and Trading in a
   Large 401(k) Plan”, American Economic Review 93, 193–215.
Alvarez, Fernando, Luigi Guiso, and Francesco Lippi, 2012, “Durable Consumption and Asset
    Management with Transaction and Observation Costs”, American Economic Review 102,
    2272–2300.
Alvarez, Fernando, Francesco Lippi, and Luigi Paciello, 2011, “Optimal Price Setting With Ob-
    servation and Menu Costs”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 126, 1909–1960.
Anagol, Santosh, Vimal Balasubramaniam, and Tarun Ramadorai, 2018, “Endowment E¤ects in
   the Field: Evidence from India’s IPO Lotteries”, forthcoming Review of Economic Studies.
Andersen, Ste¤en, John Y. Campbell, Kasper Meisner Nielsen, and Tarun Ramadorai, 2019, “Ap-
   pendix to Sources of Inaction in Household Finance”, available online at authors’websites.
Archer, Wayne R., David C. Ling, and Gary A. McGill, 1996, “The E¤ect of Income and Collateral
    Constraints on Residential Mortgage Terminations”, Regional Science and Urban Economics
    26, 235–261.
Auclert, Adrien, 2016, “Monetary Policy and the Redistribution Channel”, unpublished paper,
    Stanford University.
Bach, Laurent, Laurent E. Calvet, and Paolo Sodini, 2015, “Rich Pickings? Risk, Return, and
    Skill in the Portfolios of the Wealthy”, unpublished paper, Swedish House of Finance, EDHEC
    Business School, and Stockholm School of Economics.

                                             44
Badarinza, Cristian, John Y. Campbell, and Tarun Ramadorai, 2016, “International Comparative
   Household Finance”, Annual Review of Economics 8, 111–144.

Badarinza, Cristian, John Y. Campbell, and Tarun Ramadorai, 2017, “What Calls to ARMs?
   International Evidence on Interest Rates and the Choice of Adjustable Rate Mortgages,”
   forthcoming Management Science.

Bajo, Emanuele and Massimiliano Barbi, 2016, “Out of Sight, Out of Mind: Media Coverage,
    Financial Literacy, and Mortgage Re…nancing”, unpublished paper, University of Bologna.

Bennett, Paul, Richard Peach, and Stavros Peristiani, 2001, “Structural Change in the Mortgage
    Market and the Propensity to Re…nance”, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 33, 955–
    975.

Beraja, Martin, Andreas Fuster, Erik Hurst, and Joseph Vavra, 2017, “Regional Heterogeneity
    and Monetary Policy”, NBER Working Paper 23270.

Bhutta, Neil, Andreas Fuster, and Aurel Hizmo, 2018, “Paying Too Much? Price Dispersion in the
    US Mortgage Market”, unpublished paper, Federal Reserve Board and Swiss National Bank.

Bhutta, Neil and Benjamin J. Keys, 2016, “Interest Rates and Equity Extraction During the
    Housing Boom”, American Economic Review 106, 1742–1774.

Bilias, Yannis, Dimitris Georgarakos, and Michael Haliassos, 2010, “Portfolio Inertia and Stock
     Market Fluctuations”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 42, 715–742.

Brueckner, Jan K. and James R. Follain, 1988, “The Rise and Fall of the ARM: An Econometric
    Analysis of Mortgage Choice,”Review of Economics and Statistics 70, 93–102.

Brunnermeier, Markus K. and Stefan Nagel, 2008, “Do Wealth Fluctuations Generate Time-
    Varying Risk Aversion? Micro-Evidence on Individuals”, American Economic Review 98,
    713–736.

Bucks, Brian and Karen Pence, 2008, “Do Borrowers Know Their Mortgage Terms?”, Journal of
    Urban Economics 64, 218–233.

Caballero, Ricardo J. and Eduardo M. Engel, 1991, “Dynamic (S,s) Economics”, Econometrica
   59, 1659–1686.

Calvet, Laurent, John Y. Campbell, and Paolo Sodini, 2009a, “Fight or Flight? Portfolio Rebal-
    ancing by Individual Investors”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, 301–348.

Calvet, Laurent, John Y. Campbell, and Paolo Sodini, 2009b, “Measuring the Financial Sophisti-
    cation of Households”, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 99, 393–398.

Calvo, Guillermo A., 1983, “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework”, Journal of
    Monetary Economics 12, 383–398.


                                             45
Cameron, A. Colin, and Trivedi, Pravin K., 2005, Microeconometrics: Methods and Applications,
   Cambridge University Press, New York, NY.
Campbell, John Y., 2006, “Household Finance”, Journal of Finance 61, 1553–1604.
Campbell, John Y., 2013, “Mortgage Market Design”, Review of Finance 17, 1–33.
Campbell, John Y., 2016, “Restoring Rational Choice: The Challenge of Consumer Financial
   Regulation”, American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 106(5):1–30.
Campbell, John Y. and Joao Cocco, 2003, “Household Risk Management and Optimal Mortgage
   Choice”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 1449–1494.
Campbell, John Y. and Joao Cocco, 2015, “A Model of Mortgage Default”, Journal of Finance
   70, 1495–1554.
Caplin, Andrew, 2016, “Measuring and Modeling Attention”, Annual Review of Economics 8,
    379–403.
Caplin, Andrew, Charles Freeman, and Joseph Tracy, 1997, “Collateral Damage: Re…nancing
    Constraints and Regional Recessions”, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 29, 496–516.
Caplin, Andrew and John Leahy, 1991, “State-Dependent Pricing and the Dynamics of Money
    and Output”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 106, 683–708.
Caplin, Andrew and Daniel F. Spulber, 1987, “Menu Costs and the Neutrality of Money”, Quar-
    terly Journal of Economics 102, 703–725.
Chen, Andrew and David Ling, 1989, “Optimal Mortgage Re…nancing with Stochastic Interest
    Rates”, AREUEA Journal 17, 278–99.
Chen, Hui, Michael Michaux, and Nikolai Roussanov, 2013, “Houses as ATMs? Mortgage Re…-
    nancing and Macroeconomic Uncertainty”, unpublished paper, MIT, USC, and University of
    Pennsylvania.
Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, 2002, “De…ned Contribu-
    tion Pensions: Plan Rules, Participant Decisions, and the Path of Least Resistance”, in James
    Poterba ed. Tax Policy and the Economy 16, 67–113.
Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, 2004, “For Better or for
    Worse: Default E¤ects and 401(k) Savings Behavior”, in David Wise ed. Perspectives on the
    Economics of Aging, University of Chicago Press.
DellaVigna, Stefano, and Joshua M. Pollet, 2007, “Demographics and Industry Returns”, American
    Economic Review 97, 1667–1702.
Deng, Yongheng and John M. Quigley, 2012, “Woodhead Behavior and the Pricing of Residential
   Mortgages”, unpublished paper, National University of Singapore and University of California
   Berkeley.

                                              46
Deng, Yongheng, John M. Quigley and Robert Van Order, 2000, “Mortgage Terminations, Het-
   erogeneity, and the Exercise of Mortgage Options”, Econometrica 68, 275–307.

Dhillon, Upinder S., James D. Shilling, and C.F. Sirmans, 1987, “Choosing Between Fixed and
    Adjustable Rate Mortgages: Note”, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 19, 260–267.

Di Maggio, Marco, Amir Kermani, Benjamin Keys, Tomasz Piskorski, Rodney Ramcharan, Amit
    Seru, and Vincent Yao, 2016, “Monetary Policy Pass-Through: Mortgage Rates, Household
    Consumption and Voluntary Deleveraging”, forthcoming American Economic Review.

Du¢ e, Darrell, and Tong-sheng Sun, 1990, “Transactions Costs and Portfolio Choice in a Discrete-
    Continuous-Time Setting”, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 14, 35–51.

El-Gamal, Mahmoud A. and David M. Grether, 1995, “Are People Bayesian? Uncovering Behav-
    ioral Strategies”, Journal of the American Statistical Association 90, 1137–1145.

Gabaix, Xavier, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Olivier Vigneron, 2007, “Limits of Arbitrage: Theory
   and Evidence from the Mortgage-Backed Securities Market”, Journal of Finance 62, 557–595.

Gabaix, Xavier and David I. Laibson, 2002, “The 6D Bias and the Equity-Premium Puzzle,” in
   Ben S. Bernanke and Kenneth S. Rogo¤ eds. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2001, MIT
   Press, Cambridge, MA, 257–312.

Gaudecker, Hans-Martin von, Arthur van Soest, and Erik Wengstrom, 2011, “Heterogeneity in
   Risky Choice Behavior in a Broad Population”, American Economic Review 101, 664–694.

Gouriéroux, Christian, and Monfort, Alain, 1996, Statistics and Econometric Models, Cambridge
   University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Gyntelberg, J., Kjeldsen, K., Baekmand Nielsen, M., and Persson, M., 2012, “The 2008 Financial
   Crisis and the Danish Mortgage Market”, in A. Bardhan, R.H. Edelstein, and C.A. Kroll eds.
   Global Housing Markets: Crises, Policies, and Institutions, John Wiley, 53–68.

Haliassos, Michael, Thomas Jansson, and Yigitcan Karabulut, 2019, “Financial Literacy Exter-
    nalities,”forthcoming Review of Financial Studies.

Hall, Arden, 2000, “Controlling for Burnout in Estimating Mortgage Prepayment Models”, Journal
     of Housing Economics 9, 215–232.

Handel, Benjamin R., 2013, “Adverse Selection and Inertia in Health Insurance Markets: When
   Nudging Hurts”, American Economic Review 103, 2643–2682.

Johnson, Kathleen W. and Geng Li, 2014, “Are Adjustable-Rate Mortgage Borrowers Borrowing
    Constrained?,”Real Estate Economics 42, 457–471.

Harrison, Glenn W. and E. Elisabet Rutström, 2009, “Expected Utility Theory and Prospect
    Theory: One Wedding and a Decent Funeral,”Experimental Economics 12, 133–158.


                                              47
Johnson, Eric, Stephan Meier, and Olivier Toubia, 2015, “Leaving Money on the Kitchen Table:
    Exploring Sluggish Mortgage Re…nancing Using Administrative Data, Surveys, and Field
    Experiments”, unpublished paper, Columbia Business School.

Kang, Pan and Stavros A. Zenios, 1992, “Complete Prepayment Models for MBS”, Management
   Science 38, 1665–1685.

Keys, Benjamin J., Devin G. Pope, and Jaren C. Pope, 2016, “Failure to Re…nance”, Journal of
    Financial Economics 122, 482–499.

Khandani, Amir E., Andrew W. Lo, and Robert C. Merton, 2013, “Systemic Risk and the Re…-
   nancing Ratchet E¤ect”, Journal of Financial Economics 108, 29–45.

Koijen, Ralph S.J., Van Hemert, Otto and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, 2009, “Mortgage Timing,”
    Journal of Financial Economics 93, 292–324.

LaCour-Little, Michael, 1999, “Another Look at the Role of Borrower Characteristics in Predicting
   Mortgage Prepayments”, Journal of Housing Research 10, 45–60.

Laibson, David, 1997, “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting”, Quarterly Journal of Economics
    112, 443–478.

Lea, M., 2011, “Alternative Forms of Mortgage Finance: What Can We Learn from Other Coun-
    tries?” in N. Retsinas and E. Belsky eds., Moving Forward: The Future of Consumer Credit
    and Mortgage Finance, Joint Center for Housing Studies, Harvard University, Cambridge,
    MA, and Brookings Institution Press, Washington, DC, 118–149.

Luce, R. Duncan, 1959, Individual Choice Behavior: A Theoretical Analysis, Wiley, New York,
    NY.

Madrian, Brigitte and Dennis Shea, 2001, “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) Participa-
   tion and Savings Behavior”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 66, 1149–1188.

Mat¼
   ejka, Filip and Alisdair McKay, 2015, “Rational Inattention to Discrete Choices: A New
   Foundation for the Multinomial Logit Model”, American Economic Review 105, 272–298.

Maturana, Gonzalo and Jordan Nickerson, 2017, “Teachers Teaching Teachers: The Role of Net-
   works on Financial Decisions”, unpublished paper, Emory University and Boston College.

McConnell, John J., and Manoj Singh, 1994, “Rational Prepayments and the Valuation of Collat-
   eralized Mortgage Obligations”, Journal of Finance 49, 891–921.

McLachlan, Geo¤rey and David Peel, 2000, Finite mixture models, Wiley, New York, NY.

Miles, David, 2004, The UK Mortgage Market: Taking a Longer-term View, HM Treasury, London,
    UK.



                                              48
Moscarini, Giuseppe, 2004, “Limited Information Capacity as a Source of Inertia”, Journal of
   Economic Dynamics and Control 28, 2003–2035.

Nakamura, Emi, and Jon Steinsson, 2010, “Monetary Non-Neutrality in a Multisector Menu Cost
    Model”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 125, 961–1013.

O’Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin, 1999, “Doing it Now or Later”, American Economic
   Review 89, 103–124.

Pearson, Karl, 1894, “Contributions to the Mathematical Theory of Evolution”, Philosophical
    Transactions of the Royal Society of London A, 71–110.

Piketty, Thomas, 2014, Capital in the 21st Century, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Reis, Ricardo, 2006a, “Inattentive Consumers”, Journal of Monetary Economics 53, 1761–1800.

Reis, Ricardo, 2006b, “Inattentive Producers”, Review of Economic Studies 73, 793–821.

Schwartz, Allie, 2006, “Household Re…nancing Behavior in Fixed-Rate Mortgages”, unpublished
    paper, Harvard University.

Schwartz, Eduardo S., and Walter N. Torous, 1989, “Prepayment and the Valuation of Mortgage-
    Backed Securities”, Journal of Finance 44, 375–392.

Sims, Christopher A., 2003, “Implications of Rational Inattention”, Journal of Monetary Eco-
    nomics 50, 665–690.

Stanton, Richard, 1995, “Rational Prepayment and the Valuation of Mortgage-Backed Securities”,
    Review of Financial Studies 8, 677–708.

Taylor, John B., 1980, “Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts”, Journal of Political Econ-
    omy 88, 1–23.

Tracy, Joseph and Joshua Wright, 2012, “Payment Changes and Default Risk: The Impact of
    Re…nancing on Expected Credit Losses”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Sta¤ Report No.
    562.

Train, Kenneth E., 2009, Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation, Cambridge University Press,
    New York, NY.

Veldkamp, Laura, 2011, Information Choice in Macroeconomics and Finance, Princeton University
    Press, Princeton, NJ.

Veronesi, Pietro, 2010, Fixed Income Securities: Valuation, Risk, and Risk Management, John
    Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ.

Woodford, Michael, 2009, “Information-Constrained State-Dependent Pricing”, Journal of Mone-
   tary Economics 56, Supplement, S100–S124.


                                             49
Woodward, Susan E., and Robert E. Hall, 2010, “Consumer Confusion in the Mortgage Market:
   Evidence of Less Than a Perfectly Transparent and Competitive Market”, American Economic
   Review 100, 511–515.

Woodward, Susan E. and Robert E. Hall, 2012, “Diagnosing Consumer Confusion and Sub-Optimal
   Shopping E¤ort: Theory and Mortgage Market Evidence”, American Economic Review 102,
   3249–3276.

Zandi, Mark and Cristian deRitis, 2011, “Improved HARP Will Expand Re…nancing, Boost Re-
    covery”, unpublished report, Moody’s Analytics.

Zhu, Jun, 2012, “Re…nance and Mortgage Default: An Empirical Analysis of the HARP’s Impact
    on Default Rates”, unpublished paper, Freddie Mac.




                                           50
                    Table 1: Characteristics of Danish Fixed Rate Mortgages
These statistics are calculated using all unique mortgages taken by households in Denmark with an unchanging
number of adult members, and with a single fixed rate mortgage. In Panel A, the rows show, in order, the total
number of household-quarter observations in the data; the average principal remaining (outstanding) on these
mortgages in millions of Danish Kroner (DKK); the average number of years remaining before mortgages mature;
the average loan-to-value (LTV) ratio on these mortgages; the fraction refinancing in a quarter (i.e., the fraction
of households that refinanced their pre-existing mortgage voluntarily rather than refinancing for exogenous
reasons such as moving house); the fraction refinancing from a fixed rate mortgage (FRM) to another FRM; the
fraction of all mortgages with negative refinancing incentives calculated using Agarwal et al. (2013) formula
(ADL); the fraction of mortgages with negative ADL incentives which refinance; the fraction of mortgages with
positive refinancing incentives computed using the ADL formula; and the fraction with positive ADL incentives
which refinance. In Panel B, the rows document the fractions of households refinancing either once or multiple
times during the sample period. The columns document the fractions of these households refinancing at incentives
which are either greater than, or less than or equal to, incentive levels previously experienced over the sample
period.


                           Panel A: Household quarter observations
          Number of observations                             9,351,183
          Principal remaining (million DKK)                      0.983
          Years remaining on mortgage                           23.226
          Loan-to-value (LTV) ratio                              0.600

          Fraction refinancing                                                    0.040
          Fixed rate to fixed rate refinancing                                    0.701
          Fraction with negative ADL incentive                                    0.563
          - of which refinance                                                    0.013
          Fraction with positive ADL incentive                                    0.437
          - of which refinance                                                    0.076

                                 Panel B: Household observations
                                                               At higher   At lower
                                                       All
                                                               incentives incentives
          Number of households                       614,811
          - fraction never refinancing                 0.498
          - fraction refinancing once                  0.402        0.276       0.126
          - fraction refinancing twice                 0.089        0.040       0.049
          - fraction refinancing three or more times   0.011        0.002       0.009




                                                        51
                                                                                    Table 2: Choice Models
 We estimate our random coefficient specification using all households in Denmark with an unchanging number of household members, with a single fixed rate mortgage in the beginning of each
 year from 2010-2017. The dependent variable takes the value of 1 if there is refinancing in a given quarter, and 0 otherwise. Each column lists the parameters of our model of refinancing: χ is
 the probability that a household is asleep and does not respond to refinancing incentives (i.e., probability = exp(χ)/(1+ exp(χ))). φm captures the average level of psychological refinancing costs,
 and depending on the model variation listed in the rows, χ and φm can be functions of demographic characteristics, and χ can also depend on mortgage age effects and current quarter effects.
 φsd, when included, estimates a random coefficient model for psychological refinancing costs. exp(β) captures responsiveness to incentives. Pseudo R2 is calculated using the formula R2 = 1-
 L1/L0, where L1 is the log likelihood from the model specified in the column header, and L0 is the log likelihood from a model which only allows for a constant probability of being asleep, a
 stochastic choice error, and a constant fixed psychological refinancing cost (i.e., Model 4). All coefficients in the table are significant at the 1% level or less.

                                     Model 1        Model 2        Model 3        Model 4        Model 5         Model 6        Model 7        Model 8        Model 9       Model 10       Model 11


β*                                    -1.350         -1.063          1.298          0.745          0.846          0.655          0.667          0.677          0.770          0.820          0.873

φm                                                    6.126                         2.437          3.289          3.149          3.785          2.465          2.219          2.547          2.580
- Current quarter dummies                              No                            No             No             Yes            Yes            No             No             No             No
- Mortgage age dummies                                 No                            No             No             No             Yes            No             No             No             No
- Demographics                                         No                            No             No             No             No             No             No             Yes            Yes

φsd                                                                                                1.300                                                                                     0.848


χ*****                                                               2.381          1.671          0.967          1.387          1.392          2.238          3.049          3.059          2.988
- Current quarter dummies                                             No             No             No             No             No             Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
- Mortgage age dummies                                                No             No             No             No             No             No             Yes            Yes            Yes
- Demographics                                                        No             No             No             No             No             No             No             Yes            Yes

Pseudo R2                             -3.508         -0.096         -0.019          0.000          0.007          0.029          0.035          0.041          0.052          0.069          0.070




                                                                                                  52
                Table 3: Model with Heterogenous Household Characteristics

We estimate this specification using all households in Denmark with an unchanging number of household
members, with a single fixed rate mortgage in the beginning of each year from 2010-2017. The dependent
variable takes the value of 1 for a refinancing in a given quarter, and 0 otherwise. Each column lists the
parameters of our model of refinancing: χ is the probability that a household is asleep and does not respond to
refinancing incentives, and the rows show its dependence on the listed demographic characteristics. φ captures
the level of psychological refinancing costs (i.e., costs = exp(φ)) once again as a function of demographic
characteristics, and exp(β), which does not depend on demographics, captures the responsiveness to the
incentives. The coefficients include non-linear transformations, f(x), of all the ranked control variables in
addition to their levels, where f(x) = √2 . Pseudo R2 is calculated using the formula R2 = 1- L1/L0, where L1
is the log likelihood from the given model and L0 is the log likelihood from a model which only allows for a
constant probability of being asleep. ***, **, and * indicate coefficients that are significant at the one, five, and
ten percent level, respectively, using standard errors clustered at the level of households.


                                                                        β**            φ***           χ*****

         Intercept                                                    0.820***       2.547***        3.059***

         Random coefficient component

         Single male household                                                      -0.088***         0.008***
         Single female household                                                    -0.106***        -0.107***
         Married household                                                           0.101***        -0.039***
         Children in family                                                          0.112***         0.101***
         Immigrant                                                                  -0.101***         0.163***
         Financially literate                                                       -0.160***        -0.018***
         Family financially literate                                                -0.001***        -0.093***
         Getting married                                                            -0.248***        -0.070***
         Having children                                                            -0.106***        -0.087***
         Region of Northern Jutland                                                  0.112***        -0.280***
         Region of Middle Jutland                                                    0.082***        -0.215***
         Region of Southern Denmark                                                  0.024***        -0.100***
         Region of Zealand                                                           0.064***         0.142***

         Demeaned rank of:
         Age                                                                        -0.094***         0.783***
         Length of education                                                         0.110***        -0.251***
         Income                                                                      0.815***        -0.763***
         Financial wealth                                                            0.906***        -0.242***
         Housing wealth                                                              0.636***        -0.814***

         Non-linear transformation f(x), x is the demeaned rank of:
         Age                                                                        -1.323***        -0.014***
         Length of education                                                         0.275***        -0.005****
         Income                                                                     -0.401***         0.615***
         Financial wealth                                                           -0.896***         0.150***
         Housing wealth                                                             -0.546***         0.380***

         Current quarter dummies                                                                       Yes*
         Mortgage age dummies                                                                          Yes*

         Pseudo R2                                                                    0.069
         Log likelihood                                                          -1,332,195   ****

         Observations                                                             9,351,183   **




                                                          53
                               Figure 1: ADL Threshold as a Function of Fixed Costs
This figure plots the ADL threshold level in basis points associated with each fixed cost in DKK on the x-axis. The solid line in the
plot shows this mapping when the ADL threshold is computed using the mean estimated mortgage termination probability, the mean
remaining mortgage principal, the mean remaining horizon on the mortgage, the mean interest rate on the mortgage, and the mean
inflation rate. The two dashed lines in the plot show this mapping for (i) a smaller mortgage that is half the mean principal, and (ii)
a shorter duration mortgage with half the mean remaining horizon to maturity.




                                                                  54
                   Figure 2: Evaluating Refinancing Activity relative to the ADL threshold
This figure illustrates refinancing activity in the sample evaluated against the household-quarter-specific ADL threshold. The top
plot shows the histogram of computed incentives with the refinancing probability superimposed on it; the second plot shows the
number of refinancings at each point corresponding to the dark line on the top plot; and the third plot shows the Kaplan-Meier
“survival” (i.e., non-refinancing) estimate, i.e., plotting the number of quarters at which the household has positive incentives but
does not refinance, accounting for data censoring.




                                                                 55
                     Figure 3: Refinancing Activity by pre-existing Mortgage Coupon Rates
This figure illustrates the history of refinancing activity in the sample of Danish fixed-rate mortgages. In the top plot, the bars
represent the number of refinancing households in each quarter. The bars are shaded according to the coupon rate on the old
mortgage from which households refinance. In the bottom plot, we show the evolution of the quarterly Danish mortgage interest
rate as it moves through the average refinancing threshold for mortgages with a specific coupon rate. For example, the very top
lightest shaded horizontal line in the bottom plot shows the average interest rate refinancing threshold for the group of mortgages
that bear coupon rates of 6%, i.e., the point at which the current interest rate needs to be, on average, to optimally justify refinancing
for this group of mortgage holders. The thresholds for mortgages with coupons of 6%, 5%, 4%, 3.5%, 3%, and 2.5% are 5.06%,
4.22%, 3.27%, 2.83%, 2.28%, and 1.83% respectively.




                                                                   56
Figure 4: Evaluating whether Refinancing Activity occurs at a Household-specific Threshold
This figure illustrates refinancing activity to check whether households have idiosyncratic thresholds at which they always refinance.
The top plot shows the histogram of the difference between computed incentives at the point at which households refinance and the
best ever incentive experienced over the sample period prior to the point of refinancing; the second plot focuses on households that
refinance at least twice, and plots the histogram across these households of the difference between the incentives at the two
refinancing points; and the third plot shows the Kaplan-Meier “survival” (i.e., non-refinancing) estimate, i.e., plotting the number
of quarters at which the household has incentives above those which they previously refinanced at but do not subsequently refinance,
accounting for data censoring.




                                                                 57
                                              Figure 5: Refinancing Efficiency
This figure plots the average refinancing efficiency, calculated as the ratio of actual savings to counterfactual savings (counterfactual
estimated under optimal refinancing), as a function of the ranked variables of age, education, income, financial wealth and housing
wealth.




                                                                   58
               Figure 6: Refinancing, Incentives and Model Implied Refinancing Probabilities.
This figure plots refinancing probabilities from the baseline model presented in Table 3, as a function of refinancing incentives,
alongside the number of observations at each level of incentives. The bars in this figure show the number of household-quarters
(scale on the left vertical axis) and the lines show the fraction of these household-quarters that refinance (scale on the right vertical
axis), both plotted for each level of refinancing incentives shown on the horizontal axis. The bars are 20-basis-point incentive
intervals centered at the points on the horizontal axis. The solid line shows the actual refinancing probability observed in the data,
the long-dashed line shows the model-predicted refinancing probability, and the short-dashed line shows the fraction of households
that the model estimates do not perceive incentives (i.e., time-dependent inaction) in each period.




                                                                   59
                                       Figure 7: Refinancing Cost Components
These figures summarize the costs of refinancing estimated from the baseline model presented in Table 3 over the entire sample
period. The three plots in the left column show the costs in 1,000 DKK, while the three plots in the right column show these
costs in the form of the implied interest rate threshold in basis points that they translate into using the ADL (2013) function.
Descending vertically, the first row shows the pure financial costs of refinancing, which are based on mortgage size. The
second row shows the estimated psychological costs of refinancing, while the third row is the total costs, which sum the two
rows above it.




                                                               60
                          Figure 8: Model Implied Time-Dependent Inaction Probability
This figure shows the model implied probability of households being subject to time-dependent inaction, estimated using the model
in Table 3. The top panel shows a histogram of the distribution of the estimated time-dependent inaction probability across
households, computed using a representative quarter, i.e., inputting the average mortgage age effect and average current quarter
time effect estimated in the data. The bottom panel shows a box plot of the model implied estimated time-dependent inaction
probability for each quarter of our data, i.e., inputting the time effect and mortgage age effect for each quarter listed on the vertical
axis.




                                                                   61
                                   Figure 9: Marginal Effects of Ranked Variables
This figure shows the marginal change in the probability of being subject to time-dependent inaction, the estimated psychological
costs of refinancing in 1,000 DKK, and the psychological cost increment to the interest-rate threshold to be surmounted to induce a
household to refinance, all as functions of selected ranked variables: age, education, income, financial wealth, and housing wealth.
To plot these marginal effects, we use the household-level fitted values of the baseline model presented in Table 3.




                                                                62
                                              Figure 10: Policy Experiments

These figures consider policies to induce household refinancing alongside an interest rate cut in which 90% of Danish households
have a refinancing incentive exceeding their ADL (2013) threshold: a policy in which mortgages automatically refinance when the
interest rate saving exceeds the ADL threshold; a policy that “wakes up” households, cutting the asleep probability in half from its
initial level; a policy that rebates all fixed fees incurred by households; a policy that combines “waking up” with the rebate; and a
“do nothing policy” in which households refinance according to our baseline model. The top panel shows the fraction refinancing
at each point in time, and the second (third) the fraction refinancing 8 quarters post-cut along the age (income) distribution.




                                                                 63
