NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHAT MEASURE OF INFLATION SHOULD A DEVELOPING COUNTRY CENTRAL
BANK TARGET?
Rahul Anand
Eswar Prasad
Boyang Zhang
Working Paper 21388
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21388
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2015

We are grateful to the editor, Ricardo Reis, and an anonymous referee for their detailed and constructive
comments. We also thank Kaushik Basu, Gita Gopinath, Karel Mertens, Parul Sharma, Viktor Tsyrennikov,
and Magnus Saxegaard for helpful comments and discussions. We received helpful comments from
seminar participants at the Bank of Korea, the Brookings Institution, Cornell University, the Federal
Reserve Board, the IMF, and the Reserve Bank of India. We thank James Walsh for sharing some
of his data with us. This research was supported by a grant from the International Growth Centre's
Macroeconomics Program. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Rahul Anand, Eswar Prasad, and Boyang Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

What Measure of Inflation Should a Developing Country Central Bank Target?
Rahul Anand, Eswar Prasad, and Boyang Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 21388
July 2015
JEL No. E31,E52,E61
ABSTRACT
In closed or open economy models with complete markets, targeting core inflation enables monetary
policy to maximize welfare by replicating the flexible price equilibrium. We analyze this result in
the context of developing economies, where a large proportion of households are credit constrained
and the share of food expenditures in total consumption expenditures is high. We develop an open
economy model with incomplete financial markets to show that headline inflation targeting improves
welfare outcomes. We also compute the optimal price index, which includes a positive weight on food
prices but, unlike headline inflation, assigns zero weight to import prices.

Rahul Anand
International Monetary Fund
Institute for Capacity Development
700 19th Street, N.W.
Washington, DC 20431
ranand@imf.org
Eswar Prasad
Dyson School of Applied Economics and
Management
Cornell University
301A Warren Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
eswar.prasad@cornell.edu

Boyang Zhang
Department of Economics
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY, 14853
bz95@cornell.edu

1

Introduction
Most central banks view low and stable inflation as a primary, if not dominant, objective

of monetary policy. In the existing literature, the choice of price index to target has been
guided by the idea that inflation is a monetary phenomenon. Core inflation (excluding
food, energy, and other volatile components from headline CPI) has been viewed as the
most appropriate measure of inflation since fluctuations in food and energy prices represent
supply shocks and are non-monetary in nature (Wynne, 2008). Moreover, since these shocks
are transitory, highly volatile, and do not reflect changes in the underlying rate of inflation,
they should not be a part of the targeted price index (Mishkin, 2007, 2008).
Previous authors have used models with price and/or wage stickiness to show that targeting core inflation maximizes welfare. Existing models have looked at complete market
settings where price stickiness is the only distortion (besides monopoly power). Infrequent
price adjustments cause mark-ups to fluctuate and also distort relative prices. In order to
restore the flexible price equilibrium, central banks should try to minimize these fluctuations
by targeting sticky prices (Goodfriend and King, 1997, 2001).
Using a New Keynesian model, Aoki (2001) demonstrates that targeting inflation in the
sticky price sector leads to macroeconomic stability and welfare maximization. Targeting
core inflation is equivalent to stabilizing the aggregate output gap as output and inflation
move in the same direction under complete markets. Benigno (2004) argues that in a common
currency area the central bank should target an index that gives higher weight to inflation in
regions with a higher degree of nominal rigidity, effectively ignoring exchange rate and commodity price fluctuations. In a more general multi-sector setting, Mankiw and Reis (2003)
show that, in order to improve the stability of economic activity, the targeted “stability”
price index should put more weight on sectors that have sluggish price adjustment, are more
procyclical, and have a smaller weight in the consumer price index.
The results from the prior literature generally rely on the assumption that markets are
1

complete (allowing households to fully insure against idiosyncratic risks). The central bank
then only needs to tackle the distortions created by price stickiness. However, in developing
economies, a substantial fraction of agents are unable to smooth their consumption in a
manner consistent with the permanent income hypothesis. Moreover, developing economies
have other structural differences from advanced economies, including the relatively high share
of food in household consumption expenditures.
In this paper, we provide an analytical framework for determining the optimal price
index for developing economy central banks to target. We make three main contributions.
First, we generalize the results of Aoki (2001) and Benigno (2004) by developing a model
that encompasses their frameworks. Second, we show that incomplete financial markets and
other characteristics of developing economies substantially alter the key results. Third, we
derive optimal price indexes and compare them with feasible rules such as headline inflation
targeting that also improve welfare relative to core inflation targeting but are easier for
central banks to communicate and implement.
Our model has three sectors to make it more representative of the structures of developing
economies. First, the food (or informal) sector, which comprises a large fraction of the
economy and where prices are flexible. Workers in this sector live hand-to-mouth, i.e., they
have no access to credit markets and simply consume their current labor income. Second,
the sticky price (or formal) sector that is subject to productivity shocks and mark-up shocks,
and where workers do have access to credit markets. Third, a sector that is open to foreign
trade and where prices are flexible but also highly volatile. This sector, which proxies for
the commodity-producing sector, faces large external shocks.
Financial frictions that result in consumers being credit constrained have not received
much attention in models of inflation targeting. When markets are not complete and agents
differ in their ability to smooth consumption, their welfare depends on the nature of idiosyncratic shocks. Thus, this model also allows us to analyze the welfare distribution under

2

alternative inflation targeting rules. Under incomplete markets, household income, which is
influenced by the nature of shocks and the price elasticity of the demand for goods, matters
for consumption choices. For instance, a negative productivity shock to a good with a low
price elasticity of demand could increase the income of net sellers of that good and raise the
expenditure of net buyers of that good.
Our model incorporates other important features relevant to developing economies. In
these countries, expenditure on food constitutes 40-50 percent of household expenditures,
compared to 10-15 percent in advanced economies. Low price and income elasticities of food
expenditures as well as low income levels make the welfare of agents in developing economies
more sensitive to fluctuations in food prices. These features imply that agents factor in food
price inflation while bargaining over wages, thus affecting broader inflation expectations
(Walsh, 2011). Thus, in developing economies even inflation expectation targeting central
banks must take into account food price inflation.
Our key result is that in the presence of financial frictions targeting headline CPI inflation
improves aggregate welfare relative to targeting core inflation (i.e., inflation in the sticky
price sector). Lack of access to financial markets makes the demand of credit-constrained
consumers insensitive to interest rates. These consumers’ demand depends only on real
wages, establishing a link between aggregate demand and real wages. Thus, the relative
price of the good produced in the flexible price sector not only affects aggregate supply but,
through its effects on real wages, also influences aggregate demand.
Our model allows us to compute optimal price indexes that maximize welfare. The optimal price index also includes a positive weight on food prices but, unlike headline inflation,
generally assigns zero weight to import prices. This is because agents in that sector have
access to financial markets and, unlike in the case of food, the price elasticity of the demand
for goods produced in this sector is high.
These results differ from those of the prior literature based on complete markets settings.

3

For instance, in Aoki’s (2001) model, relative prices of the flexible price sector only appear
as a shift parameter of inflation in the sticky price sector. Under incomplete markets, by
contrast, the central bank has to respond to price fluctuations in the flexible price sector in
order to manage aggregate demand. Financial frictions break the comovement of inflation
and output, implying that stabilizing core inflation no longer stabilizes the output gap.
Thus, in the presence of financial frictions, targeting a broader measure of inflation improves
welfare.
In related work, Catão and Chang (2010) show that, for a small open economy that is
a net buyer of food, the high volatility of world food prices causes headline CPI inflation
targeting to dominate core CPI inflation targeting. Adding this feature would strengthen our
results but make our model less general since few developing economies import a large share
of their food consumption. Frankel (2008) argues that a small commodity-exporting economy
should target the export price index in order to accommodate terms of trade shocks. Our
results suggest that ignoring sectors with nominal rigidities and targeting this set of flexible
prices, which has a small weight in the domestic CPI, would reduce welfare.
The paper is organized as follows. The next section contains some empirical facts to
further motivate the structure of the model and its relevance to developing economies. In
Section 3, we outline the main feature of the model and contrast it with the prior literature.
In Section 4, we discuss the main results and in Section 5 we conduct various sensitivity
experiments to check the robustness of our baseline results and also present some extensions
of the basic model. Section 6 concludes the paper.

2

Basic Stylized Facts
We first discuss some stylized facts that are relevant to monetary policy formulation in

developing countries, starting with the share of food in household consumption expenditures

4

and measures of the elasticity of food expenditures.1 Engel’s law states that as average
household income increases, the average share of food expenditure in total household expenditure declines. When this idea is extended to countries, we expect poorer countries to
have a higher average share of food expenditure in total household expenditure. In Table
1, we present recent data on shares of food expenditure in total expenditure for selected
developing and advanced economies. As expected, expenditure on food constitutes a much
larger share of total household expenditure in developing relative to advanced economies.
Moreover, the income elasticity of food in developing economies is on average twice as
large as that in advanced economies (0.63 versus 0.30 for a selected group of economies).
We also note that the average price elasticity of food is much lower in absolute terms than
the typical assumption of a unitary price elasticity, suggesting that food is a necessary good.
As the share of expenditure on food is high in developing economies, the price elasticity
of food is higher in these economies (average of about -0.38) but still lower than the value
normally used in the literature. Low price and income elasticities of the demand for food
have considerable significance for the choice of price index.
To examine the extent of credit constraints in developing countries, in Table 2 we present
data from the World Bank (Demirguc-Kunt and Klapper, 2012) on the percentage of the
adult population with access to formal finance (the share of the population using formal
financial services) in developing countries. These data show that, on average, more than half
of the population in developing countries lacks access to the formal financial system. By
contrast, in advanced economies, nearly all households have such access.
Finally, we note that both food and nonfood inflation are higher on average in developing economies than in advanced economies. In the former group, food inflation is more
volatile than nonfood inflation, consistent with the notion that food prices are more flexible than prices of other goods. Innovations to food price inflation are also more volatile

1

Details on the data and stylized facts discussed in this section are in Anand and Prasad (2010).

5

than innovations to nonfood inflation. These observations are consistent with other evidence
that headline inflation is more volatile than core inflation in both developing and advanced
economies (Anand and Prasad, 2010). The two measures of inflation exhibit a high degree
of persistence in both sets of economies and, contrary to conventional wisdom, food price
shocks tend to be quite persistent in developing economies (also see Walsh, 2011).
The main observations from this section are that, relative to households in advanced
economies, those in developing economies have a higher share of food expenditures in total consumption expenditures, a higher income elasticity and lower price elasticity of food
expenditures, and significantly lower access to formal financial institutions. These features
potentially have implications for households’ responses to changes in monetary policy.

3

Model
In this section, we develop a small open economy model incorporating features that are

particularly relevant for developing economies. To examine whether the existing results
about optimal inflation targeting are affected by these features, we adopt a model setting
that is otherwise standard but broad enough to encompass features that previous authors
have focused on.

3.1

Households

The economy consists of a continuum of infinitely-lived households of two types: (i)
measure λ > 0 of households producing food, the flexible price domestic good and (ii)
measure 1 − λ of households producing a continuum of monopolistically produced sticky
price goods (nonfood) for domestic consumption and a flexible price good for export (nonfood
exports). Our model is thus more general than that of Aoki (2001), which is for a closed
economy, and allows for comparisons with Benigno’s (2004) open economy setting. The

6

model also embeds other key features of both Benigno (2004) and Mankiw and Reis (2003),
whose models include multiple sectors with varying degrees of price rigidity.
We assume that labor is immobile across the food and nonfood sectors.2 The representative household, denoted by the superscript i, is indexed by f (food sector) and n (nonfood
sector). Household i maximizes the discounted stream of utility:

E0

∞
X

β t [U (Cti , Nti )]

(1)

t=0

where β ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor. The utility function takes the form:

U (Cti , Nti ) = u(Cti ) − vi (Nti ),

i ∈ {f, n}

(2)

where u(Cti ) is the utility of consumption and vi (Nti ) is the disutility of labor supply. Cti
is the composite consumption index of household i in period t, including food and nonfood
goods. It is defined as

Cti

i η
h 1
η−1
η−1 η−1
1
i
∗ η
i
η
η
η
= γ (Cf,t − C )
+ (1 − γ) (Cn,t )

(3)

i
i
where Cf,t
represents food and Cn,t
is the total nonfood good, comprising both domestii
i
cally produced sticky price nonfood goods (Cs,t
) and imported nonfood goods (Cm,t
). The

composite index is given by

i
Cn,t

h

= ζ

1
ξ

i
(Cm,t
)

ξ−1
ξ

+ (1 − ζ)

2

1
ξ

i
(Cs,t
)

ξ−1
ξ

ξ
i ξ−1

(4)

This assumption reflects the large inter-sectoral wage differentials in developing economies. Galı́ et al.
(2004) demonstrate that, even with free labor mobility, financial frictions lead to similar results as ours
(aggregate demand increasing when the central bank raises the policy interest rate).

7

i
Cs,t
is a continuum of the differentiated goods, given by:

i
Cs,t
=

Z

1

cis,t (z)

θ−1
θ

θ
 θ−1

dz

(5)

0

The elasticity of substitution between the flexible price and sticky price goods is given
by η ∈ (0, +∞) and γ ∈ (0, 1) is the weight on food in the consumption index. ζ ∈ (0, 1) is
the share of imported nonfood goods in the nonfood consumption index, and ξ ∈ (0, +∞) is
the elasticity of substitution between domestic nonfood and imported nonfood goods. θ > 1
is the elasticity of substitution between any two differentiated goods.
Since food is a necessity, households must consume a minimum amount C ∗ of food for
survival. We assume that all households always have enough income to buy the subsistence
level of food. Even though this constraint does not bind, it alters the elasticity of substitution
between food and nonfood and the marginal utility of food and nonfood consumption. This
is one important departure from previous models that are mostly relevant for advanced
economies, where food is a modest share of overall household expenditures.
The utility of consumption is given by U (Cti ) =

1−σ

Cti
1−σ

, where σ is the risk aversion factor.

The disutility of labor supply for households in the food sector is given by vf (Ntf ) = φfn

1+ψ

Ntf
1+ψ

,

where the parameter ψ is the inverse of the Frisch elasticity and φin is the scaling factor. As
households in the nonfood sector provide labor to sticky price firms (s) and export sector
R s N s (m)1+ψ
R 1 N x (m)1+ψ
firms (x), aggregate labor supply is given by vn (Ntn ) = φnn [ 0 t 1+ψ dm + s t 1+ψ dm],
where s is the share of nonfood households that work in the sticky price sector.3

3.2

Budget Constraints and Financial Markets

This section highlights the key difference between our model and those of previous authors
who have studied optimal inflation targets. Households in the flexible price sector (food
3

This specification implies local labor markets for the sticky price and export sectors and perfect risksharing among households in the nonfood sector (Ferrero et al., 2010).

8

sector) do not have access to financial markets and they consume their wage income in
each period.4 So these households are akin to “rule of thumb” consumers. A representative
household in the food sector maximizes its lifetime utility given by equation (1) subject to
the budget constraint:
Pt Ctf + Pf,t C ∗ = Wf,t Ntf

(6)

where Wf,t is the nominal wage in the food sector. The total expenditure to attain a consumption index Ctf is given by Pt Ctf where Pt is defined as
 1−η
 1
1−η 1−η
Pt = γPf,t
+ (1 − γ)Pn,t

(7)

Pf,t denotes the price of food and Pn,t , the price index of nonfood goods, is given by
h
i 1
1−ξ
1−ξ 1−ξ
Pn,t = ζPm,t
+ (1 − ζ)Ps,t

(8)

and Ps,t is the Dixit-Stiglitz price index defined as
Z
Ps,t =

1

Xt (z)1−θ dz

1
 1−θ

(9)

0

Households in the nonfood sector provide labor to firms in both the sticky price sector
and the export sector. They can buy one-period nominal bonds and foreign bonds to smooth
their consumption. A representative household in this sector maximizes lifetime utility given
by equation (1) subject to the following budget constraint
Pt Ctn + Pf,t C ∗ + Bt + et Bt∗ + ψ2B Bt∗ 2
Rs
R1
∗
∗
≤ Ws,t 0 Nts (m)dm + Wx,t s Ntx (m)dm + Rt−1 Bt−1 + et Rt−1
Bt−1
+ Πst
4

(10)

Data in Demirguc-Kunt and Klapper (2012) show that, in less developed economies, access to formal
financial institutions is at least 10 percentage points lower in rural areas compared to urban areas. Basu
and Srivastava (2005) document that 80 percent of individuals in India’s agricultural sector have no access
to formal finance. To keep the model tractable, there is no storage technology.

9

where Bt and Bt∗ represents the quantity of one-period nominal risk free discount bonds
denominated in domestic and foreign currency, respectively. The gross nominal interest
rates for those two types of bonds are denoted by Rt and Rt∗ , respectively.5 Wx,t and Ws,t
are the nominal wages in the export and sticky price sectors and Ntx and Nts are the labor
supply in these two sectors. Πst is the profit from firms in the sticky price sector.

3.3

Production

Each household in the food sector owns one firm and produces food using a linear technology in labor yf,t = Af,t Ntf , subject to a common productivity shock Af,t . Firms in this
sector are price takers and, given a market price Pf,t , the zero profit condition determines
labor demand.
Similarly, firms in the sticky price sector use a linear technology in labor ys,t (z) =
As,t Nts (z) and are subject to a common productivity shock As,t . Following Calvo (1983),
we assume that a fraction α ∈ (0, 1) of firms cannot change their price in each period.6
Firms that are free to change the price at time t choose a price Xt to maximize the discounted profit stream given by:

max Et
Xt (z)

∞
X

 s

(αβ)j Qt,t+j yt,t+j
(z)(Xt (z) − M Cts )

(11)

j=0

where Qt,t+j is the stochastic discount factor, Xt is the price of the variety produced by
s
firm z, and yt,t+j
is the output of firm in period t + j when it has set its price in period t.

Furthermore, the marginal cost is given by M Cts =

Wts
.
Ast

Firms in the export sector also use a linear technology yx,t = Ax,t Ntx and face an exogenous price level every period.7 Firms in this sector are assumed to be price takers. Import
5

We also include a small quadratic portfolio holding cost for foreign bond holdings, as suggested by
Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2003), only to induce stationarity.
6
For an alternative motivation of price rigidity based on sticky information, see Mankiw and Reis (2002).
7
We model the export sector in a manner similar to Mendoza (1995) and Devereux et al. (2006).

10

prices are exogenous and follow the law of one price. The terms of trade shock, which links
import and export prices, determines the export price. Thus, Px,t = St Pm,t , where St is the
terms of trade. Given export prices, the firms’ cost minimization problem determines wages
and, therefore, the labor demand in the sector.

3.4

Inflation and Monetary Policy Rule

We define gross headline inflation as πt =
πs,t =

Ps,t
,
Ps,t−1

Pt
,
Pt−1

gross inflation in the sticky price sector as

and gross imported goods inflation is defined as πm,t =

Pm,t
.
Pm,t−1

The steady state

is characterized by constant prices (zero inflation) and no price stickiness in the economy.8
The central bank sets the short-term nominal interest rate (Rt ) according to the following
version of a Taylor (1993) rule:

log

Rt
R̄




= ρ log

Rt−1
R̄




+ (1 − ρ) φπ log



πt∗
π̄



 
yt
+ φy log
ȳ

(12)

where ȳ, π̄ and R̄ are the steady state values of output, inflation, and the nominal interest
rate, respectively. The term ρ represents the central banker’s preference for interest rate
smoothing.9 φπ and φy are the weights on inflation and output gap assigned by the policy
makers. Setting the parameter φy = 0 implies strict inflation targeting regimes. We characterize core inflation as the inflation in the sticky price sector, πs,t , and headline inflation as
the overall inflation, πt , for our policy experiments. In addition, for the computation of the
optimal inflation target, we use an inflation target given by

πt∗ = ρπs πs,t + ρπf πf,t + (1 − ρπs − ρπf )πm,t
8

(13)

Our model has zero trend inflation. Ascari (2004) shows that, in the absence of full indexation, the
Calvo staggered price model is not super-neutral when trend inflation is considered.
9
Interest rate smoothing behavior by central banks and its benefits are well documented (Clarida et al.,
1998). Mohanty and Klau (2005) find that developing countries central banks also put substantial weight on
interest rate smoothing. The formulation of the monetary policy rule with interest rate smoothing is similar
to that used by Clarida et al. (1999).

11

3.5

Exogenous Shock Processes

We assume that productivity shocks in the food sector follow an AR(1) process. Firms in
the sticky price sector face similar AR(1) productivity shocks but are also subject to mark-up
shocks that reflect rent-seeking behavior that is typical in developing economies. This is a
departure from models that only feature productivity shocks in the relevant sectors. Firms
in the export sector face terms of trade shocks as they are price takers and face international
market prices that are determined exogenously. This shock is similar to a productivity shock
to the production of export goods. The structure of the export sector allows us to encompass
the setup of Frankel (2008). To sum up, there are four shocks in the model, with innovations
to each of them drawn from i.i.d. normal distributions:
Productivity shock, food:

log



Af,t
Af



= ρfa log



Af,t−1
Af



+ εft , εft ∼ N (0, σaf )

Productivity shock, sticky price goods:

log



As,t
As



= ρsa log



As,t−1
As



+ εst , εst ∼ N (0, σas )

Mark-up shock, sticky price goods:

log

τt
τ



=

Terms of trade shock, nonfood exports:

log

St
S



=

3.6


ρτ log τt−1
+ ετt ,
τ


ρs log St−1
+ εσt ,
S

ετt ∼ N (0, στ )
εσt ∼ N (0, σs )

Welfare Evaluations

Our objective is to determine the policy rule that yields the highest level of lifetime utility
as a weighted sum of households’ welfare, which can be written as Vtotal = λVtf + (1 − λ)Vtn .
We compute the second-order accurate consumer welfare measure under different monetary
policy regimes as in Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2004, 2007).10 Since the prior literature
concludes that strict core inflation targeting is the welfare maximizing policy rule, we use
that as the benchmark to evaluate the welfare gains (or losses) associated with alternative
policy regimes. We define ω, the welfare gain from adopting an alternative policy rule, as
the fraction that has to be added to the strict core inflation targeting regime’s (denoted by
r) consumption process to yield a level of aggregate welfare equivalent to that under regime
10

For a justification of this approach and more details, see Anand and Prasad (2010).

12

a. That is,
V0a

= E0

∞
X

β t U ((1 + ω)Ctr , Ntr )

(14)

t=0

A positive value of ω means that welfare is higher under the alternative policy rule. The
welfare gain ω is given by
 1
V0a + D0r 1−σ
−1
(15)
ω=
V0r + D0r
P∞ t h (Ntr )1+ψ i
r
where D0 = E0 t=0 β φn 1+ψ . A value of ω ∗ 100 = 1, represents a gain of one


percentage point of permanent consumption under the alternative policy regime.

3.7

Parameter Selection

Parameter selection for the model is a challenging task. There is no consensus on the
values of some parameters and those used in the literature are mostly based on micro data
from advanced countries. We pick baseline parameters from the existing literature and then
do extensive sensitivity analysis with respect to the choice of key parameters.
We choose β = 0.99, which amounts to an annual real interest rate of 4 percent. We
assume that λ = 0.4, implying that 40 percent of households in the economy are credit
constrained, consistent with the data in Table 2. We use σ = 2 as the baseline value of
the risk aversion parameter, a value most commonly used in the literature on developing
economies (Aguiar and Gopinath, 2007; Devereux et al., 2006; Garcı́a-Cicco et al., 2010).
Following Basu and Fernald (1995) and Basu (1996), we choose θ = 11 (elasticity of
substitution between the differentiated goods), implying a markup of 10 percent in the
steady state. We set the probability that a price does not adjust in a given period (α) at
0.66 (Rotemberg and Woodford, 1997). This implies that prices remain fixed for a mean
duration of 3 quarters, consistent with the microeconomic evidence for both developing and
advanced economies.11 The appropriate value of the Frisch elasticity ( ψ1 ) is both important
11

Evidence from Brazil (Gouvea, 2007), Chile (Medina et al., 2007), Mexico (Gagnon, 2009), and South
Africa (Creamer and Rankin, 2008) indicates that the frequency of price adjustment is much higher for food

13

and controversial. For our benchmark case we assume it to be 0.33 (ψ = 3).12 For the
monetary policy parameters, we follow Galı́ et al. (2004) and Mohanty and Klau (2005) and
choose ρ = 0.7, φπ = 2, and φy = 0.5.
An important feature of developing countries is the high share of food expenditure in total
household expenditures. To calibrate the subsistence level food consumption parameter C ∗
and the weight on food in the consumption index γ, we assume the average expenditure
on food is around 42 percent (consistent with household surveys in developing countries).
We further assume that on average one third of households’ steady state food consumption
is required for subsistence, enabling us to match estimates of the income elasticity of food
consumption (about two-thirds).13 As the demand for food is inelastic, we set η = 0.6 for
the baseline case. Along with the subsistence level of food consumption, this implies a price
elasticity of the demand for food of around -0.3 in the steady state, which is close to the
USDA estimate.
The major argument in favor of excluding food from the core price index is that the shocks
to that sector are seasonal and transient. We set the value of the AR (1) coefficient of the food
sector shock at 0.25 (implying that the shock has low persistence, which seems reasonable
given the heavy dependence of agriculture on transitory weather conditions). Following the
literature, we set the value of the AR(1) coefficient of the nonfood sector shock at 0.9 (Aguiar
and Gopinath, 2007). The volatility of productivity shocks in developing countries is higher
than in advanced countries (Pallage and Robe, 2003; Garcı́a-Cicco et al., 2010). We set the
standard deviation of the food productivity shock σaf = 0.03 and the standard deviation of
the nonfood productivity shock σas = 0.02. We follow Devereux et al. (2006) in calibrating
the persistence and standard deviation of the terms of trade shock and choose ρs = 0.77

than for nonfood products and that price adjustments are less frequent during periods of low to moderate
inflation. Since our model has no trend inflation and we impose price stickiness only in the nonfood sector,
our parameter choice is consistent with the results of these studies.
12
Christiano et al. (1996) estimate it to be 0.25; Rotemberg and Woodford (1997) estimate it to be 0.40.
13
The income elasticity of food consumption is equal to one minus the subsistence ratio.

14

and σs = 0.013. We set the persistence of the mark-up shock ρτ = 0.9 and the standard
deviation parameter στ = 0.01.

4

Baseline Results
While it is not our objective to match specific moments, the incomplete markets version

of our model more closely matches the properties of business cycle fluctuations in developing
economies relative to advanced economies.14 For instance, with the baseline parameters and
shock processes, the incomplete markets model delivers inflation (for both food and nonfood
commodities) that is higher and more volatile than in the complete markets model. This
is consistent with the empirical findings of Fraga et al. (2004), Bowdler and Malik (2005),
and Pétursson (2008) that developing economies have more volatile inflation than advanced
ones. Consumption is more volatile than output in the incomplete markets model, while
the reverse is true in the complete markets model. This matches the findings of Aguiar and
Gopinath (2007) and Kose et al. (2009) that consumption is more volatile than output in
developing economies, while the opposite holds (as anticipated based on the consumption
smoothing motive) in advanced economies.
We now present the conditional welfare gains associated with different policy rules in our
model. We include all four shocks–productivity shocks to two sectors, mark-up shocks, and
terms of trade shocks–when we do the welfare calculations discussed below.
Table 4 shows the welfare comparisons from targeting different price indices under complete and incomplete market settings, and also the sectoral weights for constructing the
optimal price index in each case. With complete markets, the optimal price index puts the
entire weight on the sticky price sector, with zero weights on food and traded goods, making
it identical to core inflation targeting. Targeting headline inflation slightly reduces welfare.
Thus, under complete markets, the choice of targeting strict core inflation is the best policy
14

These results are not reported in detail here but are available from the authors.

15

and dominates targeting of broader price indexes, as in Aoki (2001) and Benigno (2004).
However, with incomplete markets, this result no longer holds. The second column of
Table 4 shows that headline inflation targeting is now welfare improving relative to core
inflation targeting. Targeting the optimal price index yields a slightly higher welfare gain
than targeting headline inflation.15 The optimal price index assigns a weight of two-thirds
to the sticky price sector and one-third to food prices. This result is a marked departure
from the prior literature based on complete markets, wherein the optimal weight on food
prices would be zero. On the other hand, it is consistent with the Benigno (2004) result
(and, implicitly, the results of Aoki, 2001, and Mankiw and Reis, 2003) that the weight on
the traded goods sector is zero. That sector has flexible prices and agents in that sector have
access to financial markets, so the classical result is confirmed.
To investigate these results more carefully, we analyze the responses of key variables to
a food productivity shock because shocks to that sector highlight the relevance of market
completeness. Figure 1 plots the impulse responses of various macroeconomic variables to a
one percent negative food productivity shock under complete markets. Each variable’s response is expressed as the percentage deviation from its steady state level. Impulse responses
under a strict core inflation targeting rule are shown by the solid lines. The dashed lines
are impulse responses under a strict headline inflation targeting rule. The strict headline
inflation targeting regime results in a slightly higher volatility of consumption and output.
Also, the policy response is more aggressive under strict headline inflation targeting, which
leads to a further decline in output. These results are similar to those documented in the
existing literature on inflation targeting.
Following an increase in inflation, the central bank raises interest rates, reducing aggre-

15

The welfare gains are larger than those typically reported in models calibrated to advanced economy
data. One reason is that developing economies have more volatile output and consumption than advanced
economies. Secondly, the financial frictions that we include our model imply that monetary policy can have
an even greater impact in terms of reducing the consumption volatility of different household types, which
can in some cases be higher than aggregate consumption volatility.

16

gate demand (as consumers postpone their consumption following an increase in interest
rates) and, thus, inflation. So, under complete markets, stabilizing core inflation is equivalent to stabilizing the output gap (Aoki, 2001) and there are no additional welfare gains
from adopting headline inflation targeting. Thus, core inflation targeting is the welfare
maximizing policy choice for the central bank.
However, in the presence of credit constrained consumers, headline inflation targeting appears to be a better policy choice. Figure 2 plots the impulse responses of various macroeconomic variables to a one percent negative food productivity shock under incomplete markets.
Aggregate demand responds differently to monetary tightening under strict core inflation targeting and headline inflation targeting. The central bank is now able to effectively control
aggregate demand by increasing interest rates only when it targets headline inflation. Aggregate demand, instead of going up slightly, goes up sharply in response to the shock if
the central bank follows strict core inflation targeting. Thus, headline inflation targeting
outperforms core inflation targeting as the former is more effective at stabilizing output.
In order to examine the mechanics behind this result, we look at the properties of aggregate demand under incomplete markets. In the presence of financial frictions, the consumption choices of different households vary (as opposed to complete markets, where the
consumption choice of each household is identical). While the consumption demand of unconstrained households is responsive to interest rates (as they optimize intertemporally), the
consumption demand of credit-constrained households is independent of interest rate changes
and depends only on their current period wage income. Since only a fraction of aggregate
demand is influenced by interest rate changes, a monetary tightening does not automatically
mitigate the increase in aggregate demand. The response of aggregate demand crucially
depends on the behavior of credit-constrained households.
Figure 2 shows that, following a negative shock to food productivity, the central bank
raises the interest rate, lowering the demand of unconstrained households (as it is optimal

17

for them to postpone consumption). However, it has no bearing on the demand of creditconstrained consumers. An increase in the relative price of food following a negative food
productivity shock increases the wage income and, therefore, consumption demand of creditconstrained households. Thus, the demand of the two types of households moves in opposite
directions following a negative shock to food productivity.
Which of the two demands dominates is determined by the policy regime. Under core
inflation targeting, the increase in food prices (and, therefore, the wage income of food sector
households) is higher than under headline inflation targeting. This higher wage income
translates into higher consumption demand by credit-constrained consumers (who consume
all of their current wage income), more than compensating for the lower consumption demand
of unconstrained consumers. Consequently, aggregate demand rises. By contrast, when the
central bank targets headline inflation, price increases in the food sector are lower and the
rise in income and, therefore, the increase in consumption demand in that sector is smaller.
Thus, monetary intervention is effective in achieving its objective of controlling aggregate
demand only when the central bank targets headline inflation.
To formalize the above arguments, we examine the log-linearized aggregate demand equation, which is given by:16

ĉt = −

where ζf =

C¯f
C̄

(1 − λ)ζs
Et (R̂t − π̂t+1 ) + Et ĉt+1 − λζf Et ∆ĉf,t+1
σ

(16)

is the steady state share of food sector households’ consumption and ζs =

C¯s
C̄

is the steady state share of nonfood sector households’ consumption.
Furthermore, from the optimal labor supply of food sector households, we have:

ĉf,t =

1+
1+

a
ψ
aσ
ψ

x̂f,t +

16

a(1 + ψ1 )
1+

aσ
ψ

Âf,t

(17)

Aggregate demand is the sum of the log-linearized consumption demand of households in the two sectors.
Variables with a hat denote log deviations from corresponding steady state values.

18

where a =

x̄f ȳx
C¯f

> 1.

Equations (16) and (17) suggest that, in the presence of credit-constrained consumers,
there is a link between aggregate demand and the relative price of food (xf,t ). In this setting,
relative prices affect aggregate demand in addition to aggregate supply.17 Thus, the presence
of financial frictions implies that managing aggregate demand requires the central bank to
choose a policy regime that would limit the rise in wages of credit-constrained consumers
(and, therefore, the increase in their demand).

4.1

Alternative Monetary Policy Rules

Next, we evaluate a broader range of monetary policy rules that are employed by developing (and advanced) economy central banks. The monetary policy rule employed even
by inflation targeting central banks typically includes the output gap, so we now consider
whether flexible inflation targeting delivers better welfare outcomes than strict inflation targeting.
The first row of Table 5 shows the baseline result–all three inflation targets (optimal,
headline and core) under strict inflation targeting, i.e., with zero weight on the output gap.
In the second row, we compare all three inflation targets (core, headline, and optimal weights)
under flexible inflation targeting, i.e., with a positive weight on the output gap. The results
show that the ordering of the different rules in terms of welfare gains relative to core inflation
targeting is preserved. Moreover, the weights on the different sectors in the optimal price
index are essentially the same.
In the third row, we compare flexible headline and flexible optimal inflation targeting
against strict core inflation targeting. The two flexible inflation targeting regimes still outperform strict core inflation targeting. However, comparing the first and third rows, it is
evident that adding the output gap into the monetary policy rule leads to lower welfare gains
17

Under complete markets, relative prices only affect aggregate supply (Aoki, 2001).

19

than strict targeting versions of those rules. The reason is that in the sticky price sector the
output gap, defined as the level of output relative to trend, and inflation move in the same
direction. A negative productivity shock leads to a drop in output and an increase in inflation in this sector. Therefore, adding the output gap into the monetary policy rule weakens
the central bank’s response to deviations of inflation from the target value. To confirm this,
we also conducted an experiment where we included the output gap coefficient in the search
for the optimal rule. Consistent with the results noted above, the optimal coefficient for the
output gap is zero.18

5

Sensitivity Analysis and Extensions
In this section, we report results from a variety of experiments to test the robustness of

our results to changes in the values of key parameters and certain aspects of the structure
of the model. Our results held up quite well to changes in values of most parameters, so
in the discussion below we focus on the elements of our model that represent significant
deviations from the prior literature. It should be noted that, since the steady state values
of the models differ, it is only possible to make a comparison across regimes and not across
different models.

5.1

Sensitivity to Key Parameters

One of the key parameter settings in the model is the proportion of households in the
economy that are in the food sector and face credit constraints. As the share of households
in this sector rises, welfare gains from headline inflation or optimal inflation targeting decline
relative to core inflation targeting (see Table 6, Panel A). This might seem counter-intuitive
18

This finding is consistent with the result of Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2007). We also experimented
with including the real exchange rate directly in the optimal inflation target, and found that the coefficient
on this variable was zero (we tried including it in different ways–the current level, lagged level, and changes).
Similarly, when we added the export price to the optimal inflation target, the weight on it was zero.

20

as these households lack access to credit. The mechanism for this result is as follows. When
the share of rural households is larger, under our parameter assumptions they will be poorer
on average while the nonfood sector households will be richer. For a given drop in agricultural
output, the relative price of food goes up by less when the consumption of food (above the
subsistence level) by nonfood sector households is larger. When the share of rural households
is small, the food consumption of households in the nonfood sector is also small in the steady
state. Therefore, to accommodate a drop in food production, the relative price responds
sharply.19
An important assumption in the model is the subsistence level of food. As noted earlier,
this constraint does not bind in equilibrium but reduces the elasticity of substitution between
food and nonfood goods. When there is no subsistence level of food consumption, the
weight of food in the optimal inflation target is small and core inflation targeting actually
delivers higher welfare than headline inflation (see Table 6, Panel B). As the subsistence level
goes up, the weight of food in the optimal inflation index rises and core inflation targeting
becomes inferior to headline inflation targeting. Note that in our model the total share of
food consumption is pinned down based on empirical estimates for developing economies.
A higher subsistence level of food therefore implies a lower level of nonsubsistence food
consumption. Therefore, for any given amount of drop in the food output, market clearing
necessitates a larger increase in the relative price of food. As a result, the higher is the
subsistence level of food, the more volatile the impulse responses will be and the larger the
welfare gain from headline inflation targeting.
An alternative approach to including a subsistence level of food in the utility function
would be to directly pick a lower value for the elasticity of substitution between food and
nonfood goods. Dropping the assumption that there is a subsistence level of food and
19

Reducing the share of food sector households even further leads to implausibly large welfare gains, but
this is because we have pinned down the average share of food expenditures in total household expenditures
to be 0.42. Economies with small shares of rural households tend to be richer economies with substantially
lower food shares in total expenditure.

21

lowering the elasticity to 0.38 yielded results similar to our baseline results. However, our
approach is more realistic for developing economies. Empirical evidence shows that the
income elasticity of food consumption is smaller than one in developing economies, which
suggests it is more likely that food consumption is driven by the subsistence level.20
Another crucial parameter in the model is the share of food in total household consumption expenditures. When this share is small, the optimal inflation target puts most of the
weight on the sticky price sector. Core inflation targeting then delivers higher welfare than
headline inflation targeting, and the gains from targeting the optimal inflation index are
modest. As the food share rises, the optimal inflation index involves an increasing weight on
food prices. When food accounts for half of total consumption expenditures on average, the
gains from headline inflation targeting become large and the optimal inflation index puts
nearly the entire weight on food prices. This result appears at odds with one of the results
in Mankiw and Reis (2003). They find that “the more important a price is in the consumer
price index, the less weight that sector’s price should receive in the stability price index.”
The incomplete markets structure of our model and the low elasticity of substitution between
food and nonfood account for the difference between our result and theirs. However, our
result that the weight on food prices is zero is true when markets are complete irrespective
of the share of food in consumption expenditures, consistent with a different proposition in
their paper–that sectors with more flexible prices should get a lower weight.
We also experimented with changing the degree of price rigidity in the sticky price sector
(see Table 6, Panel C). Consistent with Mankiw and Reis (2003) and Benigno (2004), we
find that the weight of the sticky price sector in the optimal price index increases with the
degree of price stickiness.

20

See Anand and Prasad (2010) for more discussion. As noted earlier, the income elasticity of food
consumption is equal to one minus the subsistence ratio so the model without subsistence level assumption
cannot match the data for developing countries.

22

5.2

Financial Frictions

In the baseline model, we assume that food sector households face strong financial frictions, turning them into hand-to-mouth consumers. We now relax this assumption by introducing a portfolio holding cost for these households, enabling us to vary the extent of
(common) financial frictions they face.21 When the portfolio holding cost is zero, rural
households have the same degree of access to the bond market as nonfood sector households.
It is important to note that this is not equivalent to having complete financial markets. When
the portfolio holding cost is very high, rural households hold zero bonds and the economy
converges to the baseline case.
In the full access (but still not complete markets) scenario, food prices do enter with a
positive weight in the optimal price index, although this weight is substantially smaller than
in the baseline incomplete markets scenario. However, the welfare gain from targeting the
optimal price index is small relative to core inflation targeting as the bonds give food sector
households the ability to smooth consumption intertemporally although they cannot fully
insure against sector-specific shocks.

5.3

Common Productivity Shocks

Finally, we consider the case where there are only aggregate rather than sector-specific
productivity shocks. To this point, we have focused on the impact of a shock to productivity
in the flexible price sector as it most clearly illustrates the point about what monetary policy
rule is better in response to a shock to the flexible price part of the economy. Of course,
while the impulse responses that we analyzed highlight different models’ responses to only
a food productivity shock, the simulation results include all shocks.
We recomputed the model with a productivity shock common to the food and the nonfood domestic goods sectors (and, as before, markup and terms of trade shocks as well).
21

The results discussed in this subsection and the next one are available from the authors.

23

Intuitively, this should increase the welfare gain from targeting inflation in the headline CPI
or the optimal price index as there are no longer any shocks specific to the rigid price sector.
This is indeed what we find, confirming our main results. The results were similar whether
the common productivity shock was transitory (food sector shock) or more persistent (sticky
price sector shock). Besides, food prices consistently have a significant weight in the optimal
inflation target.

6

Concluding Remarks
Previous research has concluded that optimal monetary policy should focus on offsetting

nominal rigidities by stabilizing core inflation. However, those results rely on the assumption
that markets are complete and that price stickiness is the only source of distortion in the
economy. In this paper, we have developed a more realistic model for developing economies
that has the following key features–incomplete markets with credit-constrained consumers;
households requiring a minimum subsistence level of food; low price elasticity of the demand
for food; and a high share of expenditure on food in households’ total consumption expenditure. We nest models such as those of Aoki (2001) and Benigno (2004) as special cases of
our model.
We show that the classical result about the optimality of core inflation targeting can
be overturned by introducing financial frictions. In the presence of credit-constrained consumers, targeting core inflation no longer maximizes welfare. Moreover, stabilizing inflation
is not sufficient to stabilize output when markets are not complete. Under these conditions,
headline inflation targeting improves welfare. Our model also allows us to compute optimal
price indexes that maximize welfare. The optimal price index includes a positive weight
on food prices but, unlike headline inflation, generally assigns zero weight to import prices.
This is because agents in that sector have access to financial markets and, unlike in the case

24

of food, the price elasticity of the demand for goods produced in this sector is high.22
One possible extension of our model is to include money explicitly. While this provides
a saving mechanism for hand-to-mouth consumers, it would also strengthen the case for
headline inflation targeting to preserve the value of monetary savings. Another extension
would be to include physical capital in the model. This highlights a practical dilemma that
developing economy central banks often grapple with in pursuit of their objective of price
stability. For instance, raising policy rates to deal with surging food price inflation can hurt
industrial activity. While raising interest rates in response to a transitory negative shock to
agricultural sector productivity might seem counter-intuitive, our results suggest that such
a policy could in fact be welfare improving in an incomplete markets setting in which food
consumption accounts for a large share of household consumption expenditures.

22

Looking beyond the CPI, Erceg et al. (2000) find that in the presence of wage stickiness optimal
monetary policy should target the nominal wage. Reinterpreting the sectors in the Mankiw-Reis (2003)
model as including a labor sector with nominal wage rigidities yields similar results.

25

References
Aguiar, Mark and Gita Gopinath (2007), “Emerging market business cycles: The cycle is
the trend.” Journal of Political Economy, 115, 69–102.
Anand, Rahul and Eswar S Prasad (2010), Optimal price indices for targeting inflation under
incomplete markets. NBER Working Paper No. 16290.
Aoki, Kosuke (2001), “Optimal monetary policy responses to relative-price changes.” Journal
of Monetary Economics, 48, 55–80.
Ascari, Guido (2004), “Staggered prices and trend inflation: some nuisances.” Review of
Economic Dynamics, 7, 642–667.
Basu, Priya and Pradeep Srivastava (2005), Scaling-up microfinance for India’s rural poor.
World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 3646.
Basu, Susanto (1996), “Procyclical productivity: increasing returns or cyclical utilization?”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111, 719–751.
Basu, Susanto and John G Fernald (1995), “Are apparent productive spillovers a figment of
specification error?” Journal of Monetary Economics, 36, 165–188.
Benigno, Pierpaolo (2004), “Optimal monetary policy in a currency area.” Journal of International Economics, 63, 293–320.
Bowdler, Christopher and Adeel Malik (2005), “Openness and inflation volatility: panel data
evidence.” University of Oxford. Working paper.
Calvo, Guillermo A (1983), “Staggered prices in a utility-maximizing framework.” Journal
of Monetary Economics, 12, 383–398.
Catão, Luis and Roberto Chang (2010), World food prices and monetary policy. NBER
Working Paper No. 16563.
Christiano, Lawrence J, Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans (1996), “The effects of
monetary policy shocks: evidence from the flow of funds.” The Review of Economics and
Statistics, 78, 16–34.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galı́, and Mark Gertler (1998), “Monetary policy rules in practice:
some international evidence.” European Economic Review, 42, 1033–1067.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galı́, and Mark Gertler (1999), “The science of monetary policy: a
new keynesian perspective.” Journal of Economic Literature, 37, 1661–1707.
Creamer, Kenneth and Neil A Rankin (2008), Price setting in South Africa 2001-2007stylised facts using consumer price micro data. Manuscript, University of the Witwaterstrand.
26

Demirguc-Kunt, Asli and Leora Klapper (2012), Measuring financial inclusion: the global
findex database. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 6025.
Devereux, Michael B, Philip R Lane, and Juanyi Xu (2006), “Exchange rates and monetary
policy in emerging market economies.” The Economic Journal, 116, 478–506.
Erceg, Christopher J, Dale W Henderson, and Andrew T Levin (2000), “Optimal monetary
policy with staggered wage and price contracts.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 46,
281–313.
Ferrero, Andrea, Mark Gertler, and Lars EO Svensson (2010), “Current account dynamics
and monetary policy.” In International Dimensions of Monetary Policy (Jordi Galı́ and
Mark Gertler, eds.), 199–244, University of Chicago Press.
Fraga, Arminio, Ilan Goldfajn, and Andre Minella (2004), “Inflation targeting in emerging
market economies.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2003, Volume 18 (Mark Gertler
and Kenneth Rogoff, eds.), 365–416, The MIT Press.
Frankel, Jeffrey A (2008), “The effect of monetary policy on real commodity prices.” In Asset
Prices and Monetary Policy (John Y. Campbell, ed.), 291–333, University of Chicago
Press.
Gagnon, Etienne (2009), “Price setting during low and high inflation: evidence from mexico.”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124, 1221–1263.
Galı́, Jordi, J David López-Salido, and Javier Vallés (2004), “Rule-of-thumb consumers and
the design of interest rate rules.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 36, 739–763.
Garcı́a-Cicco, Javier, Roberto Pancrazi, and Martı́n Uribe (2010), “Real business cycles in
emerging countries?” American Economic Review, 100, 2510–31.
Goodfriend, Marvin and Robert King (1997), “The new neoclassical synthesis and the role of
monetary policy.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997, Volume 12 (Ben S. Bernanke
and Julio J. Rotemberg, eds.), 231–296, MIT Press.
Goodfriend, Marvin and Robert G King (2001), “The case for price stability.” In The First
ECB Central Banking Conference: Why Price Stability? (Alicia G. Herrero, Vitor Gaspar,
Lex Hoogduin, Julian Morgan, and Bernhard Winkler, eds.), European Central Bank.
Gouvea, Solange (2007), Price rigidity in Brazil: evidence from CPI micro data. Banco
Central de Brasil Working Paper No. 143.
Kose, M Ayhan, Eswar S Prasad, and Marco E Terrones (2009), “Does financial globalization
promote risk sharing?” Journal of Development Economics, 89, 258–270.
Mankiw, N Gregory and Ricardo Reis (2002), “Sticky information versus sticky prices: a
proposal to replace the new keynesian phillips curve.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
117, 1295–1328.
27

Mankiw, N Gregory and Ricardo Reis (2003), “What measure of inflation should a central
bank target?” Journal of the European Economic Association, 1, 1058–1086.
Medina, Juan Pablo, David Rappoport, and Claudio Soto (2007), Dynamics of price adjustments: evidence from micro level data for chile. Central Bank of Chile Working Paper No.
432.
Mendoza, Enrique G (1995), “The terms of trade, the real exchange rate, and economic
fluctuations.” International Economic Review, 36, 101–137.
Mishkin, Frederic S (2007), “Inflation dynamics.” International Finance, 10, 317–334.
Mishkin, Frederic S (2008), Does stabilizing inflation contribute to stabilizing economic activity? NBER Working Paper No. 13970.
Mohanty, Madhusudan S and Marc Klau (2005), “Monetary policy rules in emerging market
economies: issues and evidence.” In Monetary Policy and Macroeconomic Stabilization in
Latin America (Rolf J Langhammer and Lúcio Vinhas de Souza, eds.), 205–245, Springer.
Pallage, Stephane and Michel A Robe (2003), “On the welfare cost of economic fluctuations
in developing countries.” International Economic Review, 44, 677–698.
Pétursson, Thórarinn G (2008), How hard can it be? inflation control around the world.
Central Bank of Iceland, Economics Department.
Rotemberg, Julio and Michael Woodford (1997), “An optimization-based econometric framework for the evaluation of monetary policy.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997,
Volume 12 (Ben S. Bernanke and Julio J. Rotemberg, eds.), 297–361, MIT Press.
Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie and Martın Uribe (2003), “Closing small open economy models.”
Journal of International Economics, 61, 163–185.
Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie and Martın Uribe (2004), “Solving dynamic general equilibrium
models using a second-order approximation to the policy function.” Journal of Economic
Dynamics and Control, 28, 755–775.
Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie and Martin Uribe (2007), “Optimal simple and implementable
monetary and fiscal rules.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54, 1702–1725.
Taylor, John B (1993), “Discretion versus policy rules in practice.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 39, 195–214.
Walsh, James P (2011), Reconsidering the role of food prices in inflation. IMF Working
Paper No. 11/71.
Wynne, Mark A (2008), “Core inflation: a review of some conceptual issues.” Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis Review, 90.

28

Table 1: Share of Food Expenditure in Total Household Expenditure

Developing Economies
Indonesia
Vietnam
India
China
Russia
Malaysia
Average

Food Expenditure
53.0
49.8
48.8
36.7
33.2
28.0
41.6

Advanced Economies
Japan
Germany
Australia
Canada
United Kingdom
USA
Average

Food Expenditure
14.7
11.5
10.8
9.3
8.8
5.7
10.1

Source: Household Surveys, CEIC, International Food Consumption Patterns Dataset,
Economic Research Service, USDA and authors’ calculations.
Notes: Data for developing economies are for 2005 while for advanced economies data
are for 2006. Expenditure on food includes expenditure on food consumed at home only
and does not include expenditure on beverages and tobacco.

29

Table 2: Composite Measure of Access to Financial Services in Developing Countries

Selected Countries
Percent with Access
Argentina
33
Brazil
56
Chile
42
China
64
India
35
Indonesia
20
Kenya
42
Malaysia
66
Median (29 Developing Economies): 42

Selected Countries
Nigeria
Philippines
Poland
Russia
South Africa
Thailand
Turkey

Percent with Access
30
27
70
48
54
73
58

Median (27 Advanced Economies): 96

Source: Global Findex Database, World Bank, 2011.
Notes: The composite indicator measures the percentage of the adult population with
access to an account with a financial intermediary. The table only shows data for a
selected group of individual developing countries. Reported medians are based on a
larger sample of developing and advanced economies available in the database.

30

Table 3: Parameter Values

Parameter Definition

Value

Structural
λ

Share of households in the food sector (who are credit-constrained)

0.4

η

Elasticity of substitution between food and nonfood

0.6

C∗

Subsistence level of food consumption given subsistence ratio of 1/3

0.042

Non-subsistence food consumption share

0.326

β

Discount factor

0.99

σ

Risk aversion coefficient

2

θ

Elasticity of substitution between different varieties

11

ψ

Inverse of Frisch elasticity of labor supply

3

ψb

Interest rate elasticity of debt (for technical reasons only)

0.0007

α

Probability of not being able to reset price in each quarter

0.66

ξ

Elasticity of substitution between domestic and foreign goods

0.7

ζ

Share of imports in total nonfood consumption

0.3

ρ

Degree of interest rate smoothing

0.7

φπ

Degree of response to inflation

φy

Degree of response to output gap

γ
General

Policy
2
0.5

Shocks
ρfa , σaf

Productivity shocks in the food sector: persistence, std. dev.

0.25, 0.030

ρsa ,

Productivity shocks in the sticky price sector: persistence, std. dev.

0.90, 0.020

ρs , σs

Terms of trade shocks in the export sector: persistence, std. dev.

0.77, 0.013

ρ τ , στ

Markup shocks in the sticky price sector: persistence, std. dev.

0.90, 0.010

σas

31

Table 4: Welfare Comparisons Under Different Inflation Targets

Financial
Markets

Welfare Gain

Weights in the Optimal Price Index

Headline

Optimal

Food Prices

Sticky Prices

Import Prices

Complete

-0.09%

0.00%

0.00

1.00

0.00

Incomplete

0.16%

0.20%

0.35

0.65

0.00

Notes: The optimal price index consists of food prices, sticky nonfood domestic goods
prices, and import prices. Welfare gains under alternative inflation targets are derived
as permanent consumption gains relative to strict core inflation targeting.

32

Table 5: Welfare Comparisons Between Strict and Flexible Inflation Targeting

Benchmark

Alternative

Welfare Gain

Target

Target

Headline Optimal

Strict Core

Strict

0.16%

Flexible Core

Flexible

Strict Core

Flexible

Weights in the Optimal Price Index
Food Prices

Sticky Prices

Import Prices

0.20%

0.35

0.65

0.00

0.12%

0.17%

0.34

0.66

0.00

0.07%

0.11%

0.34

0.66

0.00

Notes: The optimal price index consists of food prices, sticky nonfood domestic goods prices,
and import prices. Welfare gains under alternative inflation targets are derived as permanent
consumption gains relative to the respective benchmark target. Strict inflation targeting
refers to the monetary policy rule that only responds to inflation changes while flexible
inflation targeting allows for responses to output fluctuations.

33

Table 6: Sensitivity Tests

Parameter
Value

Welfare Gain
Headline

Optimal

Weights in the Optimal Price Index
Food Prices

Sticky Prices

Import Prices

A. Share of Rural Households (baseline = 0.4)
0.3

0.36%

0.49%

0.87

0.13

0.00

0.4

0.16%

0.20%

0.35

0.65

0.00

0.5

-0.02%

0.09%

0.22

0.78

0.00

0.6

-0.15%

0.04%

0.14

0.86

0.00

B. Subsistence Ratio of Food (baseline = 0.33)
0.0

-0.07%

0.00%

0.08

0.92

0.00

0.1

-0.06%

0.01%

0.14

0.86

0.00

0.2

-0.03%

0.03%

0.21

0.79

0.00

0.3

0.08%

0.12%

0.31

0.69

0.00

0.4

0.56%

0.63%

0.48

0.52

0.00

C. Price Stickiness (baseline = 0.66)
0.5

0.13%

0.16%

0.42

0.58

0.00

0.6

0.16%

0.19%

0.39

0.61

0.00

0.7

0.14%

0.19%

0.32

0.68

0.00

0.8

0.01%

0.11%

0.20

0.80

0.00

Notes: The optimal price index consists of food prices, sticky nonfood domestic
goods prices, and import prices. Welfare gains under different parameter values are derived as permanent consumption gains relative to strict core inflation
targeting.

34

Figure 1: Impulse Responses to a Negative Food Productivity Shock (Complete Markets)

Notes: The impulse responses shown above are to a one percent negative shock to
food productivity. Each variable’s response is expressed as the percentage deviation from
its steady state level.

35

Figure 2: Impulse Responses to a Negative Food Productivity Shock (Incomplete Markets)

Notes: The impulse responses shown above are to a one percent negative shock to
food productivity. Each variable’s response is expressed as the percentage deviation from
its steady state level.

36

