NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WEAK MARKETS, STRONG TEACHERS:
RECESSION AT CAREER START AND TEACHER EFFECTIVENESS
Markus Nagler
Marc Piopiunik
Martin R. West
Working Paper 21393
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21393

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2015, Revised April 2017
We thank seminar audiences at Harvard University, the Ifo Institute, the University of Munich,
RWI Essen, and the University of Konstanz as well as conference participants at the NBER
Education Spring Meeting, the SOLE-EALE World Meetings in Montreal, the Spring Meeting of
Young Economists in Ghent, the Workshop of the German Network of Young
Microeconometricians, the Econometric Society World Congress in Montreal, the annual meeting
of the European Economic Association in Mannheim, the European Summer Symposium in
Labor Economics, and the CESifo Area Conference in the Economics of Education for valuable
suggestions. We also thank David Autor, Michael Boehm, Raj Chetty, Matthew Chingos, Andy
de Barros, David Deming, Christian Dustmann, Bernd Fitzenberger, Mathilde Godard, Joshua
Goodman, Anna Gumpert, Eric A. Hanushek, Lawrence Katz, Asim Khwaja, Amanda Pallais,
Jonah Rockoff, Monika Schnitzer, Ludger Woessmann, and especially Martin Watzinger for
valuable comments and suggestions. Max Mandl provided excellent research assistance. Nagler
gratefully acknowledges financial support by the DFG through SFB TR 15 and the Elite Network
of Bavaria through Evidence-Based-Economics. He further thanks the Program on Education
Policy and Governance at Harvard University for its hospitality while writing parts of this paper.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Markus Nagler, Marc Piopiunik, and Martin R. West. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Weak Markets, Strong Teachers: Recession at Career Start and Teacher Effectiveness
Markus Nagler, Marc Piopiunik, and Martin R. West
NBER Working Paper No. 21393
July 2015, Revised April 2017
JEL No. E32,H75,I20,J24
ABSTRACT
How do alternative job opportunities affect teacher quality? We provide causal evidence on this
question by exploiting business cycle conditions at career start as a source of exogenous variation
in the outside options of potential teachers. Unlike prior research, we directly assess teacher
quality with value-added measures of impacts on student test scores, using administrative data on
33,000 teachers in Florida public schools. Consistent with a Roy model of occupational choice,
teachers entering the profession during recessions are significantly more effective in raising
student test scores. Results are supported by placebo tests and not driven by differential attrition.

Markus Nagler
Department of Economics
University of Munich
Akademiestr. 1/III
80799 Munich, Germany
markus.nagler@econ.lmu.de
Marc Piopiunik
ifo Institute for Economic Research
Poschingerstr. 5
Munich 81679
Germany
piopiunik@ifo.de

Martin R. West
Harvard Graduate School of Education
Gutman Library 454
6 Appian Way
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
martin_west@gse.harvard.edu

1

Introduction

How do alternative job opportunities affect teacher quality? This is a crucial policy
question as teachers are a key input in the education production function (Hanushek and
Rivkin, 2012) who affect their students’ outcomes even in adulthood (Chetty et al., 2014b).
Despite their importance, individuals entering the teaching profession in the United States
tend to come from the lower part of the cognitive ability distribution of college graduates
(Hanushek and Pace, 1995). One frequently cited reason for not being able to recruit
higher-skilled individuals as teachers is low salaries compared to other professions (e.g.,
Dolton and Marcenaro-Gutierrez, 2011; Hanushek et al., 2014).
Existing research provides evidence consistent with the argument that outside options
matter. A first strand of the literature has used regional variation in relative teacher
salaries, finding that pay is positively related to teachers’ academic quality (e.g., Figlio,
1997). A second strand has used long-run changes in the labor market – in particular,
the expansion of job opportunities for women – finding that the academic quality of new
teachers is lower when job market alternatives are better (e.g., Bacolod, 2007). However,
both bodies of evidence suffer from key limitations. First, relative pay may be endogenous
to teacher quality. Second, measures of academic quality are poor predictors of teacher
effectiveness (cf. Jackson et al., 2014). This important policy question therefore remains
unresolved.
We exploit business cycle conditions at career start as a source of exogenous variation
in the outside labor-market options of potential teachers.1 Because the business cycle
conditions at career start are exogenous to teacher quality, our reduced-form estimates
reflect causal effects. In contrast to prior research, we directly measure teacher quality
with value-added measures (VAMs) of impacts on student test scores, a well-validated
measure of teacher effectiveness (e.g., Kane and Staiger 2008; Chetty et al. 2014a,b; and
Jackson et al. 2014 for a review). Combining our novel identification strategy with VAMs
for individual elementary school teachers from a large US state, we provide causal evidence
on the importance of alternative job opportunities for teacher quality.

1

To our knowledge, the idea that outside labor-market options at career start matter for teacher quality
was first proposed by Murnane and Phillips (1981) in their classic paper on “vintage effects.” Zabalza
(1979) provides early evidence that starting salaries within teaching influence individual decisions to enter
the profession, while Dolton (1990) finds large impacts of teachers’ relative earnings and earnings growth.

1

Our value-added measures are based on individual-level administrative data from the
Florida Department of Education on 33,000 4th- and 5th-grade teachers in Florida’s public
schools and their students. The data include Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test
(FCAT) math and reading scores for every 3rd-, 4th-, and 5th-grade student tested in
Florida in the 2000-01 through 2008-09 school years. The data also contain information
on teachers’ total experience in teaching (including experience in other states and private
schools), which is used to compute the year of entry into the profession (which is not
directly observed). Following Jackson and Bruegmann (2009), we regress students’ math
and reading test scores separately on their prior-year test scores, student, classroom,
and school characteristics, and grade-by-year fixed effects to estimate each teacher’s
value-added. We then relate the VAMs in math and reading to several business cycle
indicators from the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) and the Bureau of
Labor Statistics (BLS).
We find that teachers who entered the profession during recessions are roughly 0.10
standard deviations (SD) more effective in raising math test scores than teachers who
entered the profession during non-recessionary periods. The effect is half as large for
reading value-added. Quantile regressions indicate that the difference in math value-added
between recession and non-recession entrants is most pronounced at the upper end of
the effectiveness distribution. Based on figures from Chetty et al. (2014b), the difference
in average math effectiveness between recession and non-recession entrants implies a
difference in students’ discounted life-time earnings of around $13,000 per classroom
taught each year.2 Under the more realistic assumption that only 10% of recession-cohort
teachers are pushed into teaching because of the recession, these recession-only teachers
are roughly one SD more effective in teaching math than the teachers they push out.
Based on the variation in teacher VAMs in our data, being assigned to such a teacher
would increase a student’s test scores by around 0.20 SD.
Placebo regressions show that neither business cycle conditions in the years before or
after teachers’ career starts, nor those at certain critical ages (e.g., when most students enter
or complete college), impact teacher effectiveness; only conditions at career start matter.
2

Chetty et al. (2014b) estimate that students who are taught by a teacher with a 1 SD higher value-added
measure at age 12 earn on average 1.3% more at age 28. Assuming a permanent change in earnings and
discounting life-time earnings at 5%, this translates into increases in discounted life-time earnings of
$7,000 per student. We obtain our estimate by multiplying this number by our effect size and average
classroom size.

2

Nor are our results driven by differential attrition among recession and non-recession
cohorts. Although teachers entering during recessions are more likely to exit the profession,
the observed attrition pattern works against our finding and suggests that our results
understate the differences in effectiveness between recession and non-recession cohorts at
career start. The results are also not driven by any single recession cohort, but appear for
most recessions covered by our sample period. Using alternative business cycle measures
such as unemployment levels and changes yields very similar results. The recession effect
is not driven by differences in teacher race, gender, age at career start, cohort sizes, or
school characteristics. Our finding that the effect of recessions on teacher effectiveness
is twice as strong in math as in reading is consistent with evidence that wage returns
to numeracy skills are twice as large as those to literacy skills in the US labor market
(Hanushek et al., 2015). These results are also consistent with the common finding that
students’ reading scores are more difficult to improve than their math scores (Jackson
et al., 2014, cf.).
To motivate our analysis, we present a stylized Roy model (Roy, 1951) in which
more high-skilled individuals choose teaching over other professions during recessions
because of lower (expected) earnings in those alternative occupations. The model’s main
assumption is that teaching is a relatively stable occupation over the business cycle. This
seems reasonable since teacher demand depends primarily on student enrollment and is
typically unresponsive to short-run changes in macroeconomic conditions (e.g., Berman
and Pfleeger, 1997). We present evidence that supports our interpretation of these results
as supply effects, rather than demand effects or direct impacts of recessions on teacher
effectiveness.3
Consistent with this model, existing studies show that the supply of workers for public
sector jobs in the US is higher during economic downturns (e.g., Krueger, 1988; Borjas,
2002). Falch et al. (2009) document the same pattern for the teaching profession in
Norway. Teach For America, an organization that recruits academically talented college
graduates into teaching, saw a marked decline in the number of qualified applicants during
3

Figure 1 confirms that employment in the private sector is much more cyclical than employment in
(state and local) education. The major exception is the recession period of 1980-1982, but our results for
this recession differ from and work against our main findings. Kopelman and Rosen (2016) report higher
job security for public sector jobs (including teaching) than for jobs in the private sector. Consistently,
newspapers have reported that teaching is recession-proof. During the most recent recession, job security
for teachers did decline substantially (e.g., New York Times, 2010). This last downturn does not drive
our results.

3

the recent economic recovery (New York Times, 2015). Meanwhile, several US states have
reported sharp declines in enrollment in university-based teacher preparation programs as
the job market has improved (National Public Radio, 2015).
Our results have important policy implications. First, they suggest that increasing the
economic benefits of becoming a teacher may be an effective strategy to increase the quality
of the teaching workforce. In contrast to de Ree et al. (2015), who find that unconditional
increases in teacher pay for incumbent teachers do not improve student achievement, our
results suggest that selection into teaching is affected by changes in economic benefits. This
is in line with field-experimental evidence from developing countries: For example, Ashraf
et al. (2016) find that selecting individuals who care about career incentives rather than
those who are intrinsically motivated leads to better outcomes in public service delivery.
Second, our results also suggest that recessions may provide a window of opportunity
for the public sector to hire more able applicants. Finally, they also suggest that recent
improvements in cognitive skills among new teachers in the US documented by Goldhaber
and Walch (2013) may be attributable to the 2008-09 financial crisis, rather than an
authentic reversal of long-term trends.
We extend previous research that has called attention to the potential importance of
outside job options for teacher quality. Most recently, Britton and Propper (2016) exploit
centralized wage regulation that generates regional variation in teachers’ relative wages
in England to document positive effects of relative teacher pay on school productivity.4
However, their school-level data do not allow them to disentangle selection into the teaching
profession from the sorting of teachers into specific schools and potential differences in
teacher effort due to efficiency wage effects. Bacolod (2007) documents a decrease in the
academic quality (as measured by standardized test scores and undergraduate institution
selectivity) of female teachers in the U.S. over time that coincided with improvements
in women’s outside options.5 In comparison with her study, we use a more rigorous
identification strategy and direct measures of teachers’ performance on the job. Our paper
is therefore the first to document a causal effect of outside labor-market options on the
effectiveness of entering teachers in raising student test scores.

4

Loeb and Page (2000) similarly relate regional variation in relative teacher wages and unemployment
rates to rates of educational attainment but also lack direct measures of teacher quality.
5
Corcoran et al. (2004), Hoxby and Leigh (2004), and Lakdawalla (2006) provide additional evidence of
the importance of outside job options for the supply of American teachers.

4

Business cycle fluctuations have previously been exploited as a strategy to identify
selection effects in the labor market. Oyer (2008), for example, studies the impact of the
business cycle on the likelihood that MBA graduates enter the banking sector.6 Boehm
and Watzinger (2015) show that PhD economists graduating during recessions are more
productive in academia, a finding best explained by a Roy-style model. While these
studies enhance the plausibility of our findings, they relate to rather small groups in the
labor market with highly specialized skills. Teachers, in contrast, make up roughly 3
percent of full-time workers in the US and play a critical role in developing the human
capital of future generations. Moreover, little is known about how to improve the quality
of the teaching workforce. Thus, extending this identification strategy to teacher quality
fills an important gap in the literature.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents a simple model of occupational
choice. Section 3 briefly describes the teaching profession in Florida, introduces the data,
explains our value-added measures, and presents our empirical model. Section 4 reports
results on the relationship between business cycle conditions at career start and teacher
effectiveness in math and reading and provides robustness checks. Section 5 discusses
potential implications for policymakers. Section 6 concludes.

2

A Simple Model of Occupational Choice

To motivate our analysis, we present a simple Roy-style model of self-selection (Roy, 1951)
where individuals choose an occupation to maximize (expected) earnings.7 Specifically,
individuals can choose between working in the teaching sector (t) and working in the
business sector (b), which represents all outside labor-market options of potential teachers.
Earnings depend on average earnings in the respective sector, µ, and the individual’s
ability, v. Hence, earnings in the two sectors for any individual with ability v can be
written as follows:
wt = µt + ηt v
w b = µb + v − s
6

A small literature also documents persistent negative wage effects of completing college during a
recession (e.g., Kahn, 2010; Oreopoulos et al., 2012).
7
Individuals may, of course, be motivated by other concerns than earnings. One can therefore think of
earnings as a proxy for lifetime utility.

5

where wt and wb are earnings in the teaching and business sector, respectively; v is the
(uni-dimensional) ability of the individual, distributed with mean zero and standard
deviation σv2 ; and ηt denotes the relative returns to ability in teaching versus business. If
ability is valued both in business and teaching, but teaching has lower returns to ability,
then ηt ∈ (0, 1).8 If there are no returns to ability in teaching, then ηt = 0.9
The term s (≥ 0) represents the reduction in (expected) earnings in the business sector
relative to the reduction in earnings in the teaching sector (which is normalized to zero)
during recessions. The model thus allows for recessions to affect earnings in the teaching
profession, but assumes that the impact is stronger in the business sector. Empirically,
employment in the teaching sector is less cyclical than employment in the business sector
(see Figure 1; see also Berman and Pfleeger 1997; Simpkins et al. 2012).
Individuals choose teaching if wt > wb , which is equivalent to v <

µt −µb +s
.
1−ηt

Hence, the

share of individuals seeking employment in the teaching sector is given by
µt − µb + s
P r(t) = P r v <
1 − ηt

!

=F

µt − µb + s
1 − ηt

!

where F (·) is the cumulative distribution function of individuals’ ability v, which is
continuously distributed over R. If 0 ≤ ηt < 1, recessions increase the supply and
(average) quality of potential teachers. When a recession hits the economy (increasing s),
the share of individuals seeking employment in the teaching sector increases because the
earnings of teachers increase relative to more cyclical outside options:
∂P r(t)
=f
∂s

µt − µb + s
(1 − ηt )

!

1
> 0.
1 − ηt

The average ability of individuals seeking employment in teaching increases because
individuals with higher ability prefer working in the teacher profession; formally,
1
(1−ηt )

∂vmarg
∂s

=

> 0.10 We expect our empirical analysis to be consistent with this prediction as

8

Wages are more compressed in the government-dominated teaching profession than in the business
sector (cf. Hoxby and Leigh, 2004; Dolton, 2006).
9
Since our model only uses one dimension of ability, we implicitly assume that the two abilities typically
used in Roy models are positively correlated (i.e., ηt ≥ 0). We make this assumption for expositional
clarity only, but note that it has empirical support. For example, Chingos and West (2012) show that,
among 35,000 teachers leaving Florida public schools for other industries, a 1 SD increase in teacher
value-added is associated with 6–8 percent higher earnings in non-teaching jobs.
10
Marginal individuals, indifferent between working in the teaching sector and working in the business
t −µb +s
sector, are characterized by vmarg = µ(1−η
.
t)

6

the underlying assumptions (i.e., ηt ∈ (0, 1) and s ≥ 0) have strong empirical support. If
ηt > 1, we would expect to find negative effects of recessions on teacher quality.
Empirically, we analyze the importance of outside labor-market options for teacher
quality. In our model, changes in labor-market opportunities are modeled as changes in
expected earnings. Both employment probability and relative earnings likely change in
favor of the teaching profession during recessions, but we cannot discriminate between
these two channels in our empirical analysis. If the model’s assumptions hold, however,
our estimates shed light on whether increasing teacher pay would increase teacher quality.
While our simple model only addresses the supply of teachers, fluctuations in demand
could in theory also explain changes in teacher quality over the business cycle. Fluctuations
in demand would lead to higher quality of teachers entering during recessions if the following
two conditions hold. First, school authorities are able to assess the quality of inexperienced
applicants and accordingly hire the more able ones. Second, the number of hired teachers
is smaller during recessions than during booms. If either of these two conditions does not
hold, fluctuations in demand would not cause recession teachers to be more effective than
non-recession teachers. We return to this issue after presenting our main results.

3

Setting, Data, and Empirical Strategy

First, we document the feasibility of a short-run response in teacher supply to fluctuations
in economic conditions by providing information on the pool of potential teachers nationally
and describing the requirements for entry into the teaching profession in Florida. Second,
we introduce the data and describe our empirical strategy. We use variation in career start
years to analyze the impact of outside labor-market opportunities on the selection into
teaching. We estimate the career start year by subtracting total experience in teaching
from the year in which we observe the teacher. Third, we describe our empirical strategy,
including the construction of our value-added measures of teacher effectiveness.

3.1

Supply of Potential Teachers in Florida

Nationally, the number of individuals completing teacher education programs each year
has been roughly double the number of newly hired teachers since at least 1987, when
the earliest comprehensive data are available (Cowan et al., 2016). This implies that, at
7

any point in time, there is a large pool of potential teachers nationally who are eligible to
obtain certification immediately, regardless of the rigidity of state certification regimes. It
also suggests that, for many potential teachers, the key decision about whether or not
to enter the profession occurs when they enter the labor market rather than when they
choose a degree program.
Contrary to the national data, the demand for new teachers in Florida has exceeded
the supply of new graduates from in-state preparation programs since at least the 1980s
due to growth in the student population and, since 2003, a statewide class-size reduction
mandate (Moe, 2006). In response to this pressure, state policymakers have consistently
sought to recruit teachers from outside Florida. For example, a 1983 law required the
Florida Department of Education to create a teacher referral and recruitment center to
pursue strategies such as advertising teaching positions in states with declining enrollments
and in major newspapers and establishing a national toll-free number to handle inquiries
from prospective teachers (Florida Department of Education, 1986). In the 1980s, the
state estimated that as many as 45 percent of new teachers in Florida had completed
their preparation program in another state. Similarly, the U.S. Department of Education
(2013) indicates that 23 percent of individuals receiving their initial Florida teaching
credential in 2009 were prepared out-of-state. In our data, 19% of teachers report having
teaching experience in other states, providing a lower bound on the number who prepared
elsewhere. These statistics highlight the extent to which the pool of potential teachers for
Florida public schools is national in scope and therefore apt to be influenced by national
rather than state-specific economic conditions.
Temporary fluctuations in economic conditions are also more likely to influence selection
into teaching when certification regimes permit as many individuals as possible to enter the
profession without completing additional training. Traditionally, American states required
potential teachers to complete an undergraduate or master’s degree teacher preparation
program in order to be certified to teach. Although in practice individuals without
certification were often granted emergency credentials, these certification requirements
likely constrained any short-term supply response. In recent decades, however, shortages
of certified teachers in specific subject areas led many states to create alternative entry
routes that allow college graduates who have not completed a traditional preparation
program to begin teaching immediately while completing the remaining requirements for

8

professional certification. As of 2011, 45 states had approved an alternative certification
program and individuals completing these programs comprised roughly 20 percent of all
individuals completing teacher preparation programs nationwide (U.S. Department of
Education, 2013).
Florida’s certification regime is typical of those states that have created alternative
entry routes into teaching. The state initially awards professional teaching certificates only
to graduates of state-approved teacher preparation programs who have passed tests of
general knowledge, professional education, and the subject area in which they will teach.11
However, college graduates who have not completed a teacher preparation program are
eligible for a temporary certificate if they majored or completed a specified set of courses
in the relevant subject area. They may also become eligible for a temporary certificate by
passing a test of subject-matter knowledge. Individuals with a temporary certificate may
then teach for up to three years while completing 15 credit hours of education courses and
a school-based competency demonstration program. These arrangements allow any college
graduate to enter the teaching profession in Florida (at least temporarily) in response to
labor market conditions by passing a single exam.
Florida first authorized alternative certification for teachers in all grades and subject
areas in 1997 and, since the 2002-03 school year, has required that each school district in
the state offer its own alternative certification program (Moe, 2006). However, the state
permitted school districts to hire teachers on temporary certificates for up to two years
even before creating a formal alternative route and, until 1988, allowed the same individual
to receive a temporary certificate multiple times (Florida Department of Education, 1986).
The extent to which certification requirements may have constrained the supply response
to labor market conditions among college graduates in the state prior to that period is
therefore unclear.

3.2

Data

Teacher value-added measures are based on administrative data from the Florida Department
of Education’s K–20 Education Data Warehouse (EDW). Our EDW data include observations
of every student in Florida who took the state test in the 2000–01 through 2008–09 school
11

Florida also recognizes professional certificates in comparable subject areas granted by other states and
by the National Board of Professional Teaching Standards.

9

years, with each student linked to his or her courses (and corresponding teachers). We focus
on scores on the Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test (FCAT), the state accountability
system’s “high-stakes” exam. Beginning in 2001, (only) students in grades 3–10 were
tested each year in math and reading. Thus annual gain scores can be calculated for
virtually all students in grades 4–10 starting in 2002. The data include information on the
demographic and educational characteristics of each student, including gender, race, free
or reduced price lunch eligibility, limited English proficiency status, and special education
status.
The EDW data also contain detailed information on individual teachers, including
their demographic characteristics and teaching experience. We use only 4th- and 5th-grade
teachers because these teachers typically teach all subjects, thus avoiding spillover effects
from other teachers. We construct a dataset that connects teachers and their students
in each school year through course enrollment data. Our teacher experience variable
reflects the total number of years the teacher has spent in the profession, including both
public and private schools in Florida and other states. Because the experience variable
contains a few inconsistencies, we assume the latest observed experience value is correct,
and adjust all other values accordingly. Year of career start is defined as the calendar
year at the end of the school year a teacher is observed in the data minus total years
of teaching experience.12 Starting from the baseline dataset that contains all 4th- and
5th-grade students with current and lagged test scores, we apply several restrictions to
keep only those teachers who can be confidently associated with students’ annual test
score gains. We only keep student-teacher pairs if the teacher accounts for at least 80% of
the student’s total instruction time (deleting 24.5% of students from the baseline dataset).
We exclude classrooms that have fewer than seven students with current and lagged scores
in the relevant subject and classrooms with more than 50 students (deleting 1.8% of
students). We also drop classrooms where more than 50% of students receive special
education (deleting 1.5% of students). We further exclude classrooms where more than
10% of students are coded as attending a different school than the majority of students
in the classroom (deleting 0.7%). Finally, we drop classrooms for which the teacher’s

12

We adjust career start dates for gaps in teaching observed after 2002, when we directly observe whether
a teacher is working in Florida public schools each year. Results are very similar when using the original,
uncorrected values.

10

experience is missing (deleting 1.8% of students). Our final dataset contains roughly
33,000 public school teachers with VAMs for math and reading.
Our main indicator for the US business cycle is a dummy variable reflecting recessions
as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER). Recession start and
end dates are determined by NBER’s Business Cycle Dating Committee based on real
GDP, employment, and real income. The NBER does not use a stringent, quantitative
definition of a recession, but rather a qualitative one, defining a recession as “a period
between a peak and a trough” (see http://www.nber.org/cycles/recessions.html). For
example, the NBER dates the economic downturn of the early 1990s to have occurred
between July 1990 (peak) and March 1991 (trough). We code our recession indicator
variable to be one in 1990 (the beginning of the recession), and zero in 1991. Accordingly,
teachers starting their careers in the 1990-91 school year are classified as having entered
during a recession. In robustness checks, we use alternative business cycle indicators such
as unemployment for college graduates (in levels and annual changes, nationwide and
in Florida), overall unemployment for specific industries, and GDP, which come from
the Bureau of Labor Statistics and the Bureau of Economic Analysis. NBER’s recession
indicator is highly correlated with unemployment rates (both levels and annual changes)
and GDP.

3.3

Empirical Strategy

This section describes the estimation of teachers’ value-added and our strategy for analyzing
the relationship between business cycle conditions at career start and teacher value-added.

Estimating Teacher Value-Added

Teacher value-added measures (VAMs) aim to gauge the impact of teachers on their
students’ test scores. We estimate VAMs for 4th- and 5th-grade teachers based on
students’ test scores in math and reading from grades 3–5.13 To estimate the value-added
for each teacher, we regress students’ math and reading test scores separately on their
prior-year test scores, student, classroom, and school characteristics as well as grade-by-year
fixed effects. Student-level controls include dummy variables for race, gender, free- and
13

Note that student testing in Florida starts in grade 3 only.

11

reduced-price lunch eligibility, limited English proficiency, and special-education status.
Classroom controls include all student-level controls aggregated to the class level and class
size. School-level controls include enrollment, urbanicity, and the school-specific shares of
students who are black, white, Hispanic, and free- and reduced-price lunch eligible.
To obtain an estimate of each teacher’s value-added, we add a dummy variable, θj , for
each teacher:

b i,t−1 + βXit + γCit + λSit + πgt + θj + ijgst
Aijgst = αA

where Aijgst is the test score of student i with teacher j in grade g in school s in year
t (standardized by grade and year to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of
one); Ai,t−1 contains the student’s prior-year test score in the same subject; Xit , Cit , and
Sit are student-, classroom-, and school-level characteristics; πgt are grade-by-year fixed
effects; and ijgst is a mean-zero error term. After estimating the teacher VAMs, θj , we
standardize them separately for math and reading to have a mean of zero and a standard
deviation of one.14
Since test scores suffer from measurement error, the coefficient on the lagged test score
variable, Ai,t−1 , is likely downward biased, which would bias the coefficients on other
control variables correlated with lagged test scores. We therefore follow Jackson and
b which is the coefficient on the lagged test scores from a
Bruegmann (2009) and use α,

two-stage-least-squares model where the second lag of test scores is used as an instrument
for the lagged test scores (see the web appendix of Jackson and Bruegmann (2009) for
b is
details). Because this procedure requires two lags of test scores, the estimation of α

based on 5th-grade students only (students were not tested in grade 2).
Although widely used by researchers, the reliability of value-added models of teacher
effectiveness based on observational data continues to be debated (see, e.g., Jackson et al.,
2014; Rothstein, 2014). The key issue is whether non-random sorting of students and
teachers both across and within schools biases the estimated teacher effectiveness. This
would be the case if there were systematic differences in the unobserved characteristics
14

To simplify notation, we drop the subscripts j, g, and s for the lagged test score and for the student-,
classroom-, and school-level characteristics. We control for school characteristics rather than include school
fixed effects because the latter would eliminate any true variation in teacher effectiveness across schools.
However, we show below that our results are robust to the inclusion of both school and school-by-year
fixed effects (Table A2). We include grade-by-year fixed effects because test scores have been standardized
using the full sample of students and because teachers are not observed in all years.

12

of students assigned to different teachers that are not captured by the available control
variables.15
Value-added models have survived a variety of validity tests, however. Most importantly,
estimates of teacher effectiveness from observational data replicate VAMs obtained from
experiments where students within the same school were randomly assigned to teachers
(Kane and Staiger, 2008; Kane et al., 2013). Chetty et al. (2014a) and Bacher-Hicks et al.
(2014) exploit quasi-random variation from teachers switching schools to provide evidence
that VAMs accurately capture differences in the causal impacts of teachers across schools.
Using a different administrative data set, Rothstein (2014) argues that evidence on school
switchers does not rule out the possibility of bias.
Even if our VAMs were biased by non-random sorting of students and teachers,
however, it is unclear whether and, if so, in what direction this would bias our estimates
of the relationship between recessions at career start and teacher effectiveness.
Finally, some critics argue that value-added measures may reflect teaching to the test
rather than true improvements in knowledge. In a seminal study, Chetty et al. (2014b)
find that having been assigned to higher value-added teachers increases later earnings
and the likelihood of attending college and decreases the likelihood of teenage pregnancy
for girls. Of course, there may be other dimensions of teacher quality not captured by
VAMs (e.g., Jackson, 2012). The weight of the evidence, however, indicates that teacher
value-added measures do reflect important aspects of teacher quality.

Business Cycle Conditions at Career Start and Teacher Value-Added

To estimate the effect of business cycle conditions at career start on teacher effectiveness,
we relate the macroeconomic conditions in the US during the career start year to a teacher’s
value-added in math and reading. Specifically, we estimate the following reduced-form
model:
θbj = α + γRecjs + βXj + uj
where θbj is the value-added of teacher j (either in math or in reading). Recjs is a binary
indicator that equals 1 if teacher j started working in the teaching profession (in year
15

For a more general discussion on the assumptions behind value-added models, see Todd and Wolpin
(2003).

13

s) in a recessionary period and equals 0 otherwise. The vector Xj includes teacher
characteristics. Most importantly, it contains total experience in the teaching profession
(yearly dummies up to 30 years of experience), which is not accounted for in the VAM
computation but has been shown to influence teacher effectiveness (Papay and Kraft,
2015).16 As experience differs between recession and non-recession teachers – due in
part to the idiosyncratic distance between recessions and the time period covered by our
administrative data – experience is a necessary control. Additional teacher characteristics
included in some specifications are year of birth, age at career start, educational degree,
gender, and race. Note that these teacher characteristics do not influence the business
cycle. The reduced-form estimate γ (controlling only for experience) therefore identifies a
causal effect. To the extent that the inclusion of additional controls changes the estimate
of γ, they represent mechanisms rather than confounders. Because the source of variation
is the yearly business cycle condition, we always adjust standard errors for clustering at
the level of the career start year.
Based on our Roy model, we expect to find a positive effect of recessions at career
start on teacher effectiveness since recessions negatively shock the outside options of
potential teachers. Due to this shock, both the number and the average quality of
applicants increases, leading to higher average value-added in recession cohorts. Since we
do not observe the intermediate steps (e.g., application rates or earnings), we estimate a
reduced-form relationship between teacher value-added and business cycle conditions at
career start.
Critics of this model might argue that teacher effectiveness is unrelated to productivity
in other occupations, but rather depends on intrinsic motivation. This should work against
any positive effect of recessions on teacher value-added. At the margin, recession-only
teachers should be less intrinsically motivated as they enter the teaching profession because
of low outside options. Evidence of a positive effect would therefore also suggest that
intrinsic motivation is of second-order importance relative to the effects of economic
benefits through selection on ability (cf. Ashraf et al., 2016). Note also that because the
effectiveness of all teachers in our sample is estimated during the same period (2001-2009),

16

Previous work has shown that teacher experience affects teacher value-added non-linearly (e.g., Rockoff,
2004). Wiswall (2013) shows that non-parametric specifications yield the most convincing results. Our
results are robust to using teachers with above 20 or 25 years of experience as the omitted category.

14

systematic differences in the effort levels of recession and non-recession teachers due to
differences in the (policy or economic) environment seem unlikely.

4

Business Cycle Conditions at Career Start and
Teacher Effectiveness

We start by documenting differences in math and reading effectiveness between recession
and non-recession teachers. Using kernel density plots and quantile regressions, we show
at which parts of the effectiveness distribution recession and non-recession teachers differ.
In placebo regressions, we show that teacher effectiveness is not associated with business
cycle conditions several years before and after career start or with business cycle conditions
at certain critical ages of teachers. We also show that our results are robust to using
alternative business cycle indicators or alternative value-added measures and are not
driven by any single recession. Finally, we provide evidence that our results are not driven
by differential attrition of recession and non-recession teachers.

4.1

Main Results

We first present summary statistics separately for recession teachers and the much larger
group of non-recession teachers (Table 1). The unemployment level of college graduates was
higher when recession teachers started their careers. Similarly, unemployment was rising
for recession teachers, but slightly falling for non-recession teachers. These differences
are significant at the one percent level. The share of male teachers is approximately the
same in both samples. Among recession teachers, the share of teachers with a Master’s or
PhD degree is slightly larger and the share of white teachers somewhat smaller. Because
recession teachers started around three school years earlier than non-recession teachers
on average, recession teachers also have more teaching experience. The two groups teach
similar types of students as measured by the share of students who are black and by the
share of students eligible for free or reduced-price lunch. Although none of the teacher
characteristics differ significantly, recession teachers have on average 0.08 SD higher math
value-added and 0.05 SD higher reading value-added than non-recession teachers.

15

After documenting the raw gap in math value-added between recession and non-recession
teachers (see also Column 1 in Table 2), we add several teacher characteristics (Table 2).
Due to the idiosyncratic distance between recessions and our sample period, experience is
a necessary control. We therefore refer to Column 2 as our preferred specification. The
value-added gap increases to 0.11 SD when dummies for teaching experience are included
(Column 2).17 Adding year of birth and age at career start has little effect on the coefficient
on the recession indicator (Column 3). Further controlling for teacher characteristics
such as whether the teacher holds a Master’s or PhD degree, and whether the teacher is
male or white, also does not affect our coefficient of interest.18 The specification with all
control variables indicates that recession teachers are 0.10 SD more effective in teaching
math than non-recession teachers. Since all control variables except experience represent
potential mechanisms rather than confounders, we omit them in all regressions below.
The simple Roy model predicts selection effects due to changing outside labor-market
options over the business cycle. Because research indicates that earnings returns are
twice as large for numeracy than for literacy skills in the US labor market (Hanushek
et al., 2015), we expect selection effects over the business cycle to be weaker for reading
effectiveness than for math effectiveness. The effects on teachers’ reading value-added
are indeed similar to, but weaker than in math (Table 3). However, these results are
also consistent with the common finding that students’ reading scores are more difficult
to improve than their math scores (Jackson et al., 2014, cf.).The bivariate relationship
between recession at career start and teacher effectiveness is positive, but statistically
insignificant (Column 1). As in math, controlling for teaching experience increases the
coefficient on the recession indicator; the estimate also becomes significant at the one
percent level (Column 2). Adding the other teacher characteristics reduces the coefficient
of interest only slightly. In terms of magnitude, the recession indicator for reading is
half as large as the coefficient for math (around 0.05 SD). As selection effects among

17

The coefficient on the recession indicator increases because recession teachers are overrepresented
among rookie teachers and the first years of teaching experience improve effectiveness the most.
18
Differences in the placement of recession and non-recession teachers represent another potential
mechanism through which recessions could impact productivity (cf. Oyer, 2006). However, controlling for
important student characteristics at the school level, such as the share of black students and the share of
students eligible for free or reduced-price lunch, does not explain the value-added difference (results not
shown).

16

potential teachers should be stronger with respect to math skills, we focus on teachers’
math effectiveness in the remaining analyses.19
While Table 2 indicates that recession teachers are on average more effective in raising
students’ math test scores than non-recession teachers, it is unclear whether this effect
is driven by the presence of fewer ineffective teachers or more highly effective teachers
in recession cohorts. To analyze the recession impact across the distribution of math
value-added, we estimate kernel density plots and quantile regressions. The kernel density
plots of teachers’ (experience-adjusted) math value-added reveal a clear rightward shift in
the math value-added distribution for recession cohorts (Figure 2).20 In quantile regressions
that control for experience, we analyze this finding further (Figure 3 and Table A1 in the
appendix). While teachers at the very low tail of the value-added distribution have very
similar VAMs, recession teachers are more effective than non-recession teachers from the
10th percentile onwards. The largest difference between the distributions appears among
highly effective teachers, with point estimates of differences peaking at 0.20 SD in the
upper end of the distribution.
In Table 4, we run our preferred specification on subsamples to assess whether recessions
have differential impacts across various groups of teachers. Male teachers seem to be more
affected than female teachers (Columns 1 and 2) which may suggest that the career options
of men are more strongly influenced by recessions than those of women. In Columns 3
and 4, we find similar recession impacts for teachers with and without a Master’s or PhD
degree. In line with existing research (Jones and Schmitt, 2014; Hoynes et al., 2012),
Columns 5 and 6 provide indirect evidence that minorities are more affected by recessions
than whites. Finally, Columns 7 and 8 indicate that teachers starting their teaching
careers at a relatively high age (above median) are more affected than those starting at
younger ages. This may suggest that the decisions of mid-career entrants to the teaching
profession are more strongly influenced by the outside labor market.

19

The results of the following analyses show the same overall pattern for teachers’ reading effectiveness,
but are less pronounced and more volatile than the results for math. All results are available on request.
20
Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests indicate that the distributions are statistically significantly different at the
one percent level.

17

4.2

Placebo Analyses

We assume that it is the business cycle condition at the point in time when individuals
enter the teaching profession that matters for their effectiveness. If this is true, then the
economic conditions several years before or after career start should be irrelevant. To
test this hypothesis, we run placebo regressions where we include recession indicators for
the years before or after career start with lags and leads of up to three years. Adding
these recession indicators to the main model does not change our coefficient of interest
(Columns 2 and 3 in Table 5). Furthermore, the estimated effects of the business cycle
conditions in the years before or after our preferred year are all close to zero and statistically
insignificant.21
One might worry that our career start year measure captures the effect of macroeconomic
conditions at key ages (Giuliano and Spilimbergo, 2014). For example, many individuals
may decide to become teachers when entering college (around age 18) or upon completing
their undergraduate or graduate studies (between ages 22 to 24). Therefore, we include
recession indicators at ages 18-32 (in two-year steps) to confirm that it is the economic
conditions at career start that affect teaching quality. As before, all coefficients on the
indicators of recessions at specific ages are close to zero and statistically insignificant
(Column 4).

4.3

Further Robustness Checks

Since the number of recession cohorts is limited, one might worry that our result is
driven by only one or two recessions. To investigate this issue, we include a separate
binary indicator for each recession (Table 6).22 Column 1 indicates that teachers in most
recessions (except in recession years 1974; and 1980–82, a highly atypical recession as
the demand for teachers decreased, see Figure 1) have higher math value-added than the
average non-recession teacher. In Column 2, we combine the separate recession indicators
for the adjacent recession years of 1980, 1981, and 1982 and find that teachers who started
during those years are on average as effective as the average non-recession teacher. In
Column 3, we only keep two non-recession cohorts immediately before and immediately
21

Similarly, using each of these other recession indicators individually instead of our main recession
indicator also yields small and mostly statistically insignificant coefficients.
22
Because there are fewer than 20 teachers per cohort who started teaching before 1962, we exclude these
cohorts for this analysis since estimates are less reliable for very small cohorts.

18

after each recession, such that the cohorts being compared are more similar. This leads
to the same finding: most recessions have positive effects on teacher effectiveness. The
recession impact is not driven by any single recession.
In our main analyses, we use the variation in business cycles across teacher cohorts
that started their careers many years before our sample period begins. To assess whether
recent recessions matter more for current teacher quality than distant recessions, in Table 7
we present estimates of the impact of a recession at career start on teacher value-added
separately for recent and distant teacher cohorts. Columns 2 and 3 show that the impact
of recent recessions is higher than the baseline estimate and that the impact of distant
recessions is small and not significant. This could reflect differences in the returns to
experience or differential patterns of attrition with respect to effectiveness among recession
and non-recession teachers, an issue we examine directly in Section 4.4.
Since we estimate the year of career start, we cannot observe gaps in teachers’ careers
due to fertility, child-rearing or family mobility before our sample period begins. To
assess whether our results are sensitive to this, Column 4 restricts the sample to the entry
cohorts for which we can observe the entire career. The estimate is larger than the baseline
effect and significant at the one percent level. However, because this very short panel
only contains two recessions, we prefer to use all available entry cohorts. Finally, we test
whether our estimates reflect selection into the teaching profession or selection of teachers
with experience elsewhere into Florida public schools. In Column 5, we restrict the sample
to those teachers without any teaching experience outside Florida. The coefficient is
somewhat larger than in the baseline specification.23
We also evaluate the robustness of our results using alternative measures of teachers’
outside options. Figure 4 makes it possible to compare the variation in our preferred
binary measure of the business cycle (by comparing green and blue dots) and a continuous
measure, one-year unemployment changes. In line with our main findings, unemployment
changes and teacher value-added are positively related. Figure 5 displays the variation of
both our value-added measure and the one-year unemployment change over time. The
time series move very closely, especially in the more reliable sample of teachers who started
their careers after 1990. In Table 8, we run our preferred specification using the NBER
23

Moreover, there is no statistically significant difference in the the incidence of teaching experience outside
Florida between recession (20.9%) and non-recession cohorts (18.5%). Controlling for any out-of-state
experience does not change our coefficient of interest either. This makes an explanation based on migration
patterns into Florida unlikely.

19

recession indicator (Column 1), GDP growth (2), the unemployment level (3), and one-year
unemployment changes (4), respectively. Both unemployment measures are computed
using the unemployment rates of college graduates (only available from 1970 onwards), as
this is the relevant labor market for potential teachers.24 Consistent with our preferred
business cycle indicator, GDP growth is negatively related to teacher value-added. The
coefficients on the unemployment measures are also in line with our previous findings
and significant at the five percent level. The coefficient estimates for the alternative
measures imply somewhat weaker, but qualitatively similar recession effects (based on the
difference in each business cycle indicator between recession and non-recession cohorts),
suggesting that none of the alternative business cycle indicators on its own fully captures
the full effects of a recession on potential teachers’ choices.25 Finally, it is unlikely that the
alternative job opportunities of potential teachers are evenly distributed across industries.
For example, one would expect few potential teachers to work in agriculture. In Columns
5 and 6, we find that the one-year unemployment change in agriculture at career start is
unrelated to teacher quality, while the labor-market conditions in nonagriculture industries
do matter. This pattern is consistent with the selection of potential teachers into teaching
who alternatively would have chosen industries requiring similar skills.
To assess the sensitivity of our results with respect to the value-added measure, we also
run our preferred specification with alternative VAMs (Table A2 in the appendix). For
comparison, Column 1 presents the results based on our preferred measure. In Column
2, we add school fixed effects when estimating teachers’ value-added. The inclusion
of school fixed effects eliminates any bias from unobserved school characteristics that
influence teacher effectiveness, but also removes variation in true teacher effectiveness to
the extent that average teacher quality varies across schools. The gap in effectiveness
between recession and non-recession teachers is somewhat attenuated, but the change is
small. In Column 3, we add school-by-year fixed effects when estimating value-added,
24

The results of our preferred specification are unchanged for teachers starting after 1970. We use national
rather than Florida-specific unemployment rates in this analysis because state-level unemployment rates
are not available for college graduates, the national unemployment rates are more reliable, and because
Florida recruited teachers heavily from out of state throughout our sample period (see Section 3.1).
Thus, using Florida-specific measures of economic conditions is likely to underestimate the true effect. In
Table A3 in the appendix, we show that graduate-specific unemployment rates have a stronger impact on
teacher value-added than general national unemployment rates and that Florida-specific unemployment
rates have around the same impact than national unemployment rates.
25
The same pattern appears if we use unemployment rates and changes for all workers rather than
college graduates. These coefficients are significant at the one percent level, but somewhat attenuated, as
expected.

20

likely removing additional variation in true teacher effectiveness. The estimate is further
attenuated, but remains significant. Finally, in Columns 4 and 5, we account for the
fact that the precision of the teacher value-added measures varies across teachers. Our
results are qualitatively unaffected by weighting teachers in our preferred specification by
the number of student-year or teacher-year observations that underlie their value-added
measures.

4.4

Differential Attrition of Teachers

We find that teachers who started their careers during recessions are more effective. On the
one hand, effectiveness differences might already exist among entering teachers (selection).
On the other hand, recession and non-recession teachers might have very similar VAMs at
career start, but low-quality recession teachers might be more likely to leave the occupation
than low-quality non-recession teachers (differential attrition). We use our data to assess
which of these two channels is more plausible.
Since our dataset includes all teachers in the public school system in Florida, attrition
means that a teacher leaves the Florida public school system. We cannot directly address
attrition before 2000-01, the beginning of our sample period. However, if differential
attrition of recession and non-recession teachers were driving our results, then one would
expect earlier recession cohorts to be much more effective, but more recent recession
cohorts to be only slightly more effective, than non-recession teachers. This pattern is not
present in Table 7, which shows that recession effects are generally larger for more recent
cohorts. We interpret this as first, indirect evidence that differential attrition does not
drive our results.
To provide direct evidence, we define attrition as not being observed as a teacher
during the last school year in our sample period (2008-09). First, we investigate whether
starting during a recession is correlated with attrition (Columns 1 and 2 in Table 9).26
Controlling for teachers’ value-added, we find that recession teachers are somewhat more
likely to drop out, although this difference is not statistically significant. Controlling for
recession status at career start, more effective teachers are less likely to drop out.27

26

Because the school year 2008-09 is the attrition target year, these regressions exclude teachers who
started teaching in 2008-09.
27
Excluding teachers born before 1950 as potential retirees does not change our results (not shown).

21

Among teachers who started teaching during our sample period (about 47% of the full
sample), recession teachers are also slightly more likely to leave the public school system
than non-recession teachers (Column 2). More importantly, in recession cohorts, exiting
teachers are significantly more effective compared to exiting non-recession teachers. This
pattern works against our result, suggesting that the value-added gap is even larger at
career start and decreases over time. This is confirmed in Column 3 when we look directly
at value-added, finding a large gap at career start which decreases with experience. Taken
at face value, these estimates imply that the gap in value-added between recession and
non-recession teachers closes after around 25 years. However, depending on the functional
form we impose on the interaction between starting in a recession and teaching experience,
the implied time period before the gap closes ranges from 12 to 26 years. Therefore,
these numbers need to be interpreted very cautiously. Column 4 confirms that the same
pattern holds, and in fact becomes more pronounced, when using only teachers who
started teaching during our sample period.
In sum, differential attrition between recession and non-recession teachers does not
explain our main finding. The observed attrition pattern seems to reduce the estimated
difference in effectiveness between recession and non-recession teachers over time. This
suggests that our main results understate the difference in effectiveness between recession
and non-recession teachers at career start.

4.5

Discussion

The effect of recessions at career start on teacher effectiveness might in theory be driven
by demand or supply fluctuations over the business cycle (or both). As noted in Section 2,
demand fluctuations can generate our findings only if school authorities (i) hire fewer
teachers during recessions (e.g., due to budget cuts) and (ii) are able to assess the quality
of inexperienced applicants and hire those most likely to be effective. Both conditions are
unlikely to hold in practice. First, in our data, cohort size is unrelated to the business cycle.
This is corroborated by official statistics from the BLS, which indicate that employment
in the local government education sector typically increases during recessions (with the
exception of the recessions in 1980-1982 and the Great Recession; see Figure 1 and Berman
and Pfleeger, 1997). Second, it is unlikely that school authorities are able to identify the
best applicants since education credentials, SAT scores, and demographic characteristics
22

– typically the only ability signals of applicants without prior teaching experience – are
at best weakly related to teacher effectiveness as measured by VAMs (e.g., Chingos and
Peterson, 2011; Jackson et al., 2014). Apart from the fact that both conditions are unlikely
to hold, our quantile regression results show that the effect is strongest at the upper end
of the value-added distribution. This suggests that increases in the supply of very effective
teachers rather than decreases in the overall demand for teachers are at work.28
In sum, increases in the supply of high-quality applicants during recessions seem to
drive our results. Teacher cohorts likely differ in their effectiveness already at career start,
as predicted by a Roy model of occupational selection.
Finally, note that we estimate a reduced-form coefficient. To gauge the quality
difference between recession-only teachers and those they replace, we have to inflate our
reduced-form estimates by the share of recession-cohort teachers who would not have
entered teaching under normal labor-market conditions. If all teachers who start during
recessions became teachers only because of the recession, the effectiveness difference would
be equal to our reduced-form estimate (0.11 SD). However, if only 10% of the recession
teachers went into teaching due to the recession, the difference in effectiveness would
be 10 times as large, around one SD. This would imply an impact on student math
achievement of being assigned to a recession-only entrant of around 0.2 student-level
standard deviations.

5

Policy Implications

Our results have important implications for policymakers. In a Roy model of occupational
choice, worse outside options during recessions are equivalent to higher teacher wages.
Thus, our results suggest that policymakers would be able to hire better teachers if they
increased teacher pay. Would such a policy be efficient? Chetty et al. (2014b) find that
students taught by a teacher with a one SD higher value-added measure at age 12 earn on
28

In emphasizing the role of high-quality supply, we further assume that recessions have no direct
effects on teachers’ effectiveness. This would be violated, for example, if teachers who started their
career in a recession were more fearful of losing their jobs and thus provided more effort, which raised
their effectiveness permanently. However, in this case we would expect the least effective teachers to
disproportionally better in recession cohorts. In our quantile regressions, we find that the opposite is true.
If the business cycle at career start did have a direct effect on the individual’s teaching effectiveness, we
would estimate the total effect of starting in a recession on subsequent career productivity in teaching,
comprising the combined effect of selection into teaching and the direct impact on individual’s productivity
in teaching. The reduced-form estimate still represents a causal effect.

23

average 1.3% more at age 28. Using this figure, our preferred recession effect translates into
differences in discounted lifetime earnings of around $13,000 per classroom taught each
school year by recession and non-recession teachers (evaluated at the average classroom
size in our sample). This is equivalent to more than 20% of the average teacher salary
in Florida ($46,583 in school year 2012-2013 according to the Florida Department of
Education).
Do these private benefits exceed the public costs associated with an increase in teacher
pay intended to attract more effective teachers? To shed light on this question, assume
that the entire recession effect is driven by earnings losses in the private sector during
recessions. To compute these earnings losses, we use the median earnings of BA degree
holders ($59,488 in 2010, the year Chetty et al.’s figure refer to) as a benchmark for
the average outside option of potential teachers. The adverse impact of graduating in
a recession has previously been estimated to be around 2%–6% of initial earnings per
percentage point increase in the unemployment rate (e.g., Kahn, 2010). This translates
into 4%–12% earnings differences between recession and non-recession teachers in our
sample. Based on the median earnings of BA degree holders, this implies on average
between $2,379 and $7,140 lower earnings during recessions. This admittedly coarse
comparison suggests that it may be efficient to increase pay for new teachers and thereby
improve average teacher effectiveness. Yet this conclusion comes with the caveat that it
may be difficult for policymakers to increase pay only for incoming teachers. Our evidence
does not imply that increasing pay for the existing stock of teachers would yield benefits.
Moreover, there are likely cost-neutral ways to make the total compensation package
offered to new teachers more attractive. For example, Fitzpatrick (2015) shows that the
value teachers place on pension benefits is much lower than the cost to the government of
providing them and would prefer higher salary levels.
Magnitudes aside, our findings suggest that policymakers would be able to attract
more effective individuals into the teaching profession by raising the economic benefits
of becoming a teacher. This is not a trivial result. If intrinsic motivation positively
affects teachers’ effectiveness, then increasing teacher pay may attract more extrinsically
motivated, but less effective individuals into the teaching profession. Since we find the
opposite, intrinsic motivation seems to be of second-order importance relative to the
effects of increasing teacher pay on selection when hiring more effective teachers.

24

Finally, our results indicate that recessions serve as a window of opportunity for the
public sector to hire more effective personnel than during normal economic periods. As
teachers are a critical input in the education production function affecting students’ lives
way beyond schooling, hiring more teachers in economic downturns would appear an
attractive strategy to improve American education. In the Great Recession, however, even
substantial stimulus spending was insufficient to prevent a reduction in employment in
the education sector (see Figure 1).

6

Conclusion

We provide causal evidence on the importance of outside labor-market options at career
start for the quality of teachers. We combine a novel identification strategy with a direct
and well-validated measure of teacher effectiveness. Our reduced-form estimates show
that teachers who entered the profession during recessions are significantly more effective
than teachers who entered the profession during non-recessionary periods. This finding is
best explained by a Roy-style model in which more able individuals prefer teaching over
other professions during recessions due to less opportunities in alternative occupations. In
comparison to Britton and Propper (2016), we show that the selection into teaching is
affected by outside options. We can additionally control for potential confounding channels
by using individual-level data and a direct measure of teacher quality. While the settings
differ, our productivity effects are qualitatively similar to, and in fact somewhat larger
than, recession effects on the productivity of PhD economists (Boehm and Watzinger,
2015). Recessions may serve as a window of opportunity for recruitment in the public
sector.

25

References
Ashraf, N., O. Bandiera, and S. S. Lee (2016): “Do-gooders and Go-getters: Career
Incentives, Selection, and Performance in Public Service Delivery,” Mimeo.
Bacher-Hicks, A., T. J. Kane, and D. O. Staiger (2014): “Validating Teacher
Effects Estimates Using Changes in Teacher Assignments in Los Angeles,” NBER
Working Paper No. 20657.
Bacolod, M. P. (2007): “Do Alternative Opportunities Matter? The Role of Female
Labor Markets in the Decline of Teacher Quality,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
89, 737–751.
Berman, J. and J. Pfleeger (1997): “Which Industries are Sensitive to Business
Cycles?” Monthly Labor Review, 120, 19–25.
Boehm, M. J. and M. Watzinger (2015): “The Allocation of Talent Over the Business
Cycle and its Effect on Sectoral Productivity,” Economica, 82, 892–911.
Borjas, G. J. (2002): “The Wage Structure and the Sorting of Workers into the Public
Sector,” NBER Working Paper No. 9313.
Britton, J. and C. Propper (2016): “Teacher Pay and School Productivity: Exploiting
Wage Regulation,” Journal of Public Economics, 133, 75–89.
Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, and J. E. Rockoff (2014a): “Measuring the Impacts
of Teachers I: Evaluating Bias in Teacher Value-Added Estimates,” American Economic
Review, 104, 2593–2632.
——— (2014b): “Measuring the Impacts of Teachers II: Teacher Value-Added and Student
Outcomes in Adulthood,” American Economic Review, 104, 2633–2679.
Chingos, M. M. and P. E. Peterson (2011): “It’s Easier to Pick a Good Teacher than
to Train One: Familiar and New Results on the Correlates of Teacher Effectiveness,”
Economics of Education Review, 30, 449–465.
Chingos, M. M. and M. R. West (2012): “Do More Effective Teachers Earn More
Outside the Classroom?” Education Finance and Policy, 7, 8–43.

26

Corcoran, S. P., W. N. Evans, and R. M. Schwab (2004): “Changing Labor-Market
Opportunities for Women and the Quality of Teachers, 1957-2000,” American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings, 94, 230–235.
Cowan, J. C., D. Goldhaber, K. Hayes, and R. Theobald (2016): “Missing
Elements in the Discussion of Teacher Shortages,” CALDER Explainer, National Center
for the Analysis of Longitudinal Data in Education Research.
de Ree, J., K. Muralidharan, M. Pradhan, and H. Rogers (2015): “Double
for Nothing? The Effect of Unconditional Teachers’ Salary Increases on Performance,”
Mimeo.
Dolton, P. J. (1990): “The Economics of UK Teacher Supply: The Graduate’s Decision,”
Economic Journal, 100, 91–104.
——— (2006): “Teacher Supply,” in Handbook of the Economics of Education, ed. by
E. A. Hanushek and F. Welch, Elsevier, vol. 2, chap. 19, 1079–1161.
Dolton, P. J. and O. D. Marcenaro-Gutierrez (2011): “If you Pay Peanuts do
you get Monkeys? A Cross-Country Analysis of Teacher Pay and Pupil Performance,”
Economic Policy, 26, 5–55.
Falch, T., K. Johansen, and B. Strom (2009): “Teacher Shortages and the Business
Cycle,” Labour Economics, 16, 648–658.
Figlio, D. (1997): “Teacher Salaries and Teacher Quality,” Economics Letters, 55,
267–271.
Fitzpatrick, M. D. (2015): “How Much Do Public School Teachers Value Their Pension
Benefits?” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7, 165–188.
Florida Department of Education (1986): “Teacher Supply and Demand in Florida:
Fifth Annual Report.” Strategy Planning and Management Information Systems Section,
Tallahassee, FL.
Giuliano, P. and A. Spilimbergo (2014): “Growing Up in a Recession,” Review of
Economic Studies, 81, 787–817.

27

Goldhaber, D. and J. Walch (2013): “Rhetoric Versus Reality: Is the Academic
Caliber of the Teacher Workforce Changing?” CEDR Working Paper 2013-4.
Hanushek, E. A. and R. R. Pace (1995): “Who Chooses To Teach (and Why)?”
Economics of Education Review, 14, 101–117.
Hanushek, E. A., M. Piopiunik, and S. Wiederhold (2014): “The Value of Smarter
Teachers: International Evidence on Teacher Cognitive Skills and Student Performance,”
NBER Working Paper No. 20727.
Hanushek, E. A. and S. G. Rivkin (2012): “The Distribution of Teacher Quality and
Implications for Policy,” Annual Review of Economics, 4, 131–157.
Hanushek, E. A., G. Schwerdt, S. Wiederhold, and L. Woessmann (2015):
“Returns to Skills Around the World: Evidence from PIAAC,” European Economic
Review, 73, 103–130.
Hoxby, C. M. and A. Leigh (2004): “Pulled Away or Pushed Out? Explaining the
Decline of Teacher Aptitude in the United States,” American Economic Review Papers
and Proceedings, 94, 236–240.
Hoynes, H., D. L. Miller, and J. Schaller (2012): “Who Suffers During Recessions?”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26, 27–48.
Jackson, C. K. (2012): “Non-Cognitive Ability, Test Scores, and Teacher Quality:
Evidence from 9th Grade Teachers in North Carolina,” NBER Working Paper No.
18624.
Jackson, C. K. and E. Bruegmann (2009): “Teaching Students and Teaching Each
Other: The Importance of Peer Learning for Teachers,” American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics, 1, 85–108.
Jackson, C. K., J. E. Rockoff, and D. O. Staiger (2014): “Teacher Effects and
Teacher-Related Policies,” Annual Review of Economics, 6, 801–825.
Jones, J. and J. Schmitt (2014): “A College Degree is No Guarantee,” Working Paper,
Center for Economic and Policy Research.

28

Kahn, L. B. (2010): “The Long-Term Labor Market Consequences of Graduating from
College in a Bad Economy,” Labour Economics, 17, 303–316.
Kane, T. J., D. F. McCaffrey, T. Miller, and D. O. Staiger (2013): “Have
We Identified Effective Teachers?” MET Project Research Paper, Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation.
Kane, T. J. and D. O. Staiger (2008): “Estimating Teacher Impacts on Student
Achievement: An Experimental Evaluation,” NBER Working Paper No. 14607.
Kopelman, J. L. and H. S. Rosen (2016): “Are Public Sector Jobs Recession-Proof?
Were They Ever?” Public Finance Review, 44, 370–396.
Krueger, A. B. (1988): “The Determinants of Queues for Federal Jobs,” Industrial and
Labor Relations Review, 41, 567–581.
Lakdawalla, D. (2006): “The Economics of Teacher Quality,” Journal of Law and
Economics, 49, 285–329.
Loeb, S. and M. E. Page (2000): “Examining the Link between Teacher Wages and
Student Outcomes: The Importance of Alternative Labor Market Opportunities and
Non-Pecuniary Variation,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 82, 393–408.
Moe, T. M. (2006): “Quality Teachers,” in Reforming Education in Florida, ed. by P. E.
Peterson, Stanford, CA: Hoover Institution Press, 135–148.
Murnane, R. J. and B. R. Phillips (1981): “Learning by Doing, Vintage, and
Selection: Three Pieces of the Puzzle Relating Teaching Experience and Teaching
Performance,” Economics of Education Review, 1, 453–465.
National Public Radio (2015):

“Where Have All The Teachers Gone?”

http://www.npr.org/blogs/ed/2015/03/03/389282733/where-have-all-the-teachers-gone,
March 03.
New York Times (2010): “Teachers Facing Weakest Market in Years,” May 19.
——— (2015): “Fewer Top Graduates Want to Join Teach for America,” February 6.

29

Oreopoulos, P., T. von Wachter, and A. Heisz (2012): “The Short- and Long-Term
Career Effects of Graduating in a Recession,” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 4, 1–29.
Oyer, P. (2006): “Initial Labor Market Conditions and Long-Term Outcomes for
Economists,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20, 143–160.
——— (2008): “The Making of an Investment Banker: Stock Market Shocks, Career
Choice, and Lifetime Income,” Journal of Finance, 63, 2601–2628.
Papay, J. P. and M. A. Kraft (2015): “Productivity Returns to Experience in the
Teacher Labor Market: Methodological Challenges and New Evidence on Long-Term
Career Improvement,” Journal of Public Economics, 130, 105–119.
Rockoff, J. E. (2004): “The Impact of Individual Teachers on Student Achievement:
Evidence from Panel Data,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 94,
247–252.
Rothstein, J. (2014): “Revisiting the Impacts of Teachers,” Mimeo, University of
California, Berkeley.
Roy, A. D. (1951): “Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings,” Oxford Economic
Papers, 3, 135–146.
Simpkins, J., M. Roza, and S. Simburg (2012): “What Happens to Teacher Salaries
During a Recession?” Center on Reinventing Public Education.
Todd, P. E. and K. I. Wolpin (2003): “On the Specification and Estimation of the
Production Function for Cognitive Achievement,” Economic Journal, 113, F3–F33.
U.S. Department of Education (2013): “Preparing and Credentialing the Nation’s
Teachers: The Secretary’s Ninth Report on Teacher Quality.” Office of Postsecondary
Education, Washington, DC.
Wiswall, M. (2013): “The Dynamics of Teacher Quality,” Journal of Public Economics,
100, 61–78.
Zabalza, A. (1979): “The Determinants of Teacher Supply,” Review of Economic Studies,
46, 131–147.
30

5
0
−5
−10

Change (Percentage Points)

10

Figure 1: Employment in Private Sector and Local and State Education

1970

1980

1990
Year

Local Government Education
Total Private Industries

2000

2010

State Gvt. Education

Notes: Data come from the Current Employment Statistics (Establishment Survey) of the US Bureau
of Labor Statistics as compiled by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. Number of employees in the
indicated sector are seasonally adjusted. Semiannual frequency, indexed to 100 in second half of 2007,
and detrended. Shaded areas: Recessions as defined by the NBER.

31

.3
.2
0

.1

Density

.4

.5

Figure 2: Recession at Career Start and Teacher Math Effectiveness
(Kernel Density Estimates)

−2

0
Experience−Adjusted VAM in Math
No Recession

2

Recession

Notes: Kernel density estimates of VAM in math (controlling for yearly experience dummies up to 30
years), by recession cohort status. Excludes teachers with experience-adjusted |V AM | > 2.5 for better
visibility (805 of 32,941 teachers dropped). VAMs normalized to have mean 0 and standard deviation
1 among all teachers. A Kolmogorov-Smirnov-test shows the distributions are statistically significantly
different (p < 0.01).

32

.2
.1
0
−.1
−.2

Estimates (Standard Deviations in TVA)

.3

Figure 3: Recession at Career Start and Teacher Math Effectiveness
(Quantile Regressions)

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

Quantile
Quantile Regression Coefficients

95% Conf. Bounds

Notes: Coefficients (and 95% confidence bounds) from separate quantile regressions of VAM in math
(controlling for yearly experience dummies up to 30 years) on NBER recession indicator at career start at
different quantiles. Dashed grey line: OLS estimate from Table 2, Column 2. Standard errors adjusted
for clustering at the career start year level.

33

.1
0
−.1
−.2

Mean TVA in Math (Experience−Adjusted)

.2

Figure 4: One-Year Unemployment Change and
Mean Teacher Math Effectiveness

−1

−.5
0
.5
One−Year Unemployment Change (BA Holders)
No Recession

Recession

1

Fitted Values

Notes: Cohort means of VAM in math (controlling for yearly experience dummies up to 30 years) and
one-year unemployment change for college graduates. Unemployment rates from the BLS. 2008-09 cohort
excluded as outlier (unemployment change=2.2, mean experience-adjusted VAM=0.21).

34

−1

−.2

Teacher value−added (math)
−.1
0
.1

0
1
2
Unemployment difference BA holders

.2

Figure 5: One-Year Unemployment Change and
Mean Teacher Math Effectiveness over Time

1970

1980

1990
Year of career start

2000

2010

TVA (Math), adjusted for experience
Unemployment difference BA holders

Notes: Cohort means of VAM in math (controlling for yearly experience dummies up to 30 years) and
one-year unemployment change for college graduates. Unemployment rates from the BLS. Shaded areas
are recession periods as defined by the NBER.

35

Table 1: Summary Statistics by Recession Status at Career Start

Unemp. (college)
Unemp. change (college)
Male
Master’s or PhD
White
Black
Hispanic
Experience
Career start
Age at career start
Year of birth
% black (school)
% free/red. lunch (school)
VAM (math)
VAM (reading)
Obs.

Recession
2.93
0.91
0.12
0.41
0.71
0.15
0.12
11.06
1993.98
31.26
1962.72
0.25
0.57
0.07
0.04
5,188

Non-recession
2.24
-0.12
0.13
0.38
0.76
0.14
0.09
8.67
1996.97
31.47
1965.50
0.24
0.55
-0.01
-0.01
27,946

Diff.
0.69
1.03
-0.01
0.03
-0.05
0.01
0.03
2.39
-2.99
-0.21
-2.78
0.01
0.02
0.08
0.05

p-Value
0.00
0.00
0.46
0.28
0.39
0.15
0.48
0.62
0.54
0.79
0.51
0.55
0.44
0.05
0.45

Notes: Recession status at career start based on NBER business cycle dates. T-tests adjust for clustering
of observations by career start year. Unemployment rates of college graduates only available after
1969 (5,176 and 27,414 observations, respectively); VAM (math) only available for 5,172 and 27,769
observations, respectively.

Table 2: Recession at Career Start and Teacher Math Effectiveness
Dependent variable: VAM in math
(1)
(2)
(3)
Recession
0.081** 0.110*** 0.105***
(0.040)
(0.023)
(0.023)
Year of birth
-0.015***
(0.005)
Age at career start
-0.020***
(0.005)
Master’s or PhD
Male
White
Experience dummies
Clusters (career start years)
Obs. (teachers)
R2

no
60
32941
0.001

yes
60
32941
0.022

yes
60
32941
0.024

(4)
0.100***
(0.023)
-0.014***
(0.005)
-0.019***
(0.004)
0.070***
(0.010)
-0.037**
(0.018)
-0.053**
(0.026)
yes
60
32941
0.026

Notes: Regressions of VAM in math on NBER recession indicator at career start. Experience
controls include yearly experience dummies up to 30 years. Standard errors in parentheses adjusted
for clustering at the career start year level. Significance levels: *** p< 1%, ** p< 5%, * p< 10%

36

Table 3: Recession at Career Start and Teacher Reading Effectiveness
Dependent variable: VAM in reading
(1)
(2)
(3)
Recession
0.048 0.051*** 0.047***
(0.064) (0.016)
(0.014)
Year of birth
-0.010**
(0.004)
Age at career start
-0.012***
(0.004)
Master’s or PhD
Male
White
Experience dummies
Clusters (career start years)
Obs. (teachers)
R2

no
60
33134
0.000

yes
60
33134
0.026

yes
60
33134
0.027

(4)
0.044***
(0.014)
-0.010**
(0.004)
-0.012***
(0.004)
0.040***
(0.013)
-0.139***
(0.018)
-0.027
(0.019)
yes
60
33134
0.030

Notes: Regressions of VAM in reading on NBER recession indicator at career start. Experience
controls include yearly experience dummies up to 30 years. Standard errors in parentheses
adjusted for clustering at the career start year level. Significance levels: *** p< 1%, ** p< 5%, *
p< 10%

37

38

Female
(2)
0.101***
(0.021)
60
28770
0.021

Male

(1)
0.164***
(0.039)
54
4171
0.033

(3)
0.106***
(0.029)
58
12596
0.012

(4)
0.105***
(0.029)
58
20345
0.027

(5)
0.074***
(0.025)
58
24681
0.028

Dependent variable: VAM in math
Master’s/PhD Bachelor’s
White
(6)
0.159***
(0.039)
58
8260
0.022

Non-white

≤ Median age >Median age
at career start
(7)
(8)
0.091***
0.136***
(0.022)
(0.040)
60
45
17535
15406
0.023
0.022

Notes: Coefficients from separate regressions of VAM in math (controlling for yearly experience dummies up to 30 years) on NBER recession indicator at career start for different
subsamples. Standard errors in parentheses adjusted for clustering at the career start year level. Median age at career start is 29. Significance levels: *** p< 1%, ** p< 5%, *
p< 10%

Clusters (career start years)
Obs. (teachers)
R2

Recession

Subsample:

Table 4: Recession at Career Start and Teacher Math Effectiveness (Subgroups)

Table 5: Placebo Analyses: Recession at Different Points in Life
and Teacher Math Effectiveness
Dependent variable: VAM in math
Recession at:
(1)
(2)
(3)
Career start
0.110*** 0.110*** 0.101***
(0.023)
(0.024)
(0.023)
Career start -1 yr.
0.009
(0.029)
Career start -2 yrs.
-0.006
(0.020)
Career start -3 yrs.
0.003
(0.025)
Career start +1 yr.
0.035
(0.022)
Career start +2 yrs.
-0.011
(0.021)
Career start +3 yrs.
-0.028
(0.026)
Age 18
Age 20
Age 22
Age 24
Age 26
Age 28
Age 30
Age 32
Clusters (career start years)
Obs. (teachers)
R2

60
32941
0.022

60
32941
0.022

60
32941
0.022

(4)
0.104***
(0.022)

-0.006
(0.015)
0.007
(0.018)
-0.016
(0.012)
-0.017
(0.015)
-0.022
(0.014)
-0.025
(0.017)
-0.026
(0.017)
0.011
(0.018)
60
30038
0.020

Notes: Regressions of teacher VAM in math on NBER recession indicator (controlling for yearly
experience dummies up to 30 years) at different points in time. Standard errors in parentheses
adjusted for clustering at the career start year level. Significance levels: *** p< 1%, ** p< 5%, *
p< 10%

39

Table 6: Recession at Career Start and Teacher Math Effectiveness
(Single Recessions)
Dependent variable: VAM in math
Recession year (career start)
(1)
(2)
(3)
1970
0.102*** 0.102***
0.080**
(0.029)
(0.029)
(0.036)
1974
0.020
0.020
0.009
(0.020)
(0.020)
(0.025)
1980
0.017
-0.004
-0.034
(0.035)
(0.034)
(0.034)
1981
0.002
(0.033)
1982
-0.034
(0.031)
1990
0.076*** 0.076***
0.092***
(0.016)
(0.016)
(0.009)
2001
0.138*** 0.138***
0.124***
(0.016)
(0.016)
(0.023)
2008
0.264*** 0.264***
0.230***
(0.036)
(0.036)
(0.049)
Included cohorts:
+/- 2 years
all
all
around recessions
Clusters (career start years)
48
48
28
Obs. (teachers)
32897
32897
19144
R2
0.023
0.023
0.023
Notes: Regressions of VAM in math (controlling for yearly experience dummies up to 30 years)
on seperate dummies for cohorts starting during each NBER recession (recession cohorts).
Excludes observations with fewer than 20 teachers; mean teacher cohort size is 1,292. In
Columns 2 and 3, cohorts entering in 1980 through 1982 are combined. Standard errors in
parentheses adjusted for clustering at the career start year level. Significance levels: *** p< 1%,
** p< 5%, * p< 10%

Table 7: Recession at Career Start and Teacher Math Effectiveness
(Subsamples)

Recession
Subsample:
Clusters (Car. start yrs.)
Obs. (Teachers)
R2

Dependent variable: VAM in math
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.110***
0.018
0.149***
0.185***
(0.023)
(0.025)
(0.025)
(0.033)
Baseline Pre-1990 Post-1990
Full teacher
cohorts
cohorts
career observed
60
40
20
9
32941
7303
25638
15731
0.022
0.003
0.025
0.028

(5)
0.140***
(0.022)
No exp. in
other state
58
26709
0.028

Notes: Regressions of VAM in math (controlling for yearly experience dummies up to 30 years) on recession indicator at
career start. In column (1), the recession indicator only takes the value of one for the recessions before 1990. In column
(2), the recession indicator takes the value of one for the recessions since 1990, including 1990. Columns (3) and (4) use
our preferred recession indicator and use subsamples as indicated in the text. Standard errors in parentheses adjusted for
clustering at the career start year level. Significance levels: *** p< 1%, ** p< 5%, * p< 10%

40

Table 8: Recession at Career Start and Teacher Math Effectiveness
(Alternative Business Cycle Measures)

Recession
GDP growth
Unemp. (college)
Unemp. change (college)

Dependent variable: VAM in math
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.110***
(0.023)
-0.014**
(0.006)
0.052**
(0.022)
0.083***
(0.015)

Nonagriculture industries

(5)

0.040***
(0.011)

Agriculture industries
Clusters (career start years)
Obs. (teachers)
R2

(6)

60
32941
0.022

60
32941
0.021

40
32402
0.021

39
32244
0.022

57
32936
0.022

0.015
(0.010)
57
32936
0.021

Notes: Coefficients from separate regressions of VAM in math (controlling for yearly experience dummies up to 30 years) on
alternative business cycle measures at career start. Unemployment (college) refers to BLS unemployment rates of college
graduates (4 years and above until 1991, degree holders after 1991) and are available after 1969. All unemployment rates
are from the BLS; GDP growth (2009 constant dollars) from the BEA. Agriculture industries refers to private wage and
salary workers. Standard errors in parentheses adjusted for clustering at the career start year level. Significance levels:
*** p< 1%, ** p< 5%, * p< 10%

Table 9: Recession at Career Start, Attrition,
and Teacher Math Effectiveness
Dependent
variable:
Recession
VAM (math)
Recession*VAM (math)
Career start

Attrition
(1)
(2)
0.039
0.017
(0.039)
(0.029)
-0.029*** -0.048***
(0.005)
(0.009)
0.005
0.039***
(0.012)
(0.009)
-0.004*** -0.040***
(0.001)
(0.010)

Recession*experience
Included cohorts:
Clusters (career start years)
Obs. (teachers)
R2

<2008
59
32417
0.013

2000-07
8
15207
0.043

VAM in math
(3)
(4)
0.182*** 0.333***
(0.026)
(0.033)

-0.007***
(0.002)
all
60
32941
0.023

-0.074***
(0.010)
2000-08
9
15731
0.031

Notes: Regressions of attrition indicator (Columns 1 and 2) and VAM in math (Columns 3 and 4) on
regressors as shown in table. Attrition defined as no teacher observation in 2009. Columns 3 and 4 control
for yearly experience dummies up to 30 years. Standard errors in parentheses adjusted for clustering at
the career start year level. Significance levels: *** p< 1%, ** p< 5%, * p< 10%

41

Appendix

Table A1: Recession at Career Start and Teacher Math Effectiveness
(Quantile Regressions)

Recession
Quantile
Obs. (Teachers)
R2

0.029
(0.035)
5
32941
0.020

Dependent variable: VAM in math
0.096*** 0.102*** 0.088*** 0.116***
(0.027)
(0.031)
(0.025)
(0.026)
10
25
50
75
32941
32941
32941
32941
0.021
0.021
0.021
0.021

0.139***
(0.024)
90
32941
0.015

0.175***
(0.037)
95
32941
0.008

Notes: Coefficients from separate quantile regressions of VAM in math (controlling for yearly experience dummies up to
30 years) on NBER recession indicator at career start at different quantiles of the VAM distribution. Standard errors in
parentheses adjusted for clustering at the career start year level. Significance levels: *** p< 1%, ** p< 5%, * p< 10%

Table A2: Recession at Career Start and Teacher Math Effectiveness
(Alternative VAMs)

Recession

Dependent variable: Various VAMs in math
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.110*** 0.090***
0.059***
0.092***
(0.023)
(0.022)
(0.017)
(0.029)

Fixed effects (in VAM model)
Weights
Clusters (career start years)
Obs. (teachers)
R2

none
none
60
32941
0.022

school
none
60
32941
0.018

school-year
none
60
32941
0.014

none
student obs.
60
32941
0.019

(5)
0.083***
(0.027)
none
teacher obs.
60
32941
0.020

Notes: Coefficients from separate regressions of different VAMs in math (controlling for yearly experience dummies up to 30
years) on NBER recession indicator at career start. Standard errors in parentheses adjusted for clustering at the career start
year level. Significance levels: *** p< 1%, ** p< 5%, * p< 10%

42

Table A3: Recession at Career Start and Teacher Math Effectiveness
(Further Business Cycle Measures)

Unemp. (College)
Unemp. diff. (College)
Unemp. (Nat.)
Unemp. diff. (Nat.)

Dependent variable: VAM in math
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.052**
(0.022)
0.083***
(0.015)
0.031***
(0.010)
0.046***
(0.012)

Unempl. (FL)

(5)

0.025***
(0.008)

Unempl. diff. (FL)
Clusters (Career start years)
Obs. (Teachers)
R2

(6)

40
32402
0.021

39
32244
0.022

60
32941
0.021

60
32941
0.022

53
32928
0.021

0.024**
(0.011)
52
32923
0.021

Notes: Coefficients from separate regressions of VAM in math (controlling for yearly experience dummies up to 30 years) on
alternative business cycle measures at career start. Unemployment (college) refers to BLS unemployment rates of college
graduates (4 years and above until 1991, degree holders after 1991) and are available after 1969. Other unemployment rates
are not graduate-specific. All unemployment rates are from the BLS. Standard errors in parentheses adjusted for clustering
at the career start year level. Significance levels: *** p< 1%, ** p< 5%, * p< 10%

43

