                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      ON THE WELFARE AND CYCLICAL IMPLICATIONS OF MODERATE TREND
                              INFLATION

                                            Guido Ascari
                                            Louis Phaneuf
                                              Eric Sims

                                        Working Paper 21392
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21392


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2015




We acknowledge Yuriy Gorodnichenko and Juan Rubio-Ramirez for helpful comments and suggestions
at an early stage of this project, Sylvain Leduc for useful comments on the current draft and Jean-Gardy
Victor for capable research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Guido Ascari, Louis Phaneuf, and Eric Sims. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
On the Welfare and Cyclical Implications of Moderate Trend Inflation
Guido Ascari, Louis Phaneuf, and Eric Sims
NBER Working Paper No. 21392
July 2015
JEL No. E31,E32

                                             ABSTRACT

We offer a comprehensive evaluation of the welfare and cyclical implications of moderate trend inflation.
In an extended version of a medium-scale New Keynesian model, recent proposals to increase trend
inflation from 2 to 4 percent would generate a consumption-equivalent welfare loss of 3.7 percent
based on the non-stochastic steady state and of 6.9 percent based on the stochastic mean. Welfare
costs of this magnitude are driven by four main factors: i) multiperiod nominal wage contracting, ii)
trend growth in investment-specific and neutral technology, iii) roundaboutness in the U.S. production
structure, and iv) and the interaction between trend inflation and shocks to the marginal efficiency
of investment (MEI), insofar that this type of shock is sufficiently persistent. Moreover, moderate
trend inflation has important cyclical implications. It interacts much more strongly with MEI shocks
than with either productivity or monetary shocks.


Guido Ascari                                        Eric Sims
Department of Economics                             Department of Economics
University of Oxford                                University of Notre Dame
Manor Road                                          723 Flanner Hall
Oxford OX1 3UQ                                      South Bend, IN 46556
United Kingdom                                      and NBER
guido.ascari@economics.ox.ac.uk                     esims1@nd.edu

Louis Phaneuf
Department of Economics
University of Quebec at Montreal
Montreal
Canada
H3C 3P8
phaneuf.louis@uqam.ca
1        Introduction

“Medium-scale” New Keynesian models (e.g., see Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans, 2005, and
Smets and Wouters, 2007) are now widely used in academic circles and central banks. This class
of models has served mostly to identify the sources of business cycle fluctuations and to analyze
the effects of aggregate disturbances on macroeconomic variables. In these models, the rate of
inflation is often set equal to zero in the steady state. This assumption is, of course, counterfactual
considering that the U.S. rate of inflation has averaged nearly 4 percent a year over the entirety of
the postwar period.
        There exists a large literature which explores the macroeconomic consequences of non-zero
trend inflation. The models most often used for this purpose are “small-scale” New Keynesian
models with sticky prices only (e.g. see Ascari, 2004; Hornstein and Wolman, 2005; Kiley, 2007;
Levin and Yun, 2007; Amano, Ambler, and Rebei, 2007; Ascari and Ropele, 2007; Coibion and
Gorodnichenko, 2011).1 No study has yet fully explored the effects of moderate trend inflation
in a framework that meets the current standards of New Keynesian DSGE modeling. Our paper
intends to fill this gap.
        We want to address two main research questions. The first is: what are the welfare costs of
raising trend inflation from 2 to 4 percent? In other words, what is the amount of consumption
households would be willing to give away in a low inflation state to have the same welfare as in
a high inflation state? The second is: can a moderate rate of trend inflation between 0 and 4
percent alter the business-cycle properties of New Keynesian models in non trivial ways, and if so,
in response to what type of shock and through which channels?
        The first question is timely given recent proposals to raise the inflation target in light of the
Great Recession and the zero lower bound (ZLB) on nominal interest rates. Prominent economists
like Blanchard, Dell’Ariccia, and Mauro (2010), Ball (2013) and Krugman (2014) have suggested
that the Federal Reserve increase its inflation target from 2 percent to 4 or even 5 percent annually.
Presumably, implementing this proposal would help give the Fed the flexibility to lower nominal
interest rates, increasing its ability to mitigate the harmful effects of a future recession. Interest for
the second question on the cyclical implications of trend inflation is obvious considering the large
amount of work devoted in recent years to the identification of the main sources of business cycle
fluctuations.
        To address these questions, we propose an extended version of a medium-scale DSGE model
developed by Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005). Our model shares some basic elements of
    1
        For a survey of this literature, see Ascari and Sbordone (2014) and the references therein.


                                                             1
this model like imperfectly competitive goods and labor markets, nominal wage and price rigidities
in the form of Calvo contracts, and real frictions including consumer habit formation, variable
capital utilization, and investment adjustment costs.
   However, given our main objectives, we develop this framework along four key dimensions.
First, steady-state inflation can be positive. Consequently, dispersion variables and markups can
vary with trend inflation, and thus play an active role in the model. In standard New Keynesian
models with zero trend inflation, price and wage dispersion are constant up to a first approximation.
Relaxing the assumption of zero trend inflation allows us to explore the normative and positive
implications of positive rates of long-run inflation.
   Second, our model embeds real per capita output growth stemming from two distinct sources:
trend growth in neutral productivity and investment-specific technology (IST). Previous work by
Amano, Moran, Murchison, and Rennison (2009) has examined the interaction between trend
inflation and trend growth in neutral productivity and found it to be quantitatively important
for understanding the welfare costs associated with positive trend inflation. Our analysis extends
their work to also include trend growth arising from IST. Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krusell (1997)
show that investment-specific technological change has been a major source of U.S. economic growth
during the postwar era. In our model, trend growth in IST realistically captures the downward
secular trend in the relative price of investment observed during the postwar period.
   Third, while in existing models with trend inflation aggregate fluctuations are driven primarily
by monetary policy and productivity shocks, in our model investment shocks are a major source
of business cycle fluctuations. Fisher (2006), Smets and Wouters (2007), Justiniano and Primiceri
(2008), and Altig, Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Linde (2011) treat investment shocks as a kind
of disturbance identified with trend reductions in the price of investment relative to consumption.
Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2011) distinguish instead between two types of investment
shocks: an investment-specific technology shock and a shock to the marginal efficiency of invest-
ment (MEI). The MEI shock affects the process by which investment goods are transformed into
productive capital. This shock is orthogonal to the relative price of investment. A possible inter-
pretation, supported by evidence in Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2011), is that it is a
proxy for the effectiveness with which the financial sector channels the flow of household savings
into new productive capital. Their evidence suggests MEI shocks account for the bulk of business
cycle fluctuations, while investment-specific technology shocks are unimportant for cyclical fluctu-
ations. Our model features deterministic growth in the IST process to account for the downward
secular trend in the relative price of investment and stochastic shocks to the marginal efficiency of
investment as a major business cycle shock.

                                                   2
    Fourth, our model embeds a roundabout production structure (see Basu, 1995, and Huang, Liu,
and Phaneuf, 2004), which is consistent with U.S. evidence produced by Hanes (1996) and Hanes
(1999), corroborated by Basu and Taylor (1999a, 1999b), showing that more-processed products
have become more important in U.S. aggregate output from the interwar period to the postwar era.
It is also consistent with postwar evidence in Basu (1995), Huang, Liu, and Phaneuf (2004) and
Nakamura and Steinsson (2010), corroborated by a recent dataset gathered through the joints efforts
of the NBER and the U.S. Census Bureau’s CES covering 473 six-digit 1997 NAICS industries for
the years 1959-2009. This evidence shows the degree of roundaboutness in the U.S. production
structure has been high during the postwar era.
    Our first set of substantive findings pertains to the normative implications of moderate trend
inflation. Here, we focus on two welfare cost measures: a consumption-equivalent welfare loss
metric based on non-stochastic steady states and an equivalent metric based on stochastic means.
In our baseline model, we find that the cost of increasing trend inflation from 2 to 4 percent is
3.7 percent of each period’s consumption based on the non-stochastic steady state and 6.9 percent
based on stochastic means. These welfare losses are substantially higher than what much of the
existing literature has found. Which features of our model are responsible for welfare costs of this
magnitude? Our analysis points to four key factors: i) staggered wage contracts, ii) trend growth
in investment-specific and neutral technology, iii) roundabout production, and iv) the interaction
between trend inflation and shocks to the marginal efficiency of investment (MEI), insofar this type
of shock is sufficiently persistent.
    Staggered wage contracts are a key factor determining the welfare costs of trend inflation in
our medium-scale model. In particular, if we assumed that wages were flexible the welfare cost
of raising trend inflation from 2 to 4 percent would only be 0.6 percent of consumption based on
stochastic means, or about one-tenth of the consumption equivalent welfare loss as in our baseline
analysis. Cho, Cooley, and Phaneuf (1997) have shown that multiperiod wage contracting per se
can be quite costly once included in a macroeconomic framework with explicit microfoundations.
Evidence in Amano et al. (2009) suggests this original insight seems to carry over to a framework
with positive trend inflation.2 With positive trend inflation households would like to reset their
wages each period, but only a fraction can. This leads to significant steady state wage dispersion,
which drives a wedge between aggregate labor supply and demand. It also results in higher wage
    2
      Relative to theirs, our model adds capital accumulation, habit formation in consumption, variable capital uti-
lization, investment adjustment costs, trend growth in investment-specific technology, randomness from shocks, a
roundabout production structure and a Taylor rule. Furthermore, their analysis is limited to the impact of trend
inflation on non-stochastic steady states. Ours is more general and focuses on the normative and positive aspects of
non-zero trend inflation.



                                                         3
markups on average, as updating households choose higher wages than they otherwise would to
protect their future real wages from inflation. This higher average wage markup moves the economy
further from the first best allocation, resulting in significant welfare losses.
    Trend growth in IST and neutral technology, in conjunction with wage rigidity, also contributes
significantly to the welfare costs of trend inflation. If there is no trend growth, then the welfare
cost of moving from 2 to 4 percent inflation is significantly lower relative to our baseline – e.g. the
cost of going from 2 to 4 percent trend inflation is only about 2 percent of consumption based on
stochastic means when there is no trend growth, compared to nearly 7 percent when trend growth is
positive. Positive trend growth means that households would like to adjust their wages each period
even if trend inflation is zero.3 This results in steady state wage dispersion and higher than average
wage markups than if trend growth were zero. Adding in positive trend inflation exacerbates these
distortions, resulting in much larger welfare costs than if there were no trend growth.
    Roundabout production also plays an important role in accounting for the high welfare costs of
positive trend inflation. The consumption equivalent welfare cost of going from 2 to 4 percent trend
inflation is about 1.5 percentage points lower without roundabout production than with it. This
effect is much stronger based on stochastic means than on steady states. Roundabout production
has two effects in the model: it simultaneously acts as an amplification source for real shocks and
also is isomorphic to prices being stickier, because it introduces some strategic complementarity
into price-setting. Both of these features make trend inflation relatively more costly.
    Finally, there are also potentially interesting interactions between the various shock sources and
the consumption equivalent welfare losses based on stochastic means. For our baseline parameteri-
zation, trend inflation is significantly more costly conditioned on volatility arising from MEI shocks
than from either neutral productivity or monetary shocks. This result depends in an important
way on the persistence of these shocks, a point to which we return below.
    Our results can be viewed as complementary to those reported by Coibion, Gorodnichenko,
and Wieland (2012). While they find that individual ZLB episodes are quite costly, for reasonable
frequencies of hitting the ZLB the unconditional cost of the ZLB is nevertheless low. Raising the
inflation target would reduce the frequency of hitting the ZLB, but results in welfare costs every
period. They therefore argue that the optimal inflation rate considering the effects of the ZLB is
low. While we do not explicitly take into account the ZLB, our analysis echoes their arguments in
that we find that even a moderate rise in trend inflation can be quite costly. Like those of Coibion,
    3
      It turns out that the source of trend growth – IST or neutral productivity – is not terribly important for this
effect. Either source of growth means that real wages grow along the balanced growth path, which means households
would like to increase their nominal wages each period along that balanced growth path.



                                                         4
Gorodnichenko, and Wieland (2012), our findings represent a warning against policy proposals
urging central banks to raise their inflation targets.
   Our second set of findings pertains to the cyclical implications of positive trend inflation.
Whereas trend inflation has relatively minor interactions with the dynamic responses of aggre-
gate variables to productivity and monetary shocks, there are large interactions between trend
inflation and MEI shocks. To our knowledge, no previous study has examined the business cycle
consequences of the interaction between moderate trend inflation and investment shocks.
   The interaction between trend inflation and the cyclical responses to MEI shocks depends
heavily on the persistence of the shock. When the shocks are sufficiently persistent, we find that
higher levels of trend inflation significantly dampen the responses of output and other aggregate
variables to MEI shocks. When the autocorrelation parameter in the MEI process is 0.95, at a ten
quarter forecast horizon the impulse response of output to a MEI shock is about one-quarter as
large with 4 percent trend inflation than with 2 percent trend inflation. The interaction between
trend inflation and the cyclical response to MEI shocks flips signs at lower levels of persistence.
For example, when the autoregressive parameter in the MEI process is 0.8 instead of 0.95, the
impulse response of output at a ten quarter horizon is about 15 percent larger with 4 percent
trend inflation relative to 2 percent. The effects of trend inflation on the response of output to
these shocks – whether the interaction is positive or negative – are substantially larger than the
interaction between trend inflation and responses to productivity and monetary shocks.
   What is the intuition for the interaction between trend inflation and MEI shocks, and why does
it depend on the persistence of the shock? The MEI shock is an intertemporal demand shock,
pushing output, inflation, and wages in the same direction. The key insight to understanding the
relationship between the persistence of the shock and trend inflation is that positive trend inflation
makes price- and wage-setting more forward-looking. Higher trend inflation causes households and
firms to adjust prices and wages even more to the shock than they would if trend inflation were
zero. This interaction is particularly strong when the shock is very persistent, with the increase in
wages in particular sufficiently strong that monopoly distortions are exacerbated and the response of
output to the shock is dampened with higher trend inflation. When the shock is not very persistent,
the sensitivity to trend inflation of updated prices and wages is not very strong, and output and
other aggregate variables respond more to an MEI shock at higher levels of trend inflation.
   As noted above, an increasing body of research suggests that MEI shocks are a major driver
of the business cycle – Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2010, 2011) find that these shocks




                                                  5
account for 50 percent or more of the business cycle volatility in output.4 Conventional wisdom
in the literature has been that trend inflation might matter in a normative sense, but that it is
innocuous to ignore it for the purposes of understanding positive aspects of the business cycle.
Our results suggest that this is not the case – trend inflation interacts strongly with MEI shocks,
whether that effects is to dampen or amplify the effects of these shocks.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out our medium-scale DSGE
model. Section 3 discusses some issues related to calibration. Section 4 examines the steady-
state and mean welfare implications of moderate trend inflation. Section 5 studies the cyclical
implications of trend inflation. Section 6 contains concluding remarks.


2     A Medium-Scale Macro Model with Trend Inflation

This section lays out a medium-scale DSGE model in the spirit of Christiano, Eichenbaum, and
Evans (2005). It includes nominal rigidities in the form of Calvo (1983) wage and price contracts,
habit formation in consumption, investment adjustment costs, variable capital utilization, and
monetary policy is governed by a Taylor rule. We add to this model non-zero steady-state inflation,
trend growth in IST and neutral technology, and a roundabout production structure. Aggregate
fluctuations are driven by shocks to neutral technology, the marginal efficiency of investment,
and monetary policy. The subsections below lay out the decision problems, while the optimality
conditions of the relevant model agents are in the Appendix.


2.1    Good and Labor Composites

There is a continuum of firms, indexed by j ∈ [0, 1], and producing differentiated goods with the
use of a composite labor input. The composite labor input is aggregated from differentiated labor
supplied by a continuum of households, indexed by i ∈ [0, 1]. The differentiated goods are bundled
into a gross output good, Xt . As we discuss below, some of this gross output good is used as a
factor of production by firms. Net output is therefore measured as gross output less intermediates.
The households can either consume or invest the final net output good. The composite gross output
and labor input respectively are:

                                                 Z 1                          θ
                                                                             θ−1
                                                                 θ−1
                                          Xt =          Xt (j)    θ    dj           ,                            (1)
                                                    0
   4
     Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2010) do not distinguish between MEI and IST shocks, referring instead
only to an “investment shock.” They do not associate this shock with the relative price of investment goods to
consumption, and so in the parlance of their 2011 paper, the investment shock in their 2010 paper is best interpreted
as a MEI shock.

                                                          6
                                                        Z 1                             σ
                                                                                       σ−1
                                                                              σ−1
                                             Lt =                 Lt (i)       σ    di        .                        (2)
                                                            0

      The parameters θ > 1 and σ > 1 are the elasticities of substitution between goods and labor.
The demand curves for goods and labor are:

                                                                              −θ
                                                                Pt (j)
                                                            
                                            Xt (j) =                                Xt ,    ∀j,                        (3)
                                                                 Pt
                                                                              −σ
                                                                Wt (i)
                                                            
                                             Lt (i) =                               Lt ,    ∀i.                        (4)
                                                                 Wt
The aggregate price and wage indexes are:
                                                                  Z 1
                                                   Pt1−θ =                Pt (j)1−θ dj,                                (5)
                                                                   0

                                                                  Z 1
                                                   Wt1−σ    =             Wt (i)1−σ di.                                (6)
                                                                   0


2.2     Households

There is a continuum of households, indexed by i ∈ [0, 1], who are monopoly suppliers of labor. They
face a downward-sloping demand curve for their particular type of labor given in (4). Following
Calvo (1983), each period, there is a fixed probability, (1 − ξw ), that households can adjust their
nominal wage. As in Erceg, Henderson, and Levin (2000), we assume that utility is separable in
consumption and labor. State-contingent securities insure households against idiosyncratic wage
risk arising from staggered wage-setting. With this setup, households will be identical along all
dimensions other than labor supply and wages.
      The problem of a typical household, omitting dependence on i except for these two dimensions,
is:
                                                            ∞
                                                                                                               !
                                                            X
                                                                      t                            Lt (i)1+χ
                              max                      E0         β           ln (Ct − bCt−1 ) − η                 ,   (7)
                   Ct ,Lt (i),Kt+1 ,Bt+1 ,It ,Zt
                                                            t=0
                                                                                                    1+χ

      subject to the following budget constraint,

                                             !
                                a(Zt )Kt               Bt+1
               Pt Ct + It +                        +          ≤ Wt (i)Lt (i) + Rtk Zt Kt + Πt + Bt + Tt ,              (8)
                                    εI,τ
                                     t
                                                       1 + it

and the physical capital accumulation process,

                                                                              It
                                                                                 
                                Kt+1 =     εI,τ
                                            t ϑt           1−S                           It + (1 − δ)Kt .              (9)
                                                                          It−1



                                                                          7
Here, Pt is the nominal price of goods, Ct is consumption, It is investment measured in units of
consumption, Kt is the physical capital stock, and Zt is the level of capital utilization. Wt (i) is
the nominal wage paid to labor of type i, and Rtk is the common rental price on capital services
(the product of utilization and physical capital). Πt and Tt are, respectively, distributed dividends
from firms and lump sum taxes from the government, both of which households take as given. Bt
is a stock of nominal bonds that the household enters the period with. a(Zt ) is a resource cost of
utilization, satisfying a(1) = 0, a0 (1) = 0, and a00 (1) > 0. This resource cost is measured in units of
                                    
physical capital. S            It
                              It−1       is an investment adjustment cost, satisfying S (gI ) = 0, S 0 (gI ) = 0, and
S 00 (gI ) > 0, where gI ≥ 1 is the steady state (gross) growth rate of investment. it is the nominal
interest rate. 0 < β < 1 is a discount factor, 0 < δ < 1 is a depreciation rate, and 0 ≤ b < 1 is a
parameter for internal habit formation. χ is the inverse Frisch labor supply elasticity.
       εI,τ
        t , which enters the capital accumulation equation by multiplying investment and the budget

constraint in terms of the resource cost of capital utilization, measures the level of IST. We assume
that it follows a deterministic trend with no stochastic component. The deterministic trend is
necessary to match the observed downward trend in the relative price of investment goods in the
data. The exogenous variable ϑt , which enters the capital accumulation equation in the same way
as the IST term, is a stochastic MEI shock.
       Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2011) distinguish between these two types of investment
shocks, showing that IST shocks map one-to-one into the relative price of investment goods, while
MEI shocks do not impact the relative price of investment.5 They find that MEI shocks are critical
for business cycles, while stochastic shocks to IST virtually have no effect on output at business cycle
frequencies. These findings form the basis for our modeling choice of having the MEI component
stochastic while the IST term only affects trend growth.
       A household given the opportunity to adjust its wage in period t will choose a “reset wage” to
maximize the expected value of discounted flow utility, where discounting in period t + s is (βξw )s ,
 s being the probability that a wage chosen in period t will still be in effect in period t + s. Given
ξw
our assumption on preferences and wage-setting, all updating households will choose the same reset
wage, denoted in real terms by wt∗ .


2.3       Firms

The production function for a typical producer j is:
   5
       In the model, the relative price of investment goods is easily seen to be     1
                                                                                    I,τ   . The division by εI,τ
                                                                                                             t   in the resource
                                                                                   εt
cost of utilization is therefore necessary so that capital is priced in terms of consumption goods.




                                                                8
                                                                            1−φ                 
                                             ct (j)α Lt (j)1−α
                     Xt (j) = max At Γt (j)φ K                                        − Υt F, 0 ,       (10)

where F is a fixed cost, and production is required to be non-negative. Υt is a growth factor, to
be discussed later. Given Υt , F is chosen to keep profits zero along a balanced growth path, so the
entry and exit of firms can be ignored. Γt (j) is the amount of intermediate input, and φ ∈ (0, 1) is
the intermediate input share. Intermediate inputs come from aggregate gross output, Xt . K
                                                                                         ct (j) is

capital services (the product of utilization and physical capital), while Lt (j) is labor input.
   The firm gets to choose its price, Pt (j), as well as quantities of intermediates, capital services,
and labor input. It is subject to Calvo (1983) pricing, where each period there is a (1 − ξp )
probability that a firm can re-optimize its price.


2.4   Monetary Policy

Monetary policy follows a Taylor rule:
                                                    ρi          απ             αy 1−ρi
                          1 + it         1 + it−1            πt             Yt −1
                                     
                                 =                                             g                εrt .   (11)
                          1+i              1+i               π             Yt−1 Y

   The nominal interest rate responds to deviations of inflation from an exogenous steady-state
target, π, and to deviations of output growth from its trend level, gY . εrt is an exogenous shock to
the policy rule. The parameter ρi governs the smoothing-effect on nominal interest rates while απ
and αy are control parameters.


2.5   Shock Processes

Neutral productivity obeys a process with both a trending and stationary component. Aτt is the
deterministic trend component, where gA is the gross growth rate:


                                                      At = Aτt Aet ,                                    (12)


                                                     Aτt = gA Aτt−1 .                                   (13)

The initial level in period 0 is normalized to 1: Aτ0 = 1. The stationary component of neutral
productivity follows an AR(1) process in the log, with the non-stochastic mean level normalized
to unity, and innovation, uA
                           t , drawn from a mean zero normal distribution with known standard

deviation equal to sA :
                                              ρA                   
                               Aet = Aet−1            exp sA uA
                                                              t ,           0 ≤ ρA < 1,                 (14)


                                                             9
The IST term obeys the following deterministic trend, where gεI is the gross growth rate and the
initial level in period 0 is normalized to unity:


                                                     εI,τ      I,τ
                                                      t = gεI εt−1                                          (15)


   The MEI shock follows a stationary AR(1) process, with innovation drawn from a mean zero
normal distribution with standard deviation sI :


                                  ϑt = (ϑt−1 )ρI exp(sI uIt ),              0 ≤ ρI < 1                      (16)


   The only remaining shock in the model is the monetary policy shock, εrt . We assume that is
drawn from a mean zero normal distribution with known standard deviation sr .


2.6   Functional Forms

We assume that the resource cost of utilization and the investment adjustment cost function have
the following functional forms:

                                                                         γ2
                                   a(Zt ) = γ1 (Zt − 1) +                   (Zt − 1)2 ,                     (17)
                                                                         2


                                                                                  2
                                               It          κ        It
                                                             
                                      S                  =                 − gI        ,                    (18)
                                              It−1         2       It−1
where γ2 > 0 is a free parameter; as γ2 → ∞ utilization becomes fixed at unity. γ1 must be
restricted so that the optimality conditions are consistent with the normalization of steady state
utilization of 1. κ ≥ 0 is a free parameter. The functional form for the investment adjustment cost
is standard in the literature (e.g. see Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans, 2005).


2.7   Growth

Most variables in the model will inherit trend growth from the deterministic trends in neutral and
investment-specific productivity. Let this trend factor be Υt . Output, consumption, investment,
intermediate inputs, and the real wage will all grow at the rate of this trend factor on a balanced
growth path: gY = gI = gΓ = gw = gΥ . The capital stock will grow faster due to growth in
                                       ft ≡                Kt
investment-specific productivity, with K                            being stationary. Given our specification of
                                                          Υt εI,τ
                                                              t
preferences, labor hours will be stationary. The full set of equilibrium conditions re-written in
stationary terms can be found in the Appendix.

                                                            10
        One can show that the trend factor that induces stationarity among transformed variables is:

                                                         1               α
                                        Υt = (Aτt ) (1−φ)(1−α) εI,τ
                                                                t
                                                                          1−α
                                                                                .                               (19)


        This reverts to the conventional trend growth factor in a model with growth in neutral and
investment-specific productivity when φ = 0. Under this restriction, intermediates are irrelevant for
production, and the model reduces to the standard New Keynesian model. Interestingly, from (19),
it is evident that a higher value of φ amplifies the effects of trend growth in neutral productivity on
output and its components. For a given level of trend growth in neutral productivity, the economy
will grow faster the larger is the share of intermediates in production.


3        Calibration

We split the baseline calibration of the model’s parameters into two groups: non-shock and shock
parameters.


3.1       Non-Shock Parameters

The values of non-shock parameters are summarized in Table 1. β = 0.99 is the discount factor,
b = 0.8 is the habit formation parameter, χ = 1 is the inverse Frisch elasticity, and η = 6 is the
weight on disutility of labor set so that steady-state labor hours are around 1/3. The parameters
in the production function are the share of capital services α = 1/3 and the share of intermediate
inputs φ = 0.61.
        The parameter φ is obtained as follows. As in Nakamura and Steinsson (2010), the weighted
average revenue share of intermediate inputs in the U.S. private sector using Consumer Price Index
(CPI) expenditure weights is roughly 51% in 2002. The cost share of intermediate inputs is equal
to the revenue share times the markup. Our calibration of θ implies a markup of 1.2. Therefore,
our estimate of the weighted average cost share of intermediate inputs is roughly 61%.6
        The parameter δ = 0.025 is the depreciation rate on physical capital, κ = 3 is the investment
adjustment cost parameter consistent with the estimates reported in Christiano, Eichenbaum, and
Evans (2005) and Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2010), γ2 = 0.05 relates to the squared
term in the cost of utilization and is consistent with Basu and Kimball (1997) and Dotsey and King
(2006), and γ1 is set so that steady-state utilization is 1.
    6
    The steady-state price markup is for a trend inflation of zero. We find that this markup is almost insensitive to
trend inflation between 0 and 4 percent leaving φ unaffected as trend inflation rises.



                                                         11
       The parameters θ and σ are the elasticities for goods and labor which are both set at 6 (Wood-
ford, 1997, and Liu and Phaneuf, 2007). The Calvo price and wage probabilities, ξp and ξw , are
set at 2/3. Using a dataset covering the frequency of price changes for 350 categories of consumer
goods and services for the years 1995-1997, Bils and Klenow (2004) find that the median duration
of U.S. prices ranges between 4.3 and 5.5 months. Cogley and Sbordone (2008) link the median
duration of prices to the Calvo probability of price non-reoptimization by − ln(2)/ ln(ξp ). Setting
ξp = 2/3 therefore implies a median duration of prices of 5 months, which is broadly consistent
with the evidence presented by Bils and Klenow.
       By setting ξw = 2/3, we adopt a conservative stand. While this value is broadly consistent with
the macro estimate reported by Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005), it is somewhat lower
than the micro evidence offered by Barattieri, Basu, and Gottschalk (2014), and also somewhat
lower than the estimates in Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2010,2011).
       The last three parameters are for the Taylor rule, and include the smoothing parameter set at
0.8, the coefficient on inflation at 1.5, and the coefficient on output growth at 0.2. These values are
fairly standard in the literature.


3.2      Trend Inflation, Trend Growth, and Shock Parameters

We now explain the calibration of parameters governing trend inflation, trend growth, and the
parameters governing the shock processes. Table 2 summarizes the values assigned to these param-
eters. The baseline model includes three types of shocks: neutral technology, MEI and monetary
policy shocks. In Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005), aggregate fluctuations are driven
only by shocks to monetary policy.7
       Mapping the model to the data, the trend growth rate of the IST term, gεI , equals the negative
of the growth rate of the relative price of investment goods. To measure this in the data, we define
investment as expenditures on new durables plus private fixed investment, and consumption as
consumer expenditures of nondurables and services. These series are from the BEA and cover the
period 1960:I-2007:III.
            n , C n , D n , and I n denote nominal non-durable consumption, services consumption, ex-
       Let Cnd,t s,t   t         f,t

penditure on durables, and fixed investment. Let Pnd,t , Ps,t , Pd,t , and Pf,t denote the corresponding
   7
    Smets and Wouters (2007) assume seven different types of shocks. The increasing number of disturbances in
recent New Keynesian models has been criticized. For example, referring to the seven shocks included in the model
of Smets and Wouters (2007), Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2009) argue that only three, the TFP shock, the
investment shock and the monetary policy shock, are structural. The other four are dubiously structural and do not
have a clear economic interpretation.




                                                       12
price indexes. Nominal consumption and nominal investment are then:


                                              Ctn = Cnd,t
                                                     n       n
                                                          + Cs,t ,                            (20)


                                               Itn = Dtn + If,t
                                                            n
                                                                .                             (21)

   Let gnd,t , gs,t , gd,t , and gf,t denote the real growth rates of the series:

                                     n          n
                         gnd,t = ln Cnd,t − ln Cnd,t−1 − (ln Pnd,t − ln Pnd,t−1 ) ,           (22)

                                       n         n
                            gs,t = ln Cs,t − ln Cs,t−1 − (ln Ps,t − ln Ps,t−1 ) ,             (23)

                                       n         n
                            gd,t = ln Ct,t − ln Dt,t−1 − (ln Pd,t − ln Pd,t−1 ) ,             (24)

                                        n         n
                             gf,t = ln If,t − ln If,t−1 − (ln Pf,t − ln Pf,t−1 ) .            (25)

   The real growth rate of non-durable and services consumption is the share-weighted growth
rates of the real component series:

                                             n                        n
                                                      !                          !
                                            Cnd,t−1                  Cs,t−1
                                gc,t =         n          gnd,t +      n             gs,t .   (26)
                                             Ct−1                    Ct−1

The real growth rate of investment is the share-weighted growth rates of the real components:

                                                                     n
                                                    !                        !
                                               n
                                             Dt−1                   If,t−1
                                   gi,t =     n         gd,t +        n          gf,t .       (27)
                                             It−1                    It−1

   The log-level real series is computed by cumulating the growth rates starting from a base of
1. To put them in levels, we exponentiate the log-levels. Then they are re-scaled so that the
real and nominal series are equal in the third quarter of 2009. The price indexes for consumption
and investment are computed as the ratios of the nominal to the real series. The relative price
of investment is the ratio of the implied price index for investment goods to the price index for
consumption goods. The average growth rate of the relative price from the period 1960:I-2007:III
is -0.00472. This implies a calibration of gεI = 1.00472.
   We compute aggregate output in a similar way. Define nominal output as the sum of the
nominal components:
                                     Ytn = Cnd,t
                                            n       n
                                                 + Cs,t + Dtn + If,t
                                                                 n
                                                                     .                        (28)




                                                          13
The growth rate of real GDP is calculated by using the share-weighted real growth rates of the
constituent series:

                            n                       n                                         n
                                     !                      !                   !                     !
                           Cnd,t−1                 Cs,t−1                  n
                                                                         Dt−1                If,t−1
                  gy,t =      n          gnd,t +     n          gs,t +     n        gd,t +      n         gf,t .   (29)
                            Yt−1                   Yt−1                  Yt−1                 Yt−1

       Then, we cumulate to get in log-levels, and exponentiate to get in levels. The price deflator
is obtained as the ratio between the nominal and real series. The average growth rate of the
price index over the period 1960:I-2007:III is 0.008675. This implies π ∗ = 1.0088 or 3.52 percent
annualized.
       Real per capita GDP is computed by subtracting from the log-level the log civilian non-
institutionalized population. The average growth rate of the resulting output per capita series
over the period is 0.005712. The standard deviation of output growth over the period is 0.0078.
The calculations above imply that gY = 1.005712 or 2.28 percent a year. Given the calibrated
                                                                                        1−φ
growth of IST from the relative price of investment data (gεI = 1.00472), we then pick gA   to
                                                                      1−φ
generate the appropriate average growth rate of output. This implies gA   = 1.0022 or a measured
TFP growing at about 1 percent per year.
       To get the parameters governing the shock processes, we proceed as follows. We first fix the
autoregressive parameters in both the neutral and MEI processes at 0.95, e.g. ρA = ρI = 0.95.
Given trend inflation of π ∗ = 1.0088, we then pick sI , sA , and sr so that our baseline model matches
the actual volatility of output growth of 0.0078 during our sample period.
       For this, we need to assign a percentage contribution of each type of shock to output fluctuations.
Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2011) find that MEI shocks account for nearly 60 percent of
output fluctuations, while TFP shocks contribute to about 25 percent. Several other studies find
that investment shocks explain a larger fraction of output fluctuations than TFP shocks (Fisher,
2006; Justiniano and Primiceri, 2008; Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti, 2010; and Altig, et
al, 2011).
       We take a conservative stand and set the percentage contribution of each type of shock to
output fluctuations as follows: 50 percent to MEI shocks, 35 percent to TFP shocks and 15 percent
to monetary policy shocks.8 With the AR(1) coefficients ρI and ρA set at 0.95, the resulting shock
variances satisfying these conditions are sI = 0.0272, sA = 0.0029 and sr = 0.0020.
   8
    Our results regarding the mean welfare costs are not significantly affected by varying the percentage contribution
of shocks in some reasonable range. Steady-state inflation costs are not affected at all. Since there is a consenseus
that monetary policy shocks explain a relatively modest percentage of output fluctuations–25 percent or less–this
leaves 75 percent or more to be split between MEI and neutral technology shocks.




                                                            14
3.3        Selected Moments

We use our benchmark model to generate a number of moments capturing key features of the
business cycle. The model is solved via second order perturbation about the non-stochastic steady
state. The moments are summarized in Table 3. The reported volatility statistics are for variables
measured in growth rates or as deviations from stochastic trends obtained using the HP filter.
         The mean value of real per capita output growth implied by the model, E(∆Y ), matches
the data at 0.0057 or 2.28 percent annualized. The volatility of output growth equals the actual
volatility by assumption. The volatility of HP-filtered log output is only slightly higher than the
actual volatility. The volatility of consumption, whether measured in growth rate or the filtered
log-level, matches the data. The volatility of investment is somewhat overestimated in the model,
but remains plausible.
         The model exactly matches the variability of inflation in the data, although this moment was
not explicitly targeted. The first-order autocorrelation of inflation predicted by the model is high
at 0.892 and close to the actual one.9 Note that the model predicts inflation is highly persistent in
spite of the fact that we abstract from wage and price indexation to past inflation. The model also
generates a positive autocorrelation of output growth, meeting the test of endogenous business-cycle
propagation proposed by Cogley and Nason (1995). Overall, the baseline model performs very well
along usual business-cycle dimensions.


4         The Welfare Costs of Trend Inflation

This section examines the normative implications of moderate trend inflation. We assess the
consumption-equivalent welfare losses of changes in trend inflation. Our analysis emphasizes the
welfare costs of raising trend inflation from 2 to 4 percent (annualized), a scenario which is consis-
tent with recent proposals to raise the inflation target.
         In our analysis, we focus on the following two statistics: i) a consumption-equivalent welfare
loss metric denoted λss conditioned on steady states and measuring how much consumption needs
to be taken away in a low inflation state for households to have the same welfare as in a high
inflation state, and ii) an equivalent metric denoted λm and conveying information conditioned on
stochastic means.10 Table 4 reports the welfare costs implied by the benchmark model, with panel
     9
   The autocorrelations of inflation implied by the model are positive at lags of 1 to 6 quarters (not reported).
    10
   To do this we include a recursive measure of aggregate welfare as an equilibrium condition and compute its
mean value under different levels of trend inflation after solving the model via a second order approximation, as in
Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2004).




                                                        15
(a) showing welfare losses computed from non-stochastic steady states while panel (b) presents
welfare losses computed from stochastic means.
   Our benchmark model predicts that increasing trend inflation from 2 to 4 percent would generate
a consumption-equivalent welfare loss of 3.7 percent conditioned on non-stochastic steady states
and 6.9 percent conditioned on stochastic means. That the welfare loss based on stochastic means
is higher than the steady state loss is consistent with the analysis in Amano, Ambler, and Rebei
(2007). It is worth pointing out that the welfare cost of increasing trend inflation is non-linear.
Based on stochastic means, the cost of doing from 0 to 2 percent trend inflation is only 3.3 percent,
whereas the cost of going from 2 to 4 percent is nearly twice as large. This non-linearity is important
when thinking about policies to raise the inflation target in light of the zero lower bound, as in
Coibion, Gorodnichenko, and Wieland (2012). While very small amounts of trend inflation might
be desirable to reduce the frequency of ZLB episodes, going from 2 to 4 percent trend inflation
would result in substantially larger welfare costs.
   The welfare costs of increasing trend inflation that we report are higher than conventionally
thought. We therefore consider different model ingredients and how they impact the costs of trend
inflation. These exercises are reported in Table 5, which is similar to Table 4 but shuts off different
model features to isolate their roles.
   Panel (i) considers the case where wages are flexible, ξw = 0. The welfare costs of increasing
trend inflation are substantially smaller with flexible wages. Based on the non-stochastic steady
state, the consumption equivalent welfare loss of going from 2 to 4 percent trend inflation is only
0.4 percent. Focusing on stochastic means, this cost is higher but still moderate at 0.6 percent.
That wage rigidity is more important than price stickiness in delivering large welfare costs of trend
inflation is consistent with Amano et al. (2009). Whereas the steady state and mean price markups
vary little with the level of trend inflation, the wage markup increases markedly with trend inflation.
This extra distortion has large effects on welfare.
   We next consider the role of trend growth. Panel (ii) of Table 5 sets the trend growth rates
of both IST and neutral productivity to zero. This results in much smaller welfare costs of trend
inflation – the cost of going from 2 to 4 percent trend inflation is 1.8 percent based on the non-
stochastic steady state and 2.1 percent based on stochastic means. Trend growth interacts with
wage stickiness to produce volatile wage dispersion and higher than average wage markups. When
trend growth is positive, households would like to adjust their wage every period. If wages are
sticky, positive trend growth forces updating households to adjust their wages more. This results in
higher average wage markups and large welfare losses. The exact source of trend growth is not all
that important. Panel (i) of Table 6 assumes that all trend growth in output comes from IST, with

                                                  16
no trend growth in neutral productivity. This results in welfare costs that are slightly higher (based
on both steady states and means) than our baseline analysis, as well as when the only source of
growth is neutral productivity, as shown in panel (ii). Nevertheless, these differences are relatively
minor.
   Panel (iii) of Table 5 considers the role of roundabout production. The absence of roundabout
production has a fairly strong impact on the welfare costs based on stochastic means – without
roundabout production, the cost of going from 2 to 4 percent trend inflation is 5.5 percent of
consumption, as opposed to 6.9 percent in our baseline analysis. The differences in welfare cost
based on the non-stochastic steady state with and without roundabout production are much smaller.
Roundabout production has two related roles in the model. First, it serves as an amplification source
for real shocks, and so shutting roundabout production off results in less overall volatility, which
tends to make an increase in trend inflation less costly. Second, roundabout production serves
as a source of strategic complementarity, with effects isomorphic to assuming stickier prices. The
welfare costs of rasing the inflation target are naturally larger the stickier are prices and/or wages.
   We also consider the roles of the different shock processes in generating welfare costs from trend
inflation. For these exercises we naturally focus on the welfare metric based on stochastic means.
Table 7 considers two different cases. In panel (i), we re-calibrate the model such that there are no
neutral productivity shocks. In doing so we target the same volatility of output growth but pick
the standard deviation of the MEI shock to account for 75 percent of the unconditional variance of
output. Here we observe that the welfare costs are substantially higher than our baseline analysis,
with the welfare cost of going from 2 to 4 percent trend inflation 8.7 percent (as opposed to 6.9
percent under our baseline calibration). In panel (ii) we shut off the MEI shock, choosing the
standard deviation of the productivity shock to generate 75 percent of the targeted variance of
output. Here the welfare cost of increasing trend inflation is substantially smaller than our baseline
analysis at 4 percent of consumption. These exercises suggest that there may be a significant
cyclical interaction between trend inflation and MEI shocks, a point to which we return below.
   Our analysis suggests that wage rigidity is the key nominal friction giving rise to large welfare
costs of trend inflation. Two key parameters influencing how wage rigidity interacts with trend
inflation are the Frisch labor supply elasticity and any indexation of wages to inflation. In our
model the inverse Frisch labor supply elasticity is given by the parameter χ. Panel (i) of Table 8
computes welfare costs of trend inflation when this parameter is set to zero, implying an infinite
Frisch elasticity and making the model isomorphic to the indivisible labor model of Rogerson (1988)
and Hansen (1985). Here we see that the welfare costs of higher trend inflation are substantially
smaller than in our baseline. The reasoning for the effect of χ on the results is straightforward.

                                                  17
As χ → 0, preferences become linear in labor. Trend inflation distorts the relative allocation of
labor across households through an effect on wage dispersion. With curvature in preferences over
labor, this misallocation can be quite costly. But if this curvature is absent, then misallocated
labor arising from wage dispersion has very modest effects on welfare.
    Panel (ii) of Table 8 considers the role of wage indexation. Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans
(2005) assume that wages and prices that cannot be reoptimized in a quarter are fully indexed to
the lagged inflation rate. In terms of driving the welfare costs of trend inflation, price indexation
is relatively unimportant, while wage indexation is critical. This should not be surprising since
wage rigidity is the key nominal friction driving our results. When wages are fully indexed to
lagged inflation, the welfare costs of trend inflation are significantly smaller than in our baseline
analysis. The use of indexation mechanisms in New Keynesian models has attracted its share
of criticism (Woodford, 2007; Cogley and Sbordone, 2008; and Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan,
2009). One line of criticism is that backward indexation lacks microfoundations. Another is that
it is at odds with the data since it implies that all wages and prices change every quarter (Bils
and Klenow, 2004; Barattieri, Basu, and Gottschalk, 2014 ). DSGE models which estimate the
degree of wage indexation typically find the indexing parameter is generally low, between 0 and 0.15
(Justiniano and Primiceri, 2008; Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti, 2010; Justiniano, Primiceri,
and Tambalotti, 2011). Our baseline results would be virtually the same with degrees of indexation
in this range.


5    The Cyclical Effects of Trend Inflation

This section analyzes the positive implications of moderate trend inflation. We begin by showing
impulse responses of key macroeconomic variables to the three shocks in the model for different
levels of trend inflation and then focus in on how different levels of trend inflation impact some
unconditional moments from the model.
    Figure 1 reports the impulse responses of several variables to a one standard deviation positive
shock to productivity for trend inflation varying between 0 and 4 percent. These impulse responses
are broadly consistent with those reported, for example, by Galı́ (1999) and Basu, Fernald, and
Kimball (2006). Trend inflation going from 0 to 4 percent has a relatively modest impact on
the responses of most variables. The main effect is that the expansionary effects of the shock
on consumption, output, and hours become somewhat stronger with trend inflation. Ascari and
Sbordone (2014) report a similar finding, showing that the expansionary effect of a productivity
improvement on output gets stronger with higher trend inflation. In contrast to their results, we

                                                 18
find that the fall in inflation is slightly smaller with higher levels of trend inflation. This arises due
to the different real and nominal frictions in our medium-scale model compared to the small-scale
model with only price rigidity on which they focus.
   The impulse responses to a monetary policy shock with different levels of trend inflation are
shown in Figure 2. As in Ascari and Sbordone (2014), a monetary policy shock has a larger
depressing effect on output at higher levels of trend inflation. The differences in the output response
for different levels of trend inflation are not particularly large in an absolute sense but the effects
of trend inflation seem somewhat stronger here compared to a productivity shock. The response of
inflation is very similar for the three different levels of trend inflation depicted in the figure.
   Figure 3 plots impulse responses of key variables to a shock to the marginal efficiency of in-
vestment for different levels of trend inflation. It is clear from the figure that trend inflation has
much larger effects on the reactions of macroeconomic variables to a MEI shock than to either the
productivity or monetary policy shocks. In particular, the response of output is significantly lower
at all forecast horizons, as are the responses of consumption and investment, for higher levels of
trend inflation. The depressing effect of trend inflation on these responses stands in contrast to
the amplifying effect of trend inflation conditional on productivity and monetary shocks. Quan-
titatively, the effects here are also very large – with four percent trend inflation, at most forecast
horizons the output response is roughly one-half its value with zero trend inflation. Inflation also
increases by more to a MEI shock for higher levels of trend inflation.
   Table 9 shows a few select second moments for the model under different levels of trend inflation.
The first panel, labeled (i), does so for our baseline parameterization. For 3.52 percent annualized
trend inflation, these moments are identical to those shown in Table 3. There are quantitatively
large effects of trend inflation on the volatilities of output and inflation. In particular, the volatility
of output is close to 20 percent lower with four percent trend inflation than with zero percent trend
inflation. This is true whether one measures volatility by focusing on the growth rate of output
(volatility goes from 0.0090 at zero trend inflation to 0.0077 at 4 percent) or on HP filtered output
(volatility goes from 0.0201 at zero trend inflation to 0.0164 at 4 percent). The volatility of inflation
rises by roughly the same percentage magnitude as trend inflation goes from 0 to 4 percent (from
0.0056 at zero trend inflation to 0.0066 at 4 percent).
   The next three panels of the table, labeled (ii)-(iv), present these moments conditional on one
shock at a time. For these exercises, we set the variances of two of the three shocks to zero, and
solve for the variance of the listed shock to generate the observed volatility of output growth of
0.0078 at 3.52 percent trend inflation. It is immediately clear that the effects of trend inflation on
volatilities in the full model are almost entirely driven by an interaction between trend inflation

                                                    19
and the MEI shock. In particular, the volatility of output conditional on productivity shocks is
roughly invariant to the level of trend inflation while it is increasing in trend inflation for monetary
shocks.11 In contrast, conditional on the MEI shock, the volatility of output sharply decreases with
trend inflation, while the volatility of inflation increases.
    Given the important role ascribed to MEI shocks in our calibration, and given their very strong
interaction with trend inflation, it is important to investigate the sensitivity of these results to
other parameters. In our baseline analysis we assume that the persistence parameter in the MEI
process is 0.95. Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2011) estimate this parameter to be much
smaller at 0.81. Figure 4 shows impulse responses to the MEI shock for different levels of trend
inflation when the persistence parameter is 0.81. On the one hand there is an important similarity
to our baseline analysis in that there is a much stronger effect of trend inflation on output and
other aggregate variables conditional on a MEI shock, but relative to Figure 3 there is a critical
difference – the responses of output and other aggregate variables to a MEI shock are larger for a
higher levels of trend inflation, not smaller.
    The second to last panel in Table 9, marked (v), computes model moments (when all three
shocks are included in the model) for the different parameterization of the persistence parameter
in the stochastic process for the marginal efficiency of investment. In contrast to our baseline
analysis, the volatility of output is increasing in the level of trend inflation when MEI shocks are
less persistent. While the effects on volatility are not as large in an absolute sense as in our baseline
analysis, they are nevertheless quantitatively non-negligible. The effects on second moments with
all shocks turned on are again almost entirely driven by the interaction between trend inflation and
MEI shocks, as can be gleaned from the last panel of the table, labeled (vi). There we see that
volatility is increasing in trend inflation conditioning only on MEI shocks, more so than the increase
in volatility when all three shocks are included in the model. Like the case when the persistence
parameter in the MEI process is 0.95, the volatility of inflation is increasing in the level of trend
inflation conditioning on MEI shocks, but the effect is not as strong as with a higher persistence
parameter.
    Given the large interaction between the persistence of the MEI process and trend inflation, it is
worthwhile to investigate how the welfare analysis from the previous section might be impacted by
assuming a lower level of persistence in the MEI process. We do this in Table 10. The persistence
  11
     Although not apparent to four decimal places, the volatility of output growth is increasing in trend inflation
conditional on productivity shocks. The volatility of HP filtered output is actually decreasing in trend inflation
conditional on productivity shocks, which is somewhat difficult to square with the impulse response functions. This
appears to be an artifact of filtering, as the volatility of the (deterministically detrended) level of output is increasing
in the level of trend inflation conditional on productivity shocks.



                                                            20
parameter in the MEI process is set to 0.81, and the standard deviations of the three shocks
are chosen to generate a standard deviation of output growth of 0.0078, with the investment shock
accounting for 50 percent of the unconditional variance of output, the productivity shock 35 percent,
and the monetary shock 15 percent, just as in our baseline analysis. We see that the consumption
equivalent welfare cost of moving from 2 to 4 percent trend inflation is 4.1 percent. This number
is quite high, but is nevertheless significantly lower than in our baseline analysis.
         What is the intuition for the “sign flip” in the effect of trend inflation on the responses to MEI
shocks for different levels of trend inflation? The MEI shock is an intertemporal demand shock,
pushing output, prices, and wages in the same direction. These features can clearly be seen in either
Figures 3 or 4. Trend inflation has the effect of making price- and wage-setting relatively more
forward-looking, for the reason that with positive trend inflation there is a heightened cost of being
stuck with a price or wage chosen today far into the future. Regardless of its persistence, price-
and wage-setters respond relatively more to the MEI shock with higher levels of trend inflation,
as evidenced by the responses of the relative reset price and reset wage for updating firms and
households in the graphs (this is also true for both the productivity and monetary shocks).12
However, when comparing Figures 3 and 4, one notices that the responses of the reset wage and
inflation rate are substantially more sensitive to the trend inflation rate when the investment shock
is more persistent. This is particular true for the reset wage response. The heightened sensitivity
of the reset wage to the MEI shock when the shock is very persistent is sufficiently strong such
that at high levels of trend inflation the average wage markup goes up, not down. This heightened
monopoly distortion dampens the responses of output and other aggregate variables to the MEI
shock. When the shock is much less persistent, while the updating firms and households do respond
more to the shock, this effect is not very strong, and on net trend inflation is expansionary.


6         Conclusion

Economists have recently debated over the desirability for the Federal Reserve and other major
central banks of the world to raise inflation targets. This debate is the result of economic pain
experienced through the Great Recession and after. It would strain credulity to deny that a
greater flexibility in lowering the nominal interest rate would have alleviated the burden of the last
recession. Ireland (2011), for instance, argues that because of the ZLB on nominal interest rates,
the Federal Reserve was prevented from stabilizing the U.S. economy as it previously did. With
    12
    The relative reset price is defined as the optimal reset price for updating firms relative to the aggregate price
level, while the reset wage is the optimal real wage for updating households.



                                                         21
the same flexibility the Federal Reserve had in previous in the two previous recessions, the last one
might have been shorter and less severe.
   But proposals to raise the inflation target are built on the premise that it would not be costly
to increase trend inflation by a moderate amount of 2 to 4 percent. Paradoxically, despite the
practical importance of this question, few efforts have been devoted prior to our study to address
this question in the context of the empirically realistic medium-scale DSGE models that central
bankers and academics use to study the macroeconomy. The evidence we have provided here offers
a comprehensive benchmark against which these costs can be gauged in future research, and serves
as a cautionary warning that the welfare costs of increasing an inflation target may be substantially
higher than many think.
   Another important side to our findings is their implications for the business cycle. For more than
three decades now since the work of Kydland and Prescott (1982) and Nelson and Plosser (1982),
macroeconomists have tried to identify the sources of business cycles. Moderate trend inflation can
have strong distorting effects conditioned on shocks to the marginal efficiency of investment. These
findings are thus complementary to those of Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2011), who
show that MEI shocks are the most important driving force behind business cycles. The strong
interaction between trend inflation and MEI shocks has been heretofore overlooked in the literature.
   Given that much recent research ascribes an important role to MEI shocks, our analysis suggests
that it is not innocuous to ignore trend inflation and that trend inflation may have larger effects
on business cycle dynamics than previously thought. We are aware of no other paper which has
explored the interaction between these shocks and trend inflation. Because there is an interesting
dependence between the persistence of these shocks and the sign of the interaction between trend
inflation and the responses of key aggregate variables to MEI shocks, we do not wish to take a stand
on which direction trend inflation affects business cycle volatility. We simply note that there is a
large interaction between trend inflation and these shocks, much larger than for either productivity
or monetary shocks. Researchers ought to take this dependence into account when evaluating the
quantitative effects and importance of these shocks.




                                                 22
References
Altig, David, Lawrence Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum, and Jesper Linde. 2011. “Firm-Specific
  Capital, Nominal Rigidities, and the Business Cycle.” Review of Economic Dynamics 14(2):225–
  247.

Amano, Robert, Steve Ambler, and Nooman Rebei. 2007. “The Macroeconomic Effects of Non-Zero
 Trend Inflation.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 39 (7):1821–1838.

Amano, Robert, Kevin Moran, Stephen Murchison, and Andrew Rennison. 2009. “Trend Inflation,
 Wage and Price Rigidities, and Productivity Growth.” Journal of Monetary Economics 56:353–
 364.

Ascari, Guido. 2004. “Staggered Prices and Trend Inflation: Some Nuisances.” Review of Economic
  Dynamics 7:642–667.

Ascari, Guido and Tiziano Ropele. 2007. “Optimal Monetary Policy under Low Trend Inflation.”
  Journal of Monetary Economics 54:2568–2583.

Ascari, Guido and Argia M. Sbordone. 2014. “The Macroeconomics of Trend Inflation.” Journal
  of Economic Literature 52(3):679–739.

Ball, Laurence. 2013. “The Case for Four Percent Inflation.” Central Bank Review 13 (2):17–31.
  Research and Monetary Policy Department, Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey.

Barattieri, Alessandro, Susanto Basu, and Peter Gottschalk. 2014. “Some Evidence on the Impor-
  tance of Sticky Wages.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 6(1):70–101.

Basu, Susanto. 1995. “Intermediate Goods and Business Cycles: Implications for Productivity and
  Welfare.” American Economic Review 85(3):512–531.

Basu, Susanto, John Fernald, and Miles Kimball. 2006. “Are Technology Improvements Contrac-
  tionary?” American Economic Review 96(5):1418–1448.

Basu, Susanto and Miles Kimball. 1997. “Cyclical Productivity with Unobserved Input Variation.”
  NBER Working Paper 5915.

Basu, Susanto and Alan M. Taylor. 1999a. “Business Cycles in International Historical Perspective.”
  NBER Working Paper No. 7090.

———. 1999b. “Business Cycles in International Historical Perspective.” Journal of Economic
 Perspectives 13(2):45–68.

Bils, Mark and Peter J. Klenow. 2004. “Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices.”
  Journal of Political Economy 112(5):947–985.

Blanchard, Olivier, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, and Paolo Mauro. 2010. “Rethinking Macroeconomic
  Policy.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 42(s1):199–215.

Calvo, Guillermo A. 1983. “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximising Framework.” Journal of
  Monetary Economics 12:383–398.

Chari, V. V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan. 2007. “Business Cycle Accounting.”
 Econometrica 75(3):781–836.

                                                23
———. 2009. “New Keynesian Models: Not Yet Useful for Policy Analysis.” American Economic
 Journal: Macroeconomics 1(1):242–266.

Cho, Jang-Ok, Thomas F. Cooley, and Louis Phaneuf. 1997. “The Welfare Cost of Nominal Wage
 Contracting.” Review of Economic Studies 64(3):465–484.

Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans. 2005. “Nominal Rigidities and
 the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy.” Journal of Political Economy 113 (1):1–45.

Cogley, T. and J. N. Nason. 1995. “Output Dynamics in Real-Business-Cycle Models.” American
  Economic Review 85:492–511.

Cogley, Timothy and Argia M. Sbordone. 2008. “Trend Inflation, Indexation and Inflation Persis-
  tence in the New Keynesian Phillips Curve.” American Economic Review 98 (5):2101–2126.

Coibion, Olivier and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2011. “Monetary Policy, Trend Inflation and the Great
  Moderation: An Alternative Interpretation.” American Economic Review 101 (1):341–370.

Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Johannes F. Wieland. 2012. “The Optimal Inflation
  Rate in New Keynesian Models: Should Central Banks Raise their Inflation Targets in Light of
  the ZLB?” The Review of Economic Studies 79:1371–1406.

Dotsey, Michael and Robert G. King. 2006. “Pricing, Production, and Persistence.” Journal of the
 European Economic Association 4(5):893–928.

Erceg, Christopher J., Dale W. Henderson, and Andrew T. Levin. 2000. “Optimal Monetary Policy
  with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts.” Journal of Monetary Economics 46:281–313.

Fisher, Jonas. 2006. “The Dynamic Effects of Neutral and Investment-Specific Technology Shocks.”
  Journal of Political Economy 114(3):413–451.

Galı́, Jordi. 1999. “Technology, Employment, and the Business Cycle: Do Technology Shocks
 Explain Aggregate Fluctuations?” American Economic Review 89(1):249–271.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Per Krusell. 1997. “Long-Run Implications of Investment-
  Specific Tehnological Change.” American Economic Review 87(3):342–362.

Hanes, Christopher. 1996. “Changes in the Cyclical Behavior of Real Wage Rates, 1870-1990.”
 Journal of Economic History 56(4):837–861.

———. 1999. “Degrees of Processing and Changes in the Cyclical Behavior of Prices in the United
 States, 1869-1990.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 31(1):35–53.

Hansen, Gary D. 1985. “Indivisible Labor and the Business Cycle.” Journal of Monetary Economics
 16:309–327.

Hornstein, Andreas and Alexander L. Wolman. 2005. “Trend Inflation, Firm-Specific Capital and
 Sticky Prices.” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly Review 91:57–83.

Huang, Kevin X.D., Zheng Liu, and Louis Phaneuf. 2004. “Why Does the Cyclical Behavior of
 Real Wages Change Over Time?” American Economic Review 94(4):836–856.

Ireland, Peter N. 2011. “A New Keynesian Perspective on the Great Recession.” Journal of Money,
   Credit, and Banking 43(1):31–54.


                                              24
Justiniano, Alejandro and Giorgio Primiceri. 2008. “The Time Varying Volatility of Macroeconomic
  Fluctuations.” American Economic Review 98(3):604–641.

Justiniano, Alejandro, Giorgio Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti. 2010. “Investment Shocks and
  Business Cycles.” Journal of Monetary Economics 57(2):132–145.

———. 2011. “Investment Shocks and the Relative Price of Investment.” Review of Economic
 Dynamics 14(1):101–121.

Kiley, Michael T. 2007. “Is Moderate-To-High Inflation Inherently Unstable?”       International
  Journal of Central Banking 3 (2):173–201.

Krugman, Paul. 2014. “Inflation Targets Reconsidered.” Draft paper for ECB Sintra Conference.

Kydland, Finn E. and Edward C. Prescott. 1982. “Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations.”
 Econometrica 50(6):1345–1370.

Levin, Andrew and Tack Yun. 2007. “Reconsidering the Natural Rate Hypothesis in a New Key-
  nesian Framework.” Journal of Monetary Economics 54 (5):1344–1365.

Liu, Zheng and Louis Phaneuf. 2007. “Technology Shocks and Labor Market Dynamics: Some
  Evidence and Theory.” Journal of Monetary Economics 54(8):2534–2553.

Nakamura, Emi and Jon Steinsson. 2010. “Monetary Non-Neutrality in a Multi-Sector Menu Cost
 Model.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (3):961–1013.

Nelson, Charles and Charles Plosser. 1982. “Trends and Random Walks in Macroeconomic Time
  Series: Some Evidence and Implications.” Journal of Monetary Economics 10(2):139–162.

Rogerson, Richard. 1988. “Indivisible Labor, Lotteries, and Equilibrium.” Journal of Monetary
  Economics 21(1):3–16.

Rotemberg, Julio J. and Michael Woodford. 1997. “An Optimization-Based Econometric Frame-
  work for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997, edited by
  Julio J. Rotemberg and B. S. Bernanke. Cambridge, MA, The MIT Press, 297–346.

Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie and Martin Uribe. 2004. “Solving Dynamic General Equilibrium Models
  Using a Second Order Approximation to the Policy Function.” Journal of Economic Dynamics
  and Control 28:755–775.

Smets, Frank and Raf Wouters. 2007. “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A Bayesian
  DSGE Approach.” American Economic Review 97 (3):586–606.

Woodford, Michael. 2007. “Interpreting Inflation Persistence: Comments on the Conference ‘Quan-
 titative Evidence on Price Determination’.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 39(2):203–
 210.




                                              25
                                           Table 1: Non-Shock Parameters

                                   β       δ        α        η       χ        b     κ       γ2
                                   0.99    0.025    1/3      6       1        0.8   3       0.05
                                   θ       σ        ξp       ξw      φ        ρi    απ      αy
                                   6       6        0.66     0.66    0.61     0.8   1.5     0.2

Note: this table gives the baseline values of the parameters unrelated to the stochastic processes used in our quantitative
simulations.




                                               Table 2: Shock Parameters

                           gA             gεI       ρr      sr       ρI       sI          ρA       sA
                           1.00221−φ      1.0047    0       0.0020   0.95     0.0272      0.95     0.0029

Note: this table gives the baseline values of the parameters of the stochastic processes used in our quantitative simulations.
The trend growth rate of the IST process is chosen to match the average growth rate of the relative price of investment goods
in the data. The trend growth growth of the neutral productivity processes is chosen to match the average growth rate of
output observed in the sample conditional on the growth rate of the IST process. Given the assumed values of autoregressive
parameters governing the stochastic processes, the shock standard deviations are chosen to match the observed volatility of
output growth in the data, with the MEI shock accounting for 50 percent of the variance of output growth, the neutral shock
35 percent, and the monetary shock 15 percent.




                                                    Table 3: Moments


           E(∆Y )       σ(∆Y )      σ(∆I)        σ(∆C)        σ(Y hp )      σ(I hp )      σ(C hp )    σ(π)       ρ1 (π)    ρ1 (∆Y )
 Model     0.0057       0.0078      0.0247       0.0045       0.0169        0.0555        0.0089      0.0064     0.892     0.715
 Data      (0.0057)     (0.0078)    (0.0202)     (0.0047)     (0.0162)      (0.0386)      (0.0086)    (0.0064)   (0.907)   (0.363)

Note: this table shows selected moments generated from the baseline model. These moments are generated using the parameter
values shown in the tables above with annualized trend inflation of 3.52 percent. “σ” denotes standard deviation, “∆” refers to
the first difference operator, ρ1 is a first order autocorrelation coefficient, and a superscript “hp” stands for the HP detrended
component of a series using smoothing parameter of 1600. The variables Y , I, and C are the natural logs of these series; π is
quarter-over-quarter inflation. Moments in the data are computed on the sample 1960q1-2007q3 and are shown in parentheses.




                                                                26
                                    Table 4: Welfare Effects of Trend Inflation

                                                       π∗        1.00→     1.02→     1.0352→
                                (a) Steady States
                                                       1.0000       0       n/a         n/a
                                                       1.0200    0.0171       0         n/a
                                                       1.0352    0.0424    0.0258         0
                                                       1.0400    0.0534    0.0370      0.0115
                                (b) Means
                                                       1.0000       0       n/a         n/a
                                                       1.0200    0.0336       0         n/a
                                                       1.0352    0.0802    0.0482         0
                                                       1.0400    0.1003    0.0690      0.0219

 Note: this table shows consumption equivalent welfare losses from increasing the trend inflation rate using the benchmark
parameterization of our model. Panels marked (a) show losses based on the non-stochastic steady state, while panels marked
(b) present losses based on stochastic means. A number in the table has the interpretation as the fraction of consumption the
representative household would be willing to give up to avoid changing the trend inflation rate from the level in the columns to
the level shown in the rows.




                                                                27
            Table 5: Welfare Effects of Trend Inflation, Alternative Model Specifications

                                                                     π∗        1.00→     1.02→      1.0352→
                 (i) Flexible wages
                                              (a) Steady States
                                                                     1.0000       0       n/a         n/a
                                                                     1.0200    0.0006       0         n/a
                                                                     1.0352    0.0034    0.0029         0
                                                                     1.0400    0.0049    0.0043      0.0014
                                              (b) Means
                                                                     1.0000       0       n/a         n/a
                                                                     1.0200    0.0020       0         n/a
                                                                     1.0352    0.0063    0.0044         0
                                                                     1.0400    0.0083    0.0063      0.0020
                 (ii) No trend growth
                                              (a) Steady States
                                                                     1.0000       0       n/a         n/a
                                                                     1.0200    0.0052       0         n/a
                                                                     1.0352    0.0176    0.0125         0
                                                                     1.0400    0.0235    0.0183      0.0060
                                              (b) Means
                                                                     1.0000       0       n/a         n/a
                                                                     1.0200    0.0068       0         n/a
                                                                     1.0352    0.0211    0.0144         0
                                                                     1.0400    0.0278    0.0211      0.0068
                 (iii) No RP
                                              (a) Steady States
                                                                     1.0000       0       n/a         n/a
                                                                     1.0200    0.0167       0         n/a
                                                                     1.0352    0.0404    0.0241         0
                                                                     1.0400    0.0506    0.0345      0.0106
                                              (b) Means
                                                                     1.0000       0       n/a         n/a
                                                                     1.0200    0.0276       0         n/a
                                                                     1.0352    0.0652    0.0386         0
                                                                     1.0400    0.0814    0.0553      0.0173
                 (iv) Only Sticky Wages
                                              (a) Steady States
                                                                     1.0000       0       n/a         n/a
                                                                     1.0200    0.0047       0         n/a
                                                                     1.0352    0.0142    0.0096         0
                                                                     1.0400    0.0187    0.0141      0.0045
                                              (b) Means
                                                                     1.0000       0       n/a         n/a
                                                                     1.0200    0.0093       0         n/a
                                                                     1.0352    0.0244    0.0152         0
                                                                     1.0400    0.0312    0.0221      0.0069

Note: this table presents consumption equivalent welfare losses from higher trend inflation under four different deviations from
the benchmark model: flexible wages, ξw = 0, in panel (i); no trend growth in panel (ii); no roundabout production, φ = 0,
in panel (ii); and no trend growth, flexible prices, and no roundabout production in panel (iv). The rows and columns are
organized in the same manner as Table 4.




                                                              28
                  Table 6: Welfare Effects of Trend Inflation, Sources of Trend Growth

                                                                   π∗       1.00→     1.02→     1.0352→
                     (i) Only IST
                                           (a) Steady States
                                                                   1.0000      0       n/a        n/a
                                                                   1.0200   0.0171       0        n/a
                                                                   1.0352   0.0426    0.0259        0
                                                                   1.0400   0.0536    0.0371     0.0115
                                           (b) Means
                                                                   1.0000      0       n/a        n/a
                                                                   1.0200   0.0347       0        n/a
                                                                   1.0352   0.0830    0.0501        0
                                                                   1.0400   0.1040    0.0718     0.0229
                     (ii) Only Neutral
                                           (a) Steady States
                                                                   1.0000      0       n/a        n/a
                                                                   1.0200   0.0170       0        n/a
                                                                   1.0352   0.0423    0.0258        0
                                                                   1.0400   0.0533    0.0369     0.0115
                                           (b) Means
                                                                   1.0000      0       n/a        n/a
                                                                   1.0200   0.0327       0        n/a
                                                                   1.0352   0.0779    0.0467        0
                                                                   1.0400   0.0974    0.0669     0.0212

Note: this table presents consumption equivalent welfare losses from higher trend inflation under two different sources of trend
growth: in panel (i) trend growth only comes from investment-specific technological change (IST), whereas in panel (ii) trend
output growth results solely from neutral productivity. The rows and columns are organized in the same manner as Table 4.




                         Table 7: Welfare Effects of Trend Inflation, Shock Sources

                                                              π∗        1.00→      1.02→     1.0352→
                        (i) No Neutral Shocks
                                                   Means
                                                              1.0000       0        n/a         n/a
                                                              1.0200    0.0429        0         n/a
                                                              1.0352    0.1010     0.0607         0
                                                              1.0400    0.1259     0.0868      0.0278
                        (ii) No MEI Shocks
                                                   Means
                                                              1.0000       0        n/a         n/a
                                                              1.0200    0.0187        0         n/a
                                                              1.0352    0.0461     0.0279         0
                                                              1.0400    0.0580     0.0400      0.0124

Note: this table presents consumption equivalent welfare losses from higher trend inflation when different shocks are absent.
In panel (i), we report losses when there are no neutral productivity shocks, re-calibrating the magnitudes of the MEI and
monetary shocks to jointly match the observed volatility of output growth, with the MEI shock accounting for 75 percent of
the variance of output growth and the monetary shock 25 percent. In panel (ii), we shut the MEI shock off and re-calibrate the
standard deviations of the neutral productivity and monetary shock to match the observed volatility of output growth, with
the neutral shock accounting for 75 percent of the variance of output growth and the monetary shock the remainder. Since the
steady state welfare losses are independent of the magnitudes of the shocks, these are not reported in this table. The rows and
columns are otherwise organized in the same manner as Table 4.


                                                              29
     Table 8: Welfare Effects of Trend Inflation, Labor Supply Elasticity and Wage Indexation

                                                                      π∗         1.00→     1.02→     1.0352→
                (i) Infinite Frisch elasticity
                                                 (a) Steady States
                                                                      1.0000        0         0          0
                                                                      1.0200     0.0028       0          0
                                                                      1.0352     0.0084    0.0056        0
                                                                      1.0400     0.0109    0.0081     0.0025
                                                 (b) Means
                                                                      1.0000        0         0          0
                                                                      1.0200     0.0045       0          0
                                                                      1.0352     0.0118    0.0074        0
                                                                      1.0400     0.0150    0.0106     0.0032
                (ii) Full Wage Indexation
                                                 (a) Steady States
                                                                      1.0000        0         0          0
                                                                      1.0200     0.0006       0          0
                                                                      1.0352     0.0034    0.0029        0
                                                                      1.0400     0.0049    0.0043     0.0014
                                                 (b) Means
                                                                      1.0000        0         0          0
                                                                      1.0200     0.0019       0          0
                                                                      1.0352     0.0062    0.0043        0
                                                                      1.0400     0.0082    0.0063     0.0020

 Note: this table presents consumption equivalent welfare losses (both in terms of the steady state state as well as stochastic
means) under two deviations from our benchmark parameterization: an infinite Frisch labor supply elasticity, χ = 0, in panel
(i), and full wage indexation to lagged inflation in panel (ii). The rows and columns are organized in the same manner as Table
4.




                                                              30
                                  Table 9: Trend Inflation and Model Moments

                     Specification                                  π∗        σ(∆Y )     σ(Y hp )   σ(π)
                     (i) Baseline                                   1.0000    0.0090     0.0201     0.0056
                                                                    1.0200    0.0084     0.0184     0.0060
                                                                    1.0352    0.0078     0.0169     0.0064
                                                                    1.0400    0.0077     0.0164     0.0066

                     (ii) Only Productivity Shocks                  1.0000    0.0078     0.0191     0.0039
                                                                    1.0200    0.0078     0.0189     0.0037
                                                                    1.0352    0.0078     0.0188     0.0036
                                                                    1.0400    0.0078     0.0187     0.0035

                     (iii) Only MEI Shocks                          1.0000    0.0101     0.0218     0.0070
                                                                    1.0200    0.0089     0.0185     0.0077
                                                                    1.0352    0.0078     0.0155     0.0084
                                                                    1.0400    0.0074     0.0144     0.0087

                     (iv) Only Monetary Shocks                      1.0000    0.0075     0.0156     0.0030
                                                                    1.0200    0.0076     0.0159     0.0030
                                                                    1.0352    0.0078     0.0163     0.0030
                                                                    1.0400    0.0079     0.0164     0.0031

                     (v) All Shocks, Less Persistent MEI            1.0000    0.0075     0.0171     0.0030
                                                                    1.0200    0.0076     0.0173     0.0030
                                                                    1.0352    0.0078     0.0175     0.0029
                                                                    1.0400    0.0079     0.0176     0.0029

                     (vi) Only MEI Shocks, Less Persistent          1.0000    0.0073     0.0160     0.0021
                                                                    1.0200    0.0076     0.0164     0.0022
                                                                    1.0352    0.0078     0.0169     0.0024
                                                                    1.0400    0.0079     0.0171     0.0024

Note: this table shows selected moments generated from the model for different levels of trend inflation. These moments are
generated using the parameter values shown in the tables above with annualized trend inflation of 3.52 percent. “σ” denotes
standard deviation, “∆” refers to the first difference operator, and a superscript “hp” stands for the HP detrended component of
a series using smoothing parameter of 1600. The panel labeled “Baseline” is parameterized in our baseline specification. In the
remaining panels the parameters of the shock processes are re-calibrated as indicated. In all of these specifications the relevant
shock standard deviations are chosen to generate volatility of output growth of 0.0078 when annualized gross trend inflation is
π ∗ = 1.0352. For example, in the “Only Productivity Shocks” panel the standard deviations of the MEI and monetary shocks
are set to zero, and the standard deviation of the productivity shock is chosen to generate volatility of output growth of 0.0078
when π ∗ = 1.0352. In the panels labeled “Less Persistent MEI” we set ρI = 0.81 instead of 0.95.




                                                               31
             Table 10: Welfare Effects of Trend Inflation, Less Persistence in MEI Process

                                                 π∗         1.00→     1.02→     1.0352→
                                       Means
                                                 1.0000        0       n/a         n/a
                                                 1.0200     0.0194       0         n/a
                                                 1.0352     0.0477    0.0289         0
                                                 1.0400     0.0600    0.0414      0.0129

Note: this table shows consumption equivalent welfare losses from increasing the trend inflation rate using the the alternative
parameterization of the model in which the persistence parameter of the MEI shock process is 0.81 instead of 0.95. The table is
otherwise structured similar to Table 4, although we only show welfare losses based on stochastic means because the parameters
of the shock processes are irrelevant for the welfare losses based on the non-stochastic steady state.




                                                               32
                                     Figure 1: Impulse Responses to Neutral Prod. Shock

                              Output                                      Cons.                                       Invs.
       0.015                                        0.01                                        0.03

        0.01                                                                                    0.02
                                                   0.005
       0.005                                                                                    0.01

           0                                          0                                           0
               0        5       10       15   20           0        5       10       15   20           0        5      10       15   20
                   −3                                          −3
               x 10           Hours                        x 10          Inflation                                  Real Wage
           5                                          0                                         0.01

           0
                                                     −1                                        0.005
          −5

        −10                                          −2                                           0
               0        5       10       15   20           0        5       10       15   20           0        5      10       15   20
                   −3                                          −3                                          −3
               x 10          Price MU                      x 10         Wage MU                        x 10 Relative Reset Price
           4                                          0                                           0

           2                                         −2                                          −1

           0                                         −4                                          −2

          −2                                         −6                                          −3
               0        5       10       15   20           0        5       10       15   20           0        5      10       15   20
                   −3                                          −4                                          −3
               x 10         Reset Wage                     x 10         Price Disp                     x 10         Wage Disp
           8                                          2                                           5

           6                                          0
                                                                                                  0
           4                                         −2

           2                                         −4                                          −5
               0        5       10       15   20           0        5       10       15   20           0        5      10       15   20

                                                                             π*=1.00
                                                                             π*=1.02
                                                                             π*=1.04


Note: this figures plots the average impulse responses to a neutral productivity shock using our baseline parameterization for
the three different levels of trend inflation indicated in the legend. “Price MU” and “Wage MU” stand for the average price and
wage markups, respectively, while “Price Disp” and “Wage Disp” stand for price and wage dispersion, respectively. “Relative
Reset Price” and “Reset Wage” are the optimal reset price relative to the aggregate price level and the optimal real wage for
updating price- and wage-setters, respectively.




                                                                         33
                                     Figure 2: Impulse Responses to Monetary Shock

               −3         Output                           −3         Cons.                                      Invs.
            x 10                                       x 10
        0                                         0                                            0

       −2                                         −1                                       −0.005

       −4                                         −2                                        −0.01

       −6                                         −3                                       −0.015
         0          5       10       15   20        0           5       10       15   20        0          5       10      15    20
               −3         Hours                            −4        Inflation                        −4       Real Wage
            x 10                                       x 10                                     x 10
        2                                         5                                           −4

        0                                         0                                           −6

       −2                                         −5                                          −8

       −4                                        −10                                         −10
         0          5       10       15   20        0           5       10       15   20        0          5       10      15    20
               −4        Price MU                                   Wage MU                           −3Relative   Reset Price
            x 10                                                                                   x 10
        5                                      0.015                                           1

                                                0.01                                           0
        0
                                               0.005                                          −1

       −5                                         0                                           −2
         0          5       10       15   20           0        5       10       15   20        0          5       10      15    20
               −3       Reset Wage                         −4       Price Disp                        −3       Wage Disp
            x 10                                       x 10                                        x 10
        0                                         2                                            5

                                                                                               0
       −2                                         0
                                                                                              −5

       −4                                         −2                                         −10
         0          5       10       15   20        0           5       10       15   20        0          5       10      15    20
                                                                         π*=1.00
                                                                         π*=1.02
                                                                         π*=1.04


Note: this figures plots the average impulse responses to a monetary shock using our baseline parameterization for the three
different levels of trend inflation indicated in the legend. “Price MU” and “Wage MU” stand for the average price and wage
markups, respectively, while “Price Disp” and “Wage Disp” stand for price and wage dispersion, respectively. “Relative Reset
Price” and “Reset Wage” are the optimal reset price relative to the aggregate price level and the optimal real wage for updating
price- and wage-setters, respectively.




                                                                        34
                                          Figure 3: Impulse Responses to MEI Shock

                              Output                        −3         Cons.                                      Invs.
                                                        x 10
       0.015                                       10                                         0.06

        0.01                                       5                                          0.04

       0.005                                       0                                          0.02

           0                                       −5                                           0
               0        5       10       15   20     0           5       10        15   20           0      5         10     15     20
                              Hours                         −3        Inflation                                 Real Wage
                                                        x 10
        0.01                                       3                                          0.01

                                                   2
       0.005                                                                                 0.005
                                                   1

           0                                       0                                            0
               0        5       10       15   20        0        5       10        15   20           0      5         10     15     20
                   −3        Price MU                       −3       Wage MU                             −3Relative   Reset Price
               x 10                                     x 10                                         x 10
           0                                       5                                            6

         −0.5                                                                                   4
                                                   0
          −1                                                                                    2

         −1.5                                      −5                                           0
             0          5       10       15   20     0           5       10        15   20           0      5         10     15     20
                            Reset Wage                      −4       Price Disp                                 Wage Disp
                                                        x 10
       0.015                                       10                                         0.03

                                                   5                                          0.02
        0.01
                                                   0                                          0.01

       0.005                                       −5                                           0
            0           5       10       15   20     0           5       10        15   20           0      5         10     15     20
                                                                               *
                                                                              π =1.00
                                                                              π*=1.02
                                                                              π*=1.04


Note: this figures plots the average impulse responses to a MEI shock using our baseline parameterization for the three different
levels of trend inflation indicated in the legend. “Price MU” and “Wage MU” stand for the average price and wage markups,
respectively, while “Price Disp” and “Wage Disp” stand for price and wage dispersion, respectively. “Relative Reset Price” and
“Reset Wage” are the optimal reset price relative to the aggregate price level and the optimal real wage for updating price- and
wage-setters, respectively.




                                                                      35
                              Figure 4: Impulse Responses to MEI Shock, Less Persistence
                                                                −3
                              Output                        x 10           Cons.                                      Invs.
        0.01                                           6                                        0.03

                                                       4                                        0.02
       0.005
                                                       2                                        0.01

           0                                           0                                          0
               0        5       10       15   20            0        5       10       15   20          0        5      10       15   20
                   −3                                           −4                                         −3
               x 10           Hours                         x 10          Inflation                    x 10         Real Wage
          10                                          10                                          3

           5                                           5                                          2

           0                                           0                                          1

          −5                                          −5                                          0
               0        5       10       15   20            0        5       10       15   20          0        5      10       15   20
                   −4                                                                                      −3
               x 10          Price MU                                    Wage MU                       x 10 Relative Reset Price
           5                                           0                                          2

           0                                                                                      1
                                                   −0.005
          −5                                                                                      0

         −10                                        −0.01                                        −1
               0        5       10       15   20            0        5       10       15   20          0        5      10       15   20
                   −3                                           −4                                         −3
               x 10         Reset Wage                      x 10         Price Disp                    x 10         Wage Disp
           4                                           2                                         10

           3                                                                                      5
                                                       0
           2                                                                                      0

           1                                          −2                                         −5
               0        5       10       15   20            0        5       10       15   20          0        5      10       15   20
                                                                                  *
                                                                               π =1.00
                                                                               π*=1.02
                                                                               π*=1.04



Note: this figures plots the average impulse responses to a nMEI shock assuming an AR parameter of ρA = 0.81. The other
parameters are set at their baseline values and we report responses for three different levels of trend inflation as indicated in the
legend. The standard deviations of the three shocks have been re-chosen to hit observed output growth volatility and match
the 50-35-15 variance share split as described in the text. “Price MU” and “Wage MU” stand for the average price and wage
markups, respectively, while “Price Disp” and “Wage Disp” stand for price and wage dispersion, respectively. “Relative Reset
Price” and “Reset Wage” are the optimal reset price relative to the aggregate price level and the optimal real wage for updating
price- and wage-setters, respectively.




                                                                          36
A     The Model
A.1     Households
For the household problem, the optimality conditions over non-labor choices, which will be the
same for all households, are:

                                                            1               βb
                                            λrt =                  − Et            ,                                                            (A1)
                                                        Ct − bCt−1      Ct+1 − bCt

                                                                          a0 (Zt )
                                                               rtk =                 ,                                                          (A2)
                                                                           εI,τ
                                                                            t
                                                                                                                                    2
                                       It                      It                                                It+1        It+1
                                                                                                                 
       λrt = µt εI,τ
                 t ϑt 1 − S                       − S0                    + βEt µt+1 εI,τ
                                                                                      t+1 ϑt+1 S
                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                         ,      (A3)
                                      It−1                    It−1                                                It          It
                                                                                         !
                                                                          a(Zt+1 )
                           µt =   βEt λrt+1           k
                                                     rt+1 Zt+1       −                       + β(1 − δ)Et µt+1 ,                                (A4)
                                                                              εI,τ
                                                                               t+1
                                                                              −1
                                                    λrt = βEt λrt+1 (1 + it )πt+1 .                                                             (A5)

For the above equations, λt is the multiplier on the flow budget constraint and µt is the multiplier
on the accumulation equation. We write the optimality conditions in terms of λrt ≡ λt Pt so that
this multiplier can be interpreted as the marginal value of an extra good, as opposed to an extra
                                                  Rtk                          Wt (i)                                                 Pt
dollar. Similarly, we define rtk ≡                Pt    and wt (i) ≡            Pt        as real factor prices. πt ≡                Pt−1    is gross
inflation.
    The reset wage is determined by the following first-order condition:

                                                                       σ f1,t
                                                           wt∗ =                .                                                               (A6)
                                                                     σ − 1 f2,t

    The terms f1,t and f2,t can be written recursively as:
                                    σ(1+χ)                                                        ∗      σ(1+χ)
                          wt                                                                       w
                            
                f1,t   =η                           L1+χ
                                                     t     + βξw Et (πt+1 )              σ(1+χ)      t+1
                                                                                                                        f1,t+1 ,                (A7)
                          wt∗                                                                        wt∗
and                                                 σ                                          ∗      σ
                                              wt                                                w
                                          
                                                                                                  t+1
                           f2,t =   λrt                  Lt + βξw Et (πt+1 )             σ−1
                                                                                                             f2,t+1 .                           (A8)
                                              wt∗                                                 wt∗



A.2     Firms
Regardless of whether a firm can re-optimize its price, it will always choose inputs so as to minimize
cost, subject to the constraint of meeting demand at its price. The cost-minimization problem of
a typical firm is:
                                            min          Pt Γt (j) + Rtk K
                                                                         ct + Wt Lt (j),                                                        (A9)

    subject to the constraint,

                                                                         37
                                                                                                     −θ
                                                                                            Pt (j)
                                                                    1−φ               
                                         φ       ct (j)α Lt (j)1−α
                            At Γt (j)            K                           − Υt F ≥                      Xt .               (A10)
                                                                                             Pt
It would be straightforward to show that all firms will hire capital services and labor in the same
ratio, which will also equal the aggregate ratio. Similarly, all firms will hire capital services and
intermediate inputs in the same ratio. Together, this means that all firms will have the same real
marginal cost, mct . The factor demands can be written:

                                                                           mct
                                        Lt (j) = (1 − α)(1 − φ)                (Xt (j) + Υt F ) ,                             (A11)
                                                                           wt

                                             ct (j) = α(1 − φ)        mct
                                             K                            (Xt (j) + Υt F ) ,                                  (A12)
                                                                      rtk
                                                    Γt (j) = φmct (Xt (j) + Υt F ) .                                          (A13)

       Firms given the opportunity to adjust their price in period t will do so to maximize the expected
present discounted value of profits, where discounting is the usual stochastic discount factor of the
household as well as ξps , since this is the probability that a price chosen in period t will still be in
                                                                                                                        Pt∗
effect in period t + s. All updating firms will choose the same reset price. Let p∗t ≡                                  Pt    be the
optimal reset price relative to the aggregate price index. The optimal pricing condition can be
written:
                                                                       θ x1,t
                                                             p∗t =              .                                             (A14)
                                                                     θ − 1 x2,t
The auxiliary variables x1,t and x2,t can be written recursively:

                                             x1,t = λrt mct Xt + βξp Et (πt+1 )θ x1,t+1 ,                                     (A15)

                                             x2,t = λrt Xt + βξp Et (πt+1 )θ−1 x1,t+1 .                                       (A16)

A.3          Aggregation
Given properties of Calvo (1983) price- and wage-setting, aggregate inflation and the real wage
evolve according to:
                                                  1 = ξp (πt )θ−1 + (1 − ξp ) (p∗t )1−θ ,                                     (A17)
                                                                    1−σ
                                                             wt−1
                                                         
                                    wt1−σ         = ξw                     + (1 − ξw ) (wt∗ )1−σ .                            (A18)
                                                              πt
                                                                                                                  Z 1
       Market-clearing for capital services, labor, and intermediate inputs requires that                               K
                                                                                                                        ct (j)dj =
       Z 1                         Z 1                                                                             0

K
ct ,         Lt (j)dj = Lt , and         Γt (j)dj = Γt . This means that aggregate gross output can be written:
        0                           0

                                                                              1−φ
                                              st Xt = At Γφt K
                                                             cα L1−α
                                                              t t                     − Υt F,                                 (A19)




                                                                      38
where st is a price dispersion variable that can be written recursively:

                                   st = (1 − ξp ) (p∗t )−θ + ξp (πt )θ st−1 .                    (A20)

Using the market-clearing conditions, the aggregate factor demands can be written:

                                                          mct
                                 Lt = (1 − α)(1 − φ)          (st Xt + Υt F ) ,                  (A21)
                                                          wt

                                   ct = α(1 − φ)     mct
                                   K                     (st Xt + Υt F ) ,                       (A22)
                                                     rtk
                                        Γt = φmct (st Xt + Υt F ) .                              (A23)

Aggregate net output, Yt , is gross output minus intermediate input:

                                                Yt = Xt − Γt .                                   (A24)

Integrating over household budget constraints yields the aggregate resource constraint:

                                                             a(Zt )Kt
                                         Yt = Ct + It +                  .                       (A25)
                                                                εI,τ
                                                                 t

We can define aggregate welfare using a utilitarian social welfare function as the integral over
household welfare:                                   Z 1
                                             Wt =          Vt (i)di,                             (A26)
                                                      0
where:
                                                            Lt (i)1+χ
                         Vt (i) = ln (Ct − bCt−1 ) − η                + βEt Vt+1 (i).            (A27)
                                                             1+χ
Integrating across households, and making use of the demand for labor of type i, (4), we can write
aggregate welfare in terms of aggregate variables only:

                                                               L1+χ
                                                                t
                              Wt = ln (Ct − bCt−1 ) −ηv w
                                                        t           +βE t Wt+1 ,                 (A28)
                                                               1+χ

where vtw is a wage dispersion variable that can be written recursively in terms of aggregate variables
only:
                                                σ(1+χ)                       σ(1+χ)
                                          wt                          wt πt
                                                                 
                        vtw   = (1 − ξw )                  + ξw                          w
                                                                                        vt−1 .   (A29)
                                          wt∗                         wt−1
The last expression summarizes the different factors that may affect wage dispersion, and thus the
welfare costs of long-run inflation.


B       Full Set of Stationarized Equilibrium Conditions
Output, consumption, investment, intermediate inputs, and the real wage will all grow at the rate
of this trend factor on a balanced growth path: gY = gI = gΓ = gw = gΥ . Given the source of

                                                      39
                                                                              Υt
trend growth in the model is deterministic, gΥ =                             Υt−1 ,         it will be the same for any two adjacent
periods. For these variables, the transformation                           et ≡ m
                                                                           m     Υt
                                                                                   t
                                                                                             will be stationary. The capital stock will
                                                                    ft ≡                                              Kt
grow faster due to growth in investment-specific productivity, with K                                                          being stationary.
                                                                                                                     Υt εI,τ
                                                                                                                         t
The stationary rental rate on capital will be retk ≡ rtk εI,τ
                                                          t , and the stationary transformation of the
                              e r ≡ λr Υt . Given our specification of preferences, labor hours will
marginal utility of income is λ t    t
be stationary, as will real marginal cost and capital utilization. The inflation rate and the relative
reset price will also be stationary. The full set of equilibrium conditions re-written in stationary
terms are as follows.

                                          er =                    1                               βb
                                          λ t                   −1 e
                                                                               − Et                                                          (A30)
                                                      Cet −   bgΥ Ct−1                  gΥ Cet+1 − bCet

                                                           retk = γ1 + γ2 (Zt − 1)                                                           (A31)
                                            !2                                     !                                                               !                !2
                  k         Iet                                   Iet                       Iet                                    Iet+1                 Iet+1
er = µ
λ t  e t ϑt  1 −                  gΥ − gΥ            −κ                 gΥ − gΥ                  gΥ +βEt g −1 µ
                                                                                                                et+1 ϑt+1 κ
                                                                                                                 Υ                         gΥ − gΥ               gΥ
                   2       Iet−1                              Iet−1                     Iet−1                                       Iet                   Iet
                                                                                                                                             (A32)
                                                                  γ2
                                                                                                          
     gI gΥ µ        er
           et = βEt λ                   k
                                      ret+1 Zt+1 − γ1 (Zt+1 − 1) + (Zt+1 − 1)2                                   + β(1 − δ)Et µ
                                                                                                                              et+1           (A33)
                     t+1
                                                                  2
                                                  e r = βg −1 Et (1 + it )π −1 λ
                                                  λ                            er                                                            (A34)
                                                    t     Υ                t+1 t+1

                                                                            σ f1,t
                                                               et∗ =
                                                               w                                                                             (A35)
                                                                          σ − 1 fe2,t
                                      σ(1+χ)                            ∗ σ(1+χ)
                               w                                          w
                           
                               et                                                        σ(1+χ) e
                                                L1+χ
                                                                           et+1     σ(1+χ)
               fe1,t = η                       + βξw Et (πt+1 )
                                                 t                                     gΥ      f1,t+1                                        (A36)
                               et∗
                               w                                           wet∗
                                                                        ∗ σ
                                   er w et σ                      σ−1 w
                                           
                                                                          et+1     σ−1 e
                           fe2,t = λt     ∗   Lt +  βξ E  (π
                                                      w t t+1    )                gΥ  f2,t+1                                                 (A37)
                                        w
                                        et                                wet∗

                                        ct = gI gΥ α(1 − φ) mct st X
                                                                               
                                        K                               et + F                                                               (A38)
                                        f
                                                             retk
                                                             mct  e            
                                        Lt = (1 − α)(1 − φ)          st Xt + F                                                               (A39)
                                                              wet
                                                                       
                                               Γ
                                               e t = φmct st X et + F                                                                        (A40)

                                                                             θ x1t
                                                                  p∗t =                                                                      (A41)
                                                                           θ − 1 x2t
                                                                                              −θ
                                                                                        1
                                                                                   
                                            x1t    e r mct X
                                                  =λ t
                                                           e t + ξp β                               x1t+1                                    (A42)
                                                                                       πt+1
                                                                                          1−θ
                                                                                    1
                                                                               
                                                x2t    er X
                                                      =λ t t + ξp β
                                                          e                                        x2t+1                                     (A43)
                                                                                   πt+1
                                                                        1−θ
                                                                  1
                                                              
                                                 1 = ξp                        + (1 − ξp )p∗1−θ
                                                                                           t                                                 (A44)
                                                                  πt



                                                                           40
                                                                      1−σ
                                                             w
                                                         
                                                             et−1
                           et1−σ
                           w       =         σ−1
                                        ξw g Υ                                          et∗1−σ
                                                                             + (1 − ξw )w                         (A45)
                                                              πt
                                                               et − Γ
                                                         Yet = X    et                                            (A46)

                                  eφK       fα(1−φ) (1−α)(1−φ) α(φ−1) α(φ−1)
                       st X    et Γ
                          et = A
                                   t
                                     c
                                      t                      Lt                 gΥ             gI      −F         (A47)
                                                                                       γ2
                                                                                                       
                                         −1 −1
                      Yet = Cet + Iet + gΥ gI  γ1 (Zt − 1) +                              (Zt − 1)2 K
                                                                                                    ft            (A48)
                                                                                       2
                                                                          !2 
                                     κ               Iet                      Iet + (1 − δ)g −1 g −1 K
                   K
                   ft+1   = ϑt  1 −                    gΥ − gΥ                                       ft
                                                                                                      Υ      I    (A49)
                                     2            Iet−1
                                                  απ                 !αy !1−ρi                      ρi
                        1 + it              πt                 Yet                      1 + it−1
                                        
                               =                                                                            εrt   (A50)
                        1+i                 π                Yet−1                        1+i

                                                           K
                                                           ct = Zt K                                              (A51)
                                                           f       ft
                                                                                      −θ
                                                                                 1
                                                                            
                                st = (1 − ξp )p∗−θ
                                               t   + ξp                                     st−1                  (A52)
                                                                                 πt
                                    ∗ −σ(1+χ)
                                    w                     et−1 −1 1 −σ(1+χ) w
                                                          w
                                                                     
                                     et
                   vtw = (1 − ξw )               + ξw          gΥ          vt−1                                   (A53)
                                     w
                                     et                    wet    πt
                                                         
                               Ve c = ln Cet − bg −1 Cet−1 + βEt Ve c
                                   t                              Υ                             t+1               (A54)

                                                             L1+χ
                                                              t
                                        Vtn = −η                  v w + βEt Vt+1
                                                                              n
                                                                                                                  (A55)
                                                             1+χ t
                                                 Wt = Vetc + Vetn + Ψt                                            (A56)
                                                                      β ln gΥ
                                                      Ψt =                                                        (A57)
                                                                     (1 − β)2
                                                                 ρA                     
                                         Aet = Aet−1                      exp sA uA
                                                                                  t                               (A58)
                                                                                      
                                            ϑt = (ϑt−1 )ρI exp sI uIt                                             (A59)
                              Υt
   In these equations gΥ =   Υt−1 ,     or the growth rate of the deterministic trend. We require that
βgΥ < 1. The recursive representation of social welfare above is written as the sum of three
components: utility from consumption, labor, and a third term. The third term, defined as Ψt
in (A57), is essentially a shift term that arises because of trend growth and appears when re-
writing flow utility from consumption in terms of stationarized consumption. Recursive utility
from consumption and labor in the levels, are, respectively:


                                       Vtc = ln (Ct − bCt−1 ) + βEt Vt+1
                                                                      c
                                                                                                                  (A60)

                                                                  L1+χ
                                                                   t
                                        VtL      =   −ηvtw                     L
                                                                       + βEt Vt+1                                 (A61)
                                                                  1+χ



                                                                     41
   Writing the recursive representation for utility from consumption in terms of stationary vari-
ables, one has:
                                                          
                                               −1 e
                              Vtc = ln Cet − bgΥ                      c
                                                 Ct−1 + ln Υt + βEt Vt+1                      (A62)


   Define:
                                                              
                                                   −1 e
                                 Vetc = ln Cet − bgΥ               c
                                                     Ct−1 + βEt Vet+1                         (A63)


   Similarly, define Ψt as:

                                                   ∞
                                                   X
                                         Ψt = Et         β s Et ln Υt+s                       (A64)
                                                   s=0


   If we normalize Υt = 1, then Et ln Υt+s = sgΥ . Then we can write:

                                                      β ln gΥ
                                              Ψt =                                            (A65)
                                                     (1 − β)2
   Then aggregate welfare can be written as:


                                           Vt = Vetc + Ψt + VtL                               (A66)

   We define the consumption equivalent, λ, as the fraction of consumption that would have to be
sacrificed in each period in a benchmark case (e.g. two percent inflation) to have the same welfare
as in an alternative case (e.g. four percent inflation). As discussed in the text, we consider two
different consumption equivalents – one based on steady states, λss , and one based on stochastic
means. Given the definition of welfare and the fact that utility over consumption is logarithmic, it
is straightforward to derive either measure, which are both shown below.
                                                h                         i
                                 λss = 1 − exp (1 − β)(V SS − VBSS )                          (A67)


                                λm = 1 − exp [(1 − β)(E(V ) − E(VB ))]                        (A68)

   In the above expressions a subscript “B” denotes the “base” scenario (e.g. two percent inflation)
while the absence of a subscript denotes the alternative scenario (e.g. four percent inflation).
A superscript “SS” stands for the non-stochastic steady state, while E(·) is the unconditional
expectations operator.




                                                     42
