                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           INEQUALITY WHEN EFFORT MATTERS

                                          Martin Ravallion

                                        Working Paper 21394
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21394


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2015




The comments of Tony Atkinson, Kristof Bosmans, Francois Bourguignon, Denis Cogneau, Quy-Toan
Do, Francisco Ferreira, Garance Genicot, Jèrèmie Gignoux, Ravi Kanbur, Erwin Ooghe, John Rust,
Elizabeth Savage, Dominique van de Walle and participants at the 6th ECINEQ conference in Luxembourg
are gratefully acknowledged. The author also thanks Naz Koont for very capable assistance in assembling
the data files for Section 5. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Martin Ravallion. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Inequality when Effort Matters
Martin Ravallion
NBER Working Paper No. 21394
July 2015
JEL No. D31,D63,I32,J22

                                              ABSTRACT

It is sometimes argued that poorer people choose to work less, implying less welfare inequality than
suggested by observed incomes. Social policies have also acknowledged that efforts differ, and that
people respond to incentives. Prevailing measures of inequality (in outcomes or opportunities) do not,
however, measure incomes consistently with personal choices of effort. The direction of bias is unclear
given the heterogeneity in efforts and preferences. Data on the labor supplies of single American adults
suggest that adjusting for effort imposing common preferences attenuates inequality, although the
effect is small. Allowing for preference heterogeneity consistently with behavior suggests higher inequality.


Martin Ravallion
Center for Economic Research
Georgetown University
ICC 580
Washington, DC 20057
and NBER
mr1185@georgetown.edu
1.      Introduction

        Disparities in levels of living reflect to some degree differences in personal efforts. While
views differ greatly on how much effort matters, as compared to advantageous circumstances, it
is clear that many people believe that effort plays some role. In a 2014 opinion poll of the
American public, about one third of respondents viewed poverty as stemming from a lack of
effort by poor people while a similar proportion believed that the rich were rich because they
worked harder (PEW Research Center, 2014).
        Furthermore, it is widely agreed that inequalities stemming from effort do not have the
same ethical salience as those stemming from circumstances beyond an individual’s control. This
view has influenced social policies. For example, antipoverty policies in America and elsewhere
have often identified the “undeserving poor” as those who are judged to be poor for lack of
effort.2 “Bad behaviors” are seen by some observers to be a source of exaggerated concerns
about inequality.3 Those who take the alternative view—that it is really differing circumstances
that ultimately divide the “rich” from the “poor” —tend to find the inequality far more troubling,
and are more demanding of a policy response, than do those who think it is largely about
personal choices. (In the same PEW Research Center poll, about 50% of respondents felt that
circumstances/advantages were the main reason for poverty and inequality.) Yet here too it is
often acknowledged that behavioral responses, such as through work effort, are germane to the
design of social policies even when the bulk of inequality stems from differing circumstances.4
        It is thus striking that most prevailing measures of inequality ignore such differences. The
measures treat two people with the same income (or consumption) equally even if one of them
must work hard to obtain that income while the other is idle. Nor are differences in preferences
addressed, recognizing that the cost of effort (the utility loss) almost surely depends on personal
circumstances. Thus there is a disconnection between the social-policy debates on inequality and
prevailing measurement practices.

2
  This is an old idea, but in modern times it became prominent in Katz’s (1987) critique of American antipoverty
policy. See Ravallion (2014) on the history of economic thought on antipoverty policy. Also see Gans’s (1995, ch.1)
discussion of the history of derogatory labels for poor people.
3
  For example, Stein (2014) argues that: “There is an immense amount of income inequality here and everywhere. I
am not sure why that is a bad thing. Some people will just be better students, harder working, more clever, more
ruthless than other people.” Stein goes on to claim that long-term poverty reflects “poor work habits.” Also see the
debate between Eichelberger (2014) and Williamson (2014) on the proposition that “poor people are lazy.”
4
  See the seminal formulation of the problem of redistribution with incentive constraints in Mirrlees (1971). Kanbur
et al. (1994) extend this model to accommodate poverty reduction as the objective.

                                                         2
         In the literature on inequality of opportunity (INOP) one finds an explicit recognition of
the role of effort in determining incomes. The usual theoretical starting point is Roemer’s (1998)
argument that income depends on both circumstances and personal efforts, such as labor supply.5
(Examples of relevant circumstances are parental income and parental education.) Income
inequalities due to differing efforts are not seen as having ethical or policy salience.6 Motivated
by Roemer’s formulation, there have been a number of attempts to measure INOP.7 However,
while “effort” figures prominently in the theory, it has been largely ignored in the empirical
studies of INOP. The disconnect remerges. By this approach, equality of opportunity is deemed
to prevail if observed incomes do not vary with observed circumstances.8 This can be called the
“reduced-form approach” (in that differing efforts are implicit, in so far as effort is influenced by
circumstances). Proponents argue that this provides a lower bound to the extent of INOP given
incomplete data on circumstances.9 In recent years, the approach has been applied across many
countries at all levels of development.10
         This paper explores the implications for the measurement of inequality (in either
outcomes or opportunities) of an explicit accounting for heterogeneity in personal efforts and
preferences. Some concept of individual welfare is implicit in any assessment of whether one
person is better off than another. This is taken for granted in measuring “real income,” such as
when deflating nominal incomes for cost-of-living differences or adjusting for demographic
heterogeneity using equivalence scales. But it is logically no less compelling when welfare
depends on effort. While there may be constraints (such as labor-market frictions) on the scope
for freely choosing one’s effort, it appears that a significant degree of choice can be exercised by
most people. Presumably the reason that those who think that income inequality is largely due to
5
  While Roemer’s formulation has been influential, it is not the only approach. For a more general treatment
(containing Roemer’s model as a special case) see Fleurbaey and Schokkaert (2012).
6
  It is arguably a big step to say that we should not be concerned about inequalities stemming from different efforts
if only because such inequalities today can generate troubling inequalities of opportunity tomorrow.
7
  Contributions include Van de gaer et al. (2001), Bourguignon et al. (2007), Paes de Barros et al. (2009), Trannoy et
al. (2010), Ferreira and Gignoux (2011), Ferreira et al. (2011), Hassine (2012), Marrero and Rodriguez (2012),
Singh (2012) and Brunori et al. (2013). Also see the broader discussions in Pignataro (2011), Roemer (2014),
Roemer and Trannoy (2015) and Ferreira and Peragine (2015).
8
  This is sometimes called “ex-ante” equality; “ex-post” equality requires equal reward for equal effort; see the
discussion in Fleurbaey and Peragine (2009). For example, if someone starting out with a disadvantage in terms of
her ability to generate income can make up the difference by hard work then one would surely be reluctant to say
that there is no remaining inequality of opportunity; while the income difference according to circumstances may
have vanished (no ex ante inequality), the difference in welfare remains (ex post inequality).This paper will also
focus on the ex-ante concept.
9
  See Ferreira and Gignoux (2011) for a clear statement of this argument.
10
   Ferreira and Peragine (2015) claim that the method has been applied to at least 40 countries.

                                                          3
different efforts are not so troubled by that inequality is that they think there is little or no
underlying inequality in welfare; the inequality reflects personal choices.11 The paper examines
the theoretical foundations and empirical robustness of prevailing methods of measuring
inequality amongst adults when effort is deemed to matter to welfare.12 The empirical application
uses data on the labor supply and incomes of single adults in the U.S. in 2013.
         The nub of the matter is that the way inequality is being assessed in practice does not use
a valid money-metric of welfare when effort matters.13 As long as people care about effort,
observed incomes do not identify how welfare varies and so they are a questionable basis for
assessing inequality of outcomes or opportunities. One possible fix is the idea of a “standard
income.”14 Here one measures income as if every able-bodied adult worked some standard
number of hours, such as a full-time job. Assuming that everyone is free to work as much or as
little as they like, if someone has an observed income below the poverty line but could in
principle avoid this by working full time then, by the standard income approach, she is not
deemed to be poor. (Of course, the welfare interpretation is different if the person is physically
unable to work full time, or is rationed in the labor market such that she cannot find the
stipulated standard amount of work.) However, like observed incomes, standard incomes are not
a valid money metric of welfare.15 For whatever reason, the standard income idea has attracted
little attention amongst economists measuring inequality.
         Recognizing that people take responsibility for their efforts, given their circumstances,
leads one to ask how a true money-metric of welfare—reflecting the disutility of effort—varies.
It has long been known that one can in principle measure income in a welfare-consistent way, as
the monetary equivalent of utility.16 However, the implications for inequality are far from
obvious. Those who claim that high (low) incomes largely reflect high (low) effort will expect to

11
   This is an instance of a more general point that is well understood in welfare economics, namely that inequality of
income need not imply inequality of welfare. Heterogeneity in preferences further complicates matters.
12
   Of course, effort is only one aspect of the debates about inequality numbers; for example, there are also issues
about price indices and equivalence scales. Note also that practitioners are on safer ground in measuring inequality
amongst children for whom personal effort is not yet an issue. Here the concern is about inequality among adults.
13
   Other issues, both conceptual and practical, have been raised about INOP measurement. See Kanbur and Wagstaff
(2014), Fleurbaey and Schokkaert (2012), Atkinson (2015, Chapter 1), Ravallion (2016, Chapter 5).
14
   This is the term used by Kanbur and Keen (1989). A similar idea is the full-time equivalent income (or salary) but
this terminology is not used here as it risks confusion with the concept of equivalent income adopted later in the
paper, following King (1983).
15
   For a demonstration of this point see Kanbur and Keen (1989).
16
   There have been a number of applications of the idea of money-metric utility to distributional analysis, including
King (1983), Jorgenson and Slesnick (1984) , Blundell et al. (1988), Apps and Savage (1989), Kanbur and Keen
(1989). Also see the discussions in Slesnick (1998) and Fleurbaey and Maniquet (2011, Chapter 1).

                                                          4
see a systematic positive relationship between effort and income, which will attenuate the
welfare disparities suggested by observed incomes. Against this view, people in disadvantaged
circumstances may be encouraged to make greater effort to compensate. Alongside these vertical
differences, there may also be heterogeneity in work effort at given income, reflecting
differences in (inter alia) wage rates and preferences. When two people with the same observed
income make different efforts to derive that income then adjusting for the disutility of effort
implies higher inequality between them. This “horizontal” effect mitigates the systematic effect
on welfare inequality of vertical differences stemming from a positive relationship between
income and mean effort. Indeed, one can readily construct examples in which mean effort is a
non-decreasing function of income but the horizontal heterogeneity in effort at given income
implies unambiguously higher inequality in the welfare space for a range of preference
parameters.17 The paper elaborates these points and illustrates their relevance to assessments of
the extent of inequality and poverty in America.
           Two responses can be anticipated. First, the concern identified here applies to any
situation in which income is used to measure welfare, which also depends on personal choices
that matter independently of income. That is true. A focus on measuring INOP is nonetheless
justified given that this has been the main place (in theory at least) where effort has been
acknowledged as a source of inequality that needs to be treated differently to inequalities
stemming from circumstances.
           Second, one might be uncomfortable with the welfarist perspective, in which personal
utilities are the basis for judgements about inequality and social welfare. However, it would
surely be hard to defend a view that (on the one hand) people take responsibility for their effort
but (on the other hand) the degree of their effort has no bearing on how their welfare should be
assessed. Rejecting the view that utility is the sole metric of welfare does not justify ignoring the
differences in the efforts taken to make a living.
           The next section discusses how effort has been treated in the literature on measuring
inequality of opportunity. Section 3 draws out some theoretical implications of behavioral
responses for measuring inequality of outcomes or opportunities, allowing better circumstances

17
     For example, suppose that there are three income levels y  (1,1, 2) , with corresponding efforts x  (0,1,1) and
that welfare is y   x where 0    1 . Then the Lorenz curve for y   x shifts out relative to that for y for the
poorest third but is unchanged for the upper third. (The two income-poorest are re-ranked.) For all measures
satisfying the usual transfer axiom, inequality is no lower for welfare over this range of the preference parameter.

                                                             5
to either encourage or discourage effort. Section 4 looks at a simple parametric model, which is
implemented on U.S. data. A concluding discussion is found in Section 5.

2.       Measuring inequality when effort matters

         In motivating existing measures of income inequality (whether in outcomes or
opportunities) one might start by assuming that utility depends solely on income, and is some
inter-personally constant function of income. Effort may matter for income, but there will be no
interior solution for effort; everyone will work as hard as is humanly possible. While
circumstances may still influence a person’s maximum effort, this model is clearly unrealistic. It
also too simple to capture the way effort has been widely seen as a matter of personal choice and
responsibility in policy debates. For example, the stereotype of the “undeserving poor” is not that
they are working as much as time permits, but this is still too little.
         Instead, utility is taken here to be a function of effort (denoted xi for person i=1,…,n) as

well as total personal income ( yi ), entering negatively and positively respectively.18 The
relevant income concept for welfare is normally taken to be net of taxes. Here we can “solve out”
by treating them as a function of gross income. There is heterogeneity in preferences, represented
by a parameter  i . (For example, preferences over income and effort may well depend on
household size and demographic composition, and factors such as disability.) Combining these
assumptions we can write the utility function as u( yi , xi ,  i ) .

         Income depends on circumstances ( ci ) as well as effort:

                                      yi  y ( xi , ci )                                                        (1)

The function y is taken to be increasing in both arguments. (The heterogeneity in preferences
does not directly influence incomes, but may do so indirectly via effort.) Defining:
                               u~( x , c ,  )  u[ y ( x , c ), x ,  ]
                                          i   i    i            i   i   i   i

it is assumed that:19


18
   Effort is bounded, but this is not made explicit for now since attention is confined to interior solutions for effort.
(In the parametric model in section 4 a time constraint will be explicit.)
19
   Subscripts for person i are dropped in places to simplify the notation. I assume twice differentiability when
convenient. Subscripts are used for partial derivatives, in obvious notation. When convenient for the exposition I
also treat c and e as continuous scalars (such as parental income and labor supply respectively), but they are vectors
in reality and with discrete elements.

                                                            6
                            u~xx ( xi , ci ,  i )  u y y xx  y x2 u yy  2 y x u yx  u xx  0

         Effort is taken to be a matter of personal choice. The interior solution for effort requires
that:
                            u~x ( xi , ci ,  i )  u y ( yi , xi ,  i ) y x ( xi , ci )  u x ( yi , xi ,  i )  0   (2)

The chosen effort (solving (1) and (2)) depends on circumstances and preferences, which we can
write as xi  x(ci ,  i ) .20
         The empirical approach to INOP measurement that has emerged in the literature focuses
on an estimate of the reduced-form equation for income, solving out effort. Treating effort as a
personal choice, the reduced-form equation can be written as:21
                              y (c ,  )  y[ x(c ,  ), c ]
                              ~
                                              i    i               i       i   i                                        (3)
The corresponding regression specification in the literature typically takes the form:
                                        y i   0   1 ci   i                                                        (4)

Where  is treated as a zero-mean error term uncorrelated with circumstances ( E ( i ci )  0 ).

The heterogeneity in preferences is relegated to the error term. (Of course, in practice  also
includes measurement errors.)
         The bulk of the applied literature on measuring INOP has studied the conditional mean of
income given circumstances, as usually measured by the linear projection for y based on (4),
                          
namely E ( y i ci )   0  1ci where the expectation is taken over the distribution of  .22 The R2

for the estimated regression model in (4) is interpreted as the share of inequality attributed to
unequal observed circumstances. The primary focus of the rest of this paper is the validity of
using observed incomes for measuring income inequality when effort is a personal choice
variable.




20
   Notice that this model is static, in that all effort is a current choice. In a dynamic model one might postulate that
there are also current gains from past efforts, which are taken as exogenous to choices about current effort. (An
example is past effort at school versus current labor supply given schooling.) The present paper confines attention to
a static model.
21
   This is explicit in Bourguignon et al. (2007), Trannoy et al. (2010) and Ferreira and Gignoux (2011), but implicit
in most of the literature.
22
   Instead of a regression, some studies of INOP use a cross-tabulation of mean y by groups of people defined
according to their c’s. This is not an important difference in this context.

                                                                       7
3.      Inequality of what? Observed versus welfare-equivalent incomes

        In their review of the theory and methods of measuring INOP, Ferreira and Peragine
(2015) claim that “…the existence of effort variables, observed or unobserved, is entirely
immaterial [to the measure of inequality] since [equation 4] is a reduced-form equation, where
any effect of circumstances on incomes through their effects on efforts is already captured by the
regression coefficients.” (My clarifications in brackets.)
        As the following argument will make clear, the robustness of the reduced-form model in
(4) is questionable when effort is a matter of personal choice. This also has bearing on the
measures obtained for inequality of outcomes. The extent to which circumstances are observed is
not the issue here and this problem can be ignored for now; c is taken here to be fully observed.
The problem lies elsewhere, in how one measures “income” given that effort is a choice. The
problem is found in both the traditional inequality measures based on the distribution of observed
incomes y i (i=1,…,n) and in the recent literature on measuring INOP based on estimates of

E ( y i ci ) . And once this problem is recognized it is far from clear what the measures obtained in

this literature are telling us about inequality.
        When measuring inequality or poverty we typically aim to assure that the monetary
metric of welfare is “real,” which is normally identified by consistency with a model of utility.
This is implemented using cost-of-living indices and equivalence scales or (more generally)
equivalent income functions.23 The appeal of welfare consistency is no less obvious when effort
matters.24 We are presumably concerned with how welfare varies with circumstances. However,
                             y (c ,  ), x ,  ) it is immediately evident that ~
on noting that utility is u( ~     i   i   i   i                                y ( c ,  ) is only a valid
                                                                                          i   i


monetary metric of welfare if everyone has the same preferences and effort is constant or does
not matter to welfare. These must be deemed extremely strong assumptions. Consider
preferences first. If circumstances alter preferences then the reduced-form approach is not going
to properly reflect INOP. An obvious example is disability; there is no reason to believe that the
welfare effect of disability is evident in its income effect, as presumed by standard measures of
INOP. Nor would the effect of (say) age on the personal (physical and psychic) costs of effort be

23
   The equivalent income function was introduced by King (1983).
24
   Although largely ignored in the literature on measuring INOP this point has been understood for some time in the
context of empirical welfare measurement when labor supply gives disutility. Early contributions include Blundell et
al. (1988) and Apps and Savage (1989). On micro approaches to modelling labor supply see Blundell et al. (2007).

                                                         8
necessarily evident in incomes. Second, even with homogeneous preferences (  i   , say, for

                                                                                    y ( ci ,  ) will not rank
all i), if we take effort seriously as a source of disutility then it is plain that ~

people consistently with their welfare.
        When utility depends on income and effort, the welfare-consistent measure of income is
the equivalent income, y i* obtained by solving:

                           u[ yi* , x, ]  u[ ~
                                               y (ci ,i ), x(ci ,i ),i ]                                 (5)

Here x is a fixed reference level of effort (which can be taken to depend of fixed reference levels
of both circumstances and the preference parameter, c and  ).25 On inverting the utility
function (with the inverse function w.r.t. income denoted u 1 ) it is evident from (5) that y i* is an

inter-personally constant and strictly increasing function of utility, which we can write as:26
                                          y ( ci ,  i ), x ( ci ,  i ),  i ); x ,  ]  f ( ci ,  i )
                           yi*  u 1 [u( ~                                                                 (6)

        This formulation assumes that utilities are level comparable between people with
different  i ’s (reflecting, for example, different household demographics). Theoretical

objections have been raised to such interpersonal comparisons of welfare although they are
routine in measuring inequality and poverty (though not always explicit).27 Alternatively one
might prefer to only evaluate the utility of given income and effort at fixed preference
parameters,  i   . Both approaches will be allowed in the empirical work.
        Whether there is more or less inequality in the equivalent income space than for observed
incomes depends on the properties of the utility function and how both efforts and preferences
vary across the population. We cannot determine the outcome solely by looking at how effort
varies with observed income, as in the reduced-form approach to measuring INOP. For example
(and this case will be salient empirically), one might find that mean effort (forming an
expectation over the distribution of the preference parameters) rises with income, yet the
variance in effort and preferences entails higher inequality of equivalent income than observed
income. Since nothing very general can be said in theory, the effect on measured inequality of

25
   As is well recognized in the literature on welfare measurement, only by setting fixed reference prices can we
derive a valid money-metric of utility (see, for example, King, 1983). However, the point also holds for
heterogeneity in effort or other non-income dimensions of welfare.
26
   In obvious notation and subsuming x ,  in the definition of the equivalent-income function f.
27
   An influential critique was by Robbins (1935). In modern terms, see the discussion in Fleurbaey and Maniquet
(2011).

                                                                 9
adjusting observed income for effort will be treated as an empirical question to be taken up later
in this paper.
         Without further restrictions on preferences, a standard inequality measure calculated
using a distribution of equivalent incomes need not fall in response to equalizing redistributions
of money incomes, as pointed out by Blackorby and Donaldson (1988). There are correctives for
this problem in the literature.28 Here it will also be treated as an empirical question about the
relationship between equivalent income and money income.
         While not much more can be said in theory about the effect of effort on overall
inequality, we can say more about how inequalities of opportunity in the equivalent-income
space compare to the income space. There are two sources of differences between the two
income metrics: heterogeneity in circumstances and heterogeneity in preferences. The former is
of primary interest from the perspective of measuring INOP. To focus on the former for the
expository purpose of this discussion, I now set  i   . However, the contribution of
heterogeneity in preferences will be considered in Section 4.
         Better circumstances yield higher equivalent income. (Applying the envelope theorem it
is readily verified that f c  y c u ~y / u y*  0 .) On applying the implicit function theorem to equation

(2) and differentiating we have:
                                             u y y xc  yc (u xy  y x u yy )
                                     xc                                                                       (7)
                                                          u~xx

The sign of this expression cannot be determined based on the assumptions so far. Better
circumstances (meaning that y c  0 ) could either encourage or discourage effort. However, it

would seem reasonable to assume that if better circumstances discourage effort then there is a
limit to this effect such that ~
                               y  0 , i.e., x   y / y .
                                     c               c           c   x


         The issue is then to compare how much the two income metrics respond to differing
circumstances, as required for assessing the extent of INOP. Evidently yi*  () ~
                                                                                 yi as
x ( c ,  )  (  ) x ( ci ,  ) (given that effort gives disutility). We can identify two cases:



28
  Blackorby and Donaldson (1987) recommend the use of “welfare ratios,” whereby money incomes are normalized
by the poverty line, defined as a point on the consumer's cost function, at a reference utility level. Alternatively, one
can select the (arbitrary) reference values in the equivalent income function to assure that the problem is avoided
empirically, as done by Ravallion and van de Walle (1991).

                                                            10
       Case 1: Poorer circumstances encourage effort ( x c  0 ). (Sufficient conditions are that

u xy  0 , y xc  0 and u yy  0 .) Then yi  () ~
                                                  yi as c  ( ) ci . Panel (1) in Figure 1 illustrates
                                          *



this case under linearity. We see a steeper “circumstances gradient” in equivalent income.

       Case 2: Poor circumstances discourage effort ( x c  0 ). (Sufficient conditions are that

y xc  0 and u xy  y x u yy  0 .) Then yi*  () ~
                                                   yi as c  ( ) ci . Here we find that measurement in

the income space overstates inequality of opportunity, based on how equivalent income varies
with circumstances, as illustrated in panel (2) of Figure 1.
       These stylized cases are deterministic. In the stochastic formulation with an error
distribution—reflecting (inter alia) heterogeneity in preferences unexplained by observed
circumstances—Case 1 does not imply that measuring inequality based on observed incomes
understates inequality based on equivalent incomes, with the opposite in Case 2. The error
distributions around the two income measures as functions of circumstances may well be
different, such that (for example) inequality turns out to be higher for equivalent incomes in Case
2. That is an empirical issue to which we turn next. As we will see, heterogeneity in preferences
further clouds the picture.

4.     Empirical implementation

       The upshot of these observations is that the behavioral responses to circumstances
through choice of effort remain material to the interpretation of disparities in incomes between
people in different circumstances and to the measures obtained for inequality or poverty of
outcomes.
       The following empirical example illustrates the sensitivity of inequality measures to
including an allowance for heterogeneous efforts and preferences. I focus solely on effort
through labor supply, giving the standard consumption-leisure choice model. The utility function
is assumed to have the Cobb-Douglas functional form.
       In common with the prevailing approaches in the literature to measuring INOP based on
how observed incomes vary with circumstances, any direct welfare effects of circumstances that




                                                    11
are not evident in income or labor supply are ignored.29 This limitation is likely to be especially
salient for disabilities and demographic effects on welfare (due to differing numbers of children
and family sizes). In recognition of this concern, the analysis here is only done for a specific
family type, namely single-person households, and excludes those with any (self-reported)
disability. Thus a number of thorny issues of inter-household distribution, setting equivalence
scales and making inter-personal welfare comparisons between those with and without
disabilities are swept aside for the present purpose.
           While acknowledging the limitations of these calculations, they serve to demonstrate that
allowing for the disutility of effort can give a quite different picture of inequality to that
suggested by prevailing methods.
           Data: The data are from the Annual Social and Economic Supplement of the Current
Population Survey (CPS) for the U.S. for 2014 (with reference to incomes for 2013).30 The
analysis is confined to the roughly 6,000 single-person households in the 2014 CPS.
           Labor supply is measured by average hours of work per week in 2013.31 The mean is 39
hours (with a median is 40 hours). The range in hours worked is from nearly zero to 99 hours.
Table 1 provides some key summary statistics and Figure 2 plots log hours worked per week in
the last year against log total pre-tax income.32 Mean labor supply for those with an income
under $20000 (the poorest 16%) is 30 hours, while it falls to 26 hours for those living under
$15,000 (the poorest 8%) (Table 1). We see that mean (log) labor supply rises with income up to
a certain point then levels off for the upper 30% or so (Figure 2).
           While there is an income gradient in labor supplies, it does not appear to be large enough
to plausibly account for much of the income disparities. For example, the average hourly wage
rate of those with income less than $20,000 is $8.26. Ten hours extra work at this wage rate

29
     This relates to the long-standing problem of inferring welfare from observed demand or supply behavior in
markets. Suppose that effort maximizes u[ f ( yi , xi ), d i ] subject to yi  y ( xi , d i ) where d i represents disability
(an element of ci more generally). However, the observed solutions, xi  x ( d i ) , also maximize f ( yi , xi ) and so
they cannot identify u[ f ( yi , xi ), d i ] as the unique maximand. Early expositions of this point in the context of
making welfare comparisons across different household types for the purpose of setting equivalence scales include
Pollak and Wales (1979) and Browning (1992).
30
   The CPS data were accessed through the University of Minnesota’s IPUMS-CPS site.
31
   This is obtained by multiplying reported weeks of work in the last year by reported average hours of work per
week then dividing by 52.
32
   Recall that pre-tax income (y) is the relevant concept in the model in Section 2 in which taxes are solved-out,
assuming that they are some function of y. Also note that the CPS does not ask for taxes paid so imputations of
uncertain reliability are required.

                                                              12
would only make up 10% of the gap between the average income of this group and the overall
mean income.33 Looked at a different way, this group of workers would have to work almost 100
hours per week extra to reach mean income—equivalent to three full-time jobs. (Table 1 gives
these calculations for various income cut-offs.)
        While the income gradient in hours of work does not seem especially steep, the pattern
suggests that the partial effect of adjusting for effort will go some way toward attenuating overall
inequality in observed incomes. However, the large variance in labor supply at given income,
especially at middle income levels evident in Figure 2 also comes into play. This “horizontal”
effect is inequality increasing.
        To see the net effect, consider the following measure of standard income. Suppose that all
those working less than the average hours were able to make up the gap at their current average
wage rate; there is no change for those working at or above the average hours. Thus standard
income is defined as:
                          yis  wi max(x s , xi )   i                                               (8)

Here the wage rate is wi while there unearned income (independent of effort) is  i . The standard

for labor supply is denoted x s and is set at 39 hours. The assumption that the current wage can be
maintained is questionable; to make up the hours, some may well have to switch to lower-paying
jobs or incur prohibitively high personal costs of supplying the extra effort. So this simulation
could well over-estimate the impact, especially on poverty.
        Figure 3 plots the standard income against observed income (both in logs). There are
some large proportionate gains, although they are spread through the bulk of the income range.
The first two rows of Table 2 give inequality and poverty measures for observed incomes and the
standard incomes. The full-time worker simulation brings down all three inequality measures,
and both poverty measures. Figure 4 gives the Lorenz curves; there is not strict Lorenz
dominance, although the overlap does not happen until the 98th percentile.
        When we come to incorporate effort in a welfare-consistent measure of income, this
horizontal effect will again become important although then it will also interact with preferences.
The net effect on measured inequality is thus an empirical issue to which we turn after describing
the parametric model to be used.

33
  The overall mean weekly income of the sample is $1048, while the mean weekly income of those living below
$20,000 per annum is $245.

                                                          13
           Parametric model: In implementing an empirical model of income as a function of
circumstances and effort the literature has often assumed a functional form that is additively-
separable between effort and circumstances. However, it would clearly be questionable to
assume that the marginal returns to circumstances are independent of effort. Indeed, in thinking
about the economics one is drawn to postulate that the returns to effort (the wage rate when
effort is simply labor supply) depend on circumstances—creating a natural interaction effect.
           To consider the implications further, let us write equation (1) for individual i as:
                                       yi  w(ci ) xi   (ci ) (i=1,…,n)                          (9)
The notation now recognizes explicitly that the wage rate and unearned income depend on
circumstances, denoted w( ci ) and  (ci ) respectively. The values of w( ci ) and  (ci ) are the key
parameters of effort choice, which is taken to maximize a utility function of the form:
                                       u( yi , xi ,  i )  ln yi   i ln(t  xi )                (10)

where t is the total time available for leisure or work (so that t  xi is leisure time). The (log)
equivalent income is:
                                       ln yi*  ln yi   i ln(t  xi )  k                        (11)

where k is the fixed reference. Optimal labor supply requires that  i  w( ci )(t  xi ) / y i ; the latter

is called here the leisure ratio (the ratio of the imputed value of leisure to income).
           The limitations to what can be inferred about INOP from the reduced-form relationship
between observed incomes and circumstances alone can be seen clearly if one compares the
implied elasticities to differences in circumstances. Solely for expository purposes, let us treat c
as a continuous scalar. Then it is readily verified that:
                                ln yi*        ln w(ci )        ln  (ci )
                                         swi              si                                    (12.1)
                                ln ci           ln ci            ln ci

                                ln yi   i  swi   ln w(ci )  si   ln  (ci )
                                                                                           (12.2)
                                ln ci  1   i   ln ci        1   i   ln ci


Here s wi  w( ci ) xi / yi and si   ( ci ) / yi are earned and unearned income shares respectively.

In both cases the income elasticity w.r.t. circumstances is a weighted mean of the corresponding
elasticities for the wage rate and unearned income.34 The difference in weights depends on the

34
     Note that for both (12.1) and (12.2) the weights sum to unity.

                                                               14
preference parameter. As the value attached to leisure rises (higher  i ) the observed income

progressively shifts its weight from unearned income to earned income, while the weights for
equivalent income remain unchanged at given income shares. This is intuitive; the more highly
leisure is valued, the more observed income disparities undervalue inequality in unearned
income from the point of view of welfare.
         Comparison of the two empirical income measures: There are a number of possible
scenarios of interest for the parameters and data. A benchmark case can be configured to be
deliberately conservative about the impact of adjusting for effort on measured inequality. It may
be expected that the presence of the relatively few low labor supplies in Figure 2 will exaggerate
the extent of inequality in equivalent incomes. To address this concern the following analysis is
restricted to those households who worked for money at least one day (8 hours) per week on
average over 2013. This cuts out about 200 households.35 The available time for work or leisure
is set at 100, leaving out about 10 hours per day. This also seems conservative.
         In one scenario, preferences are assumed to be constant, with  i set at the sample mean

of w( ci )(t  xi ) / y i for all i. This is instructive, but it does not allow for the preference

heterogeneity that has long been emphasized in some quarters. In a second scenario, the
preference parameter is allowed to vary. One possibility is to assume that everyone in the survey
has freely chosen their ideal labor supply, and to set  i  w( ci )(t  xi ) / y i for all i. This is

questionable given the existence of labor-market frictions, whereby some survey respondents had
too little leisure, and some too much, relative to their ideals. Setting the parameter to accord
exactly with the leisure ratios in the survey data thus produces an implausibly large variance
coming from the high levels of log leisure, which are given a high weight in the Cobb-Douglas
specification. The spread of leisure ratios is evident in Figure 5. For example, for 170
observations the implied leisure term in equation (10) added over 20 to log income! While the
spread of empirical leisure ratios undoubtedly reflects labor-market frictions, measurement errors
may also be playing a role.
         Some degree of smoothing of the empirical leisure ratios is clearly needed. For this
purpose, the idiosyncratic preferences were set at the predicted values based on a regression of

35
  As noted, those reporting any disability affecting work or any difficulty (seeing, hearing, remembering, mobility,
personal care) are excluded from the main analysis reported here. 5% of the sample reported a disability affecting
their work.

                                                         15
ln[ w( ci )(t  xi ) / yi ] on a quadratic function of the log wage rate, log unearned income (with

their interaction) and a vector of observed circumstances from the CPS related to gender, age,
race, place of birth, whether parents were born in the U.S. (Unfortunately, the data source does
not include other information about parents, such as their education.) Age enters as the deviation
from the median of 49 years. The left-out group for the dummy variables comprises white,
native-born, males of 49 years of age with parents born in the U.S.; 25% of the sample is in this
group. The Appendix gives the regression used to estimate the predicted value of the leisure
ratio. Figure 5 gives the densities of the predicted leisure ratio, showing how this trims the
extreme values.
        We can now calculate the equivalent incomes. Figure 6 gives the kernel density functions
for both log equivalent income and log observed income. Panel (a) is for common preferences.
Then we see that equivalent incomes have a similar mode but lower variance, although there is
still a fairly close alignment of the density functions. Panel (b) allows idiosyncratic preferences,
with the preference parameter set at the predicted values of the leisure ratio, as described above.
The effect of the adjustment for effort is then to add noticeably thicker tails.
        The densities in Figure 6 relate to marginal distributions. The heterogeneity in effort
creates dispersion in the equivalent income measures for given observed incomes. This
conditional variance in effort is evident in Figure 7, which plots log equivalent income against
log observed income. Again, results are given for the case of common preferences (panel a) and
for idiosyncratic preferences (panel b). Figure 7 also gives the regression lines, which have
slopes that are significantly less than unity in both cases though steeper for idiosyncratic
preferences, as expected.36 In other words, the adjustment for effort tends to raise (lower)
equivalent incomes for the poor (rich). However, the idiosyncratic-preferences case generates
much greater dispersion of equivalent incomes at given observed income.
        Both equivalent incomes are correlated with standard incomes, again using a full-time job
as the standard, although the correlation is higher for common preferences; in logs one finds that
r=0.883 using common preferences, as compared to 0.404 using idiosyncratic preferences.
Figure 8 gives the scatter plots. While standard income seems a reasonably good predictor of
equivalent income with common preferences, this cannot be said about idiosyncratic preferences.

36
  The regression coefficients are 0.832 (s.e.=0.007) and 0.565 (s.e.=0.021) for common preferences and
idiosyncratic preferences respectively.

                                                       16
        As noted in Section 3, the curvature (if any) in the relationship between observed
incomes and equivalent incomes is of interest. This was tested using the RESET test on the linear
regression of equivalent income on observed income using the squared values of fitted residuals.
The test did not reject linearity for either the constant preferences specification (prob.=0.131) or
idiosyncratic preferences specification (prob.=0.712). This was also the case when I include a
control for labor supply.37
        Table 2 also provides the same inequality indices for the two equivalent-income measures
while Figure 9 gives the Lorenz curves. When one imposes common preferences, the level of
inequality falls after adjusting for effort; the effect is not large and nor is there Lorenz
dominance, although the intersections are at the extremes (the poorest percentile for common
preferences and the upper three percentiles for the idiosyncratic preferences). By contrast,
inequality measures rise with the switch to the welfare-consistent income measure with
idiosyncratic preferences. The thicker lower tail of equivalent incomes evident in Figure 6(b)
implies that poverty rates rise for a broad interval of lines; Table 2 gives poverty rates for two
illustrative poverty lines (z). Since we have seen from Figure 2 that mean effort conditional on
income rises with income, it is plain that the higher inequality in equivalent income in the
idiosyncratic-preferences case stems from the aforementioned variance in effort at given income,
given that those consuming more leisure are deemed to value it more with idiosyncratic
preferences.
        To throw some light on the structure of INOP, Table 3 gives regressions of log observed
income and log equivalent income against the same set of variables describing circumstances as
used in predicting the leisure share. Again, results are given for both common preferences and
idiosyncratic preferences. The regressions with common preferences look fairly similar to those
for observed incomes. Nonetheless, there are a number of differences for specific circumstances.
The female income differential falls appreciably when one adjusts for labor supply, though it
remains significant.38 The curvature in the relationship with age remains, but the turning point
rises to 71 years, as compared to 58 years for observed incomes. There are small differences in
the effects of race and place of birth. Recall that in setting common preferences, the sample mean
of w( ci )(t  xi ) / y i was used. Sensitivity tests indicated that higher values (tested at one and two

37
  The RESET tests then gave prob.=0.786 and 0.522.
38
  The data do not include work done within the home, though this is probably similar by gender in the sample of
single adults.

                                                        17
standard deviations above the mean) tended to further attenuate the gender and race effects,
while increasing the effects of either being foreign born or having a foreign-born mother.
        When one allows for idiosyncratic preferences, the regressions change even more. The
relationship with age switches curvature between the two income concepts, but the turning point
is outside the range of the data; equivalent income declines with age within the data range. The
effect of being female is now positive, as is the effect of being African American, Asian or
Hispanic. Significantly negative effects emerge for those born in South-East Asia, South-West
Asia, Central or Eastern Europe, and Africa. There is positive effect of being foreign born and
having a foreign-born mother.
        Some of these effects may well be confounded by differences in unemployment rates by
gender or race, and labor-market discrimination. All one can reasonably conclude from these
calculations is that the claims made about INOP based on observed incomes may well be far
from robust to allowing for heterogeneity in both effort and preferences.
        Notice that the R2 rises appreciably when one switches to idiosyncratic preferences.
Recall, however, that the preference parameter (the leisure ratio) is predicted based (in part) on
circumstances. If one uses the actual leisure ratio rather than the predicted value the R2 falls
appreciably, as can be seen from column (4) in Table 3. There is a marked loss of overall
explanatory power for this set of circumstances. Most circumstances related to race and place of
birth become insignificant. To some extent this reflects the aforementioned problem of extreme
values in the leisure ratio. However, the observation warns against concluding that INOP is
greater when one allows for idiosyncratic preferences.

5.      Conclusions

        A not uncommon view historically, which one still hears today, is that high incomes are
simply the reward for greater effort, and poverty reflects laziness. Critics of this view point
instead to structural and institutional factors relevant to poverty and inequality. However, even
accepting that effort choice is a key factor, it is far from obvious that allowing for a disutility of
effort implies less inequality in terms of either outcomes or opportunities.
        If one takes seriously the idea that effort comes at a cost to welfare then prevailing
methods of measuring inequality—including those found in the recent literature on inequality of
opportunity—are not using a valid monetary measure of welfare. However, the likely

                                                  18
heterogeneity in effort and preferences must also be brought into the picture. It may be granted
that average effort rises with income (at least over some range), but there is also a variance in
effort at given income, and preferences clearly vary as well. The implications for assessments of
inequality stem from both the vertical differences (in how mean effort varies with income) and
the horizontal differences (in how effort varies at given income). Once this point is
acknowledged, it is not clear what existing measures tell us about inequality. The paper has
provided an elaboration of this concern and an illustration of the potential implications of
heterogeneity in effort and preferences using data on labor supply and incomes for the U.S.
       It is unclear on a priori grounds what can usefully be inferred about inequality without
adjusting for effort in a welfare-consistent way. The challenge remains of how to do better.
There are both empirical and conceptual issues. The implications of taking effort seriously for
inequality measurement depend crucially on the behavioral responses to unequal opportunities,
and not all of those responses are readily observable. Measures with a clearer welfare-economic
interpretation call for data on efforts, for which existing surveys are limited to a subset of the
many dimensions of effort. And the longstanding challenges faced in making inter-personal
comparisons of welfare across heterogeneous people cannot be avoided in this context.
       While acknowledging these limitations, the paper has provided some illustrative
calculations for American working singles. A positive income gradient in labor supply is evident
in the data. This gradient accounts for very little of the income gap between the poorest third
(say) and the overall mean. If one calculated standard incomes such that all workers had at least
the average employment of 39 hours per week (at their present wage rate) then inequality and
poverty measures would fall. The contribution of the lower employment of poor workers to
poverty rates is notable; for example, while 17% of workers have an observed income under
$20,000 this would fall to 12% if those workers supplied the average number of hours per week
of all workers although this may well be an overestimate. However, the fact that poorer workers
work less appears to contribute rather little to total inequality in observed incomes.
       Imposing common preferences at the average revealed disutility of effort, one finds that
allowing for heterogeneous efforts yields only a modest drop in the measured level of inequality.
Nor does it make much difference in the structure of inequality, as indicated by correlations with
a set of observed circumstances related to gender, age, race and place of birth, although larger
differences in the structure of inequality emerge with a stronger preference for leisure.

                                                  19
       Allowing for idiosyncratic preferences changes the picture. It is unclear just how far one
would want to go in allowing for differing preferences. Here the paper has not insisted that every
individual in the survey data is at their personal optimum, as some may well be working less than
desired, and some more. A regression-based “smoothing” of the data allows for differing
preferences associated with wages, unearned incomes and the same set of circumstances. On
doing so, the paper finds substantially higher measures of inequality and poverty and some
notable differences in the structure of inequality emerge. These distributional effects do not stem
from the relationship between mean effort and income but rather from the horizontal
heterogeneity in effort and how this is magnified by the preference heterogeneity. This source of
horizontal inequality swamps the tendency for mean labor supply to rise with income.
       Whether one accepts the assumptions underlying these methodological changes is an
open question. However, it is clear from this study that it should not be presumed that allowing
for effort in a way that is broadly consistent with behavior would substantially attenuate the
disparities suggested by standard data sources on income inequality. Indeed, one can even defend
the opposite claim when an allowance is made for heterogeneity in preferences.




                                                20
Figure 1: The circumstances gradient of income for alternative metrics and alternative
behavioral responses at given preferences
(1) Poor circumstances encourage effort       (2) Poor circumstances discourage effort

Income                                        Income

                                    y*
                                                                                  ~
                                                                                  y
                                    ~
                                    y                                             y*




                    c        Circumstances                        c         Circumstances




                                             21
  Figure 2: Labor supply plotted against total income for U.S. single adults in 2013

                   9

                   8

                   7

                   6
Log labor supply




                   5

                   4

                   3

                   2

                   1

                   0
                       4      5         6               7               8    9           10   11   12   13     14

                                                             Log observed total income

                       Note: The regression line is the “nearest neighbor” smothered scatter plot using a locally-weighted
                       quadratic function. The overall quadratic regression (with White standard errors in parentheses) is:
                                  ln x i   6.873 1.712 ln y i  0.069 ln y i2  ˆi R 2  0.206; n  5863
                                            ( 0.994 )       ( 0.143 )        ( 0.009 )




                                                                            22
                                   Figure 3: Plot of standard incomes against observed incomes



                              14

                              13

                              12
        Log standard income




                              11

                              10

                               9

                               8

                               7

                               6

                               5
                                   5     6       7      8        9      10        11   12   13   14

                                                            Log observed income

Note: The standard incomes are calculated by assuming that all those working less than average hours were to
work average hours at the same wage rate as at present.




                                                                 23
Figure 4: Lorenz curves for observed incomes and “full-employment” standard incomes
                 1.0
                               Observed incomes
                 0.9           Standard incomes


                 0.8

                 0.7

                 0.6

                 0.5

                 0.4

                 0.3

                 0.2

                 0.1

                 0.0
                       0.0   0.1   0.2     0.3     0.4        0.5       0.6   0.7       0.8   0.9   1.0
                                    Proportion of the population ranked by income




                              Figure 5: Kernel densities of the log leisure ratio
                 1.4
                              Leisure ratio (log)
                              Predicted leisure ratio (log)
                 1.2


                 1.0


                 0.8
       Density




                 0.6


                 0.4


                 0.2


                 0.0
                       -3          -2             -1                0               1           2         3
                                             Log leisure ratio (imputed value of leisure/income)


                                                              24
                   Figure 6: Kernel density functions for log incomes

                           (a) Common preferences
          .7
                    Observed income
                    Equivalent incomes
          .6


          .5


          .4
Density




          .3


          .2


          .1


          .0
               5   6      7       8        9      10     11     12    13   14   15
                                                 Log income

                                      (b) Idiosyncratic preferences
          .6
                   Observed incomes
                   Equivalent incomes
          .5


          .4
Density




          .3


          .2


          .1


          .0
               5   6      7       8        9      10     11     12    13   14   15
                                                 Log income




                                                25
                        Figure 7: Plot of log equivalent income against log observed income

                                        (a) Common preferences
                        16


                        14                                                                     Equal
                                                                                               Regression
Log equivalent income




                        12


                        10


                         8


                         6


                         4


                         2
                             5    6      7      8       9      10         11   12   13        14
                                                    Log observed income

                                        (b) Idiosyncratic preferences
                        16


                        14                                                                     Equal

                                                                                               Regression
Log equivalent income




                        12


                        10


                         8


                         6


                         4


                         2
                             5   6       7      8        9      10      11     12   13        14
                                                    Log observed income




                                                         26
                                 Figure 8: Plot of log equivalent income against log standard income

                        14                                                                          Line of equality
                                  Idiosyncratic preferences                                         Regression for common
                                  Common preferences                                                preferences
                                                                                                    Regression for idiosyncratic
                        12                                                                          preferences
Log equivalent income




                        10



                        8



                        6



                        4

                             4     5        6       7         8      9      10      11   12   13   14
                                                              Log standard income




                                                                           27
            Figure 9: Lorenz curves for the three income concepts
1.0
                   Observed incomes
0.9                Equivalent incomes: common preferences
                   Equivalent incomes: idiosyncratic preferences
0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0
      0.0    0.1      0.2    0.3   0.4    0.5    0.6   0.7    0.8    0.9   1.0

                     Proportion of the population ranked by income




                                                28
Table 1: Summary statistics

 Income        % of        Mean          Mean           Mean           % of income gap        Extra hours per
cut-off (z)   sample      hours of      wage rate      income        covered by working         week to reach
                          work per      ($/hour)      ($/week)        average hours per         mean income
                           week           ( wz )        ( yz )               week               1048.26  y z
                                                                                              (               )
                           ( hz )                                     100(39.26  hz ) wz           wz
                                                                    (                     )
                                                                        (1048.26  y z )
 10,000        4.03        23.66           5.62         119.15               9.44                 165.32
 15,000        8.31        26.35           7.10         177.20              10.52                 122.68
 20,000       15.11        29.56           8.26         244.96               9.97                  97.25
 25,000       22.67        31.64           9.38         304.60               9.61                  79.28
 30,000       29.66        33.00          10.28         354.90               9.28                  67.45
 35,000       38.20        34.50          11.40         411.69               8.52                  55.84
 Median        50.00       35.81          12.92         487.84               7.95                  43.38
Maximum       100.00       39.26          24.09        1048.26               n.a.                  0.00
Note: The median is $42,010. Means are calculated for all sample points up to z.




Table 2: Inequality and poverty measures for U.S. working singles without disabilities

                                             Inequality index                      Poverty rate
                                        Gini    Mean log          Robin       z=$15,000 z=$20,000
                                                Deviation         Hood
                                                 (MLD)
 Observed incomes                      0.402      0.296           0.284            0.083      0.165
 Standard income using mean            0.387      0.262           0.275            0.046      0.115
 hours as the standard.
 Equivalent incomes with               0.385        0.272         0.272            0.072      0.139
 common preferences set at
 mean leisure ratio
 Equivalent incomes with               0.460        0.444         0.328            0.140      0.190
 idiosyncratic preferences
 based on predicted leisure ratio
Note: The standard incomes are calculated by assuming that all those working less than the mean hours of 39
per week were to work those hours at the same wage rate as at present. The equivalent incomes are explained
in the text. The Gini index is half the average absolute difference between all pairs of incomes, expressed as a
proportion of the mean. MLD is given by the mean of the log of the ratio of the overall mean income to individual
income. Robin Hood index is the fraction of total income that one would need to take away from the richer half and
give to the poorer half to assure equality.




                                                        29
Table 3: Testing for inequality of opportunity for U.S. working singles without disabilities
                               (1)                        (2)                          (3)                               (4)
                                                                              Log equivalent income            Log equivalent income
                                                 Log equivalent income      (idiosyncratic preferences       (idiosyncratic preferences
                        Log observed income       (common preferences)    using predicted leisure ratio)     using actual leisure ratio)
                     Coeff.     SE      Prob.   Coeff.    SE      Prob.    Coeff.       SE        Prob.    Coeff.       SE         Prob.
 Constant            10.842 0.019       0.000   10.749 0.020 0.000        10.148      0.025      0.000      9.907     0.117        0.000
 Female              -0.107 0.021       0.000   -0.042 0.020 0.036          0.446     0.027      0.000      0.477     0.132        0.000
 Age-49*              0.694    0.075    0.000    0.867 0.077 0.000         -1.354     0.099      0.000     -1.472     0.475        0.002
 (Age-49) squared*   -0.040 0.046       0.000   -0.019 0.005 0.000          0.011     0.060      0.080      0.118     0.029        0.000
 Race: Black         -0.224 0.026       0.000   -0.166 0.024 0.000          0.407     0.036      0.000      0.286     0.166       0.086
 Race: Black mixed   -0.142 0.117       0.223   -0.077 0.103 0.452          0.577     0.157      0.000      0.402     0.698       0.564
 Race: Am. Indian    -0.261 0.086       0.002   -0.209 0.078 0.008          0.158     0.124      0.202      0.122     0.676       0.857
 Race: Asian          0.152    0.069    0.028    0.144 0.064 0.025          0.334     0.096      0.001      0.727     0.524        0.165
 Race: Other         -0.083 0.097       0.389   -0.095 0.085 0.268         -0.201     0.107      0.061     -0.350     0.511        0.493
 Hispanic            -0.162 0.037       0.000   -0.123 0.036 0.001          0.379     0.048      0.000      0.399     0.241        0.098
 Born US Oth.Terr.   -0.138 0.247       0.577   -0.173 0.222 0.438         -0.719     0.283      0.011     -1.459     1.178        0.215
 Born Central Am.    -0.724 0.197       0.000   -0.697 0.173 0.000          0.000     0.230      1.000      0.231     1.167        0.843
 Born Caribbean      -0.435 0.203       0.032   -0.458 0.180 0.011         -0.316     0.239      0.187     -0.481     1.158        0.678
 Born S. America     -0.311 0.215       0.149   -0.371 0.195 0.057         -0.839     0.256      0.001     -1.422     1.171        0.225
 Born N. Eur.         0.229    0.235    0.331    0.140 0.207 0.499         -0.388     0.305      0.203     -0.975     1.198        0.416
 Born Western Eur.   -0.052 0.276       0.850   -0.161 0.245 0.513         -0.607     0.285      0.033     -0.377     1.713        0.826
 Born C-East Eur.    -0.249 0.206       0.226   -0.323 0.181 0.074         -0.660     0.253      0.009     -1.422     1.107        0.199
 Born East Asia      -0.314 0.212       0.139   -0.300 0.188 0.110          0.225     0.254      0.375      0.165     1.301        0.899
 Born SE Asia        -0.548 0.228       0.016   -0.615 0.211 0.004         -0.684     0.264      0.010     -1.145     1.244        0.358
 Born SW Asia        -0.143 0.226       0.526   -0.237 0.213 0.267         -0.816     0.280      0.004     -1.389     1.327        0.295
 Born Middle East     0.096    0.267    0.719   -0.082 0.256 0.749         -0.615     0.317      0.053     -0.018     1.647       0.992
 Born Africa         -0.185 0.204       0.365   -0.320 0.183 0.080         -1.154     0.248      0.000     -1.157     1.261       0.359
 Foreign born         0.260    0.187    0.165    0.321 0.165 0.052          0.622     0.216      0.004      0.733     1.077        0.496
 Foreign: Dad         0.106    0.059    0.073    0.087 0.056 0.123         -0.081     0.090      0.368     -0.187     0.401        0.641
 Foreign: Mom         0.158    0.074    0.034    0.174 0.064 0.007          0.264     0.095      0.005      0.765     0.696        0.272
 Foreign: Both        0.132    0.056    0.018    0.117 0.051 0.023         -0.134     0.073      0.064     -0.357     0.337        0.289
N                        5633                            5633              5633     5633
R2                       0.088                           0.069             0.151   0.016
S.E. of regression       0.750                           0.738             0.986    4.736
Mean dep. var.          10.610                          10.610            10.610   10.610
F-statistic             21.740                          16.525            39.891   3.563
Prob (F-statistic)       0.000                           0.000             0.000    0.000
Note: White standard errors (SE). * coefficients scaled up by 100.




                                                                     31
Appendix: Regression used to predict the leisure ratio to allow for idiosyncratic
preferences
                                                        Log leisure ratio
                                               Coeff.           SE          Prob.
 Constant                                       0.256         0.056         0.000
 Log wage rate                                  0.150         0.031         0.000
 Log wage rate squared                         -0.046         0.005         0.000
 Log unearned income (+1)                      -0.073         0.009         0.000
 Log unearned income squared                   -0.007         0.001         0.000
 Log wage x log unearned income                 0.036         0.002         0.000
 Female                                        0.087          0.015         0.000
 Age-49*                                        0.000         0.058         0.992
 (Age-49) squared*                              0.024         0.003         0.000
 Race: Black                                    0.075         0.019         0.000
 Race: Black mixed                              0.087         0.084         0.303
 Race: American Indian                          0.061         0.066         0.355
 Race: Asian                                    0.020         0.052         0.705
 Race: Other                                   -0.008         0.058         0.885
 Hispanic                                       0.063         0.026         0.015
 Born US Other Territories                     -0.114         0.152         0.452
 Born Central America                           0.037         0.123         0.762
 Born Caribbean                                -0.042         0.128         0.746
 Born South America                            -0.107         0.138         0.438
 Born Northern Europe                          -0.161         0.164         0.325
 Born Western Europe                           -0.108         0.153         0.480
 Born Central or Eastern Europe                -0.126         0.136         0.352
 Born East Asia                                 0.036         0.136         0.789
 Born SE Asia                                  -0.055         0.142         0.698
 Born SW Asia                                  -0.144         0.150         0.337
 Born Middle East                              -0.136         0.170         0.423
 Born Africa                                   -0.174         0.133         0.192
 Foreign born                                   0.084         0.116         0.472
 Foreign: Dad                                  -0.028         0.048         0.569
 Foreign: Mom                                   0.023         0.051         0.660
 Foreign: Both                                 -0.042         0.039         0.282
 N                                              5633
 R2                                             0.122
 S.E. of regression                             0.529
 Mean dep. var.                                 0.348
 F-statistic                                   25.962
 Prob (F-statistic)                             0.000
 Note: White standard errors (SE). * coefficients scaled up by 100.
References

Apps, Patricia, and Elizabeth Savage, 1989, “Labour Supply, Welfare Rankings and the
       Measurement of Inequality,” Journal of Public Economics, 39: 335-364.
Atkinson, Anthony, 2015, Inequality: What Can be Done? Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
       University Press.
Bourguignon, François, Francisco Ferreira, and Marta Menéndez, 2007, “Inequality of
       Opportunity in Brazil,” Review of Income and Wealth 53(4): 585–618.
Barros, Ricardo Paes, Ferreira, F., J. Molinas Vega, and J. Saavedra Chanduvi, 2009, Measuring
       Inequality of Opportunities in Latin America and the Caribbean, Washington, D.C.: The
       World Bank.
Blackorby, Charles, and David Donaldson, 1987, “Welfare Ratios and Distributionally Sensitive
       Cost-Benefit Analysis,” Journal of Public Economics 34: 265-290.
__________, 1988, “Money Metric Utility: A Harmless Normalization?”, Journal of
          Economic Theory 46: 120-129.
Blundell, Richard, Costas Meghir, E. Symons and Ian Walker, 1988, “Labor Supply
       Specification and the Evaluation of Tax Reforms,” Journal of Public Economics 36: 23-
       52.
Blundell Richard, Thomas Macurdy and Costas Meghir, 2007, “Labor Supply Models:
       Unobserved Heterogeneity, Nonparticipation and Dynamics,” Handbook of Econometrics
       Volume 6A, Chapter 69, Amsterdam: North Holland.
Browning, Martin, 1992, “Children and Household Economic Behavior,” Journal of Economic
       Literature 30: 1434-1475.
Brunori, Paolo, Francisco Ferreira and Vito Peragine, 2013, “Inequality of Opportunity, Income
       Inequality and Economic Mobility: Some international comparisons”, Chapter 5 in Eva Paus
       (ed.) Getting Development Right. New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.
Chiappori, Pierre-André, and Costas Meghir, 2014, “Intra-household Welfare,” NBER Working
       Paper No. 20189.
Eichelberger, Erika, 2014, “Debunking the Attempted Debunking of Our 10 Poverty Myths,
       Debunked,” Mother Jones, March 28




                                                33
Ferreira, Francisco and Jèrèmie Gignoux, 2011, “The Measurement of Inequality of Opportunity:
       Theory and an Application to Latin America,” Review of Income and Wealth 57 (4): 622-
       657.
Ferreira, Francisco, Jèrèmie Gignoux and Meltem Aran, 2011, “Measuring Inequality Of
       Opportunity with Imperfect Data: The Case of Turkey,” Journal of Economic Inequality
       9: 651–680.
Ferreira, Francisco, and Vito Peragine, 2015, “Individual Responsibility and Equality of
       Opportunity,” in M. Adler and M. Fleurbaey (eds), Handbook of Well Being and Public
       Policy, Oxford University Press.
Fleurbaey, Marc, and François Maniquet, 2011, A Theory of Fairness and Social Welfare,
       Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Fleurbaey, Marc, and Vito Peragine, 2009, “Ex Ante versus Ex Post Equality of Opportunity,”
       ECINEQ Working Paper 2009-141.
Fleurbaey, Marc, and Erik Schokkaert, 2012, “Inequity in Health and Health Care.” Handbook of
       Health Economics, vol. 2. P. Barros, T. McGuire, and M. Pauly (eds.), 1003-92. New
       York: Elsevier.
Gans, Herbert, 1995, The War Against the Poor, New York: Basic Books.
Hassine, Nadia Belhaj, 2012, “Inequality of Opportunity in Egypt,” World Bank Economic
       Review 26(2): 265–295.
Heckman, James, Sergio Urzua and Edward Vytlacil, 2006, “Understanding Instrumental
       Variables in Models with Essential Heterogeneity,” Review of Economics and Statistics
       88(3): 389-432.
Jorgenson, Dale W., and Daniel Slesnick, 1984, “Aggregate Consumer Behavior and the
       Measurement of Inequality,” Review of Economic Studies 60: 369-392.
Kanbur, Ravi, and Michael Keen, 1989, “Poverty, Incentives, and Linear Income Taxation.” In
       Andrew Dilnot And Ian Walker (eds) The Economics of Social Security, Oxford: Oxford
       University Press.
Kanbur, Ravi, Michael Keen and Matti Tuomala, 1994, “Labor Supply and Targeting in Poverty
       Alleviation Programs,” World Bank Economic Review 8(2): 191-211.




                                               34
Kanbur Ravi, and Adam Wagstaff, 2015, “How Useful Is Inequality of Opportunity as a Policy
       Construct?” In Kaushik Basu and Joseph Stiglitz (eds). Proceedings from IEA Jordan
       Roundtable on Shared Prosperity. London, Palgrave McMillan.
Katz, Michael B., 1987, The Undeserving Poor: From the War on Poverty to the War on
       Welfare. New York: Pantheon Books.
King, Mervyn A., 1983, “Welfare Analysis of Tax Reforms Using Household Level Data,”
       Journal of Public Economics 21: 183-214.
Marrero, Gustavo, and Juan Gabriel Rodriguez, 2012, “Inequality of Opportunity in Europe,”
       Review of Income and Wealth 58(4): 597-621.
Mirrlees, James, 1971, “An Exploration in the Theory of Optimum Income Taxation,” Review of
       Economic Studies 38: 175–208.
Pew Research Center, 2014, “Most see Inequality Growing, but Partisans Differ over
       Solutions,” A Pew Research Center/USA TODAY Survey.
Pignataro, Giuseppe, 2011, “Equality of Opportunity: Policy and Measurement Paradigms,”
       Journal of Economic Surveys 26(5): 800-834.
Pollak, Robert, and Terence Wales, 1979, “Welfare Comparison and Equivalence Scale,”
       American Economic Review 69: 216–221.
Ravallion, Martin, 2014, “The Idea of Antipoverty Policy,” in A.B. Atkinson and F.
       Bourguignon (eds) Handbook of Income Distribution Volume 2, Amsterdam: North
       Holland.
__________, 2016, The Economics of Poverty. History, Measurement, Policy. New York and
       Oxford: Oxford University Press, forthcoming.
Ravallion, Martin and Dominique van de Walle, 1991, “The Impact on Poverty of Food Pricing
       Reforms: A Welfare Analysis for Indonesia,” Journal of Policy Modeling 13: 281-299.
Robbins, Lionel, 1935, An Essay on the Nature and Significance of Economic Science. London.
Roemer, John, 1998, Equality of Opportunity, Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.
__________, 2014, “Economic Development as Opportunity Equalization,” World Bank
       Economic Review 28(2): 189-209.
Roemer, John, and Alain Trannoy, 2015, “Equality of Opportunity,” in A.B. Atkinson and F.
       Bourguignon (eds) Handbook of Income Distribution Volume 2, Amsterdam: North
       Holland.

                                              35
Singh, Ashish, 2012, “Inequality of Opportunity in Earnings and Consumption Expenditure: The
       Case of Indian Men,” Review of Income and Wealth 58(1): 79-106.
Slesnick, Daniel, 1998, “Empirical Approaches to the Measurement of Welfare,” Journal of
       Economic Literature 36(4): 2108-2165.
Stein, Ben, 2014, “Poverty and Income Inequality. One Really has Nothing to do with the
       Other,” The American Spectator, April 4.
Trannoy, Alain, Sandy Tubeuf, Florence Jusot and Marion Devaux, 2010, “Inequality of
       Opportunities in Health in France: A First Pass,” Health Economics 19: 921-938
van de gaer, Dirk, Erik Schokkaert, and Michel Martinez, 2001, “Three Meanings of
       Intergenerational Mobility,” Economica 68: 519–37.
Williamson, Kevin, 2014, “Debunker Debunked,” National Review, March 26.




                                               36
