                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



            QUALITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN HEALTHCARE DELIVERY:
              AUDIT-STUDY EVIDENCE FROM PRIMARY CARE IN INDIA

                                             Jishnu Das
                                            Alaka Holla
                                          Aakash Mohpal
                                        Karthik Muralidharan

                                        Working Paper 21405
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21405


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2015

We are especially grateful to Michael Kremer for his involvement as a collaborator in the early stages
of this project and for subsequent discussions. We thank Brian Chan, Veena Das, Ranendra Kumar
Das, Diana Tabak and Manoj Mohanan for their contribution to designing and implementing the SP
methodology, and thank Eun-Young Shim for her contribution to the theoretical appendix. We thank
Prashant Bharadwaj, Gordon Dahl, Roger Gordon, Gordon Hanson, and Paul Niehaus for comments.
We are grateful to Innovations for Poverty Action, CT, and Pratap Bhanu Mehta and the Center for
Policy Research, New Delhi for hosting the project and providing logistical support and infrastructure.
We also thank Sreela Dasgupta, L. Ravi and Anvesha Khandelwal for project management support,
and Monisha Ashok, Carl Liebersohn, Prerna Mukharya, Suzanne Plant and Anand Shukla for excellent
research assistance. The project would not have been possible without the dedication of our SPs and
Purshottam, Rajan Singh, Devender, Charu Nanda, Simi Bajaj, Geeta and other staff at Institute of
Socioeconomic Research on Democracy and Development (ISERDD) in Delhi. The Social and Rural
Research Institute (SRI), New Delhi oversaw data collection of all other aspects other than SPs. This
study was funded by the Global Health Program of the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation through
Grant No. 50728 and the Knowledge for Change Program at the World Bank. The findings, interpretations
and conclusions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the
views of the World Bank, its executive directors, the governments they represent, or the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Jishnu Das, Alaka Holla, Aakash Mohpal, and Karthik Muralidharan. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Quality and Accountability in Healthcare Delivery: Audit-Study Evidence from Primary Care
in India
Jishnu Das, Alaka Holla, Aakash Mohpal, and Karthik Muralidharan
NBER Working Paper No. 21405
July 2015
JEL No. D40,H10,H42,I11,O15

                                              ABSTRACT

We present the first direct evidence on the relative quality of public and private healthcare in a low-
income setting, using a unique set of audit studies. We sent standardized (fake) patients to rural primary
care providers in the Indian state of Madhya Pradesh, and recorded the quality of care provided and
prices charged in each interaction. We report three main findings. First, most private providers lacked
formal medical training, but they spent more time with patients and completed more essential checklist
items than public providers, and were equally likely to provide a correct treatment. Second, we compare
the performance of qualified public doctors across their public and private practices, and find that
the same doctors exerted higher effort and were more likely to provide a correct treatment in their
private practices. Third, in the private sector, we find that prices charged are positively correlated with
provider effort and correct treatment, but also with unnecessary treatments. In the public sector, we
find no correlation between provider salaries and any measure of quality. We develop a simple theoretical
framework to interpret our results and show that in settings with low levels of effort in the public sector,
the benefits of higher diagnostic effort in the private sector may outweigh the costs of market incentives
to over treat. These differences in provider effort may partly explain the dominant market share of
fee-charging private providers even in the presence of a system of free public healthcare.


Jishnu Das                                           Aakash Mohpal
The World Bank                                       University of Michigan
jdas1@worldbank.org                                  amohpal@umich.edu

Alaka Holla                                          Karthik Muralidharan
World Bank                                           Department of Economics, 0508
alaka.holla@gmail.com                                University of California, San Diego
                                                     9500 Gilman Drive
                                                     La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
                                                     and NBER
                                                     kamurali@ucsd.edu
“It is the general social consensus, clearly, that the laissez-faire solution for medicine is
intolerable.”                                                      - Kenneth J. Arrow (1963)


1       Introduction

Healthcare is a credence good with substantial information asymmetries between patients
and providers. This makes it difficult for patients to determine the quality of care they have
received. It is widely believed therefore that unregulated market-based delivery of healthcare
is socially undesirable (Arrow, 1963). Further, if optimal care requires the potential denial
of services that patients value (such as steroids or antibiotics), market-based healthcare may
be over-responsive to demand, leading to socially inefficient provision (Prendergast, 2003).
Partly as a result of these considerations, the default policy approach to delivering healthcare
for the poor in most low-income countries is through free or nominally priced medical care
in publicly-run facilities staffed by qualified doctors and nurses, who are paid a fixed salary
(World Bank, 2003).
    However, for primary care services, a majority of households in low-income countries
choose to visit fee-charging healthcare providers in the private sector, whose market share
exceeds 70 percent in rural India (the focus of our study).1 This is surprising for two reasons.
First, private healthcare providers in India face little de facto regulation and most have no
formal medical training (Rohde and Viswanathan, 1995; Banerjee, Deaton and Duflo, 2004;
CPR, 2011). Second, while the high use of the private sector could, in part, reflect the
absence of public options, this cannot be the only explanation. In our data from rural India,
the private sector share of primary care visits (constructed from a household census) is 80
percent even in markets with a qualified public doctor offering free care through public clinics,
with more than 60 percent of the visits to private providers with no formal qualifications.
    The high market share of unqualified private healthcare providers raises a number of
questions about the functioning of healthcare markets in low-income settings. First, why
would people choose to pay for care from (mostly) unqualified providers when public clinics
are staffed with qualified doctors who offer care at a much lower price? Second, how does
the quality of care received vary across public and private healthcare providers? Third, what
does an unregulated healthcare market reward and how does this compare with the regulated
public sector? Specifically, to what extent are prices in the market and wages in the public
sector correlated with quality of care? Answers to these questions have been limited by the
    1
    The market share of private providers is high in many low-income countries: Data from the DHS show
that 50 percent of households seeking pediatric outpatient care in Africa and 70-80 percent in India visit
the private sector with little variation over the 20 years that these surveys have been collected (DHS, 2007;
Grepin, 2014). The World Health Surveys include adult morbidity and here, the numbers vary from 30
percent in Sub-Saharan Africa to between 70 and 80 percent in India (Wagstaff, 2013).

                                                     1
lack of evidence on the actual quality of care provided in public and private health facilities
in low-income settings.2
    This paper uses data from an audit study conducted in rural areas of the Indian state
of Madhya Pradesh (MP) to address this gap. Specifically, standardized (fake) patients
(SPs) were coached to accurately present symptoms for three different conditions - unstable
angina, asthma, and dysentery in a child (who is at home) - to multiple healthcare providers.
SPs then made over 1,100 unannounced visits to public and private providers of primary
healthcare services and recorded condition-specific metrics of quality of care provided for
each interaction, as well as the price charged.3 The quality of care metrics include the
providers’ adherence to a checklist of questions and examinations deemed essential for making
a correct diagnosis in each case, their likelihood of pronouncing a correct diagnosis, and the
appropriateness of the treatments.
    We present results from two sets of comparisons. First, we sent SPs to a (nearly) repre-
sentative sample of public and private health facilities on a walk-in basis, and we use these
data to compare the typical patient experience across public and private clinics. However,
these differences reflect variation in both provider composition, as well as differential incen-
tives across public and private clinics. To isolate the effect of practicing in the private sector
holding provider characteristics constant, we identified the private practices of qualified pub-
lic doctors (the majority of whom have one) and sent SPs to present the same medical case
to the same set of doctors in both their public and private practices. Our second comparison
uses this “dual practice sample” and compares the quality of care across the public and
private practices of the same doctors on the same set of cases.
    We report three main findings. First, while the majority of private providers in the
representative sample have no medical qualifications, they exerted significantly higher effort
than public providers and performed no worse on diagnosis and treatment. Private providers
spent 1.5 minutes more with patients (62 percent more) and completed 7.4 percentage point
more items on a checklist of essential history and examination items (47 percent more) than
public providers. They were equally likely to pronounce a correct diagnosis (only 4 percent
of public providers do so), to offer a correct treatment (27 percent of public providers do so),
    2
      Earlier work has highlighted the problem of low doctor effort in the public sector (high absence, low time
spent with patients) and low training in the private sector (Banerjee, Deaton and Duflo (2004); Chaudhury
et al. (2006); Das and Hammer (2007)). The key evidence gap, however, is the lack of credible estimates
of the actual quality of care provided in the public and private sector. For instance, Coarasa, Das and
Gummerson (2014) examine 182 cited studies in two systematic reviews of the medical literature and find
only one study that adjusts for differences in patients using an audit methodology (as we do here), and no
study that adjusts for differences in providers across public and private practices (which we also do here).
    3
      Typically used in medical education, SPs are coached to consistently portray a medical case and all of
its physical and pyscho-social aspects. When used to evaluate care in hospitals and clinics, they are also
trained to accurately recall all aspects of their interactions with the provider. See details in section 3.


                                                       2
and to offer clinically unnecessary treatments (provided by 70 percent of public providers).
These differences are not explained by the public sector having high patient loads and waiting
times, or inadequate equipment and facilities, and the results hold even after controlling for
these factors, and including market fixed effects.
    Second, in the dual practice sample the same doctors spent more time with SPs, com-
pleted more items on the checklist, and were also more likely to offer a correct treatment in
their private practices, relative to their public practices. Notably, we do not find evidence of
differential over-treatment under market incentives, with equivalently high rates of unneces-
sary treatments, use of antibiotics, and total number of medicines in both types of practices.
These differences are conditional on seeing the doctor and therefore understate the difference
in the quality of patient experiences across public and private practices of the same doctor,
because the expected number of trips to the clinic to see a qualified doctor is considerably
higher in the public practice (due to high absence rates).
    Third, we find a positive correlation between the fees charged by private providers and
measures of quality such as the time spent, the fraction of checklist items completed, and
likelihood of providing a correct treatment. However, we also find a positive correlation
between prices and the total number of medications given - including unnecessary treatment.
In the public clinics, SPs were provided free or nominally priced care. Since there is no
variation in prices, we examine the correlation between doctors’ compensation and quality
of care and find no correlation between salaries (or desirability of posting) in the public
sector and any measure of quality of care delivered.
    To help interpret our results, we develop a simple theoretical framework that models
provider-patient interactions in two stages: consultation and treatment. Patients present
their initial symptoms to the provider, based on which he forms a prior distribution regarding
the true ailment. Higher effort in the consultation stage yields a more precise posterior
distribution. The treatment choice is determined by a combination of the physician’s desire to
cure the patient, market incentives for over-treatment, and patients’ demand for medication.
The main insight of the model is that while providers will typically exert more effort in their
private practice, the effect on overall patient health is ambiguous. If the default effort level of
doctors under low-powered incentives is reasonably high, the marginal gains from additional
effort in private practice are outweighed by the costs of over-treatment resulting from market
incentives. On the other hand, if the default effort level is low, the benefits of higher effort in
the private sector (and the resulting increase in precision of the posterior) may outweigh the
costs of over-treatment under market incentives. The increase in diagnostic precision from
extra effort may also help explain why we do not find higher levels of over-treatment in the
private sector in the dual sample, though we find a positive marginal incentive to over-treat.


                                                3
    Our methodological contribution helps address the fundamental problem of inferring qual-
ity in healthcare, where the optimal action is patient and condition specific, and inefficiencies
include under-treatment, over-treatment, or both (Pauly, 1980). Specifically, there are four
advantages to the use of unannounced SPs relative to existing measures in the literature,
which are based on tests of provider knowledge, or observation of medical practices.
    First, the use of SPs ensures a common set of patient and illness characteristics, which
limits concerns about differential patient sorting across clinics on the basis of personal or
illness characteristics, as might be the case when observing real patient-provider interactions.
Second, the SP method allows us to objectively score the quality of care using condition-
specific metrics (checklist completion, diagnosis, and treatment) because we know the actual
illness being presented and the optimal care associated with the case. In the case of real
observations, we would observe only the presenting symptoms and would have to speculate
about the true underlying illness.4 Third, we are able to observe prices charged for completed
transactions, which allows us to study the extent to which the unregulated market rewards
quality, and improves upon audit studies in other settings that obtain price quotes but do
not complete the purchase.5 Finally, Hawthorne effects are not a concern in the SP context
because providers do not know that they are being observed.6
    Substantively, the advances in measurement above combined with our ability to observe
the same doctor across public and private practices allow us to provide the first direct
comparison of the quality of care across public and private sectors. We also provide the first
evidence on how market prices for healthcare behave in an unregulated setting and show that
there is a positive correlation between price and checklist completion (and correct treatment),
but also between price and unnecessary treatments. This suggests that unregulated market
prices do reflect some information on the quality of care, but also that patients cannot
evaluate whether they are being over-treated and charged for unnecessary treatments.
    These findings are consistent with the broader empirical literature on credence goods that
has demonstrated over-provision of services to the detriment of customer welfare in settings
   4
     Medical vignettes, which measure provider knowledge, also allow for standardization of case-mix and
knowledge of the actual illness underlying the presented symptoms, but do not measure actual provider
practice, which has been shown to differ markedly from provider knowledge in multiple contexts (Rethans
et al., 1991; Leonard and Masatu, 2005; Das and Hammer, 2007).
   5
     For instance, first price offers can be very different from the price of the completed transaction if the
distribution of willingness to pay is different across populations. See for instance, Ayres and Siegelman
(1995) and Goldberg (1996) for an example of how the lack of completed sales data can lead to misleading
conclusions in audit studies of car sales. In our case, the “sale” is always completed as the SP leaves only
after the provider has completed the interaction and the price has been paid.
   6
     The main limitation of the SP method is that only a few types of cases can be presented. To test
whether our SP results are externally valid, we also observed the providers in our sample during a typical
day’s practice, and found very similar results across all their patient interactions (see section 7.1).



                                                      4
ranging from caesarian sections to car mechanics and cab rides for tourists (Wolinsky, 1993;
Gruber and Owings, 1996; Dulleck and Kerschbamer, 2006; Dulleck, Kerschbamer and Sutter,
2011; Schneider, 2012). However, as is well known, inefficiencies in market provision do not
imply that public provision will do better, and a key contribution of our paper is the ability
to compare public and private provision of a canonical credence good such as healthcare.
    Combined with the theoretical framework, our results suggest that in settings of poor
governance and administrative accountability in the delivery of primary healthcare services
through the public sector (Banerjee, Deaton and Duflo, 2004; Banerjee, Duflo and Glen-
nerster, 2008), market-based provision of healthcare may present a legitimate alternative in
spite of its many theoretical (and empirical) weaknesses. Further, while public healthcare is
free to the consumer, it is not free to the taxpayer. We calculate the per-patient cost in the
public sector and conservatively estimate it to be four times higher than the fees charged
by private providers in our sample. Thus, the unregulated private market for healthcare,
which is mainly staffed by unqualified providers, appears to deliver higher provider effort
and comparable quality of care, at a much lower cost per patient. Our results have direct
implications for global policy debates on the organization and delivery of healthcare services
in low-income countries with low state capacity to deliver effective oversight over public
healthcare systems. We discuss these along with caveats in the conclusion.
    The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes healthcare provision in
rural India and Madhya Pradesh; section 3 describes the standardized patient (SP) method-
ology, sampling, data, and measures of healthcare quality; section 4 presents a theoretical
framework to interpret our results; section 5 presents results on quality of care; section 6 cov-
ers pricing and cost-effectiveness; section 7 discusses robustness to alternative explanations;
and section 8 concludes with a discussion of policy implications and caveats.


2     Context

2.1    Healthcare in Rural India

Healthcare in India is delivered by both public and private clinics and hospitals. In the
public sector, patients can obtain primary care on a walk-in basis in facilities differentiated
by their level of specialization ranging from district hospitals and Community Health Centers
(CHCs) to Public Health Centers (PHCs) and sub-centers.7 PHCs, CHCs, and hospitals are
supposed to be staffed with trained doctors, who are expected to make diagnoses and either
treat or refer patients as appropriate. Sub-centers are supposed to be staffed with qualified
   7
     Official guidelines stipulate that there should be a sub-center for every 5,000 people, a primary healthcare
center for every 25,000 people, and a community health center for every 100,000 people.


                                                       5
nurses with doctors visiting on a fixed rotation. Most doctors hold a Bachelor of Medicine
and Bachelor of Surgery (MBBS) degree, the rough equivalent of an MD in the US, and
receive a fixed salary from the government, with no variable compensation based on either
patient load or quality of care.8
    Consultations in public clinics are provided on a walk-in basis during opening hours
(appointments are rarely used), and are free or nominally priced. Patients are also supposed
to receive free medication, if available. Although a federally-funded insurance program for
inpatient hospital care was introduced in 2007, the tax-funded public system of care was the
only source of (implicit) public insurance for primary care.
    In theory, public facilities are accountable to administrative norms and procedures (docu-
mented in the Civil Service Codes for each state). In practice, administrative accountability
of public health-care providers is weak. Nationwide, doctor absences in public clinics aver-
aged 43 percent on any given day in 2003 and 40 percent in 2010 (Muralidharan et al., 2011;
CPR, 2011). These absences do not occur on predictable days or hours (Banerjee, Deaton
and Duflo, 2004) and they are not easy to address at a system-level (Banerjee, Duflo and
Glennerster, 2008; Hanna and Dhaliwal, 2015). When asked about adherence to adminis-
trative rules, more than 80 percent of public sector doctors agree that the rules and norms
are frequently flouted and that appropriate ‘payments’ can allow providers to circumvent
disciplinary proceedings, even for grave negligence (La Forgia and Nagpal, 2014).
    While official policy documents of the Government mainly focus on improving the public
system of primary healthcare (Planning Commission of India, 2013), data from household
surveys consistently show that the fee-charging private sector accounts for over 70 percent
of primary care visits (DHS, 2007; Selvaraj and Karan, 2009; CPR, 2011). Barriers to entry
for private healthcare providers are low. Provider qualifications range from MBBS degrees
to no medical training at all, and clinics can range from well-equipped structures to small
one-room shops, the provider’s residence, or the patients’ home for providers that make
home visits. Providers operate on a fee-for-service basis, and prices often include the cost
of medicines. While providers operating without a medical license are not legal and face
the threat of being shut down, they have come to be the dominant source of care in these
markets (as the data below will show).
   8
    India also recognizes medical degrees from alternative schools of medicine including the BAMS (Bachelors
in Ayurvedic Medical Sciences), the BHMS (Bachelor of Homeopathic Medical Sciences) and the BUMS
(Bachelor of Unani Medical Sciences). However, providers with these qualifications are only licensed to
prescribe medication in line with their training and are not given prescription rights on allopathic medicine.
They also are not typically posted in the frontline healthcare system of PHCs, CHCs, and district hospitals
that prescribe allopathic medicine.




                                                      6
2.2    Sampling of Healthcare Markets, and Summary Statistics

We carried out the SP study in the Indian state of Madhya Pradesh (MP), one of India’s
poorer states, with a GDP/capita of ∼$600/year (or ∼$1500/year in PPP terms) in 2010-
11 (the period of the study). We first drew a representative sample of 100 villages across 5
districts, stratified by geographic region and an index of health outcomes. We then conducted
a household census in these villages, where respondents named all providers from whom
they sought primary care in the past thirty days and their locations (including providers
outside the village, but in market clusters on the nearest main road). We then surveyed all
providers in all of these locations, regardless of whether or not the providers themselves had
been mentioned in the sample villages, thereby obtaining a census of all providers in the
healthcare market that catered to sampled villages.
    Table 1 (columns 1-3) presents summary statistics based on the provider census (Panel A)
and the household census (Panel B) in these markets; columns 4-6 compare villages sampled
for the SP study to the representative villages. The table highlights three key features of
health markets in rural India. First, villages are served by a large number of providers once
the health market is correctly accounted for by including locations that are near but outside
the village. There are 11 primary care providers per market and 46 percent of households
reported visiting a primary care provider in the 30 days prior to the survey.
    Second, the majority of providers are private (7 out of 11 or 64 percent), and they
account for 89 percent of household visits; excluding paramedical public health workers
(typically responsible for preventive, maternity and child care) increases the fraction further
to 93 percent. The share of visits to private providers (with or without qualifications) is 88
percent when there is a public provider in the market, and is 83 percent even when there is
a public MBBS doctor in the same market.
    Third, 48 percent of all providers and 77 percent of all private providers (5.4 per village)
have no formal medical training, but account for 77 percent of household visits. There is
less than one MBBS doctor per market, and they are rarely available within the village.
The distribution of MBBS providers is uneven. Only 30 percent of all villages have recourse
to an MBBS provider (public or private) in their market, and only 5 percent within village
boundaries. Private unqualified providers remain the dominant providers of care in most
settings, accounting for 74 percent of all visits even when there is a public provider in the
same market, and 60 percent even when there is a public MBBS doctor in the same market.9
MBBS doctors account for only 4 percent of all patient interactions (Panel B).
   9
    Note that even public facilities have many unqualified providers. While these are typically support staff
(who are only supposed to assist a qualified doctor), we find that it is very common for these staff to act as
the main healthcare providers in public clinics and prescribe medication (given high doctor absence rates).


                                                      7
3        Measuring Healthcare Quality Using Standardized Patients

3.1       The Standardized Patient (SP) Methodology

Used routinely in the training and evaluation of medical students in high-income countries,
including the United States, SPs are highly-trained ‘fake patients’ who present symptoms of
an illness to a physician like any other normal patient. Details of the SP interaction can be
used to evaluate the quality of care received by a typical patient (Rethans et al., 1991). SPs
are coached to present their initial symptoms and answer any questions that the physician
may ask as part of history taking, in a manner consistent with the underlying condition.
We followed the same method (adapted to local conditions) and sent unannounced SPs to
healthcare providers in our sample during the course of a normal working day.
    A total of 22 SPs were recruited from the districts where the study was conducted. Using
a team comprising of a professional SP trainer, two medical doctors, and a medical anthro-
pologist familiar with local forms of presenting symptoms and illnesses, SPs were coached to
accurately and consistently present one of three cases - unstable angina in a 45 year-old male,
asthma in a 25 year-old female or male, and dysentery in a child who was at home presented
by the father of the child (see Das et al. (2012) and Appendix B for details on SP proto-
cols).10 SPs visited sampled providers, who did not know they were receiving standardized
patients and therefore should have treated them as new patients.11 After the interaction,
SPs were debriefed within an hour with a structured questionnaire that documented the
questions and examinations that the provider completed or recommended, the treatments
provided, and any diagnoses offered. The SPs retained any medicines dispensed in the clinic
and paid all fees charged by providers at the end of the interaction.
    The SPs depicted uncomplicated textbook presentations of the cases, and a panel of doc-
tors who advised the project concurred that appropriate history taking and examinations
should lead providers towards the correct diagnosis and treatment. Cases were specifically
chosen so that the opening statement by the SPs would be consistent with multiple underly-
ing illnesses, but further questioning should have led to an unambiguous (correct) diagnosis.
This allows us to measure provider quality through adherence to an essential checklist of
questions and examinations that would allow them to accurately make a diagnosis and pro-
    10
     Das et al. (2012) discusses the SP methodology in further detail, and presents summary statistics on
overall quality of care in this setting. The current paper focuses on the economics of unregulated healthcare
markets and we do not replicate the analysis in Das et al. (2012). See Appendix B for further details on how
the SP method was implemented, including further discussion on the choice of cases and their relevance.
Details on case presentations and instruments are posted on www.healthandeducationinindia.org
  11
     The research ethics board of Innovations for Poverty Action approved this design following a successful
pilot in Delhi, where the detection rate of SP’s was extremely low even among a set of doctors who were
informed that they would receive an SP at some point in the next month.


                                                     8
vide a correct treatment. We also chose these cases since they represented conditions with
high or growing incidence in India and other middle- and low-income countries, and mini-
mized risk to SPs that could arise from unsafe invasive examinations, such as a blood test
with an unsterilized needle.
    In these cases the role of suitable medical advice was important because real patients
would be unlikely to be able to categorize the symptoms as “life threatening” or “potentially
non-harmful” and triage themselves into clinics or hospitals. For instance, the SP with
unstable angina complains of chest pain which, even in countries with advanced health
systems, is often mistaken by patients as arising from heartburn, exertion or muscle strain.12
Similarly, wheezing and shortness of breath in asthma may arise from short-term allergies
to environmental contaminants. Finally, for any child with diarrhea, a key contribution of
a healthcare provider is to assess whether the symptoms reflect a bacterial or viral infection
(and thus whether the patient requires antibiotics) and the degree of dehydration - each of
which may be difficult for parents to assess.

3.2    Healthcare Provider Sampling and Summary Statistics

Our study first uses the census of healthcare providers described earlier to construct a near
representative sample of public and private healthcare providers in rural MP in three of
the five sampled districts. While our SPs were recruited from the districts in our sample,
they were never residents of the villages where they presented themselves to health providers.
Since providers in rural areas might know their patients, the SPs had to justify their presence
in the area by mentioning, for example, work-related travel or visits to relatives. For such
excuses to be plausible, our final sample dropped villages that could not be accessed by paved
roads and comprised of a total of 46 villages across three districts. While these sampled
villages have more providers on average than the entire representative set of villages, there
is no difference in the composition of providers across the frame and sample (Table 1).
    Since SPs visited clinics to obtain primary care, we excluded community health workers,
midwives, and providers that only made home visits. We then sampled all public clinics
(some large ones were sampled twice), and a maximum of six private providers in each
market for a total of 235 clinics, and SPs completed interactions with 224 providers.13
    Data from this ‘representative sample’ allow us to compare care provided across typical
public and private clinics in rural MP (all estimates are re-weighted by the inverse of the
  12
     The REACT study in the United States found that many chest pain patients delayed calling 911 because
they confused their symptoms with heartburn (Faxon and Lenfant, 2001).
  13
     In one case, a sampled village was near a market with over a hundred different healthcare providers. In
this one case, we sampled over 20 private providers. See Appendix A for further details on sampling.



                                                     9
sampling probabilities to provide population representative averages). However, this com-
parison would reflect a combination of varying composition of providers across public and
private clinics, as well as the effect of practicing in the private sector.
    To isolate the role of private sector practice, we identified the universe of public MBBS
doctors posted to PHCs and CHCs from all five study districts, even if these clinics were
not located in the village-based sampling scheme. We then identified the private practices
of these doctors (we found a private practice for 61 percent). We sampled and successfully
administered SP visits to 118 public MBBS doctors. Our ‘dual sample’ consists of the 88
doctors in this MBBS sample who also have a private practice, and for 69 of these, SPs
presented cases in both their public and private practices. The ‘dual sample’ enables a
comparison of the quality of care provided by the same doctor on the same case across
his public and private practices. SP completion rates in the dual sample were higher in
the private (93 percent) compared to public practices (75 percent), due to higher doctor
absence rates in their public practice, leading to non-completion despite multiple attempts.
If doctors who are more absent also provide lower quality care in their public sector practice,
our public-private differences may be under-estimated.
    Note that in the representative sample, the unit of analysis is the clinic and the SP
experience is recorded based on whoever they saw in the clinic. In the dual sample, the unit
of analysis is the doctor and the SP made repeat visits to see the sampled doctor if needed
(especially in the public practice). Appendix A and Tables A.1 and A.2 provide further
details on the sampling and construction of the representative and dual samples.
    Table 2 (columns 1-3) provides summary statistics for the representative sample of
providers. The providers are mostly middle-aged men and just under 60 percent have com-
pleted 12 or more years of education (Table 2, Panel A). Their practices have been open for
13-15 years, and private and public providers self-report an average of 16 and 28 patients per
day, respectively. Most practices (82 percent of private and 100 percent of public) dispense
medicines in the clinic itself and are equipped with the infrastructure and medical devices
required for routine examinations, such as stethoscopes and blood pressure cuffs. In the rep-
resentative sample, public providers are more likely to have an MBBS degrees (26 percent
vs. 8 percent). Private providers charged an average of Rs.51 per interaction. Consistent
with nominally priced public care, our SPs paid Rs.3.7 on average in public clinics.
    Column 4 presents summary statistics on the universe of public MBBS doctors, while
columns 5-7 present these for the 88 public MBBS doctors in the dual sample and test
if they are comparable. Overall, doctors with and without dual practices are similar on
observable characteristics, but the former have a longer tenure at their current location.
There is no significant difference in the equipment reported across these practices (Columns


                                              10
8-10), although the overall number of patients seen is higher in the public practice and the
fees charged are higher in the private practice.
    We randomly assigned three SPs to each sampled clinic in the representative sample, one
presenting each of the three cases. For the dual sample, we sent SPs presenting the asthma
and dysentery cases to both practices of the same provider.14 Since the rarity of unstable
angina could raise suspicions if providers saw two travelers presenting the same case (even
though visits were typically separated by a few weeks), we randomized the providers into
two groups - one that received an unstable angina patient in his/her private practice and
another that received the case in the public clinic. We show that the randomization was
valid in Table A.3.

3.3    Measuring Quality of Care

We use three measures of quality of care. Our first metric is the extent to which the provider
adhered to a checklist of questions and examinations required for making a differential diag-
nosis on each of the presented cases. For instance, these questions and exams would allow a
doctor to distinguish between heartburn (that has gastrointestinal origins) and a heart at-
tack, or between viral diarrhea and dysentery. These items represent a parsimonious subset
of the Indian government’s own guidelines, and the list we use was developed by a panel of
Indian and American doctors (the items are described for each case in Table A.4).15 While
the most transparent measure of checklist adherence is the percentage of checklist items
completed, we also compute an index score using Item Response Theory (IRT), which gives
more weight to items that discriminate better among providers. Developed in the context of
educational testing, IRT allows us to create a composite measure of provider quality based
on questions asked across all three cases, with lower weights on checklist items that are less
essential and higher weights on more essential questions that do a better job of discriminat-
ing between low and high quality providers (see Das and Hammer (2005) for details). We
  14
      Since we had 22 SPs and 3 cases, we made sure that the same case was presented by different SPs in
the public and private practices. To ensure that our standardized patients saw the sampled provider when
(s)he visited the public clinic and not a substitute, we first interviewed all providers in their private practices
or residences without revealing that we knew they also worked in the public sector, and we obtained either
their photograph or a detailed description of their physical appearance. SPs portrayed a dummy case (e.g.
headache) if the doctor was absent when they visited the public clinic, and we sent in other SPs on our
subsequent attempts. As we discuss later, it took significantly more trips to complete an SP case in the
public practice relative to the private one, due to the high rates of provider absence in the public practice.
   15
      The Indian government’s National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) has developed triage, management,
and treatment protocols for unstable angina, asthma, and dysentery in public clinics, suggesting clear guide-
lines for patients presenting with any of these conditions. The checklist we use is more parsimonious than
what the Indian government’s own guidelines recommend. If we use the more extensive checklist, this would
likely deflate the checklist adherence further below the low numbers that we document.



                                                        11
report both measures in our analysis.
    Second, we examine diagnoses - whether one was provided and whether it was correct.
We consider a diagnosis incorrect when it cannot even be considered partially correct - for
example, a provider tells an asthma patient that she has a gastrointestinal problem or an
unstable angina patient that the weather is causing his ailment. Our definitions of correct
and incorrect diagnoses are presented in Table A.4 - Panel B.
    Third, we evaluate the quality of treatment provided. SPs noted all treatment instruc-
tions received and retained all prescriptions and medication dispensed in the clinic. These
were then classified as correct, palliative, or unnecessary/harmful, based on inputs from our
panel of doctors, pharmacists, and a pharmaceutical company (see Appendix B.4 for details;
Table A.4 - Panel C lists specific treatments in each category). Since providers can dispense
or prescribe multiple medicines, we classify each medicine as correct, palliative, or unnec-
essary/harmful and thus allow the total treatment protocol to be classified into multiple
categories at the same time.
    Correct treatment refers to a treatment that is clinically indicated for the specific case
and that would relieve/mitigate the underlying condition. Palliative treatments are those
that may provide symptomatic relief, or treatments where the providers correctly identified
which system was being affected, but which on their own would not cure the patient of the
condition that was being presented - for example, allergy medicine for the asthma patient.
Treatments classified as unnecessary/harmful were neither correct nor palliative. We group
these two potentially distinct categories together because it was difficult to achieve consensus
among doctors on what should be considered harmful. Some, for example, would consider
antibiotics for the unstable angina patient unnecessary. Others took a longer view with
antibiotic resistance in mind and considered it as ultimately harmful. However, none of the
treatments we observed were directly contra-indicated, and hence most of these represent
unnecessary treatments as opposed to directly harmful ones.16
    However, even after classifying all medicines as correct, palliative, and unnecessary/harmful,
there are two challenges in coding the “correctness” of a treatment. The first is: How should
we interpret a referral when incentives are very different? In some cases, this may be a good
thing (if, for example, the provider refers a heart attack patient to a hospital). In other
cases, a “referral” may simply reflect a provider who deflected the case without directing the
  16
     If the overall quality of care were higher, we could have designed the SP case with a patient who is
allergic to certain kinds of antibiotics or who is on regular medication for another illness. In this case, many
treatments would have been harmful and the case would have required the doctor to watch out for drug
interactions. Given the low-level of overall quality of care, designing such an SP case would not have been
very useful at discriminating quality because SPs were never asked about existing allergies or whether they
were currently taking any medication.



                                                      12
patient usefully.17 Since we did not send the SPs to the place that was referred, there is no
obvious way of coding the quality of referrals. We therefore try to be conservative in our
main analysis and do not treat referrals as correct treatments. When we repeat the analysis
treating referrals as correct in the angina case, our results are unchanged (results below).
    A second challenge arises from the proxy nature of the dysentery case. Many providers
did not provide a treatment because the child was not presented and instead asked to see the
child. We therefore report results for ‘checklist completion’ using all three cases, but drop
the dysentery case for ‘diagnosis’ and ‘treatment’ because the patient (the sick child) was
not actually presented for this case. All results are robust to dropping the case completely.


4   Theoretical Framework

A simple theoretical framework helps to interpret our results, by characterizing the optimal
effort and treatment choices that a provider is likely to make with and without market
incentives, and the effects of their choices on patient health outcomes. We present the
main insights here, with full derivations in Appendix C. The interaction between doctors
and patients is modelled in two stages - consultation and treatment - where providers first
engage in (Bayesian) learning about the patient’s condition and then treat. A patient enters
the clinic and presents her symptoms, based on which the provider forms a prior belief about
the underlying disease that caused the symptoms given by:
                                                                     !
                                                  prior          1
                                              n           ∼ N ν,                                          (1)
                                                                 α
   The provider, who has medical knowledge, K, exerts effort e and draws a signal s ∼
N (ntrue , β1 ), where ntrue is the correct underlying state and β = eK. Providers improve the
precision of the signal by either exerting higher effort, or being more knowledgeable, or both.
   The provider’s posterior belief is then:
                                                                         !
                                              post           1
                                          n          ∼ N µ,                                               (2)
                                                            α+β
    where µ is the posterior mean given by:18
  17
     Field notes suggest that this often happened in public clinics where the doctor was absent. The available
provider did not ask questions or conduct any examinations, and told the SP to go elsewhere. By necessity,
this is coded as a “referral” in our data, although the patient received no information from the interaction.
  18
     Note that the marginal effect of e on posterior precision diminishes as e becomes larger as illustrated
in Figure 1 (Panel B). Also, as in Rosenzweig (1995) a doctor with more knowledge may also have a more
accurate prior to begin with, in addition to learning more with additional effort. We abstract away from this
point to focus on deriving predictions for effort, treatment, and health outcomes for the same doctor across
public and private practices. This corresponds to our dual sample.


                                                           13
                                                αν   βs
                                          µ=       +                                                   (3)
                                               α+β α+β
     In the second stage, the provider makes treatment choices based on the posterior belief
about the true state. The choice of treatments is expressed as an interval [µ − n, µ + n],
which maps into the empirical observation that most providers in our setting provide multiple
medications. A wider range of treatments has a higher probability of covering the true illness
and curing the patient of the current ailment but also increases long-term health costs.19 The
patient’s health outcome given e and n is denoted by H(e, n) = Pe (n) − h(n), where Pe (n)
is the probability that ntrue is covered by the treatment and h(n) is the health cost which
increases with n. Thus the optimal outcome for a patient is to receive only the correct
treatment, and not receive any additional unnecessary treatments, and we can think of a
high-quality provider as someone who provides this outcome, enabled by a precise posterior
distribution of the true illness.
     In practice, providers will choose effort and treatments to maximize their own utility,
which may not be aligned with those of patients. We model provider utility as having three
components. First, providers care about curing their patients and overall patient health.
This can be attributed partly to altruism, intrinsic motivation to do the right thing, training
and professionalism (Hippocratic oath), peer pressure and monitoring, and the liability and
malpractice regime. We capture all of these factors with the parameter φ, which should be
thought about as representing the extent to which providers value patient health in their
utility in a setting without high-powered financial incentives. Thus, a higher φ represents
greater alignment between provider and patient utility.
     Second, providers also care about financial rewards, which in turn depends on how they
are compensated. Under market pricing, providers can charge a consultation fee (τ e) that
is a function of a piece rate τ (determined by their qualifications and reputation) and effort
expended (which is observable to patients), and a dispensing fee that increases linearly with
the number of medicines provided. They also have an incentive for improving patient health
because this helps build their reputation and raises future demand (which we can think
of as an increase in their consulting piece rate over time). However, patients can observe
whether they were “cured” more easily than the costs of excessive medication, and this creates
an incentive to over-treat because over-treatment increases the probability of spanning the
true illness and providing a correct treatment. We denote the observed health outcome as
H o (e, n), and true health as H(e, n).
     Third, providers’ treatment choice may respond to patient demand. Patients may self-
  19
     This is a standard assumption in the medical literature and can be motivated by either the building of
resistance to unnecessary drugs or by the potential for adverse interactions between drugs.


                                                    14
diagnose their illnesses and demand medications that they think they need,20 or may simply
seek pain-killers, steroids, and other drugs that provide symptomatic relief but are medically
inappropriate for their condition. In such cases, it can be costly for providers to not provide
medicines that patients demand, and we model patient-induced demand as a communication
cost paid by providers to convince patients about the providers’ choice of treatment.
   In the absence of market incentives and patient-induced demand, providers optimize over:

                                    V1 = max
                                          e
                                             {−c(e) + V2 (e)}                                     (4)

                                     V2 (e) = max{φH(e, n)}                                       (5)
                                                n

   where V1 and V2 (e) are the maximized utilities in the consultation and treatment stage,
and they choose a corresponding level of effort and treatment. Since there is no marginal
incentive for either effort or treatment, these will depend only on φ and the cost of effort.
The provider then chooses n that maximizes H(e, n) in the treatment stage (assuming that
medicines are provided free to patients as is the norm in public clinics).
   Under market incentives, providers maximize:

                                 V1 = max
                                       e
                                          {−c(e) + τ e + V2 (e)}                                  (6)

                            V2 (e) = max{φH(e, n) + δH o (e, n) + np}                             (7)
                                       n

    where τ is a piece-rate consultation fee, δ represents the extent to which improving
patients’ current observed health improves the provider’s reputation in the market and gen-
erates future pay-offs, and p is a per unit profit from n. Because the health cost of n is not
fully observed in the market but the provider derives pecuniary benefits from n, he chooses
excessive n where H(e, n) is decreasing in n. However, compensation for effort (τ e) and
concern about reputation induces higher effort, which yields a more accurate posterior and
increases the probability of spanning the true illness even with a smaller n, which pushes
towards a smaller n. Note also that n is bounded from going to infinity because the costs of
excessive medication are observed by patients (albeit imperfectly), and also because doctors
place a positive weight φ on H(e, n), which is decreasing in n.
    Figures 1 and 2 illustrate the main insights of the model. Market incentives typically lead
to higher effort, as shown in panel (A) of Figure 1. When φ is low, providers choose low levels
of effort without other incentives, and the difference in the level of effort with and without
market incentives leads to a large difference in the posterior precision (panel (B)). Thus,
  20
    For instance, Cohen, Dupas and Schaner (2015) show that patients with a fever in Kenya often self-
diagnose themselves as having malaria and try to obtain anti-malaria treatments though these are not
medically warranted.


                                                 15
while market compensation provides an incentive to over-treat, it also provides incentives
for greater diagnostic effort, which yields a more precise posterior. Since increased posterior
precision reduces the benefit of choosing large n, it is possible that n may be smaller with
market incentives as shown in panel (C). With higher effort leading to a greater probability
of providing the correct treatment and a smaller n (due to increased diagnostic precision) the
resulting health outcome could be better with market incentives. However, as φ increases,
the default level of effort without market incentives also increases, and the marginal gain
from additional effort on posterior precision is lower (panel (B)). In this case, the benefits of
additional effort under market incentives are outweighed by the incentives to prescribe more
(Panel (D)). Providers choose larger n with market incentives, and the health outcomes are
likely to be worse than the case without market incentives.
    Figure 2 summarizes this point and shows that market incentives are likely to lead to
worse outcomes in settings with a high φ. This may be typical in high-income countries with
better oversight of medical training and practice, which is the context where (Arrow, 1963)
is implicitly set. However, in settings with very low φ as seen in India and other low-income
countries - exemplified by high doctor absence rates (Chaudhury et al., 2006) - it is possible
that market incentives may lead to better outcomes.21
    Finally, we also add patient-induced demand to the provider’s optimization problem.
With this cost, we get n closer to the value which the patient demands, though the cost is
lower for providers who exert higher consultation effort (because this effort makes it easier
to convince patients that their desired n is not good for them). This mechanism provides a
plausible explanation for the high levels of unnecessary treatment we observe among public
providers (who have no marginal incentive to do so).22
    We present our framework formally in Appendix C, where we specify and solve the
provider’s utility maximization problem with and without market incentives, and show how
patient health outcomes vary as a function of φ and the presence of market incentives. We
do not endogenize the dynamic price setting process - because the static framework maps
into our data and is adequate to interpret our empirical results. A theoretical extension that
provides a way of endogenizing the market incentives is available on request.
  21
      See Muralidharan and Sundararaman (2011) for an adaptation of the multi-tasking framework of Holm-
strom and Milgrom (1991) and Baker (1992) that yields similar insights in the context of performance-linked
pay for teachers (showing that outcomes could improve under performance pay if the default level of teacher
effort was low, but could worsen if the default level was high). A key difference in our context is that
the high-powered incentives do not come from administratively set performance-linked bonuses, but market
rewards for effort and reputation.
   22
      Note that patient-induced demand is not necessary to explain high levels of unnecessary treatment in
public clinics (though it may partly do so). Since a less precise posterior is correlated with giving out more
medication, our model predicts that less knowledgeable providers as well as those who put in low effort will
give out more medicines.


                                                     16
5        Results - Quality of Care across Public and Private Providers

5.1       Estimation Framework

Our main interest is in estimating differences in the quality of care that patients received
from providers in the public and private sectors. In the representative sample, we estimate:

                   q(i(scp)m) = β0 + β1 Privateip + β2 Xp + δs + δc + δm + i(scp)m                     (8)

    where we regress each measure of quality q (checklist completion, diagnosis, and treat-
ment) in interaction i between a standardized patient s presenting case c, and a provider
p in market m on an indicator for the sector (Private), with β1 being the term of interest.
Since we pool cases and SPs and there may be systematic differences across them, all our
specifications include SP and case fixed effects (δs and δc ). We report three sets of estimates
for each quality measure. First, we include only SP and case fixed effects; then we add mar-
ket fixed effects so that comparisons reflect relative performance in the same market (note
that not all markets had both types of providers); finally, we add controls for provider and
practice characteristics Xp , to adjust for observable differences across providers including
demographics, reported qualifications, and number of patients waiting during the visit.
    While β1 provides a useful estimate of the differences in quality across public and private
providers in a representative sample of providers, it is a composite estimate that includes
differences in unobservable provider characteristics, as well as the effect of practicing in the
private sector. To isolate the impact of private sector practice, we re-estimate equation 8 in
the dual sample that only includes data from the cases where we sent the SPs to the public
and private practices of the same MBBS doctor. We report three sets of estimates here as
well. First, we include only SP and case fixed effects;23 then we add district fixed effects (since
the dual practice sample was drawn from the universe of public MBBS doctors practicing
in each district rather than the universe of providers practicing in sampled villages, as was
the case for the representative sample); finally, we include controls for observable differences
across the public and private practices of the doctors.
    23
     Note that we do not include provider fixed effects since the angina case was not presented in both the
public and private practices of the same doctor, and will drop out if we do so. Since the case was randomly
allocated across the public and private practices of the doctor and assignment was balanced on measures of
quality on the other case (see Table A.3), our estimates will be an unbiased estimate of the average quality
difference across the public and private practices of public MBBS doctors. We also estimate equation 8 with
provider fixed effects and the results are unchanged (but driven by variation in the asthma case).




                                                    17
5.2   Completion of Essential Checklist of History Taking and Examinations

Columns 1-3 in Table 3 present results from estimating equation 8 in the representative
sample. Our outcome variable is ‘provider effort’, measured by consultation length and
checklist completion. While the results are similar across the three specifications, we focus
our discussion on the estimates in Panel B, because they compare relative performance within
the same market (without controlling for provider characteristics), which is the relevant
choice set for patients. The base level of effort among representative public providers was
low. The average public provider spent 2.4 minutes with the SP in a typical interaction
and completed 16 percent of checklist items. Private providers spent 1.5 minutes more per
patient and completed 7.4 percentage points more items on the checklist (62 percent and
47 percent more than the public providers respectively). When evaluated on the IRT scaled
score, private providers scored 0.61 standard deviations higher. Figure A.1 shows that time
spent with the patient is strongly correlated with the number of checklist items completed,
which points to the credibility of the SP presenting the case, as more time spent with the
patient led to greater checklist completion.
    Columns 4-6 repeat the analysis in the dual sample, with similar results. Public MBBS
doctors appear to be more productive than the typical public provider in the representative
sample (many of whom are unqualified) because they complete a slightly higher fraction
of checklist items (18 percent) in 35 percent less time (0.9 minutes less). However, this
additional productivity is not used to complete more checklist items in the public practice,
but rather to reduce the time spent with patients (1.56 minutes versus 2.4 minutes in the
representative sample). In their private practices, the same doctors doubled consultation
length, completed 50 percent more checklist items, and scored 0.73 standard deviations higher
on the IRT-scaled measure of quality. It is worth comparing these differences with those
obtained in interventions that are regarded as highly successful. For instance, Gertler and
Vermeersch (2013) look at checklist completion as a result of the introduction of performance
pay in Rwanda. They find that performance pay increased checklist completion by 0.13
standard deviations; we find that the difference in checklist completion across public and
private practices of the same doctor is over five times larger.
    These differences are seen clearly in Figures 3-5. Figure 3 plots the cumulative distribu-
tion functions (CDF) of the IRT-score (based on checklist completion) of public and private
providers in the representative sample, Figure 4 does so for the dual sample, and Figure 5
pools all four samples together (Figures A.2 - A.4 plot the corresponding distributions). The
distribution of checklist completion for private providers first-order stochastically dominates
that of the public providers (Figure 3) and the corresponding distribution for the private


                                              18
practices of public providers also first-order stochastically dominates that of their public
practices (Figure 4). Finally checklist completion is higher for public MBBS doctors than a
representative public provider (as would be expected given that the former are more qual-
ified), but it is lower for the public MBBS doctors even relative to a representative sample
of private providers (most of whom are unqualified, Figure 5).
    Focusing on individual checklist items (Table A.5) shows that private providers in both
samples are significantly more likely to perform several items on the checklist on all three
cases and are no less likely to perform any of the items (except for one in asthma). In
addition to β1 , Table 3 (columns 1-3) also shows that there is no correlation between the
possession of any formal medical qualification and checklist completion, suggesting that
formal qualifications may be a poor predictor of provider effort.

5.3   Diagnosis

Results for diagnosis (Table 4) follow the same format as Table 3 but the dependent variables
of interest are whether any diagnosis was given and whether a correct diagnosis was given
(both conditional and unconditional on uttering a diagnosis). In the representative sample,
26 percent of public providers offer a diagnosis, of whom only 15 percent offer a correct one.
The unconditional probability of a correct diagnosis was only 4 percent.
    Private providers in the representative sample are more likely to offer a diagnosis but
are not more likely to offer a correct one. The probability of offering a correct diagnosis is
higher in the dual practice sample (15 percent vs. 4 percent), which is not surprising since
these providers are all trained MBBS doctors. Even among these doctors, however, there
is no difference in the rate of correct diagnosis between their public and private practices.
Overall, the summary statistics, our price regressions (seen later), and our field work suggest
that pronouncing a correct diagnosis (or even just a diagnosis) is not seen by providers (and
the market) as being essential in this setting, where patient literacy levels are low.

5.4   Treatment

Table 5 reports on several outcomes related to the treatment offered, coded as discussed in
section 3.3. The probability of receiving at least one correct treatment from a representative
public provider was 21 percent. However, they offered non-indicated treatments at much
higher rates, with a 53 percent probability of providing a palliative treatment, and a 74
percent probability of providing an unnecessary treatment. Since the majority of providers
provide unnecessary treatments, the probability of receiving only a correct treatment and
nothing more is 2.6 percent. We can also examine two potential proxies for over-treatment -


                                              19
the rate of antibiotic prescriptions and the total number of medicines provided. Antibiotics
were prescribed or dispensed in 26 percent of interactions (though they were not indicated for
the asthma and angina cases), and an average of 2 medicines per interaction were dispensed.
    In the representative sample, we do not find a significant difference between public and
private providers on the probability of providing a correct, palliative, or unnecessary treat-
ment; however, point estimates suggest that private providers have a higher probability of
providing both correct and unnecessary treatments. Private providers in the representative
sample also provide significantly more medicines (over 3 medicines on average, which is 50
percent greater than the public clinics).
    In the dual practice sample, we see that treatments provided in the private practice
strictly dominate those provided in the public practice of the same doctor. The rate of
correct treatment is 37 percent higher (14 percentage points on a base of 38 percent), the
rate of providing a clinically non-indicated palliative treatment is 18 percent lower (11.6
percentage points on a base of 63 percent), and the rate of antibiotic provision is 25 percent
lower (12.1 percentage points on a base of 48 percent) in the private relative to the public
practice of the same doctor.

5.5    Knowledge and Effort of Public and Private Providers

As predicted by the model, there is a strong correlation between higher provider effort and
probability of giving a correct treatment (Figure 6). Nevertheless, the results in Tables
3 and 5 suggest that the higher effort exerted by private providers in the representative
sample does not translate into better treatment outcomes. A natural explanation is that
the representative private provider has a lower level of medical knowledge, but compensates
with higher effort, yielding comparable overall levels of treatment accuracy (in line with
our theoretical framework). To examine this possibility further, we use the ‘discrimination’
parameter of each checklist item (as estimated by the IRT-model; see Table A.5), to classify
individual items into terciles of low, medium, and high discrimination items. Here, higher
discrimination items are those that are more effective at distinguishing provider quality.
In the model, these would correspond to questions and exams that enable a provider to
construct a more precise posterior distribution (since β = eK, this can be interpreted as a
provider with more knowledge spending the effort more efficiently).24
    Table A.6 reports the same specifications as in Table 3 but compares public and private
providers on checklist completion for different levels of item discrimination. As expected,
providers are much less likely to complete high discrimination items on the checklist (consis-
  24
     The classification of items into terciles of difficulty is done within each case, but the results are robust
to classifying the items jointly across all cases as well. The terciles for each item are indicated in Table A.5.


                                                       20
tent with low overall quality of care). In the representative sample, private providers com-
plete 11 percentage points more of the low-discrimination checklist items but are no more
likely to complete high-discrimination checklist items. However, doctors in the dual sample
are significantly more likely to complete both low and high-discrimination items in their
private practice. These results suggest that while the representative private provider does
exert more effort, their lower knowledge leads to this effort being directed towards questions
that are easy to ask and interpret, and may limit the marginal product of their effort. The
results also highlight the importance of using the dual sample for holding provider knowledge
and unobservable characteristics constant, and isolating the effect of market incentives on
quality of care provided.

5.6   Robustness of checklist and treatment results

Our main results pool data across cases to maximize power. For completeness, we also
show the results from Tables 3-5 by case (Table A.7). The superior performance of private
providers on consultation length and checklist completion is seen in each of the three cases
and in both the representative and the dual samples. Consistent with the overall results,
private providers in the representative sample do not do better on diagnosis or treatment in
any of the individual cases. In the dual sample, MBBS doctors were 14 percentage points
more likely to correctly diagnose and 28 percentage points more likely to correctly treat the
unstable angina (heart attack) case in their private practice relative to their public practices.
In the asthma case, they are 11 percentage points more likely to offer a correct treatment
(but this is not statistically significant given the smaller case-specific sample size).
    We confirm that the results in Table 5 are robust to alternative definitions of correct
treatment. Table A.8 shows the specific treatments offered by case, including referral fre-
quency. Table A.9 shows that the results in Table 5 are robust to treating all referrals as
a correct treatment. As discussed earlier, we include the dysentery case for the analysis
of checklist completion but exclude it from the analysis of correct diagnosis and treatment
because of the large (and differential) fraction of cases where the provider did not provide
these and instead asked to see the child (see Table A.8). Since checklist completion may
also be censored in such cases, we also present the checklist completion results without the
dysentery case and the results of Table 3 continue to hold (Table A.10). We also show the
core results with controls for clinic-level infrastructure and facilities (Table A.11), and all
the results continue to hold, suggesting that the results are not being driven by differences
in facilities and infrastructure across public and private clinics.




                                               21
6        Results - Pricing and Cost Effectiveness

6.1       Correlates of Prices Charged among Private Providers

Table 6 presents correlations between prices charged and our various metrics of healthcare
quality in the representative sample, dual sample, and pooled sample. The odd columns
present binary correlations, while the even columns present multiple regressions. The market
rewards several measures of quality of care including time spent, checklist completion rates,
and provision of a correct treatment (Table 6, Columns 1, 3 and 5). On the other hand, there
is no price premium for pronouncing a correct diagnosis, and a price penalty for referrals;
whether this penalty is optimal (without a penalty, every provider should just refer the
patient) or reduces provider incentives to refer patients adequately is unclear. Finally, there
is a price premium for dispensing medicines, but not for prescribing them. The price charged
is increasing in the total number of medicines dispensed, which may provide incentives for
the provision of excessive medication and is consistent with our theoretical framework.
    Most of these patterns are repeated in the multiple regressions (Table 6, Columns 2,
4 and 6). Note, however, that correct treatment is no longer rewarded in the multiple
regressions. This is likely due to the high correlation between the provision of a correct
treatment and the checklist completion rate (Figure 6), and the use of medicines. Thus
the market appears to reward observable measures of quality such as time spent, checklist
completion, and dispensing medicines (which are correlated with the provision of correct
treatment), but patients do not appear to be able to discern whether they received the
correct treatment conditioning on these observable measures.
    The correlates of pricing observed in Table 6 are in line with those predicted by our
modeling framework and point to both strengths and weaknesses of market-based incentives
for healthcare provision. On one hand, there appear to be positive incentives for the provision
of better quality care (including more effort and providing the correct treatment). On the
other hand, the results are consistent with evidence from other settings, which show that
markets for credence goods with asymmetric information between providers and customers
often reward over-provision to the detriment of customer welfare. Overall, the results suggest
that the market rewards providers who “do more”, which is correlated with doing more
“good” things as well as more “unnecessary” things.25
    In sharp contrast to the market for private healthcare, the public sector rewards qualifi-
cations and age (experience), but there is no correlation between provider wages and any of
our measures of quality including the time spent, checklist completion, or correct treatment
    25
    Note that the results are robust to excluding observations where we were not able to identify the medicines
provided and classify them as correct or not (see Table A.12).


                                                      22
(Table 7). Since public employees receive non-pecuniary rewards for better performance
through more desirable job postings, we also present correlations between the desirability
of a posting and measures of quality and again find that the only significant correlate of a
better posting is age - suggesting that the public sector does not reward the quality of care
provided by doctors with either more pay or with more desirable job postings.26

6.2       Comparative Cost Effectiveness

While healthcare in the public sector is free or nominally priced to the user, it is not cost-free
to the tax payer. Table A.13 presents estimates of the cost per patient in the public sector,
and calculates that the cost per patient interaction is around Rs.240. This is a conservative
calculation because it uses only the wage cost in the public sector and does not include any
cost of infrastructure, facilities, equipment, medicines or administration. By contrast, the
fees charged are the only source of revenue for private providers and hence will cover all
operating costs. Thus, even though private providers charge higher consultation rates than
public providers (as seen in Table 2), the per-consultation fee of Rs.51 charged by private
providers is less than a fourth of the cost of a patient interaction in the public sector.27


7        Robustness

7.1       Real Patients

The use of SPs to measure quality of healthcare presents several advantages over the next
best method of clinical observations. However, SPs are limited in the number and types of
cases that can be presented. Further, we may worry that the SPs present “off equilibrium”
situations in the market that do not extend to its general functioning. We therefore supple-
mented our data collection after completing the SP modules by conducting day-long clinical
observations to code actual provider-patient interactions. We conducted these observations
in both the representative and dual samples, and observed a provider in both his/her private
and public practices. While we cannot code the actual quality of care from these observations
(since we do not observe the underlying illness), we record several observable characteristics
of each patient interaction based on over 1000 interactions in both samples.
    26
     These results are similar to those found in publicly-provided education in India and Pakistan, where
teacher salaries increase with qualifications and seniority, but are not correlated with their effectiveness at
raising test scores (Muralidharan, 2013; Das and Bau, 2014).
  27
     Note that we assume that there is a comparable case mix for primary-health visits across public and
private facilities, as is standard in comparative cost effectiveness analysis of this sort. This is also consistent
with our data from observing real patients (see section 7 below) where we observe considerable overlap in
the symptoms presented across public and private clinics.



                                                        23
     Table 8 reports results from estimating Eq. 8 with data from real patient interactions.
Private providers spend more time with patients, ask more questions, and are more likely
to conduct a physical exam. They also give out more medicines on average. Results from
the dual sample are also remarkably similar to those in Tables 3-5, with private providers
still exhibiting higher effort but not providing more medicines. Thus, while our SPs present
only three specific cases, our results from observing real interactions between patients and
providers across the entire set of cases seen in a typical day are very similar to those from
the SPs, suggesting that our SP-based results may be valid for a wider range of cases.

7.2   Statistical Discrimination

One issue to consider in interpreting our dual-sample results is the possibility that doc-
tors expect to see different patients across their public and private practices, and that the
differences we observe do not reflect market incentives as much as statistical discrimination.
    We address this concern in three ways. First, we note that the cases are both standard
and ubiquitous in our setting. Thus, there is no reason to expect that the optimal treatment
protocol should vary by the affluence level of the patient or their ability to afford follow up
treatments. Second, we conducted detailed exit interviews with a sample of patients from
each clinic that we conducted physician observations in, and find that there aren’t many
differences on average in patient characteristics across public and private clinics (see Table
A.14). Finally, since there are some differences in average patient characteristics across
public and private clinics in Table A.14, we construct a propensity score of the likelihood
that a patient with a given set of observable characteristics will be seen in a public or private
clinic, and show that there is considerable common support in these distributions (Figure
A.5). In other words, for the majority of observable characteristics, it is not the case that
patients go exclusively to a public or private clinic, suggesting that our results are unlikely to
be explained by statistical discrimination (see Appendix D for a more detailed discussion).

7.3   Strategic Diversion of Effort in the Dual Sample

A further issue in interpreting our dual-sample results is the possibility that doctors with
private practices may deliberately under-provide effort in their free public practices to shift
demand to their fee-for-service private practices (see Jayachandran (2014) for a similar ex-
ample from education). While we cannot fully rule out this possibility, there is suggestive
evidence against this. We compare public providers with and without a private practice and
find that providers with a private practice are not any more likely to refer away an SP (Table
A.15). Providers with a dual practice do provide less effort in their public practices relative


                                               24
to those without a private practice, but the lack of any evidence of differences in referral
rates suggest that these differences may reflect selection rather than strategic behavior with
more publicly conscientious doctors being less likely to have a private practice.
    The relevant policy question is whether doctors will start exerting more effort in their
public practice if the option of private practice did not exist. But it is worth noting that
private practice by public MBBS doctors was illegal in MP during the time of our study,
and that over 60 percent of providers still had a private practice, consistent with the idea
that this is a low φ environment.

7.4       Alternative Comparisons in the Representative Sample

Finally, our representative sample analysis compares the average public and private provider
in a market, but it is not clear if the average is the correct metric for quality since patients
can choose the best provider in the market. We therefore present an alternative comparison
between the best public and best private provider in each market in Table A.16 and find
that our results are very similar to those in Tables 3-5.


8        Discussion and Conclusion

Using an audit methodology, we present the first set of results on the quality of public and
privately provided healthcare in a low-income country that features a de facto unregulated
private sector. Our data suggest that patients in our setting have few good options for
healthcare - public or private. Private sector providers, the majority of whom have no formal
medical training, spend more time with patients and are more likely to adhere to a checklist
of recommended case-specific questions and examinations, but their effectiveness appears to
be ultimately limited by their low level of medical knowledge. Public sector clinics, though
theoretically staffed by qualified providers, are characterized by lower provider effort. Posts
are vacant and doctors are frequently absent, so that even in a public sector clinic, the patient
often sees a provider without formal training. The lower effort (compared to the private
sector), appears to offset the benefit of more qualified providers in the public sector, and
ultimately there is little difference in correct treatment or the overuse of incorrect medicines
across a representative sample of public and private providers. Further, our best estimates
of cost per patient interaction suggest that the public healthcare system in India spends at
least four times more but does not deliver better outcomes than the private sector.28
    28
    These results mirror recent experimental evidence on primary education. Muralidharan and Sundarara-
man (2015) find that private schools in rural India deliver equal or superior learning outcomes than public
schools, even though public schools spend three times more per student. Private school teachers are less
qualified than public teachers, but exert much higher levels of effort. Thus, private providers in both primary


                                                      25
    Comparing the same provider in the public and private sector allows us to isolate the ef-
fect of market-based accountability in the private sector and compare it with administrative
accountability in the public sector. The first appears to perform better on all counts. Ad-
herence to checklists and correct treatment rates are higher in the provider’s private clinic,
and the extent of unnecessary treatments is no different.
    These results are consistent with the hedonic earnings-effort relationship in the private
sector, which is absent in the public sector. Providers in the private sector earn more when
they complete more of the medically necessary checklist and when they provide a correct
treatment, showing that the market rewards certain key aspects of high quality. However,
the market also rewards unnecessary treatments (consistent with healthcare being a credence
good), and patients frequently receive treatments that they do not need, and pay for them.
    Despite market incentives for over-treatment, one surprising result is that the rate of
provision of unnecessary medication is equally high in the public clinics. Our theoretical
framework provides a possible explanation for this result by showing that unnecessary treat-
ments are not only driven by market incentives, but can also arise from low diagnostic effort.
In our setting of low φ, the increase in posterior precision enabled by higher effort in the
private sector may offset the incentives for over-treatment under market incentives, yielding
no net difference in the provision of unnecessary treatment. Overall, our results suggest that
in low φ environments, the effort advantage of the private sector may outweigh the credence
good costs of privately-provided healthcare.
    Indian and global health policy debates have been hampered by a lack of empirical
evidence on the quality of clinical interactions in the public and private sectors. Under the
status quo, considerable attention has been focused on inadequate access to publicly-provided
healthcare and the need to increase spending on the public healthcare system (Planning
Commission of India, 2013). Our results suggest that enthusiasm for the public sector as
the primary source of primary care services in resource poor settings has to be tempered by
the extent to which administrative accountability is enforced in the system, and that poor
incentives for effort may be a binding constraint to quality in the public system of healthcare
delivery (where providers are more qualified).29
health and education appear to make up for lower qualifications with higher effort, yielding outcomes no
worse than those provided by the public sector - which have much higher costs per student/patient.
   29
      Designing incentives for public healthcare systems is a non-trivial problem, since fee-for-service com-
pensation models are likely to induce over-treatment (Clemens and Gottlieb, 2014). On the other hand,
it is also worth noting that the status quo public healthcare system in India provides negative incentives
to doctors for exerting effort, since greater effort is likely to lead to an increased load of patients with no
increase in compensation. One option worth evaluating could be the use of a capitation-fee based model that
compensates providers for the number of patients who register with their practice (rewarding a long-term
reputation for quality), but that limits financial incentives for over-treating patients in a given interaction.



                                                      26
    On the other hand, the marginal returns to better training and credentialing may be
higher for private healthcare providers (who have better incentives for effort). However,
current policy thinking often points in the opposite direction, with a focus on hiring, training,
and capacity building in the public sector on one hand (without much attention to their
incentives for effort), and considerable resistance to training and providing legitimacy to
unqualified private providers on the other (Reddy et al., 2011; Shiva Kumar et al., 2011;
Planning Commission of India, 2013).
    This viewpoint is often justified by assuming that patients - particularly those who are
poor and illiterate - make poor decisions regarding their health care. While certainly possible,
a more nuanced understanding of patient behavior in low-income settings requires better
empirical evidence on the actual quality of care obtained from different types of healthcare
providers. Our paper presents some of the first evidence on this question, and expanding
this methodology to other conditions and settings will allow for a richer understanding of the
functioning of healthcare systems in settings with low resources and administrative capacity.

References
Arrow, Kenneth J. 1963. “Uncertainty and The Welfare Economics of Medical Care.” American Economic
  Review, 63(5): 941–973.

Ayres, Ian, and Peter Siegelman. 1995. “Race and Gender Discrimination in Bargaining for a New Car.”
  American Economic Review, 85(3): 304–21.

Baker, George. 1992. “Incentives Contracts and Performance Measurement.” Journal of Political Economy,
  100: 598–614.

Banerjee, Abhijit, Angus Deaton, and Esther Duflo. 2004. “Wealth, Health, and Health Services in
  Rural Rajasthan.” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 94(2): 326–300.

Banerjee, Abhijit V, Esther Duflo, and Rachel Glennerster. 2008. “Putting a Band-Aid on a Corpse:
  Incentives for Nurses in the Public Health Care System.” Journal of European Economic Association, 6(2-
  3): 487–500.

Black, R E, S Cousens, H L Johnson, and et al. 2010. “Global, regional and national causes of child
  mortality in 2008: a systematic analysis.” The Lancet, 375(9730): 1969–87.

Chaudhury, Nazmul, Jeffery Hammer, Michael Kremer, Karthik Muralidharan, and F. Halsey
  Rogers. 2006. “Missing in Action: Teacher and Health Worker Absence in Developing Countries.” Journal
  of Economic Perspectives, 20(1): 91–116.

Clemens, Joshua, and Jeffrey Gottlieb. 2014. “Do Physicians’ Financial Incentives Affect Medical
  Treatment and Patient Health?” American Economic Review, 104(4): 1320–49.

Coarasa, Jorge, Jishnu Das, and Elizabeth Gummerson. 2014. “Evaluating the Evidence on Public
  and Private Sector Quality of Care in Low and Middle Income Countries.”

Cohen, Jessica, Pascaline Dupas, and Simone Schaner. 2015. “Price Subsidies, Diagnostic Tests, and
  Targeting of Malaria Treatment.” American Economic Review, 105(2): 609–645.


                                                   27
CPR. 2011. “Mapping Medical Providers in Rural India: Four Key Trends.” Center For Policy Research.

Das, Jishnu, Ada Kwan, Ben Daniels, Srinath Satyanarayana, Ramnath Subbaraman, Sofi
  Bergkvist, Ranendra K Das, Veena Das, and Madhukar Pai. 2015. “First use of the standardized
  patient methodology to assess quality of Tuberculosis care.” Lancet Infectious Diseases, forthcoming.

Das, Jishnu, Alaka Holla, Veena Das, Manoj Mohanan, Diana Tabak, and Brian Chan. 2012.
  “The Quality of Medical Care in Clinics: Evidence from a Standardized Patients Study in a Low-Income
  Settting.” Health Affairs, 31(12): 2274–2784.

Das, Jishnu, and Jeffery Hammer. 2005. “Which Doctor? Combining Vignettes and Item Response
  Theory to Measure Doctor Quality.” Journal of Development Economics, 78(3): 348–383.

Das, Jishnu, and Jeffery Hammer. 2007. “Money for Nothing: The Dire Straits of Medical Practice in
  Delhi, India.” Journal of Development Economics, 83(1): 1–36.

Das, Jishnu, and Natalie Bau. 2014. “The Misallocation of Pay and Productivity in the Public Sector:
  Evidence from the Labor Market for Teachers.” Working Paper.

DHS. 2007. “National Family Health Survey (NFHS-3) 2005-2006: Key Findings.”

Dulleck, Uwe, and Rudolf Kerschbamer. 2006. “On Doctors, Mechanics, and Computer Specialists:
 The Economics of Credence Goods.” Journal of Economic Literature, 44: 5–42.

Dulleck, Uwe, Rudolf Kerschbamer, and Matthias Sutter. 2011. “The Economics of Credence Goods:
 An Experiment on the Role of Liability, Verifiability, Reputation and Competition.” American Economic
 Review, 101(3): 526–555.

Faxon, David, and Claude Lenfant. 2001. “Timing is everything - motivating patients to call 911 on
  onset of acute myocardial infarction.” Circulation, 104(11): 1210.

Gertler, Paul J, and Christel Vermeersch. 2013. “Using Performance Incentives to Improve Medical
  Care Productivity and Health Outcomes.” Working Paper.

Goldberg, Penelopi K. 1996. “Dealer Price Discrimination in New Car Purchases: Evidence from the
 Consumer Expenditure Survey.” Journal of Political Economy, 104(3): 622–54.

Grepin, Karen. 2014. “The role of the private sector in delivering maternal and child health services in
  low-income and middle-income countries: an observational, longitudinal analysis.” The Lancet, 387(S7).

Gruber, Jonathan, and Maria Owings. 1996. “Physician Financial Incentives and Cesarean Section
  Delivery.” RAND Jounal of Economics, 27(1): 99–123.

Hanna, Rema, and Iqbal Dhaliwal. 2015. “Making a Deal with the Devil: Experiental Evidence on
 Bureaucratic Reform in India.” Working Paper.

Holmstrom, Bengt, and Paul Milgrom. 1991. “Multi-Task Principal-Agent Problems: Incentive Con-
 tracts, Asset Ownership and Job Design.” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, 7(Special Is-
 sue): 24–52.

Jayachandran, Seema. 2014. “Incentives to Teach Badly: After-School Tutoring in Developing Countries.”
  Journal of Development Economics, 27(1): 99–123.

Jindal, S K, D Gupta, A N Aggarwal, and R Agarwal. 2005. “Guidelines for management of asthma
  at primary and secondary levels of health care in India.” Indian J Chest Dis Allied Sci, 47(4): 308–343.

La Forgia, Gerrard, and Somil Nagpal. 2014. Government Sponsored Health Insurance in India: Are
  You Covered? The World Bank, Washington, DC.

                                                   28
Leonard, Kenneth L, and Melkiory C Masatu. 2005. “The Use of Direct Clinical Observation and
  Vignettes for Health Services Quality Evaluation in Developing Countries.” Social Science and Medicine,
  61(9): 1944–1951.

Muralidharan, Karthik. 2013. “Priorities for Primary Education Policy in India’s 12th Five Year Plan.”
 India Policy Forum 2012-13, 9: 1–46.

Muralidharan, Karthik, and Venkatesh Sundararaman. 2011. “Teacher Performance Pay: Experi-
 mental Evidence from India.” Journal of Political Economy, 119(1): 39–77.

Muralidharan, Karthik, and Venkatesh Sundararaman. 2015. “The Aggregate Effect of School
 Choice: Evidence from a Two-Stage Experiment in India.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

Muralidharan, Karthik, Nazmul Chudhury, Jeffrey Hammer, Michael Kremer, and F Halsey
 Rogers. 2011. “Is there a Doctor in the House? Absent Medical Providers in India.” Working Paper.

Norris, Pauline. 2002. “Reasons why mystery shopping is a useful and justifiable research method.” The
 Pharmaceutical Journal, 272: 746–747.

Patel, V, S Chatterji, D Chisholm, and et al. 2011. “Chronic diseases and injuries in India.” The
  Lancet, 377(9763): 413–428.

Pauly, Mark. 1980. Doctors and Their Workshops: Economic Models of Physician Behaviors. National
  Bureau of Economic Research Monograph, Boston, MA.

Planning Commission of India. 2013. “Health, Nutrition and Family Welfare.”

Prendergast, Canice. 2003. “The Limits of Bureaucratic Inefficiency.” Journal of Political Economy,
  111(5): 929–958.

Reddy, S K, Vikram Patel, Prabhat Jha, Vinod K Paul, A K Shiva Kumar, and Lalit Dandona.
  2011. “Towards Achievement of Universal Health Care in India by 2020: A Call to Action.” The Lancet,
  377(9767): 760–768.

Rethans, Jan-Joos, Ferd Sturmans, Riet Drop, Cees van der Vlueten, and Pie Hobus.
  1991. “Does Competence of General Practitioners Predict Their Performance.” British Medical Journal,
  303(6814): 1377–1380.

Rohde, Jon E, and Hema Viswanathan. 1995. The Rural Private Practitioner. Oxford University Press,
  New Delhi.

Rosenzweig, Mark R. 1995. “Why are there Returns to Schooling?” American Economic Review Papers
  and Proceedings, 85(2): 153–158.

Schneider, Henry S. 2012. “Agency Problems And Reputation in Expert Services: Evidence from Auto
  Repair.” The Journal of Industrial Economics, 60(3): 406–433.

Selvaraj, S, and Anup K Karan. 2009. “Deepening Health Insecurity in India: Evidence from National
  Sample Surveys since 1980s.” Economic and Political Weekly, 44(18): 55–60.

Shiva Kumar, A K, Lincoln C Chen, Mita Choudhury, Shiban Ganju, Vijay Mahajan, Amarjeet
  Sinha, and Abhijit Sen. 2011. “Financing Health Care for All: Challenges and Opportunities.” The
  Lancet, 377(9766): 668–679.

Wagstaff, Adam. 2013. “What exactly is the public-private mix in health care?”

Wolinsky, A. 1993. “Competition in the Market for Informed Expert Services.” RAND Jounal of Economics,
 24(3): 380–398.

World Bank. 2003. World Development Report 2004. The World Bank, Washington, DC.


                                                   29
Figures and Tables

Figure 1: Optimal choice of effort and treatment with high and low 𝜙 with and without market incentives




Notes: In panel (A), MBwith and MCwith are the marginal benefit and the cost of 𝑒 with market incentives, and MBwithout and MCwithout are
                                   ∗         ∗
those without market incentives. 𝑒with and 𝑒without are optimal levels of effort with and without market incentives for small and large 𝜙 values.
                                                       1                                              1
In panel (B), The graph traces the posterior variance     with 𝑒 on the x-axis. The y-axis intercept    is the posterior variance when 𝑒 = 0. In
                                                      𝛼+𝛽                                             𝛼
panel (C) and panel (D), MBwith and MCwith are the marginal benefit and the cost of 𝑛 with market incentives, and MBwithout and MCwithout
                                       ∗          ∗
are those without market incentives. 𝑛with  and 𝑛without are optimal levels of treatment with and without market incentives for small and large 𝜙
values. Panel (C) and panel (D) compares the optimal level of treatment with and without market incentives when the posterior variance with
market incentives is substantially smaller than that without market incentives and when the two posterior beliefs are similar.



                     Figure 2: Health outcome with and without market incentives with varying 𝜙




Notes: The graph illustrates the health outcome produced with and without market incentives with different values of 𝜙. The y-axis is the health
outcome 𝐻 and x-axis is the magnitude of low-powered incentive, 𝜙. The solid line traces 𝐻 without market incentives and the dotted line traces
𝐻 with market incentives.


                                                                      30
       Figure 3   Figure 4
31




     Figure 5     Figure 6
                                                        Table 1: Health market attributes
                                                               (1)             (2)             (3)                  (4)             (5)             (6)
                                                                     Madhya Pradesh                                        SP Sample Villages
                                                                  (5 districts, 100 markets)                              (3 districts, 46 markets)
                                                                           Inside          Outside                             Inside        Outside
                                                               All                                                All
                                                                           village          village                            village        village
Panel A: Composition of markets based on census of providers
Total                                                      11.68            3.97             7.71               16.02            4.65          11.37
                                                          (12.06)          (4.49)          (12.17)             (15.81)          (5.41)        (16.42)
   Public MBBS                                              0.45            0.05             0.40                0.50            0.02           0.48
                                                           (0.97)          (0.22)           (0.93)              (1.11)          (0.15)         (1.11)
   Public alternative qualification                         0.22            0.07             0.15                0.24            0.07           0.17
                                                           (0.48)          (0.29)           (0.39)              (0.52)          (0.33)         (0.44)
   Public paramedical                                       1.58            1.13             0.45                1.98            1.30           0.67
                                                           (1.90)          (1.46)           (1.33)              (2.12)          (1.49)         (1.59)
   Public unqualified                                       1.71            0.68             1.03                2.07            0.67           1.39
                                                           (1.75)          (1.04)           (1.54)              (2.05)          (1.12)         (1.94)
   Total public                                             3.96            1.93             2.03                4.78            2.07           2.72
                                                           (3.20)          (2.28)           (2.63)              (3.53)          (2.45)         (3.17)
   Private MBBS                                             0.40            0.00             0.40                0.59            0.00           0.59
                                                           (1.57)          (0.00)           (1.57)              (2.15)          (0.00)         (2.15)
   Private alternative qualification                        1.92            0.23             1.69                2.67            0.33           2.35
                                                           (3.65)          (0.66)           (3.65)              (4.86)          (0.90)         (4.89)
   Private unqualified                                      5.40            1.81             3.59                7.98            2.26           5.72
                                                           (6.01)          (2.23)           (6.14)              (7.88)          (2.74)         (8.32)
   Total private                                            7.72            2.04             5.68               11.24            2.59           8.65
                                                          (10.54)          (2.69)          (10.81)             (14.31)          (3.38)        (14.87)
Panel B: Composition of demand from census of households in sampled villages
Fraction of households that visited a
                                                            0.46                                                 0.58
provider in last 30 days
                                                           (0.50)                                               (0.49)
Fraction provider visits inside/outside village                             0.66             0.34                                0.69           0.31
                                                                           (0.47)           (0.47)                              (0.46)         (0.46)
Distance traveled to visited provider (km)                  1.61            0.40             3.83                1.37            0.38           3.51
                                                           (2.14)          (0.65)           (2.14)              (2.37)          (1.16)         (2.84)
Fraction of visits to MBBS doctor                           0.04            0.01             0.09                0.02            0.00           0.06
                                                           (0.19)          (0.09)           (0.29)              (0.13)          (0.00)         (0.23)
Fraction of visits to private sector                        0.89            0.92             0.85                0.96            0.97           0.93
                                                           (0.31)          (0.28)           (0.36)              (0.21)          (0.18)         (0.26)
   Fraction of visits to private sector                     0.88            0.89             0.83                0.95            0.96           0.91
     (conditional on public availability)                  (0.33)          (0.31)           (0.38)              (0.22)          (0.20)         (0.28)
   Fraction of visits to private sector                     0.83            0.84             0.79                0.93            0.98           0.90
     (conditional on public MBBS availability)             (0.37)          (0.36)           (0.41)              (0.25)          (0.15)         (0.30)
Fraction of visits to unqualified providers                 0.77            0.87             0.55                0.82            0.89           0.64
                                                           (0.42)          (0.34)           (0.50)              (0.39)          (0.31)         (0.48)
   Fraction of visits to unqualified providers              0.74            0.82             0.54                0.81            0.86           0.64
     (conditional on public availability)                  (0.44)          (0.38)           (0.50)              (0.39)          (0.35)         (0.48)
   Fraction of visits to unqualified providers              0.60            0.77             0.38                0.66            0.81           0.39
     (conditional on public MBBS availability)             (0.49)          (0.42)           (0.48)              (0.47)          (0.39)         (0.49)
Panel C: Sample Characteristics from household census of provider choice
Number of villages                                          100                                                   46
Average village population                                 1,149                                                1,199
Average number of households per village                    233                                                  239
Number of reported provider visits                        19,331                                               12,122
Average number of visits per household per                  0.83                                                 1.10
month
Notes: Standard deviations in parentheses. The number of providers available to a village was determined by a provider census, which surveyed all
providers in all locations mentioned by households in 100 sample villages, when asked where they seek care for primary care services, regardless of whether
or not the particular provider was mentioned by households. Unqualified providers report no medical training. All others have training that ranges from a
correspondence course to a medical degree. "Outside villages" are typically adjacent villages or villages connected by a major road. The 30-day visit rate was
calculated from visits to providers reported by households in a complete census of households in the 100 sample villages. The type of provider they visited
was determined by matching reported providers to providers surveyed in the provider census.
                                                        Table 2: Characteristics of providers and practices where SPs were administered
                                                         (1)             (2)             (3)                  (4)             (5)             (6)              (7)                 (8)             (9)             (10)
                                                                                                             Representative sample of Public MBBS
                                                            Representative sample                                                                                                        Dual practice sample
                                                                                                                            providers
                                                                    (3 districts)                                          (5 districts)                                                       (5 districts)
                                                                                     p-value of                      Non-dual                 p-value of                                                       p-value of
                                                       Public          Private                            All public              Dual public                                    Public          Private
                                                                                       (1)-(2)                         public                   (5)-(6)                                                          (8)-(9)
Panel A: Provider characteristics
Age of provider                                         46.92           43.51            0.10                44.52           44.74           44.43            0.89
Is male                                                 0.86            0.96             0.02                0.87            0.96            0.84             0.10                 0.84            0.85            0.87
More than 12 years of basic education                   0.58            0.52             0.48                0.64            0.52            0.69             0.09
Has MBBS degree                                         0.25            0.07             0.00                1.00            1.00            1.00
Has alternative medical degree                          0.11            0.21             0.18                0.00            0.00            0.00
No medical training                                     0.61            0.68             0.42                0.00            0.00            0.00
Number of practices                                     1.14            1.07             0.21                1.83            1.16            2.13             0.00
Tenure in years at current location                     15.22           13.70            0.42                6.15            5.11            6.56             0.28
Panel B: Clinic characteristics
Dispense medicine                                       1.00            0.81             0.00
Consultation fee (Rs.)                                  3.65            51.24            0.00                3.75             3.15            3.92            0.00                 3.92           57.93            0.00
Number of patients per day
                                                        28.06           15.74            0.00                31.85           31.30           35.00            0.74                35.00           17.59            0.07
(self reported in census)
Number of patients per day
                                                        5.72             5.75            0.98                16.04           13.72           16.86            0.31                16.86            5.63            0.00
(from physician observations)
Electricity                                             0.94             0.95            0.93                1.00             1.00            1.00                                 1.00            1.00
Stethoscope                                             0.97             0.94            0.47                1.00             1.00            1.00                                 1.00            1.00
Blood pressure cuff                                     0.83             0.75            0.34                1.00             1.00            1.00                                 1.00            1.00
Thermometer                                             0.94             0.92            0.64                0.97             0.94            0.98            0.20                 0.98            0.97            0.63
Weighing Scale                                          0.86             0.52            0.00                0.94             0.94            0.94            0.96                 0.94            0.82            0.04
Handwash facility                                       0.89             0.81            0.30                0.84             0.84            0.85            0.93                 0.85            0.81            0.56
Number of providers                                      36              188                                  103              31              72                                   72              84
Notes: Standard deviations are in parentheses. Unit of observation is a provider. The dual practice sample consists of providers who received a standardized patient in both their public and private practices. Provider
mapping and complete provider census yielded information about whether or not a provider operates more than practice. The representative sample did not employ the intense reconnaisance to find both the public and
private practices of the same provider, and thus the proportion of dual practice providers can be considered self-reported. In the dual practice sample, however, the existence of additional medical practices was verified
by repeated observation. Alternative qualifications are as follows: BAMS, BIMS, BUMS, BHMS/DHMS, DHB, BEHMS, BEMS, B.Sc. Nursing/M.Sc. Nursing, B.Pharma/M.Pharma. In the public sector of the
representative sample, there are 3 providers with BAMS and 1 with B.Pharma/M.Pharma. In the private sector, there are 21 with BAMS, 9 with BHMS/DHMS, 3 each with BIMS and DHB, 2 with
B.Pharma/M.Pharma and 1 with BUMS. No medical training includes providers with RMP, other degrees (which could not be verified) and providers who self-reported no formal training. In the public sector of the
representative sample, there are 22 with no formal qualifications, 4 with RMP and 1 who reported other degree. In the private sector, there are 128 with no formal qualfication, 46 with RMP and 10 who reported
other degrees. Means for consultation fee were calculated from direct observations of clinical interactions. All other variables derive from a survey administered during the census of providers.
                                         Table 3: Effort in the public and private sectors
                                                    (1)        (2)        (3)                             (4)        (5)          (6)
                                                      Representative sample                                  Dual practice sample

                                                          Percentage                                           Percentage
                                               Time Spent                                           Time Spent
                                                          of checklist IRT score                               of checklist IRT score
                                                 (mins)                                               (mins)
                                                             items                                                items

Panel A: SP and case fixed effects
Is a private provider              1.222***     6.758***                          0.512**             1.471***         8.888***        0.729***
                                    (0.250)      (2.488)                          (0.211)              (0.267)          (1.762)         (0.178)
R-squared                             0.305       0.160                                                 0.237            0.219
Number of observations                 662         662                               233                 331              331             138
Mean of public                        2.388      15.287                                                 1.562           17.677
Mean of private                       3.703      22.302                                                 2.965           28.223
Mean of sample                        3.603      21.764                                                 2.274           23.030
Panel B: SP, case and market/district fixed effects
Is a private provider              1.486***     7.352***                          0.608**             1.475***         8.882***        0.729***
                                    (0.244)      (1.948)                          (0.273)              (0.259)          (1.762)         (0.180)
R-squared                             0.391       0.259                                                 0.258            0.233
Number of observations                 662         662                               233                 331              331             138
Panel C: SP, case and market/district fixed effects
Is a private provider              1.246***      5.999**                          0.500*              1.452***         9.414***        0.770***
                                    (0.319)      (2.338)                          (0.301)              (0.268)          (1.827)         (0.190)
Has MBBS                             -0.156       3.285                            0.043
                                    (0.568)      (2.940)                          (0.257)
Has some qualification               -0.131       2.518                            0.157
                                    (0.299)      (1.716)                          (0.151)
Age of provider                      -0.004      -0.046                            0.000                 0.005          -0.064           0.004
                                    (0.012)      (0.071)                          (0.008)              (0.015)          (0.102)         (0.101)
Gender of provider (1=Male)           0.653      -0.949                            0.212                -0.077          -1.383          -0.288
                                    (0.544)      (3.529)                          (0.327)              (0.386)          (2.639)         (0.309)
Patient load during visit           -0.096*      -0.144                           0.082**              -0.106*          -0.283           0.013
                                    (0.052)      (0.554)                          (0.040)              (0.062)          (0.424)         (0.517)
R-squared                             0.399       0.259                                                  0.275           0.233
Number of observations                 638         638                               221                  302             302             126
Notes: *** Significant at 1%, ** Significant at 5%, * Significant at 10%. Robust standard errors clustered at the market level are in parenthesis.
All regressions include a constant. Observations are standardized provider-patient interactions, except in IRT score column where each
observation is a provider. The score is computed using all cases, plausible values scores are used. Market fixed effects are used for the
representative sample, and district fixed effects for dual practice sample.




                                                                        34
              Table 4: Diagnosis in the public and private sectors (unstable angina and asthma cases only)
                                         (1)          (2)           (3)              (4)          (5)         (6)
                                             Representative sample                       Dual practice sample
                                                    Correct      Correct                        Correct     Correct
                                        Gave                                        Gave
                                                   diagnosis    diagnosis                      diagnosis   diagnosis
                                      diagnosis                                   diagnosis
                                                                (conditional)    (unconditional)                           (conditional)   (unconditional)
Panel A: SP and case fixed effects
Is a private provider              0.168***       -0.014                             0.016                  0.095             -0.050            0.018
                                    (0.052)      (0.057)                            (0.022)                (0.068)           (0.105)           (0.053)
R-squared                            0.130        0.121                              0.075                  0.130             0.114             0.054
Number of observations                440          178                                440                    201                88               201
Mean of public                       0.263        0.150                              0.039                  0.380             0.395             0.150
Mean of private                      0.431        0.135                              0.058                  0.495             0.380             0.188
Mean of sample                       0.418        0.135                              0.057                  0.438             0.386             0.169
Panel B: SP, case and market/district fixed effects
Is a private provider              0.188***       -0.019                             0.023                  0.089             -0.067            0.018
                                    (0.072)      (0.093)                            (0.031)                (0.069)           (0.109)           (0.054)
R-squared                            0.218        0.301                              0.145                  0.149             0.176             0.066
Number of observations                440          178                                440                    201                88               201
Panel C: SP, case and market/district fixed effects
Is a private provider               0.149*        -0.046                             0.031                  0.083             0.005             0.037
                                    (0.081)      (0.111)                            (0.035)                (0.072)           (0.122)           (0.058)
Has MBBS                             -0.092       0.108                              0.008
                                    (0.093)      (0.134)                            (0.039)
Has some qualification               0.023        -0.010                             -0.012
                                    (0.074)      (0.075)                            (0.028)
Age of provider                      -0.002      -0.005*                             -0.002                 0.002             -0.001            0.000
                                    (0.003)      (0.003)                            (0.001)                (0.004)           (0.008)           (0.003)
Gender of provider (1=Male)          -0.089      0.272*                             0.079*                  -0.125            -0.054            -0.086
                                    (0.126)      (0.145)                            (0.041)                (0.109)           (0.182)           (0.079)
Patient load during visit            -0.003       -0.017                             -0.005                 -0.018            -0.004            -0.005
                                    (0.014)      (0.011)                            (0.004)                (0.018)           (0.034)           (0.013)
R-squared                            0.222        0.362                              0.159                  0.185             0.217             0.096
Number of observations                423          173                                423                    183                80               183
Notes: *** Significant at 1%, ** Significant at 5%, * Significant at 10%. Robust standard errors clustered at the market level are in parenthesis. All
regressions include a constant. Observations are standardized provider-patient interactions. Market fixed effects are used for the representative sample,
and district fixed effects for dual practice sample.




                                                                            35
                                                                                         Table 5: Treatment in the public and private sectors
                                                                                                 (unstable angina and asthma cases only)
                                                       (1)             (2)        (3)          (4)      (5)        (6)                                       (7)              (8)        (9)          (10)                    (11)            (12)
                                                                               Representative sample                                                                                   Dual practice sample
                                                                                            Correct                                                                                                 Correct
                                                    Correct         Palliative Unnecessary                      Number of                                 Correct          Palliative Unnecessary                                         Number of
                                                                                           treatment Antibiotic                                                                                    treatment               Antibiotic
                                                   treatment       treatment treatment                           medicines                               treatment        treatment treatment                                              medicines
                                                                                              only                                                                                                    only
Panel A: SP and case fixed effects
Is a private provider                   0.052       -0.038                            0.061           -0.008           0.016         0.972***              0.138**         -0.113*          -0.014           0.018          -0.119*           0.064
                                       (0.045)      (0.056)                          (0.072)          (0.023)         (0.062)         (0.279)              (0.064)         (0.061)          (0.051)         (0.025)         (0.068)          (0.182)
R-squared                               0.260        0.215                            0.066            0.044           0.079           0.087                0.270           0.306            0.107           0.025           0.114            0.128
Number of observations                   440          440                              440              440             440             440                  201             201              201             201             201              201
Mean of public                          0.211        0.526                            0.737            0.026           0.263           2.092                0.380           0.630            0.830           0.020           0.480            2.800
Mean of private                         0.270        0.496                            0.808            0.017           0.279           3.097                0.554           0.475            0.842           0.040           0.386            2.950
Mean of sample                          0.266        0.498                            0.802            0.018           0.278           3.021                0.468           0.552            0.836           0.030           0.433            2.876
Panel B: SP, case and market/district fixed effects
Is a private provider                   0.051        0.040                            0.095           -0.020           0.086         0.894***              0.140**         -0.116*          -0.014           0.017          -0.121*           0.052
                                       (0.059)      (0.068)                          (0.070)          (0.026)         (0.069)         (0.234)              (0.064)         (0.061)          (0.050)         (0.026)         (0.068)          (0.181)
R-squared                               0.384        0.350                            0.233            0.255           0.239           0.289                0.294           0.312            0.166           0.039           0.130            0.155
Number of observations                   440          440                              440              440             440             440                  201             201              201             201             201              201
Panel C: SP, case and market/district fixed effects
Is a private provider                   0.101        0.060                            0.066          -0.005            0.112          0.638**              0.160**         -0.095           -0.014           0.017           -0.100           0.045
                                       (0.071)      (0.080)                          (0.075)         (0.027)          (0.080)         (0.284)              (0.068)         (0.064)          (0.057)         (0.028)          (0.071)         (0.192)
Has MBBS                              0.309***     0.246**                           -0.132          0.106**         0.267***         -0.397
                                       (0.087)      (0.100)                          (0.089)         (0.051)          (0.086)         (0.352)
Has some qualification                  0.088        0.086                            0.029          -0.001            0.099          -0.116
                                       (0.057)      (0.066)                          (0.054)         (0.014)          (0.063)         (0.241)
Age of provider                        -0.001       -0.001                           -0.002          -0.000           -0.000          -0.012               -0.002          -0.007*           0.001          -0.002           -0.001          -0.019*
                                       (0.002)      (0.003)                          (0.002)         (0.000)          (0.003)         (0.010)              (0.004)         (0.004)          (0.003)         (0.001)          (0.004)         (0.011)
Gender of provider (1=Male)             0.133       -0.118                           -0.068           0.001           -0.029          -0.128                0.049           0.097            0.111           0.007            0.152           0.285
                                       (0.098)      (0.122)                          (0.091)         (0.033)          (0.132)         (0.332)              (0.100)         (0.090)          (0.081)         (0.038)          (0.100)         (0.290)
Patient load during visit              -0.008       -0.017                            0.007          -0.001           -0.008           0.009                0.001           0.005            0.014          -0.004            0.002           0.076*
                                       (0.010)      (0.011)                          (0.008)         (0.001)          (0.008)         (0.045)              (0.015)         (0.014)          (0.017)         (0.003)          (0.016)         (0.040)
R-squared                               0.406        0.370                            0.253           0.278            0.272           0.293                0.273           0.316            0.180           0.053            0.159           0.180
Number of observations                   423          423                              423             423              423             423                  183             183              183             183              183             183
Notes: *** Significant at 1%, ** Significant at 5%, * Significant at 10%. Robust standard errors clustered at the market level are in parenthesis. All regressions include a constant. Observations are standardized provider-patient interactions.
Market fixed effects are used for the representative sample, and district fixed effects for dual practice sample. In columns (6) and (12) the dependent variable is total number of medicines recommended to the patient (dispensed and/or
prescribed).
                                              Table 6: Correlates of price charged (private interactions)
                                                       (1)                (2)                     (3)            (4)                         (5)                 (6)
                                                                                                     Fees in Rs.
                                                   Representative sample                       Dual practice sample                           Pooled sample
                                                     Binary      Multiple                       Binary        Multiple                     Binary       Multiple
                                                  regressions   regression                   regressions     regression                 regressions    regression
Time spent with SP (minutes)                        1.763***       0.771                       2.625***       2.138***                    1.530***       0.839**
                                                     (0.454)      (0.475)                       (0.587)        (0.678)                     (0.363)       (0.393)
Percentage of checklist items                       0.411***     0.368***                      0.364***         0.063                     0.396***      0.312***
                                                     (0.091)      (0.101)                       (0.100)        (0.125)                     (0.073)       (0.092)
Correct diagnosis (unconditional)                    -3.749       -2.137                         7.504          6.022                       3.026         3.051
                                                     (4.212)      (2.122)                       (9.350)        (9.080)                     (4.678)       (4.192)
Correct treatment                                   7.065***       0.050                        7.744*          3.800                     7.978***        1.969
                                                     (1.789)      (2.892)                       (4.145)        (4.955)                     (1.895)       (2.351)
Palliative treatment                                8.036***     5.581***                     10.435**          7.381                     7.890***      6.125***
                                                     (2.056)      (2.036)                       (4.242)        (4.602)                     (1.807)       (1.863)
Unnecessary treatment                              14.039***       4.030                      14.973***         4.263                    14.283***       5.681**
                                                     (2.395)      (3.341)                       (5.032)        (6.181)                     (2.126)       (2.855)
Number of medicines dispensed                       4.774***     4.215***                      9.517***      10.675***                    4.101***      3.840***
                                                     (1.656)      (1.379)                       (3.035)        (3.785)                     (1.373)       (1.402)
Number of medicines prescribed                       -0.202       -1.188                        3.169*          2.895                       0.834        -1.213
                                                     (1.129)      (0.881)                       (1.885)        (2.780)                     (0.863)       (1.071)
Referred/Asked to see child                       -19.161***    -13.301***                     -9.882**        -4.554                   -16.737***     -14.223***
                                                     (4.115)      (3.636)                       (4.763)        (4.601)                     (3.366)       (3.205)
Has MBBS                                           24.325***    28.416***                                                                14.504***     22.130***
                                                     (6.644)      (7.997)                                                                  (4.608)       (4.205)
Has some qualification                                4.444       5.399**                                                                   2.317       6.087***
                                                     (3.276)      (2.139)                                                                  (2.930)       (2.185)
Patient load during visit                             0.736        0.441                        -0.073              -0.311                  0.402         0.068
                                                     (0.665)      (0.333)                       (0.807)            (0.812)                 (0.621)       (0.522)
Age of provider                                      -0.150       -0.103                         0.267               0.254                 -0.091        -0.013
                                                     (0.144)      (0.091)                       (0.239)            (0.218)                 (0.119)       (0.083)
Gender of provider (1=Male)                         -8.164**      -4.923                        -1.284              -4.168               -7.555***       -3.220
                                                     (3.497)      (4.969)                       (4.882)            (5.478)                 (2.924)       (4.079)
Constant                                                          10.526                                           -11.604                                3.318
                                                                  (6.561)                                         (12.278)                               (5.933)
R2                                                                 0.393                                             0.449                                0.358
Number of observations                                              543                                               154                                  697
Mean price charged                                                27.327                                           32.740                                28.524
SD                                                                26.079                                           28.592                                26.729
Notes: *** Significant at 1%, ** Significant at 5%, * Significant at 10%. Robust standard errors clustered at the market level are in parenthesis. Observations are
standardized provider-patient interactions. Interpretation of coefficents in "Binary regressions" needs caution. Each coefficient represents a separate regression of prices
on the row variable and SP, case and district fixed effects. Multiple regressions include SP, case and district fixed effects. The covariate number of medicines includes
all medicines recommended to the patient (dispensed and/or prescribed).




                                                                                    37
                      Table 7: Wages in the public sector (public observations only)
                                                    (1)         (2)              (3)           (4)
                                               Log of Monthly Salary            Desirability index
                                                    (pooled sample)            (PHC/CHC sample)
                                                              Binary     Multiple                      Binary     Multiple
                                                            regressions regression                   regressions regression
Percentage of checklist items                                   0.002          -0.001                   0.005            0.004
                                                               (0.003)         (0.002)                 (0.009)          (0.009)
Time spent with SP (minutes)                                  -0.049*          -0.010                  -0.056           -0.076
                                                               (0.025)         (0.014)                 (0.073)          (0.076)
Correct Treatment                                               0.011         -0.097**                 -0.268           -0.146
                                                               (0.059)         (0.048)                 (0.235)          (0.201)
Has MBBS                                                      1.056***        1.289***
                                                               (0.168)         (0.175)
Has some qualification                                         -0.094         0.851***
                                                               (0.367)         (0.301)
Age of provider                                               0.011**         0.018***                0.052***          0.060**
                                                               (0.006)         (0.006)                 (0.019)          (0.024)
Gender of provider (1=Male)                                     0.114           0.128                  -0.580           -0.887
                                                               (0.188)         (0.106)                 (0.509)          (0.739)
Born in same district                                        -0.384***          0.020                  -0.178            0.113
                                                               (0.146)         (0.081)                 (0.444)          (0.431)
Is a dual provider                                            0.578***         0.145*                   0.021           -0.169
                                                               (0.135)         (0.085)                 (0.402)          (0.523)
Constant                                                                      8.056***                                  -1.361
                                                                               (0.315)                                  (1.188)
R2                                                                              0.623                                    0.155
Number of observations                                                           302                                      183
Notes: *** Significant at 1%, ** Significant at 5%, * Significant at 10%. Robust standard errors clustered at the market level
are in parenthesis. The desirability index is a constructed using principal component analysis of proximity to several amenities
(paved road, bus stop, railway station, Internet, post-office and bank), availability of infrastructure (stethoscope,
spyghamometer, torchlight, weighing scale, hand washing facility, drinking water, staff toilet, patient toilet, fridge, sterilizers,
electric connection, electric supply, power generator, telephone, computer, IV drip, cots/beds, disposable syringes), and PHC
size (number of staff and number of patients). In binary regressions columns, each coefficient represents a separate regression
of prices on the row variable, a constant and district fixed effects. Multiple regressions include district fixed effects.




                                                                38
                                                                      Table 8: Real patients in the public and private sectors
                                                     (1)             (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)                                  (6)             (7)           (8)                (9)             (10)
                                                                       Representative sample                                                                          Dual sample
                                                                                        Dispensed/                                                                            Dispensed/
                                                Time spent          Total     Physical              Number of                          Time spent         Total     Physical             Number of
                                                                                         prescribed                                                                           prescribed
                                                  (mins)          questions examination              medicines                           (mins)         questions examination             medicines
                                                                                         medicines                                                                             medicines
Panel A: no patient controls or fixed effects
Is a private provider                1.456***  0.799***      0.371***                              -0.026**         0.500***            1.894***         1.154***         0.143**          -0.008          -0.021
                                      (0.323)   (0.180)       (0.108)                               (0.011)          (0.121)             (0.569)          (0.318)         (0.063)          (0.009)         (0.134)
R-squared                               0.054    0.030         0.103                                 0.003            0.017               0.115            0.082           0.017            0.001           0.000
Number of observations                  1,137    1,137         1,133                                 1,138            1,138               1,085            1,083           1,082            1,090           1,090
Mean of public                          2.378    2.994         0.473                                 0.994            2.319               1.499            3.284           0.678            0.991           3.190
Mean of private                         3.833    3.793         0.844                                 0.968            2.819               3.393            4.439           0.821            0.983           3.169
Mean of sample                          3.621    3.676         0.790                                 0.972            2.746               1.899            3.527           0.708            0.989           3.185
Number of public providers               29        29           29                                    29               29                  51               51               51              51              51
Number of private providers              169      169           169                                   169              169                 40               40               41              41              41
Panel B: including patient controls and market/district fixed effects
Is a private provider                1.192***   0.615**      0.510***                                0.009          0.548***            1.464***         0.494***         0.080**          -0.016          -0.014
                                      (0.325)   (0.248)       (0.086)                               (0.014)          (0.150)             (0.300)          (0.128)         (0.039)          (0.012)         (0.098)
Has MBBS degree                        -0.427   0.416*       0.155**                                -0.024           -0.336
                                      (0.516)   (0.227)       (0.079)                               (0.015)          (0.211)
Has some qualification                  0.349    0.021         0.004                               -0.034**          -0.157
                                      (0.388)   (0.143)       (0.050)                               (0.015)          (0.139)
Age of Provider                      -0.027**    0.006         0.001                                 0.001            0.007               -0.004         -0.011**          -0.001          -0.000        -0.014***
                                      (0.010)   (0.005)       (0.002)                               (0.001)          (0.006)             (0.006)          (0.005)         (0.002)          (0.000)        (0.004)
Gender of Provider (1=Male)          -1.433**   -0.780         0.016                                 0.006           -0.116              -0.362*           0.056          -0.102*           0.008          -0.017
                                      (0.688)   (0.756)       (0.087)                               (0.019)          (0.203)             (0.202)          (0.203)         (0.054)          (0.015)        (0.139)
R-squared                               0.295    0.331         0.368                                 0.113            0.309                0.167           0.354            0.195           0.051           0.180
Number of observations                   835      835           833                                   835              835                  812             811              810             813             813
Notes: *** Significant at 1%, ** Significant at 5%, * Significant at 10%. Robust standard errors clustered at the village level in parenthesis. Observations are patient-provider interactions, and the sample has
been limited to the SP sample. All regressions include controls for patients' characteristics and patients' presenting symptoms. Controls for patients' characteristics include: whether patient has no education,
number of questions asked by patient, and patients' asset index. Controls for patients' presenting symptoms include: number of days patient has been sick, patients' ease in performing activities of daily living, and
indicators for a number of presenting symptoms (fever, cold, diarrhea, weakness, injury, vomiting, dermatological problem, pregnancy, and pain). In columns (5) and (10) the dependent variable is total number
of medicines recommended to the patient (dispensed and/or prescribed).
                          Appendices (Text, Figures, Tables)


A     Mapping and Sampling of Providers

A.1    Mapping of Providers: Representative Sample

We first randomly selected five districts in the state of Madhya Pradesh, stratified by region
and an index of health outcomes. In each district, we sampled 20 villages by probability
proportional to size (PPS) sampling. Because of the rural focus of the study, we restricted
the sampling frame to villages with populations under 5,000. The sample of villages is thus
representative of rural Madhya Pradesh.
     In each sampled village, we conducted at least three Participatory Resource Assessments
in different locations within the village and obtained a list of all the healthcare providers that
households’ sought primary care services from. These lists were used primarily to identify
the geographical locations that households’ sought care from. For instance, households may
seek care from providers within the village, but also on the nearest highway. If 5 percent
or more households reported visiting a provider in an outside location, we identified that
location as a “cluster village” and considered it a part of the “healthcare market” for the
sampled village. Fifty-five sampled villages have one cluster village, 13 villages have two,
and one village has three. The remaining 31 villages have no cluster villages (i.e. less than 5
percent of primary healthcare visits were to a location outside the village). For our sample
as a whole, we identified 184 unique locations, including the 100 sampled villages.
     Surveyors then visited each location and administered a provider census to all healthcare
providers in the location - regardless of whether they had been mentioned in the participatory
assessments. The provider census details the provider’s demographic, practice and clinic
characteristics.
     Following the provider census in the villages, we administered a short household census
and obtained information on household demographics and healthcare seeking behavior. For
each household member, we asked about incidence of any illness (primary or otherwise) in the
past one month, if they sought medical attention for that illness, and (if yes), the name and
address of the provider they visited (regardless of the location of the provider). Surveyors
mapped the household visits to the providers lists; this is the mapping we use to compute the
fraction of visits to public and private providers and providers with different qualifications
in Table 1. In instances where households reported visiting providers not already on the
list, we probed for providers’ name, address and practice details and added the providers
to our listing and census exercise. We verified through this exercise that we had covered


                                                1
at least 95 percent of all providers visited by households in each village. This exhaustive
mapping process ensured that we mapped the complete “health market" where households
in our sampled villages sought primary care services.

A.2     Sampling of Providers for SP visits: Representative Sample

We conducted the SP work in three out of the five districts in our sample because of logistic
considerations. Although SPs were recruited from the local community, they needed plausible
reasons for their presence in the village (which they were not from), and the typical narrative
was that they were traveling and/or passing through the village. In order to minimize SP
detection, we excluded 5 remote markets (as assessed by road access) from the possible 60
markets, where we thought a traveling excuse might not be plausible.
    We sampled providers for the SPs to visit from a smaller set of “eligible providers”
than what we had mapped. All public nurses and midwives (ANMs), community health
workers (ASHA), and day-care center workers (Anganwadi), were excluded from the sample
as they provided primarily preventive care such as vaccinations. We also exclude mobile
and itinerant providers, chemists, and pharmacists from the sample. Finally, we exclude 55
providers with whom we could not complete the provider census prior to sampling (typically
due to the unavailability of provider, we were able to conduct the census with only 17 of
these providers in subsequent rounds). These restrictions remove 7 markets from our study,
primarily because there were no eligible providers in these markets. We also drop two other
markets because they share a cluster with other sampled villages and do not have eligible
providers inside the village. Our study in the representative sample therefore covers 46
markets in 3 districts of Madhya Pradesh (see Table A.1). Based on the eligibility criteria
defined above, these 46 markets have 649 eligible providers (130 public and 519 private) from
which we sample.
    In each market we randomly sampled up to two eligible providers in each public clinic and
up to six private providers in each market.1 In the private sector, we sampled one provider
per clinic. We also sampled all MBBS providers in both public and private sectors. Since
the unit of analysis for the representative sample is the clinic and not the provider, this
sampling procedure was equivalent to sampling private clinics with simple random sampling
(after sampling all private MBBS doctors), and sampling larger public clinics (those with
two or more eligible providers) twice. We sampled a total of 247 providers of which 45 are
public providers and 202 are private providers (Appendix Table A.1).
   1
    One market in Gwalior district was an exception to this rule. In the cluster village of a particular market,
we found 113 providers. In this market, we relaxed our sampling protocol and sampled 20 private providers.




                                                       2
A.3   Completion of SPs: Representative Sample

We sampled 247 providers in 235 clinics and SPs were completed with 224 providers in 215
clinics. Of these, 214 providers are those we sampled. Furthermore, for 27 SP interactions
(corresponding to 10 providers) we saw a provider who had not been sampled. We knew the
identity of the provider because he/she had been included in the census but was practicing
in a clinic different from their own. For 18 observations (corresponding to 8 public and 2
private clinics and 10 public and 2 private providers sampled) we do not know the identity
of the provider. These were most likely staff present in the clinic who are not licensed to
provide care, but who do so when the doctor is absent.
    The discrepancy between whom we sampled and whom we actually saw does not affect
interpretation of our results in Panels A and B of Tables 3-5, but it does in Panel C, where we
include controls for provider characteristics. Panels A and B present results without provider
controls, so whether or not we have background data on the provider is irrelevant, because we
know which market they were practicing in and whether they were public or private. This is
why the public-private difference here should be interpreted as the difference in random visits
to providers’ clinics rather than providers. In Panel C, we present results including provider
controls. Here, for 27 interactions where we saw providers we did not sample but mapped
(and conducted provider census), we use their background information. The 18 observations
where we do not know the provider at all are dropped from the estimation sample.

A.4   Mapping of Providers: Dual Practice Sample

We obtained a list of all Primary Health Centers (PHCs) and Community Health Centers
(CHCs) from the Ministry of Health of Madhya Pradesh. Excluding PHCs/CHCs which
were mapped as part of the representative sample, we mapped 200 more facilities in this
round. Of these 200 facilities, 40 did not have an MBBS provider posted (see Appendix
Table A.2). In the remaining 160 PHCs/CHCs we located 216 providers (some providers
were mapped to multiple facilities). Our field team then undertook detailed field work to find
out if these providers operated private practices and if yes, to locate their private practices.
We were able to locate a private practice for 132 of the 216 providers (61.1 percent) (this
is the sample we call the “dual practice sample”). After the mapping, we administered the
provider census to all providers. To the extent possible, the census was administered in the
private clinic of the provider.




                                               3
A.5    Sampling of Providers: Dual Practice Sample

We sampled one MBBS doctor from every PHC/CHC with preference for one with a dual
practice there were multiple MBBS doctors in the clinic. In cases where a provider was
posted to multiple public facilities, and where there were no additional MBBS providers in
these facilities, we randomly sampled the provider from one of the multiple facilities they
were posted to. With this sampling strategy, we sampled from 143 of the 160 facilities we
could have sampled from. Of the 143 providers, 94 operated private practices (65.7 percent,
see Table A.2).

A.6    Completion of SPs Interactions

SPs completed interactions with 118 of the 143 providers sampled, primarily because providers
were absent or were away on “long leave” in the 6-month phase between the listing and the
SP work. We attempted to complete these providers over a minimum of 4 attempts and
were forced to stop trying at that point due to the heightened risk of detection. Of the
49 providers without private facilities, SPs completed interactions with 30 providers (61.2
percent). Of the 94 providers with private practices, SPs were able to complete at least
one interaction with 88 providers (93.6 percent, either public or private). The number of
dual practice providers for whom we have at least one observation in both their public and
private practice is 69. As discussed in text, it was more difficult to complete a case in the
public practice of the public MBBS doctors (because of high absence rates), and we had a
lower completion rate in the public practices of these doctors than in the private practices
(75 percent versus 93 percent).


B     Standardized Patient Data Collection and Notes

B.1    Description of Tracer Conditions and Relevance for India

SPs presented either a case of unstable angina, asthma, or dysentery of an absent child.

    • Unstable Angina: A 45-year-old male complains of chest pain the previous night.
      Appropriate history taking would reveal classic signs (radiating, crushing pain) and
      risk factors (smoking, untreated diabetes, and family history of cardiac illness) of
      unstable angina or an imminent myocardial infarction.

    • Asthma: A 25-year-old male or female presents with difficulty breathing the night
      before the visit. When questioned appropriately, the SP reveals that the episode lasted
      for 10 to 15 minutes and involved a “whistling” sound (wheezing) and that he or she

                                              4
      has had similar episodes before, often triggered by house cleaning and cooking smoke.
      The SP also reports a family history of similar symptoms.

   • Dysentery: A 26-year-old father of a 2-year-old complains that his child has diarrhea
     and requests medicines. When probed, the SP reveals details of their water source and
     sanitation habits, in addition to the presence of fever and the frequency and quality of
     the child’s stools.

    For all cases, checklists of recommended history questions and examinations were de-
veloped together with an advisory committee and SPs were trained to recall the questions
asked and examinations performed. These were then recorded during debriefing with the
supervisor using a structured questionnaire within an hour of the interaction. In a recent
study, we test the reliability of recall by comparing audio recordings with recall and find a
very high correlation of 0.63 (p<.001) (Das et al., 2015).

B.2   Relevance of Cases

Incidence of cardiovascular and respiratory diseases has been increasing, and diarrheal disease
kills more than 200,000 children per year in India (Black et al., 2010; Patel et al., 2011)
The Indian government’s National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) has developed triage,
management, and treatment protocols for unstable angina, asthma, and dysentery in public
clinics, suggesting clear guidelines for patients presenting with any of these conditions (Jindal
et al., 2005). The cases were also chosen to minimize risk to standardized patients since
they could not portray any symptoms of infection given the documented high propensity to
administer medicines intravenously with unsterilized needles and to use thermometers that
have not been appropriately disinfected (Banerjee, Deaton and Duflo, 2004).

B.3   SP Recruitment, Script Development and Training

22 SPs were recruited from an initial group of 45 who were extensively screened and trained
for 3 weeks. The age and sex of recruited SPs corresponded to the relevant tracer conditions.
For instance, angina was depicted by male SPs between 40 and 50 years old.
    Scripts were developed under the guidance of a medical anthropologist with active SP
participation that described the social and family contexts of the patient if a provider were to
ask questions about these details. Script development and SP training jointly ensured that
the clinical symptoms and case history reflected the social and cultural milieu of which the
SP was assumed to be a member and, second, the presentation of symptoms and answers to
history were consistent with biomedical facts about the disease. SPs were trained to present


                                               5
symptoms and answer questions pertaining to case history that were medically correct. For
example all opening statements and questions pertaining to the type of cough and its duration
were standardized. SPs were also trained to distinguish between questions to which answers
could be improvised but had to be appropriate to the social role of the SP and answers that
had to be given using local idioms but in a standardized format without any alterations.
    All SPs underwent rigorous training for 100-150 hours that started with a focus on the
cases and the development of scripts and proceeded to memorization and appropriate role-
playing, as well as techniques to perfect recall of the questions asked and examinations
completed during the interaction. Following the training, SPs visited doctors who were
working with our team to provide feedback on their presentation and depiction of the cases.
Finally, dry runs were completed with unannounced visits to consented providers to help
build the confidence of the SPs and take them through a number of “real-life" situations.
Field work started once protocols were in place for the variety of these experiences.
    With consent from the Institutional Review Board at Harvard University, the study was
first piloted in Delhi with 64 consented providers who had been previously informed that
they would be visited by an SP within the next 6 months (see Das et al. (2012)). In the pilot
phase of the study, a total of 248 out of a potential 256 SP interactions were completed.
Within a month of the SP visit, field-workers visited the consented providers to enquire
if they had been visited by an SP. In cases where the provider felt that an SP visit had
occurred, we elicited the sex, approximate age and symptoms of the SP. We could confirm
a match between the providers’ suspicions and the actual SP sent to the provider in only 2
cases for a detection rate of less than 1 percent.
    The Institutional Review Boards of Innovations for Poverty Action and the Central and
State governments in India granted clearance for the study. To minimize detection in rural
Madhya Pradesh, where providers are more likely to recognize their entire patient population,
the study proceeded as an audit, and providers were not aware that they were being visited
by standardized patients. Clearance was granted for this deception design because the risks
to providers and their patients were minimal, whereas accurate measures of provider practice
were nonexistent. The expected length of clinical interactions, patient loads, and levels of
provider anxiety induced by the cases were thought to be small, and standardized patients
had to pay providers whatever they charged. The waiver of consent is consistent with the
principle that where the research subject provides a public service to other customers, the
public have a right to know about the quality of the service provided (Norris, 2002).




                                             6
B.4   Categorizing Treatment in SP Interactions

In rural Madhya Pradesh, as in much of India, providers often dispense medicines in the
clinic rather than prescribe them for purchase from external chemists (some do both). Our
field staff recorded names of all dispensed/prescribed medicines in SP exit interviews and
used multiple resources to classify medicines as accurately as possible. Field staff were given
a list of commonly used drugs in India along with their medical classification, and the CIMS
Drug Information System (in print), which they used to record exact medicine names and
classes. For drugs that were not immediately confirmed, they consulted local chemists and
pharmacists and obtained correct names to the extent possible.
    To construct our main treatment variables - correct treatment, palliative treatment and
unnecessary/harmful treatment - we obtained from a panel of doctors in the United States
and India a full list of correct and palliative treatments/medicines for each case. These
include nitrates, aspirin, clopidogrel, anti-platelet agents, blood thinners, beta blocker, mor-
phine, other pain control, ACE inhibitor and vasodilator for unstable angina; ORS, elec-
trolytes and zinc for dysentery; and inhaled-corticosteroids, leukotriene inhibitors, cromones,
inhaled-anticholinergics and oral-corticosteroids for asthma (see Table A4).
    After medicine coding in the field, the authors and members of the ISERDD team in
Delhi verified the codes assigned to all medicines and recoded if them when necessary. To
further ensure the coding was correct, we used a third party, a pharmaceutical consulting
firm in Delhi, to independently verify our classification of medicines.
    Medicine coding is relatively straightforward in instances where providers prescribe and
SPs receive a written prescription. In cases where providers dispense, it was easier to obtain
names when medicines came with packaging than when they did not. In the 1,123 complete
SP interactions, SPs were recommended a total of 2,772 medicines corresponding to 969
unique medicines (by medicine names, ignoring unlabeled ones). We are unable to classify
14.18 percent of the all 2,772 medicines because they were unlabeled (providers dispensed
them as loose samples or in crushed powder form). We are further unable to classify 3.64
percent of medicines (93 unique medicines by name) because we could not match them
to secondary information sources. SPs received at least one unclassifiable medicine in 268
interactions (23.9 percent of all interactions). However, in 211 of these interactions (18.8
percent), SPs received classifiable medicines along with the unclassifiable medicines. In only
57 interactions (5.1 percent) were all medicines unclassifiable.
    We construct our main treatment variables - correct treatment, palliative treatment and
unnecessary treatment - after completing the medicine coding process described above. For
each interaction, we determine if any recommended medicines fall into correct, palliative


                                               7
and/or unnecessary treatments, treating all unlabeled and unidentifiable medicines as un-
necessary. It is possible that the unlabeled and unidentifiable medicines construe correct or
palliative treatment. However, the likelihood that the provider dispenses an unclassifiable
medicine is decreasing in other measures of provider quality from the SP study. We are
therefore confident that such medicines are more likely unnecessary treatments than not.
Our results are also robust to excluding interactions that include unclassifiable medicines.


C       Theoretical Appendix

We provide a simple theoretical framework which demonstrates providers’ choice of effort
and treatment with and without market incentives as well as the effects of their choices
on a patient’s health outcome. This framework incorporates three possible channels which
can generate excessive unnecessary treatments. The first channel is ignorance. Providers
want to treat patients, but they do not know the cause of patient’s symptoms and dispense
a cocktail of medicines hoping that one of the medicines would work. Second, there is a
pecuniary incentive to sell more medicines. Third, excessive treatment can be driven by
patients. Patients have their own expectation about proper treatment, and providers may
satisfy patients by meeting their demand for medication.
    One key insight from the framework is that unnecessary treatments are not only driven
by market incentives but can also arise due to low effort of providers. When providers lack
motivation to exert enough effort to substantially reduce their ignorance about a patient’s
condition, they may provide multiple treatments to increase the chance of providing a correct
one. Market incentives induce higher effort (and a more precise diagnosis) but also lead to
more unnecessary treatment at any given level of effort.2 Hence health outcomes produced
under a market system may not necessarily dominate that of public system, and vice versa.
    Our aim is to provide a framework which helps to interpret the empirical findings related
to the choice of effort and treatment by providers facing different incentives. We abstract
from any market equilibrium component such as pricing, entry and exit decisions of providers,
or any strategic interaction among providers in the market or across sectors (public and pri-
vate). Patients’ expectations also enter exogenously. We also assume that private providers
have dynamic incentives to acquire a positive reputation, but do not endogenize these mar-
ket incentives since a static framework is adequate to interpret our empirical findings. A
theoretical extension where we provide one potential way of endogenizing market incentives
is available on request, but is omitted here because our data does not allow us to study the
dynamics of reputation and price setting.
    2
   This can also explain why we do not see a higher level of over-treatment by private providers in the dual
sample, even though we find that there is a marginal incentive to over-treat.

                                                     8
C.1   Problem Setup

A patient visits a provider endowed with a level of medical knowledge K. The patient has
an illness defined by the required type of treatment denoted by ntrue . Patients with different
underlying illnesses may experience similar symptoms. In other words, given a set of symp-
toms, there is a distribution of ntrue associated with the symptoms. A provider’s job is to
identify the true state of the patient and perform adequate treatments. The provider-patient
transaction is modeled as a two-stage process: consultation and treatment. A subscript i for
ith provider is used when there is a need to emphasize heterogeneity among providers. The
subscript is suppressed otherwise for notational simplicity.

C.2   Consultation Stage

A patient visits a provider. The true state of the patient ntrue is unobserved to both the
patient and the provider. The patient describes her symptoms, and the provider forms a
prior belief about the true state given the described symptoms. The prior belief follows a
normal distribution:
                                                        1
                                                         
                                        prior
                                      n       ∼ N ν,
                                                        α
    The prior belief can be thought of as the distribution of illnesses in the region which
cause the given symptoms. The provider exerts costly effort e to learn about ntrue . The cost
of effort is given by e2 . We can interpret e as the number of checklist items completed by
the provider or time spent with the patient. e can also be observed by the patient. The
provider draws a noisy signal s ∼ N (ntrue , β1 ) by exerting e where β = eK. The signal is not
observed by the patient. Given s, the provider updates his belief about ntrue . The posterior
belief of the true state is given by:
                                                               
                                        αν       βs      1 
                            npost ∼ N        +         ,
                                                           
                                                            
                                       α + β    α + β α + β
                                        |     {z      }
                                               ≡µ


This is the result of standard Bayesian normal updating, and hence, a separate proof is
omitted. Note that npost → ntrue as β → ∞.

C.3   Treatment Stage

Based on the posterior belief about the true state, the provider decides the types of treatment
he will perform. The treatment is expressed as an interval [µ − n, µ + n], and n is interpreted
as the variety of treatments chosen by the provider. Let Fe denote the cumulative density

                                              9
function of the posterior belief given some level of effort e. Given K, the shape of the
posterior belief is governed by e (e and β are used interchangeably depending on the context).
The probability that the interval [µ − n, µ + n] includes ntrue is denoted by Pe (n) where
Pe (n) = Fe (µ+n)−Fe (µ−n). There is a health cost of using multiple treatments given by n2 .
The expected health outcome, H, is a function of e and n and is given by H(e, n) = Pe (n)−n2 .
Note that for each individual patient, the interval either includes the true state or not with
probability of Pe (n) and 1 − Pe (n).
    The patient has her own belief about the proper treatment that she expects to receive
when visiting a clinic given the symptoms she has, which is denoted by n̄. It is assumed
that n̄ is also known to the provider. When the chosen n is different from n̄, the provider
needs to communicate with the patient to convince her that his choice of n is the correct
treatment. The farther away n is from n̄, the greater the need for communication. Also, the
patient can be more easily convinced if the provider has exerted more effort to examine her
                                                                 2
in the first place. The cost of communication is given by (n−n̄)
                                                              e
                                                                   . An easy way to reduce this
communication cost is to simply give something close to n̄. We are particularly interested
in the case where n̄ is large.

C.4   Providers’ Optimization Problem with and without Market Incentives

Denote the maximized utility of providers in the consultation stage and treatment stage by
V1 and V2 respectively. Without market incentives, providers have low-powered incentives
and maximize their utility:
                                           n            o
                                 V1 = max −e2 + V2 (e)                                 (1)
                                          e
                                              (               )
                                                 (n − n̄)2
                               V2 (e) = max φH −
                                         n          e
where φ governs the extent to which providers care about patients’ health without high-
powered incentives.
    In market environment, providers face market incentives in addition to low-powered in-
centives. Now, a provider i charges a piece rate τi per unit of effort as a consultation fee and
also charges p per unit of n for the treatment. Providers also care about their reputation in
the market, which is determined by the health outcomes of their patients. Health outcomes
are not fully observed in the market because the long-term health cost of excessive treatment
is not as easily observed as the immediate relief of symptoms. Instead, reputation is based on
the observed health outcome H o , which is given by H o (e, n) = Pe (n)−γo n2 where 0 < γo < 1,
and δ, which is a parameter that governs the extent to which providers care about their rep-
utation in the market. When there are market incentives, providers maximize their utility


                                              10
given by:

                                            n                  o
                              V1 (τ ) = max
                                         e
                                            −e2 + τ e + V2 (e)                             (2)
                                      (                               )
                                                (n − n̄)2
                                                     o
                         V2 (e) = max φH + δH −           + np
                                   n               e
   To focus on how the presence of market incentives shapes the optimal choices of providers,
                                                                       2
we omit the patients’ expectation channel and remove the term − (n−n̄)
                                                                    e
                                                                         from the provider’s
maximization problem. We reintroduce the term in subsection C.1.5.
   The first order conditions without market incentives are given by:

                                                  n(e)K
                                  φfe (µ + n(e)) √        = 2e                             (3)
                                                   α + eK


                                          fe (µ + n) = n                                   (4)

where fe is the probability density function of the posterior belief given e. The term fe (µ+n)
captures the marginal benefit of increasing n through the higher probability of spanning the
correct treatment, and the right hand side is the marginal cost of increasing n through the
higher health cost of excessive treatment. In the absence of market incentives, note that
providers choose n which maximizes H at any given e.
   The first order condition in the consultation stage with market incentives is given by:

                                                      n(e)K
                           τ + (φ + δ) fe (µ + n(e)) √        = 2e                         (5)
                                                       α + eK

and the first order condition in the treatment stage is given by:
                                                                 !
                                             p           φ + γo δ
                            fe (µ + n) +           =              n                        (6)
                                         2 (φ + δ)        φ+δ

    It is easy to see from (4) and (6) that given e, providers choose larger n when there are
market incentives. Because there is pecuniary benefit from n and also because the cost of
excessive n is not fully observed in the market (γo < 1), given e, the marginal benefit of
n is always greater and the marginal cost is always smaller with market incentives. Thus,
providers choose excessive n where H is decreasing in n instead of where H is maximized.
This means that by slightly decreasing n, the health outcome can be improved.
    Whether market incentives induce higher effort depends on the relative size of the rewards
for e and n in the market. As long as the rewards for n are not so large so as to dominate


                                                11
those for e, providers choose higher e with market incentives.3 Since our empirical results
find that private providers always exert more effort (in both the representative and dual
samples) and we also find a robust positive relationship between prices charged and effort
expended, it appears that the τ in our setting is high enough to induce additional effort from
providers facing market incentives.

C.5     Market Incentives and Health Outcomes

However, even if provider effort were to always be higher under market incentives, the impact
of market incentives on health outcomes is ambiguous and will depend on parameter values.
In particular, when φ is very low, it is possible that health outcome under market incentives
are better; however, as φ increases, health outcome without market incentives may be better.4
     Figures 1 and 2 in the main text illustrate this mechanism. Panel (A) in Figure 1
illustrates a case where market incentives induce higher effort. M Bwith and M Bwithout are
the left hand side of (5) and (3) with respect to e. M Cwith and M Cwithout are the right hand
side of (5) and (3) with respect to e. The terms e∗with and e∗without are the optimal levels of
effort with and without market incentives, respectively, for small and large φ values. The
rewards for effort in the market are sufficiently large in this case that e∗with is larger than
e∗without . With larger φ the optimal choice of e is higher.
                                           1
     Panel (B) traces posterior variance α+β  , the inverse of posterior precision, as a function
   3
     If there is little punishment for excessive treatment in the market and the marginal profit from treatment
is large, providers may find it optimal to choose low e and profit from large n unless the rewards for effort,
τ , are large enough to offset the tradeoff. To see this from the first order conditions (3) and (5), observe that
the marginal benefit of e is larger when there are market incentives if n(e) were the same for both with and
without market incentives. However, providers choose larger n when there are market incentives. Note that,
for any given e, nfe (µ+n) is increasing in n when n < √ 1 , maximized when n = √ 1 , and decreasing in
                                                            α+β                             α+β
n when n > √ 1       . Also, nfe (µ + n) is bounded below by 0 and above by   √1
                                                                               2π
                                                                                    exp{− 12 }. Let n1 (e) and n0 (e)
               α+β
denote the optimal choice of treatment as a function of e with and without market incentives. Observe that
when n1 (e) < √ 1 , the marginal benefit of e with market incentives is always greater than that without
                 α+β
market incentives. The n1 (e) term is more likely to be smaller than √ 1        when market incentives for n are
                                                                          α+β
small, i.e. when p is small and H o is close to H. On the other hand, when n1 (e) > √ 1                 , the left hand
                                                                                                  α+β
side of (3) may be larger than that of (5). However, because nfe (µ + n) is bounded, we can always find a τ
which makes the marginal benefit of e with market incentives larger.
    4
      Although we do not provide a formal proof, we confirmed in numerical simulations that there exists
a set of parameter values for which the model produces outcomes consistent with the argument provided
here. There are three conditions on parameter values for the model to produce such outcome: (1) τ is large
enough so that providers exert high effort even when φ is small; (2) K is large enough so that exerting extra
effort is meaningfully translated into higher posterior precision; (3) p and γo , the parameters that govern
the size of market incentives for excessive treatment, are large enough to induce excessive treatment even
when φ becomes high, but also small enough to not entirely offset the gains from a more precise posterior
distribution that is obtained due to market rewards for higher effort (especially at low values of φ). The
simulation results are available upon request.


                                                       12
of e holding K constant. The y-intercept, α1 , is the posterior variance when e = 0. The term
  1
α+β
      decreases with e at diminishing rates because β = eK. When φ is small, a difference in
                                                      1
e is translated into a substantial difference in α+β     . When φ is large, the marginal effect of
            1
effort on α+β   is small.
    Panel (C) illustrates the optimal level of treatment with and without market incentives,
n∗with and n∗without , when the posterior variance with market incentives is substantially smaller
than that without market incentives. M Bwith and M Bwithout are the left hand side of (6)
and (4) with respect to n. M Cwith and M Cwithout are the right hand side of (6) and (4) with
respect to n. The slope of M Cwith is smaller than 1 because the health cost of excessive
treatment is not fully observed, and hence, penalties for additional treatment in the market
are weaker than what providers would impose on themselves under low-powered incentives.
                                                                                          p
The term p, the unit price of n, is added to M Bwith , so M Bwith asymptotes to 2(φ+δ)        rather
than to 0. When the posterior variance with market incentives is substantially smaller
than that without incentives, the optimal level of n with market incentives can be smaller
in spite of incentives for excessive treatment. Panel (D) illustrates the optimal level of
treatment when the posterior variance with market incentives is only slightly smaller than
that without market incentives. In this case, the effects of market incentives on excessive
treatment dominates, and the optimal level of n is larger with market incentives.
    Figure 2 illustrates the health outcome produced with and without market incentives
with different values of φ. H increases with φ because e increases with φ, and n is invariant
to φ given e when there are no market incentives and decreases with φ when there are market
incentives. We argue that, when φ is low, H is higher with market incentives; however, as φ
increases, H without market incentives starts to dominate that with market incentives. At
low levels of e, a small difference in e is translated into a substantial difference in the posterior
precision. Although market incentives induce excessive n, the effect of higher posterior
precision on the health outcome dominates the offsetting effect of excessive n. However, as φ
increases, e under both environment increases, and the marginal effect of e on the posterior
precision, and hence on the health outcome, becomes smaller. At sufficiently high levels of e,
higher e with market incentives generates a difference in the posterior precision that is too
small to offset the effect of excessive n. Thus, when φ is high, the health outcome without
market incentives is higher.

C.6    Re-introducing Patient Expectations

When patients have their own expectation about proper treatment, providers engage in
costly communication to convince patients that their choice of n is the correct treatment.
                                                                 2
The first order conditions with the communication cost, (n(e)−n̄)
                                                            e
                                                                   , are given below.

                                                 13
   Without market incentives :

                                         n(e)K     (n(e) − n̄)2
                         φfe (µ + n(e)) √        +              = 2e
                                          α + eK       e2

                                                      !
                                                  1     1
                                fe (µ + n) = 1 +    n − n̄                                    (7)
                                                 eφ    eφ
   With market incentives :

                                               n(e)K    (n(e) − n̄)2
                    τ + (φ + δ) fe (µ + n(e)) √       +              = 2e
                                               α + eK       e2

                                                                !
                                 p          φ + γo δ      1          1
                 fe (µ + n) +          =             +         n−         n̄                  (8)
                              2(φ + δ)       φ+δ       eφ + eδ    eφ + eδ
    Note that, in the treatment stage, the marginal cost of n is smaller than that when the
patients’ expectation channel is omitted when n < n̄ and it is larger when n > n̄. Thus,
there is an incentive to choose n closer to n̄. Figure C.1 illustrates the effect of some large n̄
in the treatment stage. We consider a case where providers choose higher effort with market
incentives. Panel (A) is when the patient’s expectation channel is omitted and panel (B)
is when the channel exists. In panel (A), M Bwith and M Bwithout are the left hand sides
of (6) and (4) with respect to n. M Cwith and M Cwithout are the right hand sides of (6)
and (4) with respect to n. In panel (B) they are the left and the right hand sides of (8)
and (7). The optimal levels of treatment with and without market incentives are labeled as
n∗with and n∗without . At small values of n, MC of n is lower in panel (B) than in (A) because
the communication cost decreases as n comes closer to n̄. Thus, the optimal choice of n is
larger than that without patients’ expectation. The effect is larger when there are no market
incentives where the level of effort is lower and the communication cost of deviating from n̄
is greater.




                                               14
    Figure C.1: Optimal choice of treatment with and without patient’s expectation n̄




    Notes: The graphs illustrate the effect of some large n̄ when the effort with market incentives is
    larger than when without. Panel (A) is when the patient’s expectation term is omitted and panel
    (B) is when it is present. In panel (A), M Bwith and M Bwithout are the graphs of the left hand
    side of (6) and (4) with respect to n. M Cwith and M Cwithout are the graphs of the right hand
    side of (6) and (4) with respect to n. In panel (B), M Bwith and M Bwithout are the graphs of
    the left hand side of (8) and (7) with respect to n. M Cwith and M Cwithout are the graphs of the
    right hand side of (8) and (7) with respect to n.


D   Differential Patient Sorting Across Sectors

Although audit studies are advantageous over other metrics of healthcare quality such as
vignettes and direct observations, they are limited by the number and type of cases that can
be presented. As we discussed in Section 3.1, one reason we selected our cases - unstable
angina, dysentery and asthma - was that providers could clinically diagnose and recommend
treatment to SPs without need for invasive procedures or examinations that could potentially
harm the SPs. Then, when using SPs to measure healthcare quality, one has to worry if the
cases presented represent off-equilibrium conditions for the market.
    Furthermore, even if presented cases map well into the overall morbidity patterns and
care seeking behaviors of the population, it is possible that patients choose to visit different
provider types (public or private) for different types of conditions. Patients may choose
public facilities for more serious conditions, or vice versa. Or for instance, in cases such
as tuberculosis there is enormous government attention, and private providers of all stripes

                                                   15
immediately refer patients to the public sector. Not accounting for such differential patient
sorting across sectors will produce confounded estimates of the public-private healthcare
quality gap.
    Note that this is a difficult problem to address in general because observing real provider-
patient interactions precludes the possibility of off-equilibrium behavior, but we cannot code
the quality of care accurately because we do not know the underlying ailment. On the other
hand, the SP method allows for better measurement of quality of care, but may represent
an off-equilibrium interaction
    Here, we provide evidence against differential patient sorting using direct observation data
described in Section 7. We conducted patient exit interviews immediately after provider
interactions in which we ask patients reasons for their visit including a list of symptoms,
their current physical activity, and other background and demographic questions. In Table
A.14 we present estimates of differences in patient characteristics in the public and private
clinics. For the representative sample, for each outcome variable (rows of the table), Columns
(1) and (2) present means in public and private sectors respectively, and Columns (3) and
(4) present coefficients from regressing the outcome variable on a private indicator with
and without market fixed effects. Our preferred estimate of public-private difference is in
Column (4) and we discuss these coefficients below. Among the nine common symptoms
we record, there are only two symptoms where observe significant differences in observing a
symptom across sectors. Patients are 13.5 percentage points more likely to visit the private
sector when they have a fever and 4.6 percentage points more likely when they experience
vomiting. There is no difference in the number of days the patients has been sick before
coming to see the provider. Similarly there are no significant differences between patients
assets index or education levels, but patients to the private sector are more likely to have
traveled from outside than patients in the public sector (which is consistent with results in
table 1 that patients are more likely to travel to see a private provider).
    Columns (5)-(8) repeat the same exercise for the dual sample except that we use district
fixed effects instead of market fixed effects. Here, the differences in patterns of observed
symptoms are even smaller and not a single outcome is statistically different across the two
sectors. Patients in the private sector are richer (which is not surprising because MBBS
providers charge a much higher fee) and are 8.7 percentage points (3 percent) more likely
to have formal education. Finally, in both representative and dual samples we find that
patients are more likely to ask provider questions in the private sector, which may simply
reflect customer accountability as opposed to differential patient sorting.
    Even though the mean differences in patient characteristics across sectors are small and
largely insignificant, one might still worry about differences in distributions. For our public-


                                              16
private comparisons to be valid, what we need is that for any given set of symptoms and
conditions, there are enough patients who visit the private sector and those who visit the
public, i.e. a common support assumption.
    To show that there is common support, we construct propensity scores of visiting a public
or a private provider for a given set of symptoms and conditions and plot the empirical
distributions of the propensity scores (Figure A.5). The x-axis in Figure A.5 is the predicted
probability of visiting a public or private provider which we obtain by regressing a private
dummy on symptoms, patient physical activity, and background and demographic variables
(rows in Table A.14). The y-axis is the density of each propensity score estimate, by sector.
The figure shows that for a given probability of visiting a public or private provider (which
represents the same set of symptoms, activity and patient background), there are providers
of both types - public and private - throughout the probability distribution. These results
suggest that differential patient sorting is not likely to affect our results.




                                             17
     Appendix Figures and Tables




                              Figure A.1         Figure A.2
18




                                   Figure A.3   Figure A.4
19




     Figure A.5
                                                Table A.1: Sampling and completion of SPs in the representative sample
                                                                         (1)             (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)         (6)       (7)
                                                                                             Number of providers                Number of MBBS providers
                                                                      Markets
                                                                                        Total       Public       Private        Total       Public   Private
Panel A: Sampling and completion by market
Total eligible                                                            60             719          144         575            51          23        28
Markets selected for SP                                                   46             649          130         519            50          23        27
Reasons for not sampling market
   Remote market                                                           5
   No eligible provider                                                    7
   Common cluster market, no provider within village                       2
Sampled for SPs                                                                          247           45         202            28          12        16
Not sampled for SPs                                                       14             472           99         373            23          11        12
Completed SPs                                                             46             224           36         188            23           9        14
Panel B: Sampling and completion by sector
Public Sector                                                                                     (Number of providers with whom SPs were completed)
   At least 1 public provider sampled                                     22             151           36         115            20           9        11
   At least 1 public provider completed                                   20             141           36         105            20           9        11
   At least 1 public MBBS provider sampled                                10              98           21          77            18           8        10
   At least 1 public MBBS provider completed                               9              87           19          68            18           9         9
Private Sector
   At least 1 private provider sampled                                    44             218           30         188            22           8        14
   At least 1 private provider completed                                  44             218           30         188            22           8        14
   At least 1 private MBBS provider sampled                                8              68           5           63            16           2        14
   At least 1 private MBBS provider completed                              7              67           5           62            16           2        14
Private and Public Sector
   Markets with at least 1 public and 1 private provider sampled          20             145           30         115            19           8        11
   Markets with at least 1 public and 1 private provider completed        18             135           30         105            19           8        11
Notes: In 5 markets where SP work was over completed, the SP saw a provider other than a sampled provider
                            Table A.2: Mapping, sampling and completion in the dual practice sample
                                              (1)        (2)                                                                 (3)        (4)
     Facilities                           Number of                          Providers                                    Number of
                                                      Percentage                                                                    Percentage
                                           facilities                                                                     providers
     Panel A: Mapping
     Total                                     200                           Total                                             216
     without doctors                           40            20.0%           without private facilities                        84           38.9%
     with doctors                              160           80.0%           with private facilities                           132          61.1%
     Panel B: Sampling
     Total                                     143                           Total                                             143
                                                                             without private facilities                        49           34.3%
                                                                             with private facilties                            94           65.7%
21




     Panel C: Completed (at least one case)
     Total                          102                                      Total                                             118
                                                                             without private facilities                        30           25.4%
                                                                             with private facilities                           88           74.6%
     Notes: Reasons for not completing SP surveys include transferred and provider not found. In almost all cases our field staff made at least three
     attempts to complete a case. During fieldwork we replaced five sampled providers with other providers. In two cases, it was because the provider
     was on sick leave, two cases because provider had been transferred and one case because provider had gone on training.
                                Table A.3: Randomization balance for dual sample providers' assignment of Unstable Angina cases
                                                        (1)             (2)              (3)         (4)       (5)                        (7)              (8)           (9)        (10)
                                                                                               Asthma outcomes                                                         Dysentery outcomes
                                                                     Percent                                                                                                          Percent
                                                  Time spent                           Gave           Correct          Correct         Palliative Unnecessary          Time spent
                                                                    checklist                                                                                                        checklist
                                                    (mins)                           diagnosis       diagnosis        treatment       treatment treatment                (mins)
                                                                   completed                                                                                                        completed
Is private                                          1.497***        13.190***          0.181            0.077            0.131         -0.230**          -0.017           0.302      9.109**
                                                     (0.483)         (3.292)          (0.118)          (0.099)          (0.113)         (0.117)          (0.075)         (0.241)     (4.119)
Received Unstable Angina in private                   0.433           5.441            0.100            0.075           -0.194          -0.079            0.094           0.205      -0.862
                                                     (0.518)         (3.534)          (0.127)          (0.106)          (0.121)         (0.126)          (0.080)         (0.255)     (4.356)
(Is private) x
                                                      0.143           -2.996           -0.214          -0.094           0.044            0.131           -0.051          0.268        -0.604
(Received Unstable Angina in private)
                                                     (0.719)         (4.898)          (0.176)         (0.147)          (0.168)          (0.174)          (0.111)         (0.354)     (6.053)
Constant                                            1.644***        13.687***        0.307***         0.150**         0.639***         0.487***         0.873***        0.783***    17.088***
                                                     (0.347)         (2.367)          (0.085)         (0.071)          (0.081)          (0.084)          (0.054)         (0.172)     (2.941)
Notes: *** Significant at 1%, ** Significant at 5%, * Significant at 10%. Robust standard errors are in parenthesis. All regressions include district fixed effects.
                                                 Table A.4: Checklist items, diagnoses and treatments
                                                  (1)                                       (2)                                     (3)
                                            Unstable angina                               Asthma                                 Dysentery
Panel A: Checklist Items
History questions        where is the pain, when started,                  current breathing probes, cough,         age of child, qualities of school,
                         severity of pain, radiation, previous             expectoration probes, previous           frequency, quantity of stool,
                         similar, since when, shortness of                 breathing problems, since when           urination, child active/playful, fever,
                         breath, sweating, beedi-cigarette,                problems, shortness constant of          abdominal pain, vomitting, source
                         family history                                    episodic, what triggers, fever, chest    of water, what has child eaten, child
                                                                           pain, weight loss, beedi-cigarette,      taking fluids
                                                                           family history
Examinations                     pulse, bp, auscultation (front or         pulse, bp, auscultation (front or
                                 back), temperature attempt, ecg           back), temperature attempt
                                 in/outside clinic
Panel B: Diagnosis
Correct                          Heart attack, angina, myocardial          Asthma, asthma attack                    Dysentery, bacteria
                                 infarction, attack
Incorrect                        Blood pressure problem,                   Blood pressure problem,               Weather, heat in liver, acidity,
                                 gastrointestinal problem, muscle          gastrointensinal problem, heart       diarrhea
                                 problem, the weather, injury, nerve       problem, the weather, cough in
                                 pull, lack of blood, swelling in chest,   chest, thyroid problem, weakness,
                                 pain from drinking cold water,            lack of blood, infection in windpipe,
                                 heavy work, bad blood, decaying           pregnancy, allergy
                                 lungs, chest congestion
Panel C: Treatment
Correct                          Aspirin, clopidogrel/other anti-          Bronchodilators, theophylline,           ORS, rehydration
                                 platelet agents, do an ECG.               inhaled or oral corticosteroids,
                                                                           leukotriene inhibitors, cromones,
                                                                           inhaled anticholinergics
Palliative                       Nitroglycerin, blood thinners,            Anti-allergy medication                  Antibiotics,zinc
                                 betablockers, ACE inhibitors,
                                 vasodilators, other cardiac
                                 medication, morphine, other pain
                                 medication, referral or referral for
                                 an ECG.
Unncessary or harmful            Antibiotics, oral rehydration salts,     Aspirin, clopidogrel, anti-platelet       Aspirin, clopidogrel, anti-platelet
                                 oral electrolyte solution, zinc,         agents, blood thinners, betablockers,     agents, blood thinners, betablockers,
                                 steroids, inhaler, bronchodilators,      ACE inhibitors, vasodilators, other       ACE inhibitors, vasodilators, other
                                 theophylline, inhaled corticosteroids, cardiac medication, morphine, other         cardiac medication, morphine, other
                                 leukotriene inhibitors, cromones,        pain medication, oral rehydration         pain medication, steroids, inhaler,
                                 inhaled anti-cholinergics, oral cortico- salts, oral electrolyte solution, zinc,   bronchodilators, theophylline,
                                 steroids, other anti-asthmatic           antibiotics, anti-ulcer medication,       inhaled corticosteroids, leukotriene
                                 medication, anti-allergy medication, psychiatric medication                        inhibitors, cromones, inhaled anti-
                                 psychiatric medication.                                                            cholinergics, oral cortico-steroids,
                                                                                                                    other anti-asthmatic medication, anti-
                                                                                                                    allergy medication, psychiatric
                                                                                                                    medication
Notes: See Appendix B for coding of treatments




                                                                             23
                                                Table A.5: List of checklist items used in the treatment of SPs
                                             (1)           (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)             (6)        (7)         (8)        (9)
                                            Item                         Representative sample                              Dual practice sample
                                         discriminat                                      Difference                                         Difference
                                                           All        Public    Private                           All   Public     Private
                                         ion tercile                                        (4)-(3)                                           (9)-(8)
Panel A: Unstable Angina
History questions
   where is the pain                       high           0.659       0.486        0.694     0.208***        0.582      0.528       0.645        0.117
   when started                            low            0.369       0.270        0.389      0.119*         0.149      0.167       0.129       -0.038
   doing when began                        high           0.074       0.054        0.078       0.024         0.119      0.083       0.161        0.078
   severity of pain                        low            0.258       0.162        0.278      0.116*         0.284      0.167       0.419      0.253**
   radiation                               high           0.143       0.108        0.150       0.042         0.299      0.222       0.387       0.165*
   previous similar                       medium          0.392       0.270        0.417     0.146**         0.328      0.278       0.387        0.109
   since when                              low            0.263       0.216        0.272       0.056         0.209      0.111       0.323      0.211**
   quality of pain                         high           0.115       0.108        0.117       0.009         0.179      0.111       0.258       0.147*
   pain changes                            low            0.060       0.054        0.061       0.007         0.104      0.056       0.161       0.106*
   shortness of breath                    medium          0.138       0.081        0.150       0.069         0.045      0.056       0.032       -0.023
   nausea                                 medium          0.295       0.297        0.294      -0.003         0.209      0.056       0.387      0.332***
   sweating                                high           0.290       0.270        0.294       0.024         0.313      0.194       0.452      0.257**
   beedi-cigarette                         low            0.069       0.054        0.072       0.018         0.134      0.083       0.194       0.110*
   family history                          high           0.014       0.000        0.017       0.017         0.045      0.000       0.097      0.097**
Examination questions
   pulse                                   low            0.392       0.243        0.422     0.179**         0.537      0.417       0.677      0.261**
   bp                                     medium          0.313       0.135        0.350     0.215***        0.373      0.222       0.548      0.326***
   auscultation (either front or back)     low            0.447       0.189        0.500     0.311***        0.522      0.444       0.613       0.168*
   temperature attempt                    medium          0.134       0.108        0.139       0.031         0.134      0.028       0.258      0.230***
   ecg in/outside clinic                  medium          0.230       0.243        0.228      -0.015         0.313      0.278       0.355        0.077
Number of observations                                     217         37           180                       67         36          31
Panel B: Asthma
History questions
   current breathing probes               medium          0.601       0.385        0.647     0.262***        0.552      0.422       0.671      0.250***
   cough                                   low            0.677       0.590        0.696       0.106         0.575      0.453       0.686      0.233***
   expectoration probes                    low            0.148       0.077        0.163      0.086*         0.045      0.016       0.071       0.056*
   previous breathing problems             high           0.439       0.333        0.462      0.129*         0.410      0.266       0.543      0.277***
   previous episode probes                medium          0.184       0.128        0.196       0.067         0.201      0.109       0.286      0.176***
   since when problems                    medium          0.475       0.385        0.495       0.110         0.328      0.234       0.414      0.180**
   how often happens                       high           0.108       0.128        0.103      -0.025         0.067      0.047       0.086        0.039
   shortness constant or episodic          low            0.103       0.051        0.114       0.063         0.090      0.047       0.129      0.082**
   what triggers                          medium          0.117       0.077        0.125       0.048         0.164      0.094       0.229      0.135**
   how long lasts                          high           0.067       0.077        0.065      -0.012         0.052      0.016       0.086      0.070**
   childhood illness                      medium          0.027       0.000        0.033       0.033         0.030      0.016       0.043        0.027
   age                                     high           0.170       0.308        0.141    -0.166***        0.537      0.578       0.500       -0.078
   fever                                   low            0.309       0.231        0.326       0.095         0.306      0.219       0.386      0.167**
   chest pain                              low            0.336       0.154        0.375     0.221***        0.231      0.172       0.286       0.114*
   weight loss                             high           0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000         0.015      0.016       0.014       -0.001
   night sweats                            high           0.054       0.051        0.054       0.003         0.067      0.047       0.086        0.039
   beedi-cigarette                         high           0.018       0.026        0.016      -0.009         0.045      0.016       0.071       0.056*
   family history                         medium          0.022       0.000        0.027       0.027         0.037      0.031       0.043        0.012
Examination questions
   pulse                                   low            0.502       0.256        0.554     0.298***        0.388      0.313       0.457      0.145**
   bp                                     medium          0.278       0.205        0.293       0.088         0.239      0.109       0.357      0.248***
   auscultation (either front or back)     low            0.516       0.333        0.554     0.221***        0.649      0.484       0.800      0.316***
   temp attempt                            low            0.166       0.103        0.179       0.077         0.082      0.063       0.100        0.038
Number of observations                                     223         39           184                       134        64          70
                                                                                                                                 (continued on next page)




                                                                              24
                                               Table A.5 continued
                             (1)                 (2)         (3)        (4)               (5)         (6)        (7)
                            Item                   Representative sample                     Dual practice sample
                         discriminat                                Difference                                Difference
                                        All     Public     Private                All    Public     Private
                         ion tercile                                  (3)-(2)                                  (6)-(5)
Panel C: Dysentery
History questions
   age of child            low         0.919    0.795        0.945   0.150***    0.930   0.921       0.939       0.019
   qualities of stool      low         0.167    0.077        0.186   0.109**     0.271   0.159       0.379     0.220***
   frequency              medium       0.288    0.179        0.311   0.132**     0.372   0.270       0.470     0.200***
   quantity of stool       high        0.050    0.000        0.060    0.060*     0.031   0.016       0.045       0.030
   urination               high        0.018    0.000        0.022     0.022     0.008   0.016       0.000      -0.016
   active/playful          high        0.032    0.026        0.033     0.007     0.000   0.000       0.000       0.000
   fever                  medium       0.171    0.077        0.191   0.114**     0.295   0.222       0.364     0.141**
   abdominal pain          low         0.113    0.077        0.120     0.043     0.256   0.222       0.288       0.066
   vomiting                low         0.216    0.077        0.246   0.169***    0.295   0.254       0.333       0.079
   source of water         high        0.023    0.000        0.027     0.027     0.016   0.000       0.030      0.030*
   what has eaten         medium       0.050    0.000        0.060    0.060*     0.093   0.032       0.152     0.120***
   taking fluids          medium       0.023    0.000        0.027     0.027     0.062   0.048       0.076       0.028
Number of observations                  222      39           183                 130     63          67
Notes:




                                                        25
                   Table A.6: Effort in the public and private sectors by checklist item discrimination terciles
                                             (1)           (2)           (3)              (4)           (5)         (6)
                                               Outcome variable: Percentage of recommended type of checklist items
                                                 Representative sample                         Dual practice sample

                                                     Low          Medium           High                             Low          Medium           High
                                                discrimination discrimination discrimination                   discrimination discrimination discrimination

Panel A: SP and case fixed effects
Is a private provider               10.982***       7.085**                                  1.760                10.519***           11.745***           5.122***
                                     (3.281)        (2.875)                                 (2.143)                (2.404)             (2.360)             (1.746)
R-squared                             0.144          0.175                                   0.238                  0.279               0.236               0.318
Number of observations                 662            662                                     662                    330                 330                 330
Mean of public                       21.770         13.975                                  10.197                 28.254              14.592              10.020
Mean of private                      32.966         21.322                                  12.235                 41.104              28.800              15.234
Mean of sample                       32.108         20.759                                  12.079                 34.756              21.782              12.659
Panel B: SP, case and market/district fixed effects
Is a private provider               11.290***      8.597***                                  1.594                10.594***           11.709***           5.077***
                                     (2.609)        (2.535)                                 (1.969)                (2.358)             (2.381)             (1.751)
R-squared                             0.253          0.256                                   0.300                  0.301               0.247               0.322
Number of observations                 662            662                                     662                    330                 330                 330
Panel C: SP, case and market/district fixed effects
Is a private provider               8.538***        7.317**                                  1.657                11.786***           12.518***            4.523**
                                     (3.030)        (3.092)                                 (2.381)                (2.480)             (2.466)             (1.794)
Has MBBS                              2.548          5.175                                   2.307
                                     (3.949)        (3.449)                                 (2.916)
Has some qualification                2.300         4.764*                                   0.721
                                     (2.563)        (2.447)                                 (1.831)
Age of provider                       -0.151         -0.009                                  0.044                  -0.069              -0.135             -0.042
                                     (0.102)        (0.094)                                 (0.077)                 (0.139)             (0.138)            (0.101)
Gender of provider (1=Male)           1.009          -1.353                                 -2.369                   2.773              -2.792             -3.651
                                     (4.541)        (5.383)                                 (3.361)                 (3.586)             (3.565)            (2.593)
Patient load during visit             -0.041         -0.396                                  0.050                   -0.501             -0.203             -0.211
                                     (0.736)        (0.557)                                 (0.528)                 (0.576)             (0.572)            (0.416)
R-squared                             0.254          0.262                                   0.301                   0.290               0.252              0.330
Number of observations                 638            638                                     638                     301                 301                301
Notes: *** Significant at 1%, ** Significant at 5%, * Significant at 10%. Robust standard errors clustered at the market level are in parenthesis. Observations
are standardized provider-patient interactions. Checklist item discrimination parameters are estimated using the IRT methodology. The classification of items
into terciles of difficulty is done within each case, but the results are robust to classifying the items jointly across all cases. Market fixed effects are used for the
representative sample, and district fixed effects for dual practice sample.




                                                                                  26
                                                                                     Table A.7: Effort, diagnosis and treatment by case
                                                       (1)           (2)                  (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)                                (7)        (8)          (9)     (10)        (11)
                                                               Effort                               Diagnosis                                                                       Treatment
                                                                                                     Correct       Correct                                                                  Correct
                                                                                         Gave                                     Correct                           Palliative Unnecessary                      Number of
                                                  Time spent       Checklist                        diagnosis      diagnosis                                                               treatment Antibiotic
                                                                                       diagnosis                                 treatment                         treatment treatment                           medicines
                                                                                                          (conditional)    (unconditional)                                                    Only
Panel A1: Unstable angina, representative sample, with SP fixed effects
Is a private provider                 1.101***   7.890**           0.112                                     0.033              0.011                0.021           -0.070           0.083           -0.026          0.024        0.782***
                                       (0.303)    (3.418)         (0.093)                                   (0.074)            (0.030)              (0.034)          (0.081)         (0.083)          (0.028)        (0.062)        (0.286)
R-squared                               0.083      0.138           0.016                                     0.155              0.082                0.033            0.021           0.056            0.016          0.030          0.043
Number of observations                   217        217             217                                       102                217                  217              217             217              217            217            217
Mean of public                          2.592     17.354           0.378                                     0.071              0.027                0.027            0.784           0.730            0.027          0.135          2.054
Panel A2: Unstable angina, dual practice sample, with SP fixed effects
Is a private provider                 3.232***   12.856**        0.214**                                     0.164             0.142*              0.281***          -0.004           0.061                          -0.013          0.490
                                       (1.012)    (5.367)         (0.109)                                   (0.153)            (0.076)              (0.093)          (0.079)         (0.124)                         (0.112)        (0.356)
R-squared                               0.214      0.105           0.349                                     0.141              0.153                0.179            0.062           0.055                           0.070          0.181
Number of observations                    61         61              61                                        29                 61                  61               61              61              61               61            61
Mean of public                          1.986     18.586           0.375                                     0.083              0.031                0.031            0.906           0.656           0.000           0.250          2.188
Panel B1: Asthma, representative sample, with SP fixed effects
Is a private provider                 1.952***   6.015**         0.224***                                   -0.123              0.021                0.082           -0.008           0.040            0.010          0.009        1.158***
                                       (0.475)    (2.940)         (0.071)                                   (0.201)            (0.043)              (0.094)          (0.081)         (0.085)          (0.034)        (0.094)        (0.301)
R-squared                               0.200      0.172           0.209                                     0.065              0.067                0.043            0.029           0.076            0.038          0.019          0.095
27




Number of observations                   223        223             223                                        76                223                  223              223             223              223            223            223
Mean of public                          3.301     17.716           0.154                                     0.333              0.051                0.385            0.282           0.744            0.026          0.385          2.128
Panel B2: Asthma, dual practice sample, with SP fixed effects
Is a private provider                 1.418*** 12.167***           0.033                                     -0.078            -0.015                0.107           -0.136          -0.049            0.023        -0.151*         -0.169
                                       (0.374)    (2.545)         (0.092)                                   (0.158)            (0.080)              (0.089)          (0.089)         (0.056)          (0.043)       (0.092)         (0.224)
R-squared                               0.201      0.235           0.090                                     0.102              0.060                0.127            0.107           0.110            0.043         0.097           0.119
Number of observations                   122        122             122                                        51                122                  122              122             122              122           122             122
Mean of public                          1.872     15.831           0.379                                     0.545              0.207                0.534            0.448           0.914            0.034         0.586           3.086
Panel C1: Dysentery, representative sample, with SP fixed effects
Is a private provider                 0.846***   7.088***
                                       (0.231)    (2.052)
R-squared                               0.091      0.108
Number of observations                   222        222
Mean of public                          1.281     10.897
Panel C2: Dysentery, dual practice sample, with SP fixed effects
Is a private provider                 0.395**    5.279**
                                       (0.181)    (2.569)
R-squared                               0.095      0.340
Number of observations                   119        119
Mean of public                          0.879     16.228
Notes: *** Significant at 1%, ** Significant at 5%, * Significant at 10%. Robust standard errors clustered at the market level are in parenthesis. All regressions include a constant and controls for provider qualifications, age, gender, and
patient load. Observations are standardized provider-patient interactions. In column (11) the dependent variable is total number of medicines recommended to the patient (dispensed and/or prescribed).
                                           Table A.8: Summary of treatment by case
                                               (1)        (2)         (3)                            (4)        (5)        (6)
                                                 Representative sample                                 Dual practice sample
                                                                  Difference                                            Difference
                                              Public    Private                                    Public     Private
                                                                    (2)-(1)                                              (5)-(4)
Panel A: Unstable Angina
   Correct treatment                           0.03            0.06            0.03                 0.03             0.29          0.26***
   Correct treatment (alternate)               0.46            0.37            -0.09                0.42             0.61           0.20*
   Palliative treatment                        0.78            0.71            -0.07                0.92             0.90           -0.01
   Unnecessary treatment                       0.73            0.80            0.07                 0.67             0.74            0.08
   Aspirin                                     0.03            0.04            0.02                 0.03             0.23          0.20***
   Anti-platelet agents                        0.03            0.01            -0.02                0.00             0.03            0.03
   Referred                                    0.30            0.24            -0.05                0.22             0.32            0.10
   ECG                                         0.24            0.23            -0.02                0.28             0.35            0.08
   ECG & Referred                              0.11            0.12            0.01                 0.08             0.16            0.08
   Antibiotic                                  0.14            0.17            0.03                 0.28             0.23           -0.05
   Number of observations                       37             180                                   36               31
Panel B: Asthma
   Correct treatment                           0.38            0.50           0.12*                 0.58             0.67             0.09
   Palliative treatment                        0.28            0.29            0.01                 0.47             0.29           -0.18**
   Unnecessary treatment                       0.74            0.83           0.09*                 0.92             0.89             -0.04
   Bronchodilators                             0.33            0.36            0.03                 0.52             0.59             0.07
   Theophylline                                0.13            0.22           0.09*                 0.31             0.31             0.00
   Oral Corticosteroids                        0.15            0.31           0.16**                0.16             0.24             0.09
   Antibiotic                                  0.38            0.40            0.02                 0.59             0.46            -0.14*
   Number of observations                       39             184                                   64               70
Panel C: Dysentery
   Correct treatment                           0.08            0.13            0.05                 0.33             0.22           -0.11*
   Palliative treatment                        0.44            0.61           0.18**                0.75             0.61           -0.13*
   Unnecessary treatment                       0.28            0.56          0.28***                0.35             0.40            0.05
   ORS                                         0.05            0.12            0.07                 0.33             0.21           -0.12*
   Asked to see child                          0.33            0.14          -0.20***               0.27             0.42           0.15**
   Antibiotic                                  0.44            0.61           0.18**                0.75             0.61           -0.13*
   Number of observations                       39             183                                   63               67

Notes: In Unstable Angina, alternate definition for correct treatment codes referrals and referrals for ECG as correct. In the dysentery case,
note the large and significant differences in "asked to see the child" across public and private providers in the representative and dual
samples. If we were to assume the same rate of correct treatment by public and private providers in the cases where they "asked to see the
child" as in the cases where a treatment was provided, then the differences in correct treatment are no longer significant in either sample. If
we carry out a bounding exercise, the differences are still not significant, and the standard errors are too wide for meaningful inference. This
is why we exclude the dysentery case in our pooled analysis of treatment across cases.
                Table A.9: Robustness of treatment results with alternative definition for correct treatment for unstable angina
                                                               (1)                    (2)                                          (3)                   (4)
                                                               All (compare with table 4)                                 Unstable angina only (compare with table A8)
                                                      Representative sample  Dual practice sample                          Representative sample     Dual sample
                                                        Correct treatment      Correct treatment                             Correct treatment     Correct treatment
Panel A: SP fixed effects
Is a private provider                                          -0.014                          0.119*                                -0.112                           0.206*
                                                               (0.063)                         (0.069)                               (0.088)                          (0.121)
R-squared                                                       0.075                           0.086                                 0.092                            0.070
Number of observations                                           440                             201                                   217                              67
Mean of public                                                  0.421                           0.520                                 0.459                            0.417
Mean of private                                                 0.421                           0.653                                 0.360                            0.613
Mean of sample                                                  0.421                           0.587                                 0.367                            0.507
Panel B: SP and market/district fixed effects
Is a private provider                           0.001                                          0.122*                                -0.065                           0.195*
                                               (0.069)                                         (0.070)                               (0.118)                          (0.115)
R-squared                                       0.196                                           0.095                                 0.298                            0.186
Number of observations                           440                                             201                                   217                              67
Panel C: SP and market/district fixed effects
Is a private provider                          -0.009                                           0.126*                               -0.203                            0.190
                                               (0.070)                                          (0.075)                              (0.141)                          (0.122)
Has MBBS                                      0.340***                                                                                0.233
                                               (0.081)                                                                               (0.147)
Has some qualification                        0.164***                                                                                0.139
                                               (0.057)                                                                               (0.095)
Age of provider                                 0.000                                           -0.004                                0.002                           -0.006
                                               (0.004)                                          (0.004)                              (0.004)                          (0.006)
Gender of provider (1=Male)                     0.256                                            0.007                               0.334**                          -0.165
                                               (0.158)                                          (0.111)                              (0.170)                          (0.162)
Patient load during visit                    -0.030***                                          -0.006                              -0.022**                          -0.034
                                               (0.008)                                          (0.018)                              (0.010)                          (0.021)
R-squared                                       0.244                                            0.106                                0.352                            0.240
Number of observations                           423                                              183                                  208                              61
Notes: *** Significant at 1%, ** Significant at 5%, * Significant at 10%. Robust standard errors clustered at the market level are in parenthesis. All regressions include a constant.
Observations are standardized provider-patient interactions. Columns (1) and (2) also include case fixed effects. Market fixed effects are used for the representative sample, and
district fixed effects for dual practice sample. Alternative definition for Unstable Angina adds "referral" and "referral for ECG" as correct treatment.




                                                                                          29
                Table A.10: Robustness of provider effort results to exclusion of dysentery cases
                                        (1)          (2)         (3)             (4)          (5)         (6)
                                          Representative sample                     Dual practice sample
                                                Percentage                               Percentage
                                   Time Spent                                Time Spent
                                                of checklist IRT score                   of checklist IRT score
                                      (mins)                                   (mins)
                                                   items                                    items
Panel A: SP and case fixed effects
Is a private provider                1.531***     6.942**      0.519**        2.200*** 12.267***       0.687***
                                      (0.306)     (3.307)      (0.209)         (0.419)     (2.376)      (0.194)
R-squared                              0.225       0.152                        0.170       0.154
Number of observations                  440          440         233             201          201         138
Mean of public                         2.956      17.540                        1.970      17.481
Mean of private                        4.548      24.335                        4.043      30.196
Mean of sample                         4.427      23.820                        3.011      23.870
Panel B: SP, case and market/district fixed effects
Is a private provider                1.907***    7.593***      0.629**        2.201*** 12.271***       0.682***
                                      (0.367)     (2.727)      (0.275)         (0.406)     (2.392)      (0.194)
R-squared                              0.341       0.278                        0.194       0.164
Number of observations                  440          440         233             201          201
Panel C: SP, case and market/district fixed effects
Is a private provider                1.654***     6.087*       0.543*         2.061*** 12.243***       0.729***
                                      (0.481)     (3.354)      (0.299)         (0.421)     (2.514)      (0.196)
Has MBBS                              -0.062      6.415*        0.206
                                      (0.847)     (3.805)      (0.254)
Has some qualification                -0.159       2.737        0.119
                                      (0.435)     (2.159)      (0.156)
Age of provider                       -0.002       0.027        0.003           0.018      -0.004        0.003
                                      (0.017)     (0.088)      (0.008)         (0.024)     (0.141)      (0.010)
Gender of provider (1=Male)           1.460*       2.136        0.060          -0.343      -3.130       -0.186
                                      (0.789)     (4.284)      (0.325)         (0.605)     (3.609)      (0.315)
Patient load during visit           -0.188***     -0.333        0.034          -0.132      -0.054       -0.033
                                      (0.059)     (0.609)      (0.044)         (0.103)     (0.614)      (0.038)
R-squared                              0.357       0.283                        0.218       0.170
Number of observations                  423          423         221             183          183         126
Notes: *** Significant at 1%, ** Significant at 5%, * Significant at 10%. Robust standard errors clustered at the market level are in parenthesis.
All regressions include a constant. Observations are standardized provider-patient interactions, except in IRT score column where each
observation is a provider. The score is computed using all cases, plausible values scores are used. Market fixed effects are used for the
representative sample, and district fixed effects for dual practice sample.




                                                                        30
                                                                     Table A.11: Robustness of results to inclusion of facilties controls
                                         (1)           (2)            (3)                (4)          (5)               (6)                 (7)            (8)             (9)       (10)                (11)            (12)
                                                       Effort                                       Diagnosis                                                                Treatment
                                                                                                    Correct         Correct                                              Correct
                                       Time                                            Gave                                              Correct Palliative Unnecessary                      Number of
                                                    Checklist IRT Score                             diagnosis       diagnosis                                           treatment Antibiotic
                                       spent                                         diagnosis                                          treatment treatment treatment                        medicines
                                                                                                   (conditional) (unconditional)                                           only

Panel A: Representative sample, with SP, case and market fixed effects
Is a private provider                1.207***       7.826***       0.635**            0.197**        -0.023            0.039              0.143*          0.082          0.115           -0.009         0.153*        0.861***
                                      (0.363)        (2.494)       (0.305)            (0.085)        (0.126)          (0.038)             (0.073)        (0.085)        (0.076)          (0.027)        (0.081)        (0.285)
Facilities index                       0.012        1.679***       0.129*             0.051**         0.014            0.010              0.034*          0.026         0.038**          -0.001          0.029        0.203***
                                      (0.112)        (0.600)       (0.072)            (0.023)        (0.033)          (0.011)             (0.018)        (0.022)        (0.018)          (0.004)        (0.021)        (0.078)
R-squared                              0.356          0.265                            0.233          0.362            0.161               0.410          0.379          0.267            0.280          0.275          0.313
Number of observations                  634            634            220               420            171              420                 420            420            420              420            420            420
Panel B: Dual practice sample, with SP, case and district fixed effects
Is a private provider                1.218***       9.185***       0.751***             0.030        -0.035           -0.004             0.166**         -0.121          -0.010           0.021        -0.146*          -0.070
                                      (0.259)        (1.927)        (0.213)            (0.081)       (0.135)          (0.069)            (0.072)         (0.076)         (0.058)         (0.028)       (0.080)          (0.207)
Facilities index                      -0.206         -0.928         -0.033             -0.040        -0.029           -0.029             -0.066*         -0.016           0.002           0.001         -0.038         -0.249**
                                      (0.157)        (1.148)        (0.111)            (0.041)       (0.079)          (0.037)            (0.038)         (0.040)         (0.034)         (0.014)       (0.045)          (0.115)
R-squared                              0.321          0.244                             0.219         0.199            0.092              0.315           0.304           0.157           0.051         0.144            0.197
Number of observations                  272            272            114                164            73              164                164             164             164             164           164              164
Notes: *** Significant at 1%, ** Significant at 5%, * Significant at 10%. Robust standard errors clustered at the market level are in parenthesis. All regressions include a constant and controls for provider qualifications, age,
gender, and patient load. Observations are standardized provider-patient interactions. Dual sample refers to providers who operate both public and private clinics. Market fixed effects are used for the representative sample,
and district fixed effects for dual practice sample. Columns (1)-(3) include all cases and can be compared with Table 3. The remaining columns include Unstable Angina and Asthma cases only - compare Columns (4)-(6) with
Table 4; and Columns (7)-(12) with Table 5. In column (12) the dependent variable is total number of medicines recommended to the patient (dispensed and/or prescribed). Note that the reason for not including the controls
for an index of Facility quality in the main results in Tables 3-5 is that we are missing data on the facility index for around 4% of the representative sample and 18% of the dual sample. However, as we see here, the results are
robust to including the facility controls.
                                                         Table A.12: Correlates of price charged
                                        (private interactions, excludes cases where all medicines are unidentifiable)
                                                       (1)                (2)                     (3)            (4)                         (5)                (6)
                                                                                                     Fees in Rs.
                                                   Representative sample                       Dual practice sample                           Pooled sample
                                                     Binary      Multiple                       Binary        Multiple                     Binary       Multiple
                                                  regressions   regression                   regressions     regression                 regressions    regression
Time spent with SP (minutes)                        1.720***        0.618                      2.625***       2.279***                    1.484***       0.709*
                                                     (0.476)      (0.477)                       (0.587)        (0.692)                     (0.377)       (0.401)
Percentage of checklist items                       0.397***     0.339***                      0.364***         0.055                     0.386***      0.291***
                                                     (0.089)      (0.096)                       (0.100)        (0.129)                     (0.071)       (0.084)
Correct diagnosis (unconditional)                    -4.269       -3.647*                        7.504          5.494                       2.690         2.685
                                                     (3.978)      (1.993)                       (9.350)        (9.046)                     (4.658)       (4.148)
Correct treatment                                   6.199***       -1.564                       7.744*          4.475                     7.306***        0.602
                                                     (1.757)      (2.919)                       (4.145)        (4.967)                     (1.934)       (2.404)
Palliative treatment                                7.711***        2.198                     10.435**          7.757                     7.796***       3.542**
                                                     (1.810)      (1.722)                       (4.242)        (4.873)                     (1.743)       (1.726)
Unnecessary treatment                              15.794***        3.147                     14.973***         5.137                    15.655***       4.888*
                                                     (2.842)      (2.963)                       (5.032)        (6.240)                     (2.451)       (2.746)
Dispensed medicines                                19.525***    16.400***                     16.118***       12.371*                    16.511***     15.688***
                                                     (2.993)      (2.726)                       (6.070)        (7.019)                     (2.319)       (2.830)
Prescribed medicines                                 -2.931        -4.331                        7.540         -2.854                       0.071        -4.133
                                                     (3.600)      (3.639)                       (5.997)        (6.734)                     (2.918)       (3.202)
Number of medicines                                 5.540***        1.630                      5.863***         3.016                     5.283***        1.111
                                                     (0.842)      (1.394)                       (1.783)        (2.987)                     (0.787)       (1.348)
Referred/Asked to see child                       -20.348***    -10.054***                     -9.882**        -4.867                   -17.533***     -11.860***
                                                     (4.999)      (3.683)                       (4.763)        (4.888)                     (3.911)       (3.021)
Has MBBS                                           23.517***    27.905***                                                                14.155***     23.516***
                                                     (6.150)      (7.830)                                                                  (4.369)       (3.923)
Has some qualification                                4.305      6.067***                                                                   2.127       6.952***
                                                     (3.768)      (2.282)                                                                  (3.376)       (2.370)
Patient load during visit                             1.017       0.867**                      -0.073              -0.285                   0.512         0.276
                                                     (0.888)      (0.404)                      (0.807)             (0.810)                 (0.748)       (0.581)
Age of provider                                      -0.186        -0.111                       0.267               0.248                  -0.119        -0.018
                                                     (0.155)      (0.100)                      (0.239)             (0.218)                 (0.126)       (0.089)
Gender of provider (1=Male)                         -8.238**       -5.876                      -1.284              -3.760                 -7.475**       -3.810
                                                     (3.518)      (4.543)                      (4.882)             (5.580)                 (2.961)       (3.919)
Constant                                                            9.745                                         -11.295                                 2.234
                                                                  (7.179)                                         (11.810)                               (6.345)
R2                                                                  0.446                                           0.444                                 0.398
Number of observations                                               495                                             154                                   649
Mean price charged                                                27.638                                           32.740                                28.849
SD                                                                26.557                                           28.592                                27.118
Notes: *** Significant at 1%, ** Significant at 5%, * Significant at 10%. Robust standard errors clustered at the market level are in parenthesis. Observations are
standardized provider-patient interactions. Interpretation of coefficents in "Binary regressions" needs caution. Each coefficient represents a separate regression of prices
on the row variable and case and district fixed effects. Multiple regressions include case and district fixed effects.




                                                                                    32
                                 Table A.13: Cost in the public sector
                                                           (1)                                               (2)
Panel A: Staff per facility                                N                                     Average monthly wage (Rs.)
  Medical Officer in Charge/Medical Officer               1.92                                            Rs.32,245
  GNM/ANM/VHN/LHV                                         3.24                                            Rs.16,305
  MPW/MNA/Assistant/Compounder                            1.43                                            Rs.16,657
  Pharmacist/Chemist/Lab Assistant/Technician             0.8                                             Rs.16,571
  Paramedic/other                                         6.08                                            Rs.13,387
  All                                                    13.47                                            Rs.17,315
  Number of facilities                                    115
Panel B: Visits to the public facilities per month
  Year 2008                                             111,039
  Year 2009                                             113,230
  Year 2010                                             111,473
Panel C: Average per patient cost
  Year 2008                                            Rs.241.87
  Year 2009                                            Rs.237.66
  Year 2010                                            Rs.241.61
Notes: We use an extremely conservative measure of per patient cost in the public sector facility. We assume that salary cost are the
only cost in running a public health facility. Furthermore, we assume that every patient that visits the public health facility visits for
a primary care visit, while people also visit public health facilities for preventative services such as vaccination. Wages data were
collected in the year 2010, note that we use 2010 wage data to compute cost per patient in 2008 and 2009. Wages in 2008 and 2009
could have been lower.




                                                                   33
                            Table A.14: Real patients' characteristics in the public and private sectors
                                        (1)        (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)        (6)         (7)           (8)
                                                Representative Sample                                      Dual Practice
                                                                    Difference                                          Difference
                                      Public     Private                                    Public    Private
                                                                (coeff. on private)                                 (coeff. on private)
                                                              no fixed       market                               no fixed       market
                                                               effects fixed effects                               effects fixed effects
Patient/Case Characteristics
   Number of symptoms                  1.446      1.568        0.122**         0.092         2.075      2.113       0.038         0.026
                                                               (0.057)       (0.081)                               (0.095)       (0.101)
   Fever                               0.309      0.445       0.136***       0.135**         0.550      0.548      -0.002         0.012
                                                               (0.034)       (0.054)                               (0.043)       (0.043)
   Cold                                0.272      0.195        -0.077         -0.015         0.476      0.434      -0.042        -0.047
                                                               (0.049)       (0.062)                               (0.054)       (0.050)
   Diarrhea                            0.105      0.151         0.046          0.008         0.066      0.075       0.009         0.006
                                                               (0.033)       (0.040)                               (0.014)       (0.015)
   Weakness                            0.148      0.209        0.061*          0.047         0.182      0.176      -0.006        -0.016
                                                               (0.034)       (0.047)                               (0.029)       (0.031)
   Injury                              0.093      0.069        -0.023         -0.045         0.061      0.070       0.010         0.011
                                                               (0.023)       (0.030)                               (0.016)       (0.017)
   Vomitting                           0.031      0.116       0.085***        0.046*         0.056      0.057       0.001         0.001
                                                               (0.019)       (0.025)                               (0.018)       (0.018)
   Dermatological                      0.062      0.054        -0.007          0.016         0.086      0.070      -0.016        -0.017
                                                               (0.024)       (0.023)                               (0.021)       (0.022)
   Pregnancy                           0.037      0.010        -0.027          0.013         0.035      0.058       0.022         0.024
                                                               (0.033)       (0.018)                               (0.019)       (0.019)
   Pain                                0.426      0.346        -0.080         -0.127         0.648      0.659       0.011        -0.008
                                                               (0.081)       (0.104)                               (0.043)       (0.037)
   Number of days sick                 0.623      1.584         0.961         -2.264         1.570      1.742       0.172        -0.438
                                                               (4.295)       (2.819)                               (1.068)       (1.022)
Activities of Daily Living
   Can easily dress                    1.000      0.983      -0.017***       -0.019*         0.957      0.938      -0.020        -0.018
                                                               (0.006)       (0.009)                               (0.023)       (0.023)
   Can easily work                     0.856      0.901         0.045          0.077         0.748      0.798       0.050         0.050
                                                               (0.051)       (0.051)                               (0.047)       (0.049)
   Can easily lift                     0.698      0.730         0.032          0.038         0.666      0.692       0.027         0.017
                                                               (0.104)       (0.124)                               (0.071)       (0.071)
   Can easily walk                     0.623      0.699         0.076          0.146         0.785      0.755      -0.030        -0.049
                                                               (0.131)       (0.104)                               (0.074)       (0.071)
Patient Background and Demographics
   New patient                         0.944      0.850       -0.094**        -0.001         0.911      0.903      -0.008        -0.003
                                                               (0.036)       (0.043)                               (0.037)       (0.038)
   Age                                30.006     25.401        -4.605         -5.082        28.913     30.700       1.788         1.410
                                                               (3.087)       (3.530)                               (2.042)       (2.040)
   Is Male                             0.494      0.579         0.086          0.021         0.487      0.454      -0.033        -0.039
                                                               (0.053)       (0.059)                               (0.042)       (0.041)
   Assets index                        0.455      0.411        -0.044         -0.238        -0.077      1.006     1.084***      1.146***
                                                               (0.423)       (0.442)                               (0.220)       (0.211)
   Has formal education                0.565      0.517        -0.048         -0.053         0.546      0.637      0.091**      0.087**
                                                               (0.085)       (0.081)                               (0.035)       (0.034)
   No. of questions patient asked 0.369           0.478         0.109        0.387**         0.488      0.956     0.467***      0.472***
                                                               (0.103)       (0.152)                               (0.125)       (0.125)
   Is from this village                0.759      0.529      -0.230***      -0.149**         0.538      0.582       0.045         0.036
                                                               (0.060)       (0.063)                               (0.049)       (0.051)
   Came by foot                        0.741      0.451      -0.290*** -0.158***             0.594      0.414     -0.180**     -0.186***
                                                               (0.044)       (0.041)                               (0.068)       (0.068)
Notes: *** Significant at 1%, ** Significant at 5%, * Significant at 10%. Robust standard errors clustered at the market level are in
parenthesis. Data is from patient-exit surveys which obtained by observing all providers for a full day of practice. Columns (3) and (7)
present binary regression coefficients from estimating the relevant row variable on an indicator for private provider visit, and thus
represent the mean difference of the row variable between private and public sectors. Columns (4) and (8) repeat the exercise but add
market fixed effects in the representative sample and district fixed effects in the dual sample.
                                                Table A.15: Difference between dual and non-dual providers' treatment of SPs (public sample only)
                                                      (1)
                                                    (2)          (3)         (4)           (5)            (6)           (7)        (8)         (9)         (10)      (11)       (12)      (13)
                                                   Effort                             Diagnosis                                                       Treatment
                                                                                        Correct        Correct                                           Correct
                                                                            Gave                                     Correct    Palliative Unnecessary                       Number of Referred
                                    Time spent Checklist IRT Score                     diagnosis      diagnosis                                         treatment Antibiotic
                                                                          diagnosis                                 treatment treatment treatment                            medicines  patient
                                                                                      (conditional) (unconditional)                                        Only
Panel A: Dual practice sample, with SP, case and district fixed effects
Is a dual provider                   -0.659***   -3.881*       -0.329      -0.022        0.021          0.014         -0.007     -0.029      -0.029       -0.017    -0.106     -0.212   -0.015
                                      (0.210)    (2.045)      (0.218)      (0.057)      (0.100)        (0.034)        (0.064)    (0.072)     (0.064)      (0.026)  (0.077)     (0.209)  (0.049)
R-squared                              0.268      0.131                     0.187        0.319          0.113          0.340      0.211       0.096        0.044    0.142       0.153    0.159
Number of observations                  252        252          103          252           73            252            161        161         161          161      161         161      161
Mean of non-dual observations          2.343     22.788                     0.326        0.207          0.067          0.295      0.705       0.836        0.033    0.541       2.885    0.131
Mean of dual observations              1.562     17.677                     0.270        0.341          0.092          0.380      0.630       0.830        0.020    0.480       2.800    0.080
Mean of sample                         1.838     19.482                     0.290        0.288          0.083          0.348      0.658       0.832        0.025    0.503       2.832    0.099
Panel B: Dual practice sample, with SP, case and district fixed effects
Is a dual provider                   -0.677***   -4.285*      -0.420*      -0.065        -0.092         -0.020        -0.007     -0.005      -0.073       -0.012   -0.153*     -0.293   -0.050
                                      (0.248)    (2.291)      (0.253)      (0.071)      (0.140)        (0.042)        (0.077)    (0.090)     (0.073)      (0.029)  (0.088)     (0.267)  (0.060)
Age of provider                       -0.017*     -0.077       -0.001      -0.001        -0.003         -0.002        -0.004     -0.007       0.001       -0.002    -0.006    -0.028**   0.000
                                      (0.009)    (0.101)      (0.011)      (0.003)      (0.008)        (0.002)        (0.004)    (0.004)     (0.003)      (0.001)  (0.004)     (0.012)  (0.002)
Gender of provider (1=Male)            0.097      1.275        -0.083      -0.073        -0.027         -0.023         0.032      0.160       0.147       -0.039   0.245**      0.434   -0.162
                                      (0.342)    (3.264)      (0.368)      (0.100)      (0.202)        (0.062)        (0.127)    (0.120)     (0.106)      (0.058)  (0.123)     (0.349)  (0.102)
Patient load during visit              -0.031     0.495        0.036        0.008        -0.019         -0.000        -0.010    0.033**       0.004       -0.006    0.002       0.006    0.020
                                      (0.040)    (0.584)      (0.031)      (0.011)      (0.048)        (0.010)        (0.019)    (0.016)     (0.023)      (0.005)  (0.026)     (0.086)  (0.017)
R-squared                              0.310      0.143                     0.198        0.375          0.145          0.360      0.259       0.202        0.099    0.255       0.248    0.275
Number of observations                  215        215           90          215           62            215            137        137         137          137      137         137      137
Notes: *** Significant at 1%, ** Significant at 5%, * Significant at 10%. Robust standard errors clustered at the market level are in parenthesis. All regressions include a constant. Observations are standardized provider-patient interactions. In column (13) the
dependent variable is total number of medicines recommended to the patient (dispensed and/or prescribed).
                                                        Table A.16: Robustness to alternative metrics for public-private comparison
                                          (1)         (2)              (3)             (4)             (5)               (6)        (7)         (8)         (9)      (10)        (11)
                                                Effort                            Diagnosis                                                       Treatment
                                                                                    Correct         Correct                                              Correct
                                                                                                                      Correct    Palliative Unnecessary                      Number of
                                      Time spent Checklist       Gave diagnosis    diagnosis       diagnosis                                            treatment Antibiotic
                                                                                                                     treatment treatment treatment                           medicines
                                                                                  (conditional)  (unconditional)                                           only
Panel A: Best public vs. best private (by correct treatment)
Is a private provider                  1.632*** 11.288***           0.235***          0.033          0.079            0.162**      0.074       0.169      -0.014    0.143     1.147***
                                        (0.388)     (2.855)          (0.090)         (0.136)        (0.054)            (0.079)    (0.077)     (0.117)     (0.056)  (0.109)     (0.429)
R-squared                                0.453       0.417            0.430           0.714          0.363              0.592      0.447       0.353       0.218    0.435       0.463
Number of observations                    286         286              192             76             192                192        192         192         192      192         192
Mean of public                           2.547      16.000            0.271           0.154          0.042              0.271      0.521       0.708       0.042    0.250       2.063
Mean of private                          3.613      24.551            0.438           0.238          0.104              0.438      0.535       0.750       0.049    0.292       3.014
Mean of sample                           3.352      22.458            0.396           0.224          0.089              0.396      0.531       0.740       0.047    0.281       2.776
Panel B: Best public vs. best private (by checklist items)
Is a private provider                  3.216*** 16.987***            0.263**          0.119          0.079              0.141      0.034       0.167      -0.027    0.222     1.581***
                                        (0.916)     (5.003)          (0.116)         (0.160)        (0.056)            (0.095)    (0.104)     (0.139)     (0.028)  (0.156)     (0.503)
R-squared                                0.586       0.501            0.610           0.823          0.487              0.616      0.699       0.468       0.540    0.473       0.674
Number of observations                    191         191              129             63             129                129        129         129         129      129         129
Mean of public                           2.481      18.832            0.333           0.133          0.044              0.200      0.556       0.689       0.022    0.178       1.800
Mean of private                          4.708      30.269            0.571           0.146          0.083              0.286      0.595       0.845       0.012    0.310       3.381
Mean of sample                           3.938      26.317            0.488           0.143          0.070              0.256      0.581       0.791       0.016    0.264       2.829
Notes: *** Significant at 1%, ** Significant at 5%, * Significant at 10%. Robust standard errors clustered at the market level are in parenthesis. All regressions include a constant and SP, case and market fixed effects. Observations are
standardized provider-patient interactions. In column (11) the dependent variable is total number of medicines recommended to the patient (dispensed and/or prescribed).
