                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              SCHOOL ENTRY CUTOFF DATE AND THE TIMING OF BIRTHS

                                             Hitoshi Shigeoka

                                          Working Paper 21402
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w21402


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2015




This project is supported by a research grant from the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare (H22-policy-033,
Principle Investigator: Kenji Shibuya and co-investigator: Hideki Hashimoto). The use of data in this
paper is approved by Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare under this grant. Also all analysis on
the insurance claim data was conducted onsite at Department of Health Management and Policy at
the University of Tokyo, as a project of DPC working group under the supervision of Hideo Yasunaga
and Hiromasa Horiguchi. I am especially grateful to Krishna Pendakur for extensive discussions and
suggestions. I also thank Michael Anderson, Kelly Bedard, Flavio Cunha, Meltem Daysal, Stefano
DellaVigna, Carlos Dobkin, Karen Eggleston, Pilar García-Gómez, Hideki Hashimoto, Toshiaki Iizuka,
Fidan Ana Kurtulus, Adriana Lleras-Muney, Tomohiro Machikita, Andrew McGee, Asako Ohinata,
Heather Royer, Kensuke Teshima, Takashi Unayama, and participants at Allied Social Sciences Association
Meeting 2014, Erasmus University, Kansai Labor Seminar, Kyoto Summer Workshop on Applied
Economics, Osaka University, Simon Fraser University, SOLE 2014, Stanford Summer Juku, Tilburg
University, UC Santa Barbara, UC Santa Cruz, University of Tokyo, for their suggestions and comments.
All errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Hitoshi Shigeoka. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
School Entry Cutoff Date and the Timing of Births
Hitoshi Shigeoka
NBER Working Paper No. 21402
July 2015
JEL No. I24,J11,J13

                                            ABSTRACT

Using birth records in Japan, where school entry rule is strictly enforced, this paper shows that more
than 1,800 births a year are shifted from one week before the school entry cutoff date to one week
following the cutoff date. Because older children perform better academically than their younger peers,
parents who value potential long-term academic gains over the short-term gain of childcare cost savings
do exploit birth timing as a means of early childhood investment. Heterogeneous responses by parents
violate the assumption of regression discontinuity design that births around the school entry cutoff
dates are random.


Hitoshi Shigeoka
Department of Economics
Simon Fraser University
8888 University Drive, WMC 4653
Barnaby, BC V5A 1S6
and NBER
hitoshi_shigeoka@sfu.ca
1        Introduction

Many governments require children to be of a certain age by a specified date in the calendar year in
order to start primary school. This school entry rule mechanically creates a one-year age gap within
the school cohort. Parents who happen to give birth near the school entry cutoﬀ dates face a tradeoﬀ
to time a birth after the cutoﬀ date. On one hand, parents tend to think that older children perform
better academically than their younger peers (e.g., Bedard and Dhuey, 2006).1 On the other hand,
parents must bear an additional year of childcare costs as parents need to look after their children longer
(Dickert-Conlin and Elder, 2010).
        Parents who value potential long-term academic gains of children over short-term gains from saving
one year in childcare costs as well as those who can aﬀord such costs may shift births after the cutoﬀ dates
as a form of childhood investment. To the extent that skills acquired in early childhood complement
later learning (for a review, see Cunha et al., 2006), the timing of births may indeed have long-lasting
consequences.2
        This paper investigates whether parents react to such incentives and strategically alter the timing
of births, and if so, which incentive dominates. Specifically, it examines the shifts of births around
the school entry cutoﬀ dates using birth certificate records in Japan from 1974—2010 that report exact
dates of births. In addition, it exploits the characteristics of mothers and births to shed light on the
heterogeneous responses of parents. Finally, it examines how much of the relative academic advantage
of older students over younger students can be accounted for if birth timing is taken into account.
        Japan is an interesting setting in which to examine such a tradeoﬀ because the school entry cutoﬀ
date is strictly enforced. In fact, Kawaguchi (2011) documents that only 0.03 percent of primary school
age children are exempted from the mandatory starting age. Therefore, the timing of births indeed
determines when children start primary school later. This setting is in contrast to the case in the US,
where a significant proportion of children defer school entry by a year (so-called “red-shirting”), in eﬀect
making them the oldest students in their year (Deming and Dynarski, 2008). However, such strict
enforcement of the school entry rule is not unique to Japan. For example, Bedard and Dhuey (2006) list
a few other countries for which there is little or no evidence of early/late starting or grade retention,
    1
     The evidence comes from a cross-country study by Bedard and Dhuey (2006), and country-level studies by Crawford
et al. (2007) for the UK, Elder and Lubotsky (2009) for the US, Fredriksson and Öckert (2013) for Sweden, Kawaguchi
(2011) for Japan, McEwan and Shapiro (2008) for Chile, Puhani and Weber (2007) for Germany, and Strom (2004) for
Norway. However, the challenge is to understand such academic advantage for older children as due to either the absolute
age at which they start school or their relative age to peers (e.g., Datar, 2006; Elder and Lubotsky, 2009). I refer to it as
“relative academic advantage,” which includes both absolute and relative age eﬀects, throughout the paper. Furthermore,
a few studies on the long-run impacts of delayed school entry (e.g., wages) find there are no impacts or even that children
are harmed slightly. See, for example, Black et al. (2011), Cascio and Schanzenbach (2013), Dobkin and Ferreira (2010),
and Fredriksson and Öckert (2013).
   2
     Recent findings demonstrate the importance of early childhood intervention for long-term outcomes, such as health and
human capital formation (Almond and Currie, 2011; Heckman 2006, 2007).



                                                             1
specifically, Iceland, Norway, and the United Kingdom.
    My main finding is that more than 1,800 births per year are shifted roughly a week before the school
entry cutoﬀ date to a week following the cutoﬀ date in Japan, where the mean daily number of births
during this period is roughly 3,700. Some of the shifts are indeed real, rather than manipulation of
birthdates, since I find an increase in birth weight and gestational length of mothers among births born
just after the cutoﬀ. This finding suggests that parents do exploit birth timing as a means of early
childhood investment.3
    This finding oﬀers a new perspective into previous studies documenting that mothers shift the timing
of births in response to incentives created by birth-related cutoﬀ dates. Because the use of birth-related
cutoﬀ dates to determine eligibility for policy programs is quite common across the world–due to
government resource constraints, the clearness of cutoﬀ dates, and their easiness to implement–past
studies have analyzed the timing of births in response to a variety of cutoﬀ dates.4 However, most of the
incentives are immediate and short-term financial incentives, such as tax benefits (Dickert-Conlin and
Chandra, 1999) and one-time monetary bonuses (Gans and Leigh, 2009). I show that some mothers are
forward looking and take into account the long-term academic consequences of their children when they
decide on birth timing.
    In addition, there are some related findings. First, the overall shifts in births mask heterogeneous
responses of mothers. Second-born births, and male births are more likely to be shifted than firstborn
births, and female births, respectively. These results on birth parity are especially interesting because
they may suggest that parents learn from prior experience that it is probably beneficial for children to
be born after the cutoﬀ date. This finding also has implications for the growing body of literature that
use regression discontinuity (RD) design, assuming that births around the school entry cutoﬀ date are
random.5 These heterogeneous responses create discontinuities in mother and child characteristics at
the school entry cutoﬀ dates, which violate the assumption of RD design. A few papers indeed examine
the distribution of births around the school entry cutoﬀ date in other countries, but none find evidence
of sorting of births around the cutoﬀ date.6 While the findings of this paper in Japan may be country
   3
     While some mothers may value the additional year of time spent together with their children, this is unlikely to explain
the delay in the timing of births observed given a steady increase in women’s labor force participation as well as an increase
in preschool enrollment during the period of the study.
   4
     For example, shifts of birth timings are found in tax incentives in the US (Dickert-Conlin and Chandra, 1999; LaLumia
et al., 2013; Schulkind and Shapiro, 2014), tax incentives in Japan (Kureishi and Wakabayashi, 2008), one-time pecuniary
bonus payments in Australia (Gans and Leigh, 2009), and parental leave benefits reform in Germany (Neugart and Ohlsson,
2013; Tamm, 2012), while shifts are not found in expansion of job protection leave in Germany (Dustmann and Schönberg,
2012) and extension of leave duration in Austria (Lalive and Zweimüller, 2009).
   5
     See, for example, Bedard and Dhuey (2006, 2012), Berlinski et al. (2011), Black et al. (2007, 2011), Cascio and
Schanzenbach (2007), Crawford et al. (2007), Datar (2006), Dhuey and Lipscomb (2010), Dobkin and Ferreira (2010),
Elder and Lubotsky (2009), Fertig and Kluve (2005), Fredriksson and Öckert (2013), Kawaguchi (2011), Leuven et al.
(2010), McCrary and Royer (2011), McEwan and Shapiro (2008), Muhlenweg and Puhani (2010), Puhani and Weber
(2007), Smith (2009), Stipek (2002), and Strom (2004).
   6
     See, for example, Berlinski et al. (2011) in Argentina, Dickert-Conlin and Elder (2010) in the US, and McEwan and



                                                              2
specific, to the best of my knowledge, this is the first study that provides a cautionary note on applying
such design in contexts in which the stakes of birth timing are high.7
    Second, using another dataset that reports students’ birth month (unfortunately not birthdate) and
their test scores, I find that the fraction of low socioeconomic status (SES) parents is highest among
students born just a month before the school entry cutoﬀ date. This is because high SES parents–
who care about their children’s academic performance and can aﬀord an additional year of childcare
costs–may time births or conception after the school entry cutoﬀ date, while low SES mothers may
delay less to avoid an additional year of childcare costs. Interestingly, once I controls for these parental
characteristics, the relative academic advantage of older students against younger students is lowered by
20—60 percent, suggesting that some of the observed academic disadvantages of the youngest children in
a school year comes from the negative selection of parents.
    This result has implications for school entry policies in other countries. Red-shirting–which is in-
creasingly popular in the US, where the enforcement of the school entry rule is weak–can be socially
problematic because socioeconomically advantaged parents tend to hold back their children. One pro-
posed solution is to impose strict enforcement of school entry policy in which delayed entry is prohibited
(Deming and Dynarski, 2008). However, to the extent that high SES parents evade the policy by ma-
nipulating either the timing of births or conception, the eﬀect of such strict enforcement can be partially
or even entirely oﬀset. While the magnitude of the overall shifts in the timing documented is relatively
small, the diﬀerential seasonal patterns of birth months by parental SES indicate that the timing of
conception may be another way for high SES parents to avoid the strict school entry rule. However,
this result should be viewed with considerable caution because there are many reasons other than the
school entry rule that diﬀerentially aﬀect the timing of conception by diﬀerent SES parents (e.g., types
of occupation and industry).
    The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background information
on the school system and birth registration in Japan. Section 3 describes the data and identification
strategy used in this study. Section 4 reports the main results, and Section 5 presents supplemental
analysis. Section 6 concludes.
Shapiro (2008) in Chile.
   7
     In addition, Buckles and Hungerman (2013) question the validity of the instruments used by Angrist and Krueger
(1991), who use yearly quarters of births as the instrument for years of schooling. However, note that they focus on the
timing of conceptions rather than the timing of births, which is the main focus of this paper.




                                                           3
2        Background

2.1       School System

The school system in Japan is legally defined in the School Education Law (SEL) enacted in 1947. Since
then, the school entry cutoﬀ date has remained unchanged at April 2. Kindergartens follow the same
academic year as primary schools. Article 22 of the SEL obliges parents to send their children to primary
schools as soon as their children turn six years of age before the school starting day, which is April 1.
However, according to Japanese law, people reach the additional age a day before their birthday. This
means that the actual school entry cutoﬀ date is April 2 instead of April 1; children born on April 1 enter
primary schools on their 6th birthday, while those born on April 2 need to wait for another year, and
enter primary school on the day before their 7th birthday. Thus, there is at most about a one year age
diﬀerence among primary school students in the first grade. Importantly, the fact that April 2 instead of
April 1 is the school entry cutoﬀ date helps this study to isolate the eﬀect of school from other potential
mechanical confounders, such as first day of the month eﬀects. To my knowledge, nothing other than
the school entry cutoﬀ date occurs on this specific day.8
        This school entry rule is strictly enforced in Japan and, thus, students rarely delay or start primary
school earlier than the scheduled date. Article 23 of the SEL allows a delay in school entry due to a
child’s illness or underdevelopment, but this exception is rarely applied. According to Kawaguchi (2011),
the percentage of exemption is 0.03 percent.9 This low exemption rate is not surprising as parents need
to apply formally for an exemption and provide proof of underdevelopment or illness from physicians
designated by the local educational advisory board (article 34 of the SEL).
        The fact that almost all children start school without delay contrasts clearly with the situation in
the US, where postponement of entry to kindergarten is becoming popular, especially among educated
parents (Deming and Dynarski, 2008).10 Also, the Japanese educational system is known for its social
promotion system, in which automatic promotion occurs from one grade to the next. Article 23 of the
SEL does not prohibit students from being fast-tracked to the grade above the scheduled grade, but this
advancement is very rare.11
        Furthermore, in Japan there is no systematic variation in years of schooling based on the timing of
    8
     For example, the tax year is January 1 to December 31 in Japan. See Kureishi and Wakabayashi (2008) on taxes and
timing of births in Japan.
   9
     In 2004, 7,200,933 children at primary school age (6—12 years) attended primary schools, while 2,261 did not, according
to Kawaguchi (2011).
  10
     In addition, the fact that there is only a single school entry cutoﬀ date that applies to all children is in contrast to the
US case; since each state has diﬀerent school entry cutoﬀ dates, and interstate migration is relatively common, parents may
not know precisely which school entry cutoﬀ date they should refer to. Furthermore, each state has repeatedly changed the
school entry cutoﬀ dates (Bedard and Dhuey, 2012). See Dickert-Conlin and Elder (2010) for school entry cutoﬀ dates in
the US, and Bedard and Dhuey (2006) for international school entry cutoﬀ dates. Note that most countries have only one
school entry cutoﬀ date, unlike the case of the US.
  11
     In addition, Japan is known for its high-stakes college entrance examinations.


                                                               4
births, unlike the US (Angrist and Krueger, 1991). Compulsory schooling in Japan is not defined by
the age that students can leave, but by length of years: nine years of education (six years in primary
school, and three years in junior high school) is mandated uniformly for all children. This means that
parents in Japan do not face the well-known tradeoﬀ in schooling in the US by which students who are
the youngest in their school cohort typically have poorer academic performance, although, on average,
they have slightly higher educational attainment (Dobkin and Ferreira, 2010).
    Interestingly, some parents and schools recognize the relative academic advantages of older children.
For example, a handful of elite kindergartens (such as Keio, and Tsukuba) specifically mention that they
take into account the diﬀerence in maturity by birth months of children at the entrance exam but such
diﬀerential treatment by birth month is still very uncommon.


2.2    Birth Registration

The birth certificate is written by physicians if births occur at either hospitals or clinics, while it is
written by midwives in case of home deliveries. According to the birth data described in detail below,
99.4 percent of births occurred at medical institutions (either hospitals or clinics) during 1974—2010, and
thus, it is very unlikely that this study’s results are driven by home deliveries.
    Parents are required to bring birth certificates signed by attending physicians (or midwifes) to register
their children at their closest public health center (Hokenjyo in Japanese). The newborns need to be
registered within 14 days after birth; parents must otherwise pay a fine. Since the birth certificate is
signed by an attending physician, it is unlikely that manipulation of birthdates occurs at the reporting
stage at public health centers. Thus, if manipulation does take place, it is more likely to occur at the
stage of filling in birth certificates at medical institutions before being signed oﬃcially by physicians.


3     Data and Identification strategy

3.1    Data

The data used in this study come from four sources. The primary data are birth data, supplemented with
death data to examine infant mortality, and insurance claim data to examine the timing of Cesarean-
section (C-section) births. In addition, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development’s
(OECD’s) Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) is used to examine parental so-
cioeconomic status by children’s birth months. To avoid confusion, this section focuses on my primary
data source (birth data) and supplementary data sources (death data and insurance claim data). The
secondary PISA data are described in Section 5.1.
    The birth data are compiled by Japan’s Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare, and cover the


                                                      5
universe of births in Japan during 1974—2010. The key variable in the birth data is the exact date of
birth. Combining 1974—2010 birth data together provides information on more than 50 million births.
The data are of high quality in that only 4,935 observations (less than 0.01 percent) are missing birthdate
information, and these observations are excluded. Even if I restrict the sample to the last 7 days and
the first 7 days around April 2, I still observe more than 1.8 million births. The birth data also contain
information on exact hour of births, which is rare in the public versions of birth certificates available
to researchers. Unless otherwise specified, the main outcome is the number of births at the daily level
rather than hourly level because most past studies use daily observations; thus, the data are comparable
across studies.
   The birth data collect very limited characteristics of mothers, such as their ages at the time of births.
Unfortunately, the data do not collect other key characteristics of mothers (e.g., education, income,
and working status), delivery method (e.g., C-section and inducement), complications of births, and
Apgar scores of newborns. In addition, the study examines a number of child characteristics collected
in the birth certificates to investigate whether shifts in the timing of births are real rather than manip-
ulated birthdate by analyzing the birth weight of newborns as well as the gestational length of mothers.
Furthermore, it examines the heterogeneous responses of mothers by dividing the sample by gender of
children, and parity of children (i.e., firstborn births vs. second-born births and above).
   In addition to birth certificates, I use death certificates to examine infant mortality. The death
certificates contain all death records that occurred in Japan during 1974—2010, which include information
about the decedent’s exact date of death, exact date of birth, gender, and cause of death (ICD8—10).
Even though the birth and death certificates are not linked in Japan, it is nonetheless possible to calculate
the infant mortality rate on each birthdate, where the numerator is the number of deaths for births on
each birthdate from death certificates, and the denominator is the number of births for each birthdate
from birth certificates. The summary statistics are reported in Appendix Table A.
   I also complement the analysis on birth records with insurance claim data from roughly 500 hospitals
for 2011—2012 because birth records lack information on delivery method. The unit of observation in
this data is mother’s deliveries instead of births. Thus, while exact dates of admission of mothers for
delivery are available, exact dates of birth are not available. However, the data also include the exact
dates of surgery. Thus, I assume that for C-section births, surgery dates are equivalent to birthdates,
and test whether C-section births are shifted around April 2. I examine emergency C-section births
and elective C-section births separately. Since C-sections involve physical risks for both mothers and
children, I expect to see shifts of births, if any, only for elective C-section births.




                                                       6
3.2      Identification Strategy

The main specification uses the observations only around April 2 of each year. Note that days are
organized in relation to April 2 for each year. The econometric model estimated is:

                                               P
                                               6                      P
                                                                      
                    =  +   +             ()   +         ()  +  +                    (1)
                                               =1                    =1


where  is the count of births for day  in year .   takes one if the birthday  is after April
2 in each year . () is one of six dummy variables for each day of the week, and () is
one of  dummy variables for each holiday.  are year fixed eﬀects to account for time trends in the
overall number of births.12  is an idiosyncratic error term. The coeﬃcient of interest is . Replacing
the counts of births by the log number of births in Equation (1) provides a measure of the proportion
of births shifted. I also examine infant characteristics around the cutoﬀ date, where  are the mean
infant characteristics for day  in year .13
       Following Gans and Leigh (2009), I change the windows around April 2 from 7 days to 28 days.
Widening the window has two purposes. First, it allows for births to have moved by more than one
week, even though, as is shown later, birth shifting is concentrated within a week from the cutoﬀ date.
Second, it allows for the possibility of “attempted but unsuccessful moves,” where some parents may
have attempted to delay births until April 2, but instead could only move the births from mid-March to
late-March (Gans and Leigh, 2009). In addition, if capacity constraints are binding, some births that
would have taken place in early April may be shifted to mid-April. Both such moves attenuate the
estimates from focusing on a narrow window.
       Alternative specification uses not only observations around April 2 as the abovementioned specifi-
cation, but also observations around the second day of the other months as well. Following Evans and
Moore (2011, 2012) and Stephens (2003, 2006), I construct “synthetic” months and years: let  be
the birth counts for synthetic day  in month  and year . Days are organized in relation to the second
day of the month, so  is in the range of -14 to 14. Synthetic months do not follow the calendar; instead,
synthetic months begin 14 days prior to the second day of the month and last until 14 days after the
second day of the month. Month 1 contains data from December 19 to January 15 of the next year,
Month 2 from January 19 to February 15, and so on. Similarly, synthetic years begin 14 days before
January 2 of the next year.
  12
     In addition, I attempted to include the interactions of day of the week fixed eﬀects and year fixed eﬀects to allow each
week day to have diﬀerential impact by each year. These results (not shown) are very similar.
  13
     The individual birth as a unit of observation can be used instead of the mean at each birthdate; however, this study
takes the former approach using the number of observations as weight to reduce the computational burden.




                                                             7
         Given this structure for the data, the econometric model is


                      =  + ( 2 ·  ) + 2                                            (2)
                              P6                 P
                            +    ()   +    ()  +  +  + 
                                  =1                    =1


where 2 takes one if the birthday  is after the second day of the synthetic month  in each
year , and  takes one if the birthday is during synthetic months of April.  and  capture
synthetic month and year eﬀects, and  is an idiosyncratic error term.14 The coeﬃcient of interest
is , the coeﬃcient on the interaction term between  2 and . This specification allows for
the isolation of the deviation of the number of births after April 2 from the second day of the other
months. The coeﬃcient on  should capture whether days after the second day of each month is unusual
compared to days before the second day of the month. I expect the coeﬃcient on  to be economically
very small, since there is no reason to believe that the period around the second days of each month is
unusual. Standard errors are estimated, allowing for arbitrary correlation in errors within each unique
synthetic month. The advantage of this specification, Equation (2), over previous specification, Equation
(1), is that any eﬀects around the second day of the typical months can be isolated, while disadvantage
is that the windows can be extended only up to 14 days around the cutoﬀ because of the way the data
are constructed. In fact, as shown in Section 4.1, both specifications yield very similar results, which
provide reassurance that within monthly fluctuations do not drive the results.


4         Main Results

4.1        Shifts in the Timing of Births

Before running formal statistical analysis, a simple histogram-like plot reveals a striking pattern. Figure
1 displays the mean daily number of births throughout the year using the pooled 1974—2010 birth data.
The markers with cross signs correspond to holidays. Note, once again, that the school entry cutoﬀ date
is April 2 instead of April 1.
         Figure 1 depicts a clear heap on April 2, and relatively high frequency of births on subsequent days.
In fact, April 2 is the day with the highest number of births throughout the year, and April 1, a day
before the cutoﬀ date, is the third lowest. Table 1 reports the top five and bottom five days of mean
daily number of births, together with the ratio to average daily birth, computed as the average number
of births on a given day divided by average births across all days. Thus, a value of 1.1 represents a 10
    14
    In addition, it is possible to replace  2 by dummies for each day within synthetic months (14 or 28 dummies,
depending on the estimation window), but the results are very similar. The results are also very similar when I instead
include the interaction of the synthetic month and synthetic year dummy variables instead of synthetic year and synthetic
month dummies separately (not shown).


                                                            8
percent increase in daily births compared to the overall average. April 2, and April 3 have 20 and 10
percent more births than yearly average, respectively, while April 1–the day before the cutoﬀ date–has
15 percent less births than average.15 In addition, this graph highlights the importance of controlling
for holidays in the estimation. Furthermore, there is variation in weekdays versus weekends, but the
pooling of many years of data smooths out such an eﬀect in the figure. In the regression, the day of the
week fixed eﬀects are included to control for within week fluctuations.
       Figure 2A provides a closer look at births around the cutoﬀ date by plotting the mean daily number
of births around April 2. To provide symmetry, I report 28 days prior to April 2 (March 4—April 1), and
28 days after April 2 (April 2—April 29). Again, the markers with cross signs correspond to holidays.
Starting about 10 days before April 2, daily number of births declines gradually and falls to roughly
2,800 per day on April 1, a day before the school entry cutoﬀ date. The number of births then increases
sharply to roughly 4,500 on April 2. Note that other dips around March 20 and April 29 are the result of
holidays, Spring Equinox Day (either March 20 or 21) and Greenery day (April 29), respectively. Figure
2B accounts for holidays and weekends by plotting the residual of regressions of the daily number of
births on holidays, days of the week, and year fixed eﬀects. This graph shows a similar pattern to Figure
2A, without fluctuations due to holidays.
       Table 2 summarizes the results from formal statistical tests of estimating Equation (1). The first
column in Panel A restricts the sample to the last 7 days and the first 7 days around April 2, and shows
that roughly 1,835 births are shifted within a week from April 2. Because the daily average of births
during the sample period is 3,713, the size of shifts corresponds to roughly half of the mean daily number
of births. In the remaining columns, the window of analysis is widened progressively. As the window is
widened, the number of births shifted does not change much, which suggests that most of the shift is
concentrated roughly within a week from the cutoﬀ date. Panel B uses the natural log of the mean daily
birth as an outcome. The first column shows that roughly 7 percent of births are shifted from one week
before the school entry cutoﬀ date to one week following the cutoﬀ date.
       Appendix Table B compares the estimates from Equations (1) and (2). To facilitate the comparison,
columns with odd numbers replicate the results from the main Equation (1). Note that because of the
way the data are constructed, the window around the cutoﬀ date can be expanded only up to 14 days
in Equation (2). Appendix Table B shows that the two equations yield very similar results. In addition,
the estimates on 2 dummy in the columns with even numbers are very small economically,
suggesting that the days after the second day of each month are not unusual compared to the days
before the second day of the month.
  15
     February 29 is the lowest, not because it exists every four years, as the mean daily number of births on February 29
is calculated per existing years. The low frequency of births on February 29 indicates that shifting birth for a day or so is
easily possible, either though manipulation of birthdate or actual shifts in birth timing. In addition, many clinics are closed
around the New Year in Japan, which explains the huge dips before and after New Year in Figure 1.


                                                              9
       Furthermore, I explore the patterns of shifts across periods. Appendix Figure A displays the mean
daily number of births around April 2 by diﬀerent time periods. While the magnitude of the shifts is
largest in the earliest period (1974—1980), there are discernible delays of births in the most recent decade
(2001—2010). To gauge the magnitude of the shifts across years, Equation (1) is estimated separately
for each year with a seven day window from the cutoﬀ. Because the equation is estimated for each year,
the year fixed eﬀects are not included in the estimation. Appendix Figure B plots the size of the shifts
in each year.
       There are two noteworthy points to mention. First, the estimates are positive across all years and
statistically significant at the conventional level, indicating that delays of births are not limited to a
certain period. For example, the proportion of births shifted is 5.2 percent in 2010–the last year
available in the dataset–while the corresponding figure for the entire 1974—2010 period is 7 percent.
       Second, the magnitude of the delays of births declines in recent years. It is not clear a priori whether
more or fewer delays of births in recent years are expected to be observed. On one hand, it may be
expected there will be more delays of births due to the development of medical technology to easily time
births, rising competition in academic markets, and a quantity/quality tradeoﬀ of children.16 On the
other hand, it may be expected there will be fewer delays of births if childcare costs increase and/or if
the digitalization of medical records make it harder to manipulate birthdates.17 Given the large secular
changes in family structure and environment, it is diﬃcult to isolate each channel over time. Nonetheless,
the results at least indicate the latter story may be more dominant than the former story. In fact, as
shown in Section 4.3.2, this result is in line with the finding that regions with higher availability of public
daycare centers, and hence potentially lower costs of childcare, observe more delays in births.


4.2      Manipulation or Real Shifts?

Given the size of the magnitude of shifts, some of the birth shifts estimated are potentially due to the
manipulation of reported birthdates. Figure 3 plots hourly numbers of births within 72 hours (3 days)
before and after the school entry cutoﬀ date using the pooled 1974—2010 birth data. A unique feature
of Japan’s birth certificates is that they report the exact hour of birth. The graph shows systematic
patterns within a day, in which more births are observed during the daytime and fewer births late at
  16
      For example, the fraction of weekend births decreased from 25.7 percent in 1974 to 22.8 percent in 2010, which may
reflect that fact that births can be more easily timed as medical technology advances to avoid weekend births. In addition,
note that weekend births are always lower than the random distribution of 2/7 (=28.6 percent), which suggests that births
can be shifted by at least a few days.
   17
      In addition, as shown in Section 4.3.1, aging of mothers potentially accounts for the fewer delays in recent years because
older mothers tend to delay births less than younger mothers. To examine how much of the recent decline in the magnitude
of the shifts can be explained by the age of mothers, I perform a Blinder—Oaxaca decomposition to decompose the magnitude
of the shifts into the fraction explained by the compositional change of mothers, and those remaining. Using 1974 as a
baseline year, the age of mothers accounts for roughly 5—20 percent of the change in the magnitude (the results are available
upon request).



                                                              10
night or early in the morning, possibly due to the preferences of physicians/hospitals to avoid deliveries
when staﬃng levels are low.
       Interestingly, bunching of reported births is observed at midnight of April 2, with a slight dip just a
few hours before midnight. Such patterns around midnight of the other days are not observed. Because
delaying birth by a few hours is much easier than delaying birth by a few days, this is consistent with the
real shift of births. However, it is more likely to reflect the manipulation of reported birth hours because
such bunching at midnight is rarely observed in recent data years, possibly because of the digitalization
of medical records (not shown).
       Nonetheless, there are a few reasons why it seems unlikely that manipulation of reported birthdates
fully accounts for all the shifts. First, high frequency of births is observed not only on April 2 but even
after April 2. Similarly, in the years when April 2 coincides with weekends, a peak of births on April
3 or later is observed (not shown). If manipulation is the main mechanism, there would be no need to
shift births further after April 2. Additional evidence is documented in Sections 4.2.1 and 4.2.2.


4.2.1      Child Outcomes

Next, I show further evidence against pure manipulation by examining the birth weights of children
and gestational length of mothers. Birth weight is of particular importance as there is ample evidence
that initial health at birth has medium and long-term impacts on children.18 I am aware of only three
previous papers–Gans and Leigh (2009), Schulkind and Shapiro (2014), and Tamm (2013)–that analyze
the impact of cutoﬀ induced birth timing on infant health.
       Figure 4A plots the mean birth weight around April 2.19 The graph shows clearly that birth weights
after the school entry cutoﬀ date are heavier than those before April 2. Figure 4B plots the proportion
of birth weights over 4000 grams (high birth weight) and shows similar patterns as mean birth weight.
Table 3 presents the results of estimating Equation (1) in which the outcome is mean birth characteristics
at each birthdate. Column (1) in Table 3 reports that children born after the cutoﬀ date are roughly
2.3 grams heavier than those born before the cutoﬀ date. Since 7 percent of births are delayed, this
implies that delayed births are heavier by around 33 grams.20 While delaying births seems more diﬃcult
  18
     See, for example, Bharadwaj et al. (2012), Black et al. (2007), Johnson and Schoeni (2011), Oreopoulos et al. (2008),
and Royer (2009).
  19
     Birth weight is given in 100 gram intervals until 1995, and collected using single grams after 1995. Therefore, I divide
birth weight collected after 1995 by 100. In addition, if the increase in birth weight is concentrated in recent years, it raises
concern that some of the shifts in the early period are due to manipulation of reporting instead of real shifts. However,
the increase in birth weight is clearly observed in the early periods as well. Furthermore, the coeﬃcients on the probability
of birth weights over 4000 grams estimated separately for each year are statistically significant for any single year during
1974—2010 (both results are available upon request).
  20
     In Section 4.3, I show that babies born after the cutoﬀ date are more likely to be boys and are more likely to be born
to younger mothers; both of these factors are associated with higher birth weights. However, the birth weight estimates
remain statistically significant (P0.05) after controlling for gender of children and mothers’ ages (coeﬃcient= 1.636, SE=
0.799).



                                                               11
medically than hastening births, my result is consistent with that of Gans and Leigh (2009), who also
find an increase in birth weight among delayed births so as to ensure parents are eligible for one-time
pecuniary bonus payments given to children born after a certain date in Australia.21 Column (2) reports
that births after the school entry cutoﬀ date are 0.05 percentage points more likely to be over 4000
grams (mean of 2.2 percent). Column (3) demonstrates that the proportion of deliveries after 42 weeks
of gestation or more is higher after April 2, which is consistent with the increase in birth weight. Appendix
Table C presents the results using diﬀerent size of windows around the cutoﬀ date.
       Finally, as a part of child outcomes, I analyze infant mortality. On one hand, if the surge in the
number of births right after the school entry cutoﬀ date creates congestion or overcrowding in hospitals,
it could potentially harm infant health. On the other hand, it may not aﬀect infant health because
hospitals can anticipate such a surge, and thus, they are well prepared. Consistent with the latter view,
Figure 4C shows that while the mortality profile is noisy due to Japan’s low mortality rate, there is
no clear change in infant mortality around the cutoﬀ date. Column (4) in Table 3 confirms that births
right after the cutoﬀ date do not show excess mortality.22 Here it is important to note that mortality
is just one health outcome and other health measures, such as readmission rate, are potentially aﬀected
because of the shifts of births. Unfortunately, due to lack of data, this study does not examine any other
health outcomes.


4.2.2      C-section Births using Insurance Claim Data

I add further evidence against pure manipulation by examining whether C-section births are shifted in
response to the school entry cutoﬀ date. One disadvantage of birth data examined so far is that they do
not report delivery procedures. To compensate, the insurance claim data are used below.
       Figure 5 shows that for elective C-sections–the day of the operation can to some extent be chosen by
mothers–are shifted after the cutoﬀ date, although no shifts for emergency C-sections are observed.23
The spike for elective C-sections does not occur exactly on April 2 in the graph because the insurance
claim data is limited to two years (2011 and 2012), and thus if April 2 happen to coincide with weekends,
the births are shifted to days after April 2.24
  21
      During casual conversations with physicians, some mention that an easy and simple way to delay birth for a few days
is for pregnant mothers not to move around much near their due dates.
   22
      Since this study is concerned with the eﬀect of birth complications due to congestion on infant mortality, I also restricted
infant deaths in the sample to those that occurred within 28 days from birth (neonatal death), and to those classified as
“conditions originating in the perinatal period” (specifically, ICD-10 category P). These results are similar (they are available
upon request).
   23
      This result also provides some evidence for the power that parents exert on the timing of births. While there is ample
evidence that a certain number of births can indeed be timed, it is generally not clear whether this timing is chosen by
physicians/hospitals or parents. Because physicians/hospitals prefer to avoid congestion, this surge in the number of births
right after the school entry cutoﬀ date suggests that parents have some influence over physicians/hospitals on the timing
of deliveries.
   24
      April 2 fell on a Saturday in 2011 and on a Monday in 2012. As shown in Appendix Figure C, elective C-sections on



                                                               12
    Table 4 separately shows the estimates of Equation (1) for any C-section, elective C-section, and
emergency C-section. The outcome is the log of the mean daily number of births, and the sample is
limited to a seven day window from the cutoﬀ date. Column (2) shows that 26.3 percent of elective
C-sections are shifted within a week around the cutoﬀ date while Column (3) shows that estimate on
emergency C-sections are economically small and statistically insignificant. These results are plausible
since the C-sections involve physical risks for both mothers and children, and thus I expect to see the
shifts of births only for elective C-sections. Also this result shows that while it may be medically more
challenging to delay births than hasten births, shifting the timing of elective C-sections may be one way
to ensure that births occur after the cutoﬀ date. This result is consistent with Gans and Leigh (2009)
who show that induction and C-section procedures account for most of the delays in births in response to
bonus payments in Australia. Appendix Table D presents results from diﬀerent size of windows around
April 2.25


4.3     Heterogeneous Responses

4.3.1    By Mother and Child Characteristics

Thus far, there is evidence for sizeable shifts in births in response to the school entry cutoﬀ date, and
some of the shifts are indeed real instead of pure manipulation of birthdates. In this subsection, I exploit
the characteristics of mothers and births to examine the heterogeneous responses of parents.
    Figure 6—1, 6—2, and 6—3 plot the mean daily number of births of the subsample divided by a parity,
mother’s age, and gender of the child using the pooled 1974—2010 birth data. Table 5 summarizes the
results from estimating Equation (1), where outcome is the log of the mean daily number of births
separately for each subgroup. Because the shifts of births are concentrated within a week from the cutoﬀ
date, the sample is limited to within seven days of the cutoﬀ date.
    Figure 6—1A displays that births at higher parity are more likely to be delayed. This pattern is more
apparent in Figure 6—1B, which plots the share of high parity births (second-born or later births) among
all births. The figure shows that the share of high parity births increases discontinuously right after April
2. Columns (1) and (2) in Table 5 show that although 8.6 percent of births at higher parity are delayed,
the corresponding estimate for firstborn births is 5.3 percent. The null hypothesis that coeﬃcients of
diﬀerent parity are the same is rejected at the 1 percent significance level.
    This result implies that mothers may learn from the experiences of their firstborn children that it is
probably beneficial for later children to be born after the cutoﬀ date. In addition, mothers have already
gained experience through firstborn births, and thus, it may be easier for them to time second-born
weekends and holidays are very rare
  25
     Unfortunately, because the unit of observation is mothers instead of births in this dataset, I cannot examine the size of
shifts in C-section births by gender of births.


                                                             13
births or later births by comparison. Note that the proportion of second-born or later births to all births
seems to be increasing even after April 2 in Figure 6—1B, which implies that conception may also be
timed. Section 5.2 reconsiders this point.
       Next, the sample is divided by a mother’s age at delivery (the mean is 29.8 years). Figure 6—2A shows
that relatively younger mothers, that is, those less than 30 years of age at delivery, show a larger delay
of births compared to mothers of more than 30 years.26 Because of this diﬀerential pattern by mothers’
age group, Figure 6—2B depicts a sharp decline in the mean mother’s age at birth right after the school
entry cutoﬀ date.27 Columns (3) and (4) in Table 5 report while 7.9 percent of births among mothers
less than 30 years are delayed, the corresponding estimate for mothers older than 30 years is 5.6 percent.
This enables rejection of the null hypothesis that coeﬃcients on mothers less than 30 years and more
than 30 years are the same at the conventional level. One possible but at best speculative explanation
is that for older mothers, it is much more important to ensure the survival of their children and thus,
mothers care less about the timing of births. In addition, since the delay of births is potentially harmful
to a mother’s health, the delays of births for older mothers may be physically diﬃcult, and physicians
may not allow such delays.
       Finally, the sample is divided by the gender of newborns. Figure 6—3A clearly displays that the
births of boys are more likely to be delayed than those of girls.28 Figure 6—3B plots the fraction of male
births and shows that the share of male births is substantially higher after the school entry cutoﬀ date.
Columns (5) and (6) in Table 5 report while 8 percent of male births are delayed, 6.1 percent of female
births are delayed. Again, the coeﬃcients on male and female births are statistically distinguishable.
Appendix Table E presents the estimation results for each gender by parity. Consistent with the findings
thus far, the table shows that male births at higher parity are most likely to be delayed. Unfortunately,
because there is no mother identifier in the birth data, I cannot examine the shifts of second births
conditional on the gender of the first birth.
       There are a few possible explanations for this finding. First, the result may reflect parents’ preferences
for sons.29 If so, this is an interesting finding because Japan is known to reveal little preference for sons,
at least in the prenatal stage, and therefore, the country shows normal sex ratios of births, unlike many
Asian countries with elevated sex ratios at births (Sen, 1990).30 This result may imply a mild form of
  26
      Mothers’ ages are further divided into finer intervals. Interestingly, the estimates monotonically decline as a mother’s
age increases. More specifically, the percentage shifts of births are 9.1, 8.1, 7.8, 6.1, 4.1, and 2.9 percent for mothers aged
less than 19 years, 20—24 years, 25—29 years, 30—34 years, 35—39 years, and 40-plus years, respectively. All estimates are
statistically significant at the 1 percent significance level.
   27
      In addition, I find that fathers’ ages (measured in years) increase discontinuously at the school entry cutoﬀ date, possibly
due to the associative matching of fathers and mothers in terms of age.
   28
      Similarly, boys are more red-shirted than girls in the US (Deming and Dynarski, 2008).
   29
      There is a growing body of literature that investigates parents’ diﬀerential investment in children by gender. See, for
example, Baker and Milligan (2013), Dahl and Moretti (2008), and Lhila and Simon (2008) for developed countries, and
Barcellos et al. (2014), Bharadwaj and Lakdawala (2013), and Jayachandran and Kuziemko (2011) for developing countries.
   30
      Having said so, Rohlfs et al. (2010) document that boys are predominately delivered in Japan in 1966, a year which girls


                                                               14
son preference in Japan, which diﬀers from sex-selective abortion. Alternatively, the result may reflect
the fact that boys are slower than girls in early childhood development and also socially less mature
than girls; thus, parents may want to ensure that boys do not suﬀer from disadvantages of being the
youngest. For example, Datar (2006) shows that boys’ reading abilities benefit significantly more from
delaying entry to kindergarten compared to girls’ reading abilities in the US. In addition, larger body size
of older cohorts may matter more for boys than girls when it comes to playing sports.31 Unfortunately,
this study cannot disentangle “son preference” from such “son weakness.”
    To summarize, the abovementioned heterogeneous responses by mothers suggest that births around
the school entry cutoﬀ date reflect the diﬀerences in mothers’ characteristics, providing a cautionary
note for a growing body of literature that assumes randomness of birth timing when the stakes of birth
timing are high. This result provides one example of how endogenous sorting at discontinuities may
invalidate RD design (Lee, 2008; McCrary, 2008, Urquiola and Verhoogen, 2009).


4.3.2    Availability of Public Day-care Centers

Unfortunately, birth data in Japan do not contain key maternal characteristics, such as income, working
status, and education, which may be useful to understand the role of childcare costs as well as the
opportunity cost of mothers in decisions about birth timing. This subsection, while far from being
perfect, explores whether easier access to childcare, and hence, potentially lower costs of raising children,
aﬀects the timing of births. It assumes that greater availability of daycare in regions, the greater is the
likelihood of observing delays of births because the additional year of childcare is less worrisome for a
mother in these regions. I am aware that this is simply a correlation and not a causal estimate because
there is no explicitly exogenous regional variation on daycare availability. Nonetheless, it is a relevant and
interesting correlation and, therefore, this exercise should be viewed as complementary to the preceding
analyses.
    As a measure of availability of childcare, I exploit the year-to-year variation in prefectures of the
availability of public daycare centers. More specifically, I compute the “capacity” measure at each
prefecture for every year by dividing the total slots at public daycare centers by the total number
of females between the ages of 20—39 years, the typical child-bearing age.32 This measure captures the
“potential” availability of childcare instead of the “actual” availability of childcare, in which the total slots
of public daycare centers is often divided by the number of children before school entry age instead of the
number of females of childbearing age. This measure is arguably better than actual daycare availability
are regarded as less desirable astrologically (Hinoeuma in Japanese), suggesting that prenatal gender selection prevailed at
least until 1966 in Japan.
  31
     For example, Allen and Barnsley (1993) show that two and a half times as many boy players in Canada’s Hockey League
were born in January compared to December; the cutoﬀ date for Canadian hockey is January 1.
  32
     The female population is interpolated through the census, which is taken every five years (specifically, years ending
with a 0 or 5).


                                                            15
because the number of children may be the result of mothers’ fertility decisions, and hence, potentially
endogenous to the timing of births (Unayama, 2012). There is considerable prefectural variation in the
capacity variable, which ranges from 0.0355 (Kanagawa in 1974) to 0.293 (Ishikawa in 1979), with a
mean of 0.144 (a standard deviation of 0.053) slots per females. There are 47 prefectures in Japan, and
I utilize information on total slots of public daycare centers in each prefecture for 1974—2007.33
       The relationship between the availability of public daycare centers and the magnitude of birth shifts
is estimated in the following two steps. First, the following Equation (3) is estimated for each prefecture
 and each birth year  cell separately using a seven day window from the cutoﬀ:

                                                         P
                                                         6                        P
                                                                                  
               ln(            
                        ) =  +    +                    () 
                                                                        +           ()    
                                                                                                   +                   (3)
                                                         =1                     =1


This equation is simply the analogue of Equation (1), but   is estimated at each prefecture/year-of-birth
cell instead of using all pooled data at once, thus, generating a series of estimates across prefecture/year-
of-birth (1,598 = 34 years × 47 prefecture/year-of-birth).34 Note that, because Equation (3) is estimated
for each year, the year of birth fixed eﬀects is no longer included.35
       In the second step, the following Equation (4) is estimated by regressing the magnitude of delays at
                                         
prefecture/year-of-birth cell, ̂ , on a capacity measures.

                                                                                     0
                              ̂        =  +  ln((−1) ) +   +  +   +                                 (4)

The coeﬃcient of interest is . Note here that because the capacity variable is collected on October 1 in
each year y, I use the capacity variable in  − 1, a year prior to March/April in year , when the shifts
of births occur.  are time-varying prefectural characteristics, and I specifically include real GDP per
capita, which is deflated by the prefecture GDP deflator to Yen in 2000, and the job application-to-
opening ratio at October of  − 1, which roughly captures prefectural labor market conditions around
the time of conception to partially control for selection in fertility.36 The job application-to-opening
ratio in March of the year  is included to account for the economic condition at the time of births.37
These controls essentially have no impact on the estimates. The source of variables and years available
are summarized in Appendix Table F. Equation (4) is estimated by weighted least squares where weight
                                                                 
is the inverse of square of standard errors for each ̂               from estimating Equation (3).
  33
     I am grateful to Takashi Unayama for kindly sharing this data.
  34
     This is conceptually the same as pooling the data for all years of births and including all the interactions of independent
variables with a full set of prefecture/year-of-birth dummies.
  3 5 
     ̂ varies from -0.127 to 0.387 with a mean of 0.082 and standard deviation of 0.063.
  36
     In fact, Dehejia and Lleras-Muney (2004) show that the business cycle aﬀects the characteristics of mothers who
conceived children in the US.
  37
     While a more standard measure of labor market conditions, such as the unemployment rate at the prefectural level, is
available only in the census years, the monthly job application-to-opening ratio at the prefectural level is available as early
as 1963 in Japan.


                                                                16
       Table 6 summarizes the results from estimating Equation (4). Column (1) reports that a 10 percent
increase in the capacity of public daycare centers is associated with an increase of birth delays by 1.16
percent. This result is consistent with the view that better access to public daycare centers mitigates
mothers’ worries about childcare, and hence, they are more willing to delay births. While the result
cannot be interpreted as causal, it may imply that an increase in the availability of public daycare
potentially exacerbate the shifts of births. The addition of time-varying controls in Column (2) does
not virtually aﬀect the estimate. Finally, to check whether the results are driven by prefectures with
large populations, which tend to have low availability of public daycare centers, Column (3) excludes
Tokyo and Osaka, the two biggest prefectures. The estimate is very similar to the baseline estimate in
Column (1). Finally, Column (4) limits the sample to the most recent years, 2000—2007. The underlying
assumption in estimating Equation (4) is that mothers are aware of year-to-year variations in potential
need for public daycare centers in their areas. It is plausible that mothers have good foresight about
the availability of public daycare centers in their area, at least in recent years, because the shortage of
slots in public daycare centers are covered in media very intensively. While the estimate in Column (4)
is no longer statistically significant because of the small sample size, it is reassuring that the estimate in
Column (4) is quantitatively similar to the baseline estimate in Column (1).
       To summarize, these results are consistent with the hypothesis that childcare costs may be one of
the driving forces of the birth shifts. However, these results should be viewed with considerable caution
because the availability of public daycare is simply a crude proxy of the costs of childcare,38 and also
there is no exogenous regional variation on public daycare availability. Again, I stress that these results
provide only correlations and not causal interpretation.


4.4      Magnitude of the Shifts

Next, the magnitude of the shifts is examined by simply comparing the results of this study to those of
previous studies that analyzed the eﬀect of birth-related cutoﬀ dates on the timing of births in other
contexts. The results are summarized in Table 7. Three things are noteworthy. First, the school entry
cutoﬀ date is known well in advance so that the timing of both conception as well as births could be
aﬀected by the school entry cutoﬀ date. This is in contrast to the case of bonus payments in Australia in
July 2004, which aﬀected only the timing of births because mothers did not know the policy at the time
of conception (Gans and Leigh, 2009). Second, the incentive of parents in this study is the long-term
academic consequences for children, while other studies examine immediate financial incentives, such as
tax incentives. Third, while the incentive structure of other studies moves in one direction (i.e., either
delaying or hastening of births, but not both), there is a clear tradeoﬀ in parents’ incentives in this
  38
    While there are private daycare centers, public daycare centers tend to be cheaper and vary less in quality; thus public
daycare centers are dominant in Japan.


                                                            17
study. Despite these diﬀerences, the 7 percent shift of births found in this study is within the range of
other studies.


5     Supplemental Analysis and Discussion

5.1    Birth Timing, Parental SES, and Test Scores

The analysis on birth data demonstrates that parental characteristics are associated with the timing
of births. However, the birth data in Japan contain very limited characteristics of parents, and in fact
only mothers’ ages at birth are examined. Therefore, I use other sources of data that report parental
characteristics, as well as birthdates of children. Specifically, the data from PISA collected by the OECD
are used and include information on the parental characteristics of 15-year-olds (normally 10th grade),
birth months of students, and test scores on various subjects.39
    The advantage of PISA is that it collects nearly complete information of parental education. PISA
was first performed in 2000 and has been repeated every three years since. This study uses PISA 2003
because the data is much more complete than in other years.40 In addition, this data is helpful for
examining how much of the relative academic advantage of older students to younger students can be
explained by parental background rather than relative age because the data collect test scores of children.
    There are two drawbacks of this data that are noteworthy to mention. First, they reports only the
birth months of students but not the birth day, and thus, I cannot precisely examine the distribution of
births around April 2. This means I cannot distinguish timing of births and timing of conception in this
data.41 Second, the data are collected for one academic cohort (from April to March in the following
year) and thus, does not contain data for the adjacent March and April of the same calendar year. Thus,
I cannot examine the shifts of births from March to April. The summary statistics of PISA 2003 are
shown in Appendix Table G.42
    Figures 7A—C plot the birth months of students and the average of three diﬀerent parental charac-
teristics: proportion of fathers with white-collar jobs, fathers’ years of schooling, and family economic,
  39
     The 10th grade corresponds to the first year of high school. The advancement rate to high schools was 97.3 percent in
2003.
  40
     The missing rates of maternal and paternal educations are is only 0.34 percent and 0.63, respectively, in 2003, but vary
between 4 and 11 percent in other years. Other similar sources of data, such as Trends in International Mathematics and
Science Study (TIMSS), have much higher missing rates of parental education (roughly 25—40 percent) probably because
students are still young (either in 4th or 8th grade) and may not be aware of their parents’ education levels.
  41
     Unfortunately, I am not aware of any dataset in Japan that contains both the exact date of birth and parental
characteristics, except for birth data.
  42
     There are 4,707 observations for Japan in PISA 2003. 10th graders in 2003 should have been born between April 1985
and March 1986, if students strictly follow the school entry cutoﬀ rule. Indeed, out of 4,707 observations, there are only
7 born outside of this period. In fact, they are all born in April 1986 but it is not clear whether these observations fall
outside of the required grade because the birthdates of these students can be April 1. To be conservative, I drop these
seven observations. In any case, it is reassuring that only 0.15 percent of children (7/4707) at the maximum do not follow
the assignment of the scheduled academic cohort in this data.



                                                             18
social, and cultural status (a variable called ESCS ) constructed by the OECD based on parental educa-
tion, parental occupation, and home possession, where higher values indicate higher SES (OECD, 2005,
p. 316).
       These figures show the obvious trends in parental characteristics by birth month, which may be
driven by concerns about the relative advantage of older children. Children born right after the cutoﬀ
month (April) are more likely to have high SES parents, while those born right before April are less
likely to have high SES parents. In particular, this is the case for March-born children, who are labeled
in diamonds in the figure. Of all three variables that capture parental background, parents of children
born in March are by far the most negatively selected.
       Interestingly, Figure 8, which corresponds to Figure 7A, shows that the lower proportion of high
SES parents in March is driven by fewer births by high SES parents rather than more births by low
SES parents in March as the number of births by low SES mothers shows little seasonable variation.43
This result implies that high SES parents tend to ensure that deliveries occur after the school entry
cutoﬀ date, while low SES parents do much less, probably because they cannot aﬀord an additional year
of childcare costs, or they simply do not recognize or value the relative academic advantage of older
children.
       Importantly, the negative selection of mothers may partly explain the relative academic disadvantages
of younger children. In fact, Figure 7D shows that math test scores reported in PISA 2003 depict similar
patterns to Figures 7A—C; namely, children born in March perform almost worst, suggesting that the
relative academic advantage of older children may be driven in part by the negative selection of mothers.44
       To investigate this point more formally, Equations (5) and (6) are estimated following a similar
strategy to Buckles and Hungerman (2013):


                                               =  +  1  +                                              (5)

                                                                          0
                                           =  +  2  +   +                                           (6)

where  is a linear measure of relative age for each individual student . Following Bedard and Dhuey
(2006), I construct  as follows: since April is the school entry cutoﬀ month,  = 0 for students born
in March,  = 1 for students born in February, and so on until  = 11 for students born in April.
       The only diﬀerence between Equations (5) and (6) is that the latter includes controls for parental
background characteristics  .  comprises the six categorical variables for education of mothers and
fathers, ESCS, and a dummy that takes one if the father is a white-collar worker. While I replace missing
  43
    Similar patterns are observed when the sample is divided by education of fathers and mothers (not shown).
  44
    PISA 2003 also reports test scores on reading, science, and problem solving, but all the subjects show similar patterns
to Figure 7D (not shown).



                                                            19
values with 0 and include the indicator for the missing variable, because the missing rate is very low,
the estimates are very similar even if these observations are dropped from the data (not shown).
    To test whether parental background drives the relative academic advantage of older children, I
compare the coeﬃcients on  in Equations (5) and (6). If parental characteristics are orthogonal to
relative age  or if they have no direct impact on test scores (i.e.,  = 0 in Equation (6)), adding
parental controls would not change the estimates of the relative age coeﬃcients from Equation (5).
The null hypothesis that  1 =  2 is tested by estimating both Equations (5) and (6), using seemingly
unrelated regression estimation.45
    Table 8 demonstrates the results from this exercise. Columns (1) and (2) use the data for the whole
year, and Columns (3) and (4) use the data only for children born in March and April, respectively.
Column (1) shows that children born one month earlier score higher by 0.014—0.024 standard deviation.
However, Column (2) shows that once these parental characteristics are controlled, the relative academic
advantage of older children is lowered by 20—35 percent, suggesting that some of the observed academic
disadvantages of younger children stems from the selection of mothers. More drastically, if the sample is
limited to students born in March and April, as shown in Columns (3) and (4), the estimates are reduced
by as much as 25—60 percent after controlling parental backgrounds.46 In all cases, a Wald test rejects
that the coeﬃcients are the same at the 5 percent level. Appendix Table H presents the estimates from
the same exercise separately for each gender and shows that relative age advantages of female students
are much more attenuated after controlling parental backgrounds than those of male students.
    These results suggest that the observed relative academic disadvantage of younger children is a
combination of double deficits: children born right before the school entry cutoﬀ dates are relatively
younger within the school cohort and these children also come from low SES families. However, it is
important to note that while the magnitude of the eﬀect becomes smaller, the relative age eﬀects remain
even after controlling for parental characteristics. The persistence and magnitude of relative age eﬀects
may be driven partly by a parsimonious set of parental characteristics available in the data or there is,
indeed, a relative age advantage.47
   45
      In addition,  is replaced by 11 birth month dummies, and a Wald estimate is computed in which the null hypothesis
is that coeﬃcients on each birth month are the same. The Wald test ((11)) rejects this hypothesis at the ten percent
significance level for science (the results are available upon request).
   46
      This eﬀect may be underestimated because births on April 1 are included in April instead of March due to observing
only birth months.
   47
      In fact, Bedard and Dhuey (2006) exploit the school entry cutoﬀ date among OECD countries, which include Japan,
and show that younger children within the academic cohort perform worse than older children. It is important to note that,
in addition to estimating each country separately, Bedard and Dhuey (2006) pool the data from countries with diﬀerent
school entry cutoﬀ dates, and therefore, include birth of month fixed eﬀect to control for season of birth eﬀects. They still
find that older children perform significantly better than younger children. In addition, Kawaguchi (2011) finds that those
born in March have worse test scores, less completed years of schooling, and lower wages than those born in April in Japan.




                                                             20
5.2      Timing of Conception

The main focus of this paper is the timing of births instead of timing of conception. However, shifts in
the timing of births are only one limited margin of adjustment. Because the school entry cutoﬀ date has
been in place since 1947 and has not changed, it is plausible that risk-averse mothers who have a strong
preference for their children to be the oldest in class are likely to time conception so that birth does not
fall near April 2.
       The eﬀect of the school entry rule on the timing of conception is diﬃcult to identify as there are
many reasons other than the school entry rule that influence the timing of conception compared to the
timing of births, which has a clear cutoﬀ date of April 2. Thus, the results here are at best suggestive,
and I essentially rely on the seasonable patterns of births using pooled 1984—2010 birth data to shed
light on this possibility.
       Figure 9A displays the mean daily number births by parity of birth throughout the year, extending
essentially Figure 6—1A to a whole year. While the number of firstborn births is always higher than that
of second-born births throughout the year, the gap almost disappears around May and June.48 As a
result, Figure 9B shows that the proportion of second-born births to all births peaks around May—June.49
While we cannot conclude that this pattern is driven entirely by the school entry rule, the seasonal birth
pattern is at least consistent with the view that parents become more aware of the importance of the
birth months of children at second births, possibly through learning. This result is in line with Buckles
and Hungerman (2013), who document that some types of mothers carefully time conception in the US.
       Interestingly, I find that this conception pattern can be inter-generational, especially for mothers
who are themselves born in March and April, both of which are adjacent to the school entry cutoﬀ date.
Since 1992, mothers’ exact birthdates have been reported in the birth data.50 Table 9 shows the relation
between mothers’ birth months and their children’s birth months. Row (1) shows the distribution of
children’s birth months by mothers born in January. Row (2) shows the case of mothers born in February,
and so on. All figures in this table are in percentages. For example, cell (4)—(v) shows that mothers
born in April give birth in May with a probability of 8.46 percent. The sum of each row should be equal
to 100 percent. The cells with shadows show cases in which the birth month of a mother and that of her
child are the same (i.e., diagonal cells (1)—(i), (2)—(ii), and so forth).51
       Table 9 shows that mothers indeed seem to prefer to deliver in their own birth months. However, it
  48
     It is not clear why I observe another peak of firstborn births in the fall.
  49
     Assuming the uniform distribution of births throughout a year as a counterfactual, I can calculate a very rough estimate
of excess second-born births in May and June. This back-of-envelope calculation suggests that 6,094 births per year are
“manipulated” by timing of conception because of the school entry rule. This figure is more than three times as large as
births shifted by timing (1,835 births per year, as documented in Section 4.1). Note that this is an extremely rough estimate
because I ignore other reasons to time deliveries in May and June, and thus, considerable caution should be employed in
interpreting the result.
  50
     I also confirm that the number of mothers’ exact date of births peaks on April 2 (the results are available upon request).
  51
     Note that April 1, the day before the school entry cutoﬀ date, is included in March.


                                                              21
is interesting to note that mothers born in March and April have a much stronger tendency to do so:
mothers born in March (April) are much more likely to give birth in March (April). To illustrate this, at
the second to last row, for each column (i.e., for each child’s birth month), I report the highest fraction of
births in bold text excluding that of same birth month mothers (the cells with shadows). For example,
for children born in January, the highest proportion of births excluding mothers born in January is
mothers born in February at 8.65 percent (cell (2)—(i)). Then, the last row shows the diﬀerence between
the proportion of their own cell (the cells with shadows) and the highest proportion presented in the
second to last row. Using the same example, because the proportion of January births by mothers born
in January is 8.63 percent (cell (1)—(i)), the diﬀerence is -0.02. The last row clearly shows that mothers
born in March and April have by far a stronger preference to give birth in the same months as their own
birth months (0.33 and 0.30 for mothers born in March and April, respectively) compared to mothers
born in other months.
   This result implies that mothers born in April may be aware of the relative academic advantage
of older children due to their own experience, and thus, prefer to time births in April. On the other
hand, it is quite surprising that mothers born in March do not avoid delivering births in March, even if
they themselves may have suﬀered from this relative disadvantage while they were young. It is possible
that mothers born in March are not aware of such disadvantages and/or they cannot simply aﬀord an
additional year of childcare costs. While the precise reasons for strong preference of mothers born in
March and April to time births in their own birth month are unknown, the result possibly implies that,
even though the magnitude is small, the persistence of mothers’ preferences regarding birth months may
partially contribute to the persistence of inter-generational immobility.


5.3   Hard or Soft Cutoﬀ Date?

An important policy question is whether stricter enforcement of the school entry rule is socially bene-
ficial. Red-shirting, the practice of delaying school entry of children to give them an edge, has become
increasingly popular in the US and elsewhere where the enforcement of school entry rules is not strictly
binding. In fact, one out of six children born in 1999 in the US delayed entering first grade by a year
(Deming and Dynarski, 2008). Red-shirting can be socially problematic because it may exacerbate
inequality as socioeconomically advantaged parents tend to hold back their children.
   One proposed solution is strict enforcement of school entry policy that prohibits delayed entry (Dem-
ing and Dynarski, 2008). However, to the extent that high SES parents avoid early entry by manipulating
either timing of births or timing of conception, the eﬀect of such strict enforcement can be partially or
even entirely oﬀset.
   From this perspective, Japan is an interesting case due to its hard cutoﬀ date. The magnitude of



                                                     22
the overall shifts documented in this paper is relatively small (half of the mean daily number of births),
implying that an education system with stricter enforcement may possibly be eﬀective in lessening delayed
school entry. However, I cannot examine the magnitude of the shifts by parental SES due to the lack of
such information in the birth data, and thus, this study may underestimate the magnitude of shifts by
high SES parents. Furthermore, diﬀerent seasonal patterns of birth months by parental SES using PISA
indicate that timing of conception may be another way for high SES parents to evade the strict school
entry rule. Because there are many reasons other than the school entry rule that diﬀerentially aﬀect the
timing of conception by diﬀerent SES parents (e.g., types of occupation and industry), the argument
here is at best speculative.


6    Conclusion

Many governments impose a school entry cutoﬀ date, which mechanically creates a one year age gap
within a school cohort. Parents–who value the potential long-term academic gains of children over the
short-term gain of saving one year in childcare costs–have incentives to time births after the cutoﬀ dates
as a form of early childhood investment. Indeed, this paper found that in Japan, where the school entry
rule is strictly enforced, more than 1,800 births per year are shifted roughly a week before the cutoﬀ
date to a week following the cutoﬀ date. This finding suggests that parents exploit birth timing as a
means of early childhood investment.
    Previous studies, which investigated the distribution of births around the school entry cutoﬀ date
in the US, Chile, and Argentina, did not find such behavioral responses of parents, probably because
of weak enforcement of the school entry rule. However, the strict enforcement of the school entry rule
is not unique to Japan. Whether a similar shift in the timing of births is observable in other countries
with strict enforcement is potentially interesting. In particular, given the lack of key parental variables
such as education and income in Japan’s birth data, an investigation of whether strict enforcement is
socially beneficial using data from these countries is an avenue for future research.


References

References

Allen, Jeremiah, and Roger Barnsley. (1993) “Streams and tiers: the interaction of ability, maturity,
    and training in systems with age-dependent recursive selection,” Journal of Human Resources, 28(3):
    643—659.




                                                    23
Almond, Douglas, and Janet Currie. (2011) “Human Capital Development before Age Five,” In Orley
   Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics. North Holland: Amsterdam, 1315—
   1486.

Angrist, Joshua. D., and Alan B. Krueger. (1991). “Does compulsory school attendance aﬀect schooling
   and earnings?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106(4): 979—1014.

Baker, Michael, and Kevin Milligan. (2013) “Boy-Girl Diﬀerences in Parental Time Investments: Evi-
   dence from Three Countries,” NBER Working Paper No. 18893.

Barcellos, Silvia Helena, Leandro S. Carvalho, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. (2014) “Child Gender and
   Parental Investments in India: Are Boys and Girls Treated Diﬀerently?” American Economic Journal:
   Applied Economics, 6(1): 157—189.

Bedard, Kelly, and Elizabeth Dhuey. (2006) “The Persistence of Early Childhood Maturity: International
   Evidence of Long-Run Age Eﬀects,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(4): 1437—1472.

Bedard, Kelly, and Elizabeth Dhuey. (2012) “School-Entry Policies and Skill Accumulation Across Di-
   rectly and Indirectly Aﬀected Individuals,” Journal of Human Resources, 47(3): 643—668.

Berlinski, Samuel, Sebastian Galiani, and Patrick J. McEwan. (2011) “Preschool and maternal labor sup-
   ply: Evidence from a regression discontinuity design,” Economic Development and Cultural Change,
   59(2): 313—344.

Bharadwaj, Prashant, Juan Eberhard and Christopher Neilson. (2012) “Do Initial Endowments Matter
   Only Initially? Birth Weight, Parental Investments and Academic Achievement in School,” Unpub-
   lished manuscript.

Bharadwaj, Prashant, and Leah K. Lakdawala. (2013) “Discrimination Begins in the Womb: Evidence
   of Sex-Selective Prenatal Investments,” Journal of Human Resources, 48(1): 71—113.

Black, Sandra, Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes. (2007) “From the Cradle to the Labor Market?
   The Eﬀect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1): 409—439.

Black, Sandra, Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes. (2011) “Too Young to Leave the Nest? The
   Eﬀects of School Starting Age,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(2): 455—467.

Buckles, Kasey, and Daniel M. Hungerman. (2013) “Season of Birth and Later Outcomes: Old Questions,
   New Answers,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(3): 711—724.

Cascio, Elizabeth, and Diane W. Schanzenbach. (2007) “First in the Class? Age and the Education
   Production Function,” NBER working paper No. 13663.




                                                 24
Crawford, Claire, Lorraine Dearden, and Costas Meghir. (2007) “When You Are Born Matters: The
   Impact of Date of Birth on Child Cognitive Outcomes in England,” Institute for Fiscal Studies
   report.

Cunha, Flavio, James J. Heckman, Lance Lochner, and Dimitriy V. Masterov. (2006) “Interpreting the
   Evidence on Life Cycle Skill Formation,” Handbook of the Economics of Education, E. Hanushek and
   F. Welch, editors, Amsterdam North Holland.

Dahl, Gordon B., and Enrico Moretti. (2008) “The Demand for Sons,” Review of Economic Studies,
   75(4): 1085—1120.

Datar, Ashlesha. (2006) “Does Delaying Kindergarten Entry Give Children a Head Start?” Economics
   of Education Review, 25(1): 43—62.

Dehejia, Rajeev, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. (2004) “Booms, Busts, and Babies’ Health,” Quarterly
   Journal of Economics, 119(3): 1091—1130.

Deming, David, and Susan Dynarski. (2008) “The Lengthening of Childhood,” Journal of Economic
   Perspectives, 22(3): 71—92.

Dhuey, Elizabeth, and Stephen Lipscomb. (2010) “Disabled or Young? Relative Age and Special Edu-
   cation Diagnoses in Schools,” Economics of Education Review, 29(5): 857—872.

Dickert-Conlin, Stacy and Amitabh Chandra. (1999) “Taxes and the Timing of Births,” Journal of
   Political Economy, 107(1): 161—177.

Dickert-Conlin, Stacy, and Todd Elder. (2010) “Suburban Legend: School Cutoﬀ Date and the Timing
   of Births,” Economics of Education Review, 29(5): 826—841.

Dobkin, Carlos, and Fernando Ferreira. (2010) “Do School Entry Laws Aﬀect Educational Attainment
   and Labor Market Outcomes?” Economics of Education Review, 29(1): 40—54.

Dustmann, Christian, and Uta Schönberg. (2012) “Expansions in Maternity Leave Coverage and Chil-
   dren’s Long-Term Outcomes,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(3): 190—224.

Elder, Todd, and Darren Lubotsky. (2009) “Kindergarten Entry Age and Children’s Achievement: im-
   pacts of state policies, family background, and peers,” Journal of Human Resources, 44(3): 641—683.

Evans, William N., and Timothy J. Moore. (2011) “The short-term mortality consequences of income
   receipt,” Journal of Public Economics, 95(11): 1410—1424.

Evans, William N., and Timothy J. Moore. (2012) “Liquidity, economic activity, and mortality,” Review
   of Economics and Statistics, 94(2): 400—418.

Fertig, Michael, and Jochen Kluve. (2005) “The Eﬀect of Age at School Entry on Educational Attainment
   in Germany,” IZA discussion paper No. 1507.

                                                  25
Fredriksson, Peter, and Björn Öckert. (2013) “Life-cycle Eﬀects of Age at School Start,” The Economic
   Journal, doi: 10.1111/ecoj.12047

Gans, Joshua S., and Andrew Leigh. (2009) “Born on the First of July: An (Un)natural Experiment in
   Birth Timing,” Journal of Public Economics, 93(1-2): 246—263.

Heckman, James J. (2006) “Skill formation and the economics of investing in disadvantaged children,”
   Science, 312(5782): 1900—1902.

Heckman, James J. (2007) “The economics, technology, and neuroscience of human capability formation,”
   Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(33): 13250—13255.

Jayachandran, Seema, and Ilyana Kuziemko. (2011) “Why Do Mothers Breastfeed Girls Less than Boys:
   Evidence and Implications for Child Health in India.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(3): 1485—
   1538.

Johnson, Rucker, and Robert F. Schoeni. (2011) “The influence of early-life events on human capital,
   health status, and labor market outcomes over the life course,” The B.E. Journal of Economic
   Analysis & Policy (Advances), 11(3): 1—55.

Kawaguchi, Daiji. (2011) “Actual age at school entry, educational outcomes, and earnings,” Journal of
   Japanese International Economies, 25(2): 64—80.

Kureishi, Wataru, and Midori Wakabayashi. (2008) “Taxing the Stork,” National Tax Journal, 61(2):
   167—187.

Lalive, Rafael, and Josef Zweimüller. (2009) “How does parental leave aﬀect fertility and return to work?
   Evidence from two natural experiments,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(3): 1363—1402.

LaLumia, Sarah, James M. Sallee, and Nicholas Turner. (2012) “New Evidence on Taxes and the Timing
   of Birth,” NBER Working Paper No. 19283.

Lee, David S. (2008) “Randomized Experiments from Non-random Selection in US House Elections,”
   Journal of Econometrics, 142(2): 675—697.

Leuven, Edwin, Mikael Lindahl, Hessel Oosterbeek, and Dinand Webbink. (2010). “Expanding schooling
   opportunities for 4-year-olds,” Economics of Education Review, 29(3): 319—328.

Lhila, Aparna, and Kosali I. Simon. (2008) “Prenatal Health Investment Decisions: Does the Child’s
   Sex Matter?” Demography, 45(4): 885—905.

McCrary, Justin, and Heather Royer. (2011) “The Eﬀect of Female Education on Fertility and Infant
   Health: Evidence from School Entry Policies Using Exact Date of Birth,” American Economic Review,
   101(1): 158—195.



                                                   26
McCrary, Justin. (2008) “Manipulation of the Running Variable in the Regression Discontinuity Design:
   A Density Test,” Journal of Econometrics, 142(2): 698—714.

McEwan, Patrick J., and Joseph S. Shapiro. (2008) “The benefits of delayed primary school enrollment:
   Discontinuity estimates using exact birthdate,” Journal of Human Resources, 43(1): 1—29.

Muhlenweg, Andrea M., and Patrick A. Puhani. (2010) “The evolution of the school-entry age eﬀect in
   a school tracking system,” Journal of Human Resources, 45(2): 407—438.

Neugart, Michael, and Henry Ohlsson. (2013) “Economic incentives and the timing of births: evidence
   from the German parental benefit reform of 2007,” Journal of Population Economics, 26(1): 87—108.

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. (2005) PISA 2003 Technical Report.

Oreopoulos, Phil, Mark Stabile, Randy Walld, and Leslie Roos. (2008) “Short-, medium-, and long-term
   consequences of poor infant health,” Journal of Human Resources, 43(1): 88—138.

Puhani, Patrick A., and Andrea M. Weber. (2007) “Does the Early Bird Catch the Worm? Instrumental
   Variable Estimates of Educational Eﬀects of Age at School Entry in Germany,” Empirical Economics,
   32(2-3): 359—386.

Rohlfs, Chris, Alexander Reed, and Hiroyuki Yamada. (2010) “Causal eﬀects of sex preference on
   sex-blind and sex-selective child avoidance and substitution across birth years: Evidence from the
   Japanese year of the fire horse,” Journal of Development Economics, 92(1): 82—95.

Royer, Heather. (2009) “‘Separated by girth’: US twin estimates of the eﬀect of birth weight,” American
   Economic: Journal Applied Economics, 1(1): 49—85.

Schulkind, Lisa, and Teny Maghakian Shapiro. (2014) “What a Diﬀerence a Day Makes: Quantifying the
   Eﬀects of Birth Timing Manipulation on Infant Health,” Journal of Health Economics, 33: 139—158.

Sen, Amartya. (1990) More than 100 Million Women are Missing. New York Review of Books, 37(20):
   61—66. http://ucatlas.ucsc.edu/gender/Sen100M.html (accessed April 3, 2014)

Smith, Justin. (2009) “Can Regression Discontinuity Help Answer and Age-old Question in Education?
   The Eﬀect of Age on Elementary and Secondary School Outcomes,” The B.E.Journal of Economic
   Analysis and Policy (Topics), 9(1): 1—30.

Stephens Jr., Melvin. (2003) “‘3rd of the Month’: do Social Security recipients smoothconsumption
   between checks? American Economic Review, 93(1): 406—422

Stephens Jr., Melvin. (2006) “Paycheck receipt and the timing of consumption,” The Economic Journal,
   116(513): 680—701.

Stipek, Deborah. (2002) “At what age should children enter kindergarten? A question for policy makers
   and parents,” Social Policy Report, 16(2): 3—16.

                                                  27
Strom, Bjarne. (2004) “Student Achievement and Birthday Eﬀects,” Norwegian University for Science
   and Technology working paper.

Tamm, Marcus. (2013) “The Impact of a Large Parental Leave Benefit Reform on the Timing of Birth
   around the Day of Implementation,” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics,75(4): 585—601.

Unayama, Takashi. (2012) “The Possibility of Pursuing Both Marriage/Childbirth and Employment,
   and the Development of Nursery Schools,” Japanese Economy, 39(1): 48—71.

Urquiola, Miguel, and Eric Verhoogen. (2009) “Class size caps, sorting, and the regression discontinuity
   design.” American Economic Review, 99(1): 179—215.




                                                  28
                                              Figure 1: Mean daily number of births throughout the year

                                  4500                        Apr2
    Mean daily number of births


                                  4000




                                  3500




                                  3000

                                                       Apr1



                                  2500         Feb29

                                         Jan1 Feb1 Mar1 Apr1 May1 Jun1 Jul1 Aug1 Sep1 Oct1 Nov1 Dec1
                                                                         Birth day

Note: Each plot is the mean daily number of births. The vertical line corresponds to April 2, which is the
school entry cutoff date in Japan. The markers with cross signs are holidays. The data come from pooled
1974–2010 birth data.




                                                                         29
                                                      Figure 2: Mean daily number of births around April 2
                                                                           A. Raw data

                                            4500                                          Apr2



   Mean daily number of births
                                            4000




                                            3500




                                            3000

                                                                                Apr1



                                            2500
                                                   Mar5    Mar12   Mar19   Mar26      Apr2       Apr9   Apr16   Apr23   Apr30
                                                                                   Birth day

                                                                            B. Adjusted

                                            1000

                                                                                          Apr2
   Mean daily number of births (residual)




                                             500




                                               0




                                             -500



                                                                                   Apr1
                                            -1000
                                                    Mar5   Mar12   Mar19   Mar26       Apr2      Apr9   Apr16   Apr23   Apr30
                                                                                    Birth day

Note: Each plot is the mean daily number of births. The vertical line corresponds to April 2,
which is the school entry cutoff date in Japan. The markers with cross signs in Panel A are
holidays (March 20 or March 21 depending on the year, and April 29). Panel B adjusts for
holidays, day of week, and year fixed effects. The data come from pooled 1974–2010 birth
data.


                                                                                30
                                  Figure 3: Reported birth hours within 72 hours from midnight of April 2


                                  300



   Mean hourly number of births   250



                                  200



                                  150



                                  100



                                   50
                                        -72       -48        -24         0         24         48            72
                                                          Hours from Midnight of April 2

Note: Each plot is the mean hourly number of births. The vertical solid line corresponds to the
midnight of April 2, which is the exact school entry cutoff time in Japan. Every vertical dashed
line corresponds to the midnight of other days. The data come from 1974–2010 pooled birth
data.




                                                                    31
                                 Figure 4: Child Outcomes
                                A. Birth weight (100 grams)


       30.95

Mean




        30.9




       30.85



               Mar5   Mar12   Mar19    Mar26       Apr2    Apr9   Apr16   Apr23   Apr30
                                               Birth day

                       B. Proportion of birth weights over 4000 grams

       .023




       .022
Mean




       .021




        .02
              Mar5    Mar12   Mar19   Mar26        Apr2    Apr9   Apr16   Apr23   Apr30
                                               Birth day




                                              32
                                                                         C. Infant mortality

                                         .005




                     Mean               .0048




                                        .0046




                                        .0044




                                        .0042

                                                Mar5     Mar12     Mar19    Mar26       Apr2     Apr9     Apr16      Apr23   Apr30
                                                                                    Birth day

Note: Each plot is the mean outcome in each day. The vertical line corresponds to April 2, which is the school
entry cutoff date in Japan. The markers with cross signs are holidays. The data for Panels A and B come from
pooled 1974–2010 birth data. The data for Panel C come from pooled 1974–2010 birth and death data.

                                                                   Figure 5: C-section (raw data)

                                        400
          Mean daily number of births




                                        300



                                        200



                                        100



                                         0
                                              Mar5     Mar12     Mar19     Mar26     Apr2       Apr9    Apr16     Apr23      Apr30
                                                                                   Birth day
                                                               C-section: Emergency            C-section: Elective
Note: Each plot is the mean daily number of births. The vertical line corresponds to April 2, which is the
school entry cutoff date in Japan. The data come from pooled 2011–2012 insurance claim data.
                                                        Figure 6-1: Heterogeneous responses, by parity
                                                               A. Number of births by parity (raw data)
                                                                                   33
                                        2500




          Mean daily number of births   2000




                                        1500




                                        1000
                                               Mar5    Mar12    Mar19      Mar26        Apr2    Apr9     Apr16   Apr23   Apr30
                                                                                   Birth day
                                                                       firstborn        second-born or later


                                                      B. Proportion of second-born births among all births

                                        .57



                                        .56



                                        .55
          Mean




                                        .54



                                        .53



                                        .52

                                              Mar5    Mar12    Mar19     Mar26       Apr2       Apr9    Apr16    Apr23   Apr30
                                                                                   Birth day

Note: Each plot in Panel A is the mean daily number of births. Each plot in Panel B is the mean outcome in
each day. The markers with cross signs in Panels A and B are holidays. The vertical line corresponds to April
2, which is the school entry cutoff date in Japan. The data come from pooled 1974–2010 birth data.




                                                                                   34
                                                  Figure 6-2: Heterogeneous responses, by mothers’ age
                                                       A. Number of births by mother’s age (raw data)

                                        3000


          Mean daily number of births
                                        2500



                                        2000



                                        1500



                                        1000
                                               Mar5   Mar12   Mar19    Mar26        Apr2     Apr9    Apr16   Apr23    Apr30
                                                                               Birth day
                                                         Mother's age: below 30            Mother's age: above 30


                                                                      B. Mothers’ age


                                        28.5




                                        28.4
                 Mean




                                        28.3




                                        28.2
                                               Mar5   Mar12   Mar19    Mar26        Apr2      Apr9   Apr16    Apr23   Apr30
                                                                               Birth day

Note: Each plot in Panel A is the mean daily number of births. Each plot in Panel B is the mean outcome in
each day. The markers with cross signs in Panels A and B are holidays. The vertical line corresponds to April
2, which is the school entry cutoff date in Japan. The data come from pooled 1974–2010 birth data.




                                                                               35
                                               Figure 6-3: Heterogeneous responses, by gender
                                                    A. Number of births by gender (raw data)

                                 2400



   Mean daily number of births   2200


                                 2000


                                 1800


                                 1600


                                 1400

                                        Mar5    Mar12   Mar19   Mar26      Apr2     Apr9       Apr16   Apr23   Apr30
                                                                        Birth day
                                                                        Girl      Boy


                                                          B. Proportion of male births



                                 .525




                                  .52
   Mean




                                 .515




                                  .51




                                 .505
                                        Mar5   Mar12    Mar19   Mar26      Apr2     Apr9   Apr16       Apr23   Apr30
                                                                        Birth day

Note: Each plot in Panel A is the mean daily number of births. Each plot in Panel B is the mean
outcome in each day. The markers with cross signs in Panels A and B are holidays. The vertical
line corresponds to April 2, which is the school entry cutoff date in Japan. The data come from
pooled 1974–2010 birth data.



                                                                      36
                                                                                  Figure 7: Birth months and outcomes
                                                 A. Father is white-collar                                                               C. Family socioeconomic status




                        .54




                                                                                                                      0
                        .52




                                                                                                                      -.05
                        .5
                 Mean




                                                                                                               Mean
                        .48




                                                                                                                      -.1
                        .46




                                                                                                                      -.15
                        .44




                               Apr   May   Jun    Jul   Aug   Sep   Oct     Nov   Dec   Jan   Feb   Mar                      Apr   May   Jun   Jul   Aug   Sep   Oct     Nov   Dec   Jan   Feb   Mar
                                                              Birth month                                                                                  Birth month


                                            B. Fathers’ years of schooling                                                                           D. Math score
                        13.2




                                                                                                                      .2
                        13




                                                                                                                      .1
                 Mean




                                                                                                               Mean
                 12.8




                                                                                                                0
                        12.6




                                                                                                                      -.1
                        12.4




                                                                                                                      -.2




                               Apr   May   Jun    Jul   Aug   Sep   Oct     Nov   Dec   Jan   Feb   Mar                      Apr   May   Jun   Jul   Aug   Sep   Oct     Nov   Dec   Jan   Feb   Mar
                                                              Birth month                                                                                  Birth month

Note: Each plot is the mean of each outcome at birth month of students. The markers with diamonds correspond to March-born students. Math score is standardized to
mean 0 with standard deviation of 1. Family socioeconomic status is economic, social and cultural status (a variable called ESCS) constructed by the OECD based on
parental education, parental occupation, and home possession, where a higher value indicates higher SES (OECD, 2003).The dotted line is the linear projection. The data
come from PISA 2003 data for Japan.

                                                                                                          37
                                              Figure 8: Mean daily number of births by fathers’ job types




                        7.5
          Mean daily number of births
            5.5     6   56.5       7




                                        Apr    May    Jun   Jul   Aug    Sep    Oct    Nov    Dec       Jan   Feb   Mar
                                                                        Birth month
                                                                  Father: Not have a while-collar job
                                                                  Father: Has a white-collar job


Note: Each plot is the mean daily number of births, which is the number of students born each month divided
by the number of days in each month. The data come from PISA 2003 data for Japan.




                                                                           38
                                               Figure 9: Mean daily number of births through the year, by parity
                                                              A. Firstborn and second-born births

                                         2000


           Mean daily number of births

                                         1500




                                         1000




                                          500
                                                Jan1 Feb1 Mar1 Apr1 May1 Jun1 Jul1 Aug1 Sep1 Oct1 Nov1 Dec1
                                                                                Birth day
                                                                        firstborn     second-born


                                                      B. Proportion of second-born births among all births

                                         .42




                                          .4
           Mean




                                         .38




                                         .36




                                         .34
                                               Jan1 Feb1 Mar1 Apr1 May1 Jun1 Jul1 Aug1 Sep1 Oct1 Nov1 Dec1
                                                                               Birth day

Note: Each plot in Panel A is the mean daily number of births. Each plot in Panel B is the mean outcome in
each day. The vertical line corresponds to April 2, which is the school entry cutoff date in Japan. The markers
with cross signs are holidays. The data come from pooled 1974–2010 birth data.



                                                                               39
        Table 1: Top five and bottom five days of mean daily number of births within a year
                                                     Mean daily            Ratio to average
                                      Date
                                                   number of births          daily birth
                       Top 5
                                     April 2              4,465                 1.20
                                     Sep 25               4,143                 1.12
                                     Dec 25               4,122                 1.11
                                     Sep 26               4,119                 1.11
                                     April 3              4,085                 1.10
                       Bottom 5
                                      Feb 29             2,452                0.66
                                      Dec 31             2,757                0.74
                                      April 1            2,791                0.75
                                       Jan 2             2,798                0.75
                                       Jan 1             2,862                0.77
Notes: The ratio to the average is the average number of births on a given day divided by average births across
all days. Therefore, a value of 1.1 represents a 10 percent increase in daily births compared to the yearly
average. Mean daily births during 1974–2010 are 3,713. The days included within a week of April 2 are
indicated by boldface. April 2 is the school entry cutoff date in Japan. The data come from pooled 1974–2010
birth data.


                                             Table 2: Shift of births
                                                 (1)                (2)             (3)           (4)
    Windows                                    ± 7 days           ±14 days       ± 21 days    ±  28 days
    A: Number of births
        After                                  524.2***           268.6***       178.9***      166.2***
                                                (34.3)             (20.6)         (14.4)        (11.5)
         Number of births moved                 1,835              1,880           1,879         2,327
         R2                                     0.83               0.86            0.89          0.90
    B: ln(number of births)
         After                                 0.136***           0.070***       0.047***      0.043***
                                                (0.008)            (0.005)        (0.004)       (0.003)
          Share of births moved                   7.0%            3.6%             2.4%            2.2%
          R2                                       0.86            0.88            0.90            0.91
          N                                        518            1,036           1,554           2,072
Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Coefficients on After are reported. After is a dummy that takes 1 if the
birthday is after April 2 in each year and 0 otherwise. April 2 is the school entry cutoff date in Japan. Robust
standard errors are reported in parentheses. The data come from pooled 1974–2010 birth data. The sample is the
number of daily births within the relevant window from the school entry cutoff date. The window denotes the
number of days before and after April 2. For example, the ±7 day window covers the 7 days prior to April 2,
and the 7 days after April 2. All specifications include holiday, year, and day of week fixed effects. Number of
births moved is Wβ/2, where W is the number of days in the window, and β is the coefficient on After. The share
of births moved is exp(β/2)−1. Note that mean daily births during 1974–2010 is 3,713.




                                                        40
                                     Table 3: Children’s characteristics
                                                           Birth weight               Gestation            Infant mortality
                                    Birth weight
                                                             >4000 g                  >42 wks             (per 1000 births)
                                         (1)                     (2)                     (3)                     (4)
After                                2.198***                  0.0005**               0.0007***               -0.090
                                      (0.762)                  (0.0002)                (0.0003)               (0.090)
R2                                     0.988                    0.967                   0.987                  0.883
Mean                                  3,090.42                  0.022                   0.022                  4.155
N                                        518                 518                   518                   518
Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Coefficients on After are reported. After is a dummy that takes 1 if the
birthday is after April 2 in each year and 0 otherwise. April 2 is the school entry cutoff date in Japan. Robust
standard errors are reported in parentheses. The data for Columns (1)–(3) come from pooled 1974–2010 birth
data. The data for Column (4) come from pooled 1974–2010 birth and death data. The window is restricted to
the 7 days prior to April 2, and the 7 days after April 2. All specifications include holiday, year, and day of
week fixed effects.

                       Table 4: Shift of C-section births from insurance claim data
                                                   Any                    Elective              Emergency
                                                 C-section                C-section              C-section

                                                    (1)                      (2)                    (3)
        After                                    0.198***                 0.467***                -0.040
                                                  (0.061)                  (0.085)                (0.043)
        Share of births moved                      10.4%                   26.3%                  -2.0%
        R2                                         0.961                   0.985                  0.910
        Mean daily births                          170                   100                  69
Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Outcome is log number of births. Coefficients on After are reported.
After is a dummy that takes 1 if the birthday is after April 2 in each year and 0 otherwise. April 2 is the school
entry cutoff date in Japan. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. The data come from pooled
2011–2012 insurance claim data. The window is restricted to the 7 days prior to April 2, and the 7 days after
April 2. All specifications include holiday, year, and day of week fixed effects. The share of births moved is
exp(β/2)−1, where β is the coefficient on After.




                                                          41
            Table 5: Heterogeneous responses, by mothers’ and children’s characteristics
                                      Parity                          Mother's age                      Gender
                                        Second-born          Less than       More than
                          Firstborn                                                              Girl            Boy
                                          or above              30              30
                             (1)                (2)             (3)              (4)              (5)            (6)
After                     0.101***        0.164***           0.151***         0.109***         0.118*** 0.153***
                           (0.007)         (0.009)            (0.008)          (0.008)          (0.008)  (0.008)
Share of births moved       5.2%               8.6%            7.9%            5.6%              6.1%         8.0%
R2                          0.851              0.871          0.949            0.847             0.863       0.855
Mean of daily births        1,645              1,938          2,253            1,330             1,740       1,843
N                            518           518                 518             518              518           518
Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Outcome is log number of births. Coefficients on After are reported.
After is a dummy that takes 1 if the birthday is after April 2 in each year and 0 otherwise. April 2 is the school
entry cutoff date in Japan. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. The data come from pooled
1974–2010 birth data. The window is restricted to the 7 days prior to April 2, and the 7 days after April 2. All
specifications include holiday, year, and day of week fixed effects. The share of births moved is exp(β/2)−1,
where β is the coefficient on After.


                    Table 6: Magnitude of shifts and capacity of child care centers
                                          (1)                   (2)                 (3)                 (4)
                                                                                Exclude
                                                               With                              Limit sample to
                                         Basic                                 Tokyo and
                                                             Controls                               2000–2007
                                                                                  Osaka
Capacity                               0.116***             0.118***            0.125***               0.107
                                        (0.026)              (0.027)             (0.036)              (0.107)
N                                        1,598                1,597               1,529                 376
R2                                       0.495                0.495               0.481                0.339
Weight                                     X                    X                    X                   X
Year fixed effects                         X                    X                    X                   X
Prefecture fixed effects                   X                    X                    X                   X
Controls                                                        X                    X                   X
Without Tokyo and Osaka                                                              X
Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Coefficients on capacity are reported. Capacity is defined as total slots
of the daycare centers (i.e., total capacity of daycare centers) divided by the total number of females between
the ages of 20–39 years, the child-bearing age at prefecture-year level. There are 47 prefectures in Japan. Other
controls include real GDP per capita, which is deflated by a prefectural GDP deflator to Yen in 2000, job
application-to-opening ratio at October of year y-1 (a year prior to March/April when the shifts of births occur
in year y), and application-to-opening ratio in March of the year y. All specifications include prefecture and
year fixed effects. The weight is the inverse of square of standard errors from first-stage estimation described in
detail in the text. Tokyo and Osaka are the two largest prefectures in Japan. Standard errors clustered at
prefectural level are reported in parentheses.




                                                        42
                                    Table 7: Magnitude of the timing of shifts from other studies
                                                                                                                      Could policy Share of
Authors                                Policy                                           Country     Incentives        also affect  births
                                                                                                                      conceptions? moved
Dickert‐Conlin and Chandra (1999) Tax changes from 1979–1993                               US         Hasten          Yes            13.6%
Gans and Leigh (2009)                    Baby Bonus introduction in 2004                   Australia Delay            No             16.2%
Gans and Leigh (2009)                    Baby Bonus increase in 2006                       Australia Delay            Yes              9.2%
Tamm (2012)                              Parental leave benefit reform in 2006/2007        Germany Delay              Yes              7.8%
Neugart and Ohlsson (2013)               Parental leave benefit reform in 2006/2007        Germany Delay              Yes              5.4%
Shigeoka (2014)                          School entry cutoff dates from 1974–2010          Japan      Both            Yes              7.0%
Notes: The share of births moved in the last column is based on estimates from a seven-day window from the cutoff dates.




                                                                    43
                                                  Table 8: Estimates of relative age on test scores (PISA 2003)
Sample                                                      All months                                                          March vs. April
                                                                                          χ 2(1)                                                              χ 2(1)
                                         (1)              (2)         Reduction                               (3)              (4)          Reduction
                                                                                        [p-value]                                                           [p-value]
A: Math
 Relative age                        0.0239***       0.0192***           19.6%           6.03             0.0262***        0.0180***          31.6%           6.27
                                      (0.0050)        (0.0043)                          [0.014]            (0.0066)         (0.0061)                         [0.012]
  R2                                   0.008           0.158                                                0.021            0.201
B: Reading
  Relative age                       0.0224***       0.0178***           19.9%           6.39             0.0254***        0.0183***          25.8%           5.55
                                      (0.0047)        (0.0041)                          [0.012]            (0.0062)         (0.0059)                         [0.018]
  R2                                   0.019           0.166                                                0.040            0.214
C: Science
  Relative age                       0.0136***        0.0089**           34.6%           6.70              0.0122*           0.0052           57.0%           6.45
                                      (0.0048)        (0.0042)                          [0.010]            (0.0064)         (0.0062)                         [0.011]
 R2                                    0.003            0.147                                               0.004             0.169
D: Problem solving
 Relative age                        0.0237***        0.0194***            18.1%           5.53            0.0280***         0.0203***        26.9%            5.29
                                      (0.0050)         (0.0042)                          [0.019]            (0.0067)          (0.0064)                        [0.022]
  R2                                   0.007             0.151                                                0.024            0.184
Sample size                            4,700             4,700                                                 759              759
Gender                                   X                 X                                                    X                X
Fathers’ education                                         X                                                                     X
Mothers’ education                                         X                                                                     X
Family socioeconomic status                                X                                                                     X
Father is white-collar                                     X                                                                     X
Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Coefficients on relative age are reported. Since April is the school entry cutoff month, relative age takes 0 for students born in
March, and it takes 11 for students born in April. Each test score is standardized to mean 0 with standard deviation of 1. Family socioeconomic status is economic, social
and cultural status (a variable called ESCS) constructed by the OECD based on parental education, parental occupation, and home possession, where a higher value
indicates higher SES (OECD, 2003). Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. P-values are reported in the brackets. The data come from PISA 2003 data for
Japan.




                                                                                   44
                                       Table 9: Mothers’ birth months and children’s birth months
                                                                   Children’s birth month
                                     (i)     (ii)   (iii)   (iv)   (v)    (vi)    (vii)   (viii)   (ix)    (x)    (xi)   (xii)
                                                                                                                                 Sum
                                     Jan     Feb    Mar     Apr    May    Jun      Jul    Aug      Sep     Oct    Nov    Dec
                           (1)
                                     8.63    7.71   8.56    7.75   8.39   8.13    8.69    8.63     8.58    8.52   8.00   8.41    100
                          Jan
                           (2)
                                     8.65    7.83   8.58    7.77   8.32   8.13    8.67    8.57     8.53    8.46   8.06   8.43    100
                          Feb
                           (3)
                                     8.59    7.81   8.91    7.61   8.37   8.12    8.67    8.62     8.48    8.36   8.01   8.45    100
                          Mar
                           (4)
                                     8.48    7.65   8.33    8.19   8.46   8.22    8.74    8.65     8.50    8.44   8.00   8.34    100
                          Apr
 Mothers’ birth month




                           (5)
                                     8.34    7.63   8.51    7.89   8.62   8.31    8.83    8.64     8.56    8.42   7.96   8.29    100
                          May
                           (6)
                                     8.32    7.57   8.54    7.86   8.53   8.30    8.83    8.72     8.60    8.47   7.96   8.29    100
                          Jun
                           (7)
                                     8.31    7.51   8.44    7.89   8.50   8.31    8.89    8.77     8.61    8.48   7.96   8.33    100
                           Jul
                           (8)
                                     8.33    7.48   8.42    7.80   8.54   8.32    8.93    8.79     8.61    8.47   7.99   8.33    100
                          Aug
                           (9)
                                     8.37    7.52   8.36    7.75   8.47   8.31    8.83    8.78     8.71    8.54   8.01   8.35    100
                          Sep
                          (10)
                                     8.34    7.48   8.41    7.78   8.37   8.24    8.85    8.73     8.74    8.69   8.08   8.31    100
                          Oct
                          (11)
                                     8.40    7.50   8.42    7.77   8.40   8.18    8.84    8.76     8.63    8.60   8.15   8.37    100
                          Nov
                          (12)
                                     8.46    7.54   8.41    7.81   8.37   8.13    8.71    8.73     8.66    8.56   8.10   8.52    100
                          Dec
                        Highest of
                         (1)-(12)
                                     8.65    7.81   8.58    7.89   8.54   8.32    8.93    8.78     8.74    8.60   8.10   8.45
                        excluding
                           Own
                         Own-
                                     -0.02   0.02   0.33    0.30   0.08   -0.02   -0.04   0.01     -0.03   0.09   0.05   0.07
                        Highest

Notes: All figures in this table are in percentages. The cells with shadow are the cases where the birth month of
a mother and that of her child are the same (i.e., diagonal cells (1)–(i), (2)–(ii), and so forth). For each column
(i.e., for each child’s birth month), the second to last row reports the highest fraction of births in bold text,
excluding that of same birth month mothers (the cells with shadows). The last row shows the difference
between own cell (i.e., mothers’ birth months are the same as children’s birth months) and the highest
proportion presented in the second to last row. April 1, a day before the school entry cutoff date, is included in
March. The data come from pooled 1992–2010 birth data.




                                                                          45
  For Online Publication
Appendix Figures and Tables




             1
                                                 Figure A: Mean daily number of births around April 2, by period

                                                                    Years:1974-1980                                                       Years:1981-1990
                                          8000


                                          6000
         Mean daily number of births




                                          4000


                                          2000

                                                                    Years:1991-2000                                                       Years:2001-2010
                                          8000

                                          6000


                                          4000


                                          2000
                                                         Mar12

                                                                  Mar19

                                                                          Mar26

                                                                                  Apr2

                                                                                          Apr9

                                                                                                 Apr16

                                                                                                         Apr23

                                                                                                                 Apr30



                                                                                                                                Mar12

                                                                                                                                        Mar19

                                                                                                                                                Mar26

                                                                                                                                                        Apr2

                                                                                                                                                               Apr9

                                                                                                                                                                      Apr16

                                                                                                                                                                              Apr23

                                                                                                                                                                                      Apr30
                                                  Mar5




                                                                                                                         Mar5




                                                  Birth day
            Graphs
Note: Each plot  is by
                    theperiod
                         mean daily number of births. The vertical line corresponds to April 2, which is the
school entry cutoff date in Japan. The markers with cross signs are holidays. The data come from 1974–
2010 birth data.
                                                                 Figure B: Share of births moved by each birth year

                                          20
              Share of births moved (%)




                                          15




                                          10




                                          5




                                          0
                                                 1975              1980                  1985            1990               1995                2000             2005                 2010
                                                                                                           Birth year

Note: The dotted line represents 95 % confidence interval. The data come from 1974–2010 birth data.

                                                                                                                 2
                                                  Figure C: Seasonality of elective C-sections (Year 2011)

                                         300
           Mean daily number of births




                                         200




                                         100




                                          0
                                               Jan1 Feb1 Mar1 Apr1 May1 Jun1 Jul1 Aug1 Sep1 Oct1 Nov1 Dec1
                                                                            Birth day
                                                          Monday-Friday      Saturday&Sunday       Holiday


Note: Eachplot is the mean daily number of births. The vertical line corresponds to April 2, which is the school
entry cutoff date in Japan. The data come from 2011insurance claim data.




                                                                             3
                          TableA: Summary statistics of birth and death data
                                                    7 days      7 days
                                                                                 Dif         Entire
                                                    before       after
                                                                               (2)-(1)        year
                                                  cutoff date cutoff date
                                                      (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)
     Mother’s age (in years)                         29.84        29.75      -0.091***       29.81
     Firstborn birth                                  0.47         0.45      -0.020***       0.46
     Second-born birth                                0.37         0.39       0.021***       0.38
     Birth weight (in grams)                         3,089        3,094        4.7***        3,089
     Birth weight (>3500 grams)                     0.1783        0.1819     0.0037***      0.1785
     Birth weight (>4000 grams)                     0.0215        0.0225     0.0010***      0.0216
     Birth weight (>4500 grams)                     0.0017        0.0018      0.0001*       0.0017
     Gestational length (weeks)                      39.21        39.23        0.017*        39.20
     Home deliveries                                 0.003        0.004       0.0005**       0.003
     Infant mortality                               0.0042        0.0041      -0.0001       0.0042
      Mean daily number of births                    3,321         3,845        524***        3,713
Note: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Colum (1) is mean from the sample in 7 days prior to April 2, and
Column (2) is mean from sample in the 7 days after April 2, and Column (3) is difference between Columns (2)
and (1). Column (4) is the mean from data that cover entire year.The data come from pooled 1974–2010 birth
data.




                                                     4
                                       TableB: Robustness checks
         Windows                                       ±7 days                     ±14 days
                                                 (1)             (2)           (3)         (4)
         A: Number of births
            After2nd× April                   524.2***      540.0***        268.6***     305.1***
                                               (34.3)         (34.3)         (20.6)        (21.2)
            After2nd                                         -15.9**                     -36.5***
                                                               (7.0)                        (4.9)
            Number of births moved              1,835         1,890           1,880        2,136
            N                                    518          6,202           1,036       12,404
            R2                                  0.83           0.89           0.86          0.89
         B: ln(number of births)
            After2nd× April                   0.136***       0.140***        0.070***       0.079***
                                               (0.008)        (0.008)          (0.005)       (0.005)
              After2nd                                       -0.004**                      -0.009***
                                                              (0.002)                        (0.001)
              Share of births moved               7.0%         7.3%             3.6%          4.0%
              N                                    518         6,202            1,036        12,404
              R2                                  0.86         0.88             0.88           0.88
Note: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. To facilitate the comparison between different specifications, Columns
(1) and (3) report the estimates from Equation (1), while Columns (2) and (4) report estimates from the
Equation (2), which use the observations from other months as well.The data come from pooled 1974–2010
birth data.




                                                        5
                                    Table C: Children’s characteristics
                                                       (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)
              Windows                   Mean         ±7 days       ±14 days       ±21 days       ±28 days
   A: Birth weight (100 g)
                After                  3,090.4      2.198***       3.785***       4.667***       4.436***
                                                     (0.762)        (0.534)        (0.443)        (0.407)
                 R2                                   0.988          0.981          0.979          0.975
   B: Birth weight>4000 g
                After                   0.022       0.0005**      0.0006***      0.0007***      0.0007***
                                                    (0.0002)       (0.0002)       (0.0001)       (0.0001)
                 R2                                   0.940          0.942          0.940          0.937
   C: Gestation>42 wks
                After                   0.023      0.0007***        0.0001        0.0003*       0.0005***
                                                    (0.0003)       (0.0002)       (0.0002)       (0.0002)
                 R2                                   0.969          0.961          0.954          0.948
   D: Mortality per 1000 births
                After                   4.155         -0.090         -0.100         -0.030         -0.010
                                                     (0.090)        (0.060)        (0.050)        (0.050)
                 R2                                   0.883          0.844          0.826          0.817
                   N                                    518           1,036          1,554           2,072
Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Coefficients on Afterare reported. After is a dummy that takes 1 if the
birthday is after April 2 in each year and 0 otherwise. April 2 is the school entry cutoff date in Japan. Robust
standard errors are reported in parentheses. The window denotes the number of days before and after the April
2. For example, the ±7 day window covers the 7 days prior to April 2, and the 7 days after April 2. All
specifications include holiday, year, and day of week fixed effects. The share of births moved is exp(β/2)−1,
where β is the coefficient on After.The datafor Panels A, B, and Ccome from pooled 1974–2010 birth data. The
data for Panel Dcome from pooled1974–2010 birth anddeath data.




                                                       6
                       Table D:Shift of C-section births from insurance claim data
                                   Mean daily          (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)
                                    births           ±7 days        ±14 days       ±21days         ±28 days
 A: Any
     After                             170          0.198***        0.086**        0.094***        0.137***
                                                     (0.061)        (0.042)         (0.031)         (0.034)
      Share of births moved                           10.4%          4.4%            4.8%            7.1%
      R2                                              0.961          0.959           0.963           0.945
 B: Elective
      After                            100          0.467***       0.241***        0.199***        0.227***
                                                     (0.085)        (0.070)         (0.059)         (0.080)
     Share of births moved                            26.3%          12.8%          10.4%           12.0%
     R2                                               0.985          0.979           0.976           0.941
 C: Emergency
     After                              69             -0.040          -0.018         0.017         0.057**
                                                      (0.043)         (0.035)        (0.027)        (0.028)
       Share of births moved                           -2.0%           -0.9%          0.9%           2.9%
       R2                                              0.910           0.854          0.850          0.799
       N                                                 28              56            84             112
Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Outcome is log number of births. Coefficients on After are reported.
After is a dummy that takes 1 if the birthday is after April 2 in each year and 0 otherwise. April 2 is the school
entry cutoff date in Japan. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. The window denotes the number
of days before and after the April 2. For example, the ±7 day window covers the 7 days prior to April 2, and the
7 days after April 2. All specifications include holiday, year, and day of week fixed effects. The share of births
moved is exp(β/2)−1, where β is the coefficient on After.The data come from pooled 2011–2012insurance claim
data.




                                                        7
                    Table E: Heterogeneous responses, by gender/parity of children
                                               Girl                                          Boy
                                                       Second-bornor                                   Second-born
                            All births     Firstborn                       All births     Firstborn
                                                           above                                         or above
                               (1)          (2)             (3)               (4)           (5)            (6)
After                      0.118***      0.084***        0.145***          0.153***      0.117***       0.183***
                            (0.029)       (0.024)         (0.033)           (0.029)       (0.024)        (0.034)
Share of births moved         6.1%         4.3%            7.5%              8.0%          6.0%           9.6%
R2                           0.948         0.944           0.946             0.952         0.944          0.950
Meandaily births             1,740          799             940              1,843          846            998
N                              518          518             518               518           518            518
Note: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Coefficients on After are reported. After is a dummy that takes 1 if the
birthday is after April 2 in each year and 0 otherwise. April 2 is the school entry cutoff date in Japan. Robust
standard errors are reported in parentheses. The window is restricted to the 7 days prior to April 2, and the 7
days after April 2. All specifications include holiday, year, and day of week fixed effects. The share of births
moved is exp(β/2)−1, where β is the coefficient on After.The datacome from pooled 1974–2010 birth data.

                                           TableF: Source of variables
  Variable name          Years available      Mean          SD                          Source

Total slots of day-     1974–2007:
                                             42,199     30,829    Survey of Social Welfare Institutions
care centers            yearly level

Number of female
                        1970–2010:
population between                           371,624    378,970   Census
                        every five years
ages 20-39
                                                                  Prefecture SNA, available at
                        1974–2009:                                http://www.esri.cao.go.jp/jp/sna/data/data_list/k
GDP per capita                                2,269         730
                        yearly level                              enmin/files/files_kenmin.html (last accessed
                                                                  March 11, 2013)
                                                                  Prefecture SNA, available at
Prefecture   specific   1974–2009:                                http://www.esri.cao.go.jp/jp/sna/data/data_list/k
                                               91           12
deflator                yearly level                              enmin/files/files_kenmin.html (last accessed
                                                                  March 11, 2013)
                                                                  Job/employment placement services statistics,
Job application-to-
                        1974–2009:                                available at http://www.e-
opening       ratio                           0.863      0.561
                        monthly level                             stat.go.jp/SG1/estat/List.do?lid=000001108017
(October)
                                                                  (last accessed March 11, 2013)
                                                                  Job/employment placement services statistics,
Job application-to-
                        1974–2009:                                available at http://www.e-
opening       ratio                           0.839      0.475
                        monthly level                             stat.go.jp/SG1/estat/List.do?lid=000001108017
(March)
                                                                  (last accessed March 11, 2013)




                                                        8
                               TableG: Summary statistics of PISA 2003
                                               (1)               (2)            (3)            (4)
                                                                                               Dif
                                               All           March-born     April-born
                                                                                             (3)-(2)
     A. Test Score
        Math                                 -0.006            -0.173          0.101        0.274***
                                             (0.998)           (1.035)        (0.957)        (0.072)
         Reading                             -0.007            -0.196          0.081        0.277***
                                             (1.000)           (1.036)        (0.959)        (0.072)
         Science                             -0.006            -0.124          0.007         0.130*
                                             (0.998)           (1.033)        (0.984)        (0.073)
         Problem solving                     -0.007            -0.203          0.095        0.298***
                                             (0.997)           (1.045)        (0.963)        (0.073)
     B. Family controls
        Family socioeconomic status           -0.084              -0.167          -0.068        0.099*
                                              (0.732)            (0.702)         (0.740)        (0.053)
        Father’s years of education            12.84               12.50           12.89        0.391*
                                               (3.15)             (3.26)          (3.09)         (0.23)
        Mother’s years of education            12.84               12.83           12.85          0.02
                                               (2.44)             (2.39)          (2.48)         (0.18)
        Father has a white-collar job          0.477               0.447           0.494         0.047
                                              (0.500)            (0.498)         (0.501)        (0.036)
     N                                         4,700                358             401
Note: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Column (1) is mean from the entire sample. Column (2) is mean
ofMarch-born students, and column (3) is mean ofApril-born students. Column (4) is difference between
Columns (3) and (2). Each test score is standardized to mean 0 with standard deviation of 1. Family
socioeconomic status is economic, social and cultural status (a variable called ESCS) constructed by the OECD
based on parental education, parental occupation, and home possession, where a higher value indicates higher
SES (OECD, 2003).The data come from PISA 2003 data for Japan.




                                                       9
                   TableH: Estimates of relative age on test scores, by gender (PISA 2003)
                                                All months                                        March vs. April
                                  No controls    Controls                  χ2(1)      No controls     Controls                   χ2(1)
                                                             Reduction                                              Reduction
                                      (1)           (2)                   [p-value]       (3)           (4)                     [p-value]
 Male
   A: Math
   Relative age                   0.0273***     0.0237***         13.1%    1.17        0.0221**      0.0192**        13.3%        0.31
                                   (0.0079)      (0.0066)                 [0.278]      (0.0103)      (0.0097)                   [ 0.577]
    R2                              0.007         0.184                                  0.012         0.232
    B: Reading
    Relative age                  0.0252***     0.0219***         13.0%    1.03        0.0249**      0.0223**        10.3%       0.21
                                   (0.0074)      (0.0062)                 [0.310]      (0.0099)      (0.0093)                   [0.650]
    R2                              0.006         0.185                                  0.016         0.256
    C: Science
    Relative age                   0.0150**      0.0114*          23.6%    1.21         0.0102         0.0080        21.6%       0.18
                                   (0.0073)      (0.0063)                 [0.272]      (0.0097)       (0.0094)                  [0.674]
    R2                               0.002        0.174                                 0.003          0.214
    D: Problem solving
    Relative age                  0.0301***     0.0266***         11.5%    1.20       0.0321***      0.0288***       10.3%       0.44
                                   (0.0078)      (0.0065)                 [0.273]      (0.0105)       (0.0101)                  [0.505]
    R2                              0.009         0.173                                  0.025         0.209
 Sample size                        2,301          2,301                                 356            356
 Female
    A: Math
    Relative age                  0.0208***     0.0160***         23.0%     3.88      0.0297***      0.0174**        41.4%        7.68
                                   (0.0061)      (0.0053)                 [ 0.049]     (0.0093)      (0.0078)                   [0.0056]
    R2                              0.006         0.137                                  0.032         0.227
    B: Reading
    Relative age                  0.0198***     0.0144***         27.2%    5.05       0.0257***       0.0146*        43.3%        6.76
                                   (0.0062)      (0.0055)                 [0.025]      (0.0089)       (0.0079)                  [0.0093]
    R2                              0.005         0.136                                  0.025         0.204
    C: Science
    Relative age                   0.0123*        0.0073          40.4%    4.57         0.0139         0.0041        70.5%       5.21
                                   (0.0065)      (0.0058)                 [0.033]      (0.0091)       (0.0080)                  [0.022]
    R2                              0.002         0.129                                 0.007          0.167
    D: Problem solving
    Relative age                  0.0179***      0.0134**         25.1%    3.48       0.0244***       0.0127*        47.9%        7.25
                                   (0.0062)      (0.0054)                 [0.062]      (0.0091)       (0.0077)                  [0.0071]
    R2                              0.004          0.136                                 0.021         0.216
    Sample size                     2,399          2,399                                 403            403
    Gender                            X             X                                     X              X
    Father’s education                              X                                                    X
    Mother’s education                              X                                                    X
    Family socioeconomic status                     X                                                    X
    Father is white-collar                          X                                                    X
Note: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Coefficients on relative age are reported. Since April is the school entry
cutoff month, relative age takes 0 for students born in March, and it takes 11 for students born in April. Each test
score is standardized to mean 0 with standard deviation of 1. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
P-values are reported in the brackets. The data come from PISA 2003 data for Japan.
                                                             10
