                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE REAL EFFECTS OF FOREIGN
                    INFLATION IN THE PRESENCE
                    OF CURRENCY SUBSTITUTION




                          Charles Engel




                      Working Paper No. 2140




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                           February 1987




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #2140
                                                  February 1987



               The Real Effects of Foreign Inflation
              in the Presence of Currency Substitution



                                 ABSTRACT



     The paper explores optimizing models of small open economies that hold
foreign money balances.     Particular attention is paid to the impact of
foreign inflation on the real exchange rate and other real variables. At
first, an environment in which foreign money is the only traded asset is
explored. This is compared to a more general setting in which many assets
can be traded. The effect of foreign inflation on domestic real variables
depends on: 1) the degree to which it causes a substitution out of traded
assets as a whole and into non-traded assets, and 2) the change in real
returns on the portfolio of traded assets held by domestic residents.




                                                  Charles Engel
                                                  NBER
                                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
1.     Introduction

       Residents   of many countries    that actively engage in international   trade
must    hold   foreign currency balances.       These holdings provide an important

link for transmission of inflation from abroad for economies that otherwise

mIght he insulated through flexible exchange rates.

       James Tobin, in his classic work on money and growth (1965), proposed

that changes in the inflation rate might have a real economic effect even if

nominal prices are completely flexible.            Higher inflation would induce a

shift in people's desired portfolio away from money toward capital, which in

turn would have the effect of increasing investment.              Consider, now, a

country that is not very self-sufficient, and that carries on many

transactions using foreign currencies.           In such a country, a shift in the

real demand for domestic versus foreign currency has a real economic impact.

A change in the inflation rate abroad can change economic conditions at home

through what is essentially an international version of the Tobin effect - -

where the relevant tradeoff is between domestic and foreign money balances,

rather than money balances and capital.

       This paper considers a perfect-foresight intertemporal optimizing model

of a small open economy in which just such an international Tobin effect is

present. An increase in foreign inflation causes consumers to wish to shift

out of holding foreign money and into domestic money. When foreign money is

the only internationally traded asset, this implies a direct effect on the

current account. Foreign balances are run down over time through a current

account deficit, which implies that domestic consumption of traded goods

rises relative to production.          This is accomplished through a decrease in

the price of traded goods relative to non-traded goods.



                                            1
         Although the model presented here does verify that there is a tendency

for a real appreciation domestically in the face of higher foreign inflation
through the international Tobin effect, there is a mitigating factor.

£s lents want to run down the it hodings of foreign balances, but they do
not necessarily have to run a current account deficit to do so. The
increase in foreign inflation will increase the rate at which foreign
money's value is eroded in real terms. The capital losses from this source
may more than satisfy people's desire to dispose of real foreign money

holdings, so a trade deficit and its attendant real appreciation may not be

necessary.

      A further mitigating factor is added when bonds as well as foreign

money may be traded internationally.                Then the impact of the portfolio

rearrangement on the current account may be lessened or eliminated.                   As

foreign inflation rises, holdings of foreign money need not be reduced

gradually. Another channel is to trade foreign money for foreign bonds.

      The channels through which foreign inflation have real effects on the

domestic economy in models of currency substitution can be described in more

general terms. What        is   essential is that home country residents hold traded

assets whose real return varies with changes in the foreign inflation rate.

The   impact on the real exchange rate depends on: 1) the degree to which
foreign    inflation causes a substitution out of traded assets as a whole and

into non-traded assets through a Tobin effect, and 2) the change in real

returns on the portfolio of traded assets held by domestic residents.

      Section 2 of this paper presents a basic optimizing model and discusses

some of the key assumptions. An economy which trades only goods and foreign

money is examined in section 3. The fourth section adds traded bonds, The

fifth section discusses the real effects of foreign inflation in general

terms.     The   models   of sections 2,   3    and 4   are   special cases that help to

illustrate the conclusions drawn in        the     fifth section.

                                               2
     A recent paper by Daniel         (1985) considers the international

transmission of inflation under currency substitution. Her model is in many

ways similar to the ones considered here. She discusses the effect of reaL

capital tosses on foreign money balances as a factor that allows dimunit:an

of foreign money holdings without a change in the trade balance (p. 134).

However, since foreign money is the only traded asset in her model, she does

not consider the possibility of asset trade as an avenue for changing

foreign currency balances.     Her model also has the disadvantage that

consumption decisions are not explicitly optimizing. This is important here

because higher foreign inflation has real effects from reducing real income

and thereby affecting consumption choices.

     The models of sections 2-4 are closely related to that of Calvo and

Rodriguez (1977), and are essentially optimizing versions of their set-up.

Money plays a role because it is an argument of the utility function.             In

fact, real domestic balances and real foreign balances appear separately.

The models, therefore, are extremely similar to those of Liviatan (1981) and

Calvo (1985). The models of Rogers (1986), Sen (1986), and Obstfeld (1981)

also share some of the characteristics of the ones considered here. None of

these papers considers international trade in both foreign money and bonds,

but that environment has been explored in the cash -   in   -   advance models of,

for example, Helpman (1981), Helpman and Razin (1982), and Svennson (1985).

The work of Feenstra (1986) suggests that many properties of models in which

money enters in some fundamental way (such as the cash -            in   -   advance

approach) are captured with money in the utility function.          However, this

paper makes several simplifying assumptions for concreteness, so that it

cannot claim the generality of some of the aforementioned papers.

     The issue of the effect of an increase in domestic money growth on the

real exchange rate, a matter which is of primary concern to Calvo and

Rodriguez (1977), Liviatan (1981) and Calvo (1985) (and in slightly
                                     3
 different contexts, Obstfeld (1981) and Daniel (1985)), is also briefly

 considered.

           In some respects, the work of Cuddington (1983) is also relevant

here.      Afthough his approach differs in that he investigates a partial

equilibrium, descriptive Keynesian two-country model, he is also concerned

with behavior in an economy in which domestic residents' portfolio includes

both foreign money and foreign bonds.       He asks the question of whether

economic behavior is much different in such an economy as compared to one in

which only bonds are traded internationally, and concludes that it is not.

Although this paper is really concerned primarily with a different set of

questions, in the economy explored here currency substitution is essential.




2.   The Model



        In this section, the basic model is laid out, and the dynamics of the

system are briefly described. The economy is small and open.      It produces

and consumes a traded good and a non-traded good.       People hold domestic

money and foreign money.     Foreign bonds may or may not be traded - -   both
cases are examined.     Factors of production are not mobile across borders.

Producers maximize profit. Consumers, who have infinite horizons, maximize

utility.     Utility is a function of the goods they consume, and of the two

monies. The foreign exchange rate is flexible.

     This model is meant to describe a small country whose imports and

exports are a large fraction of domestic consumption and output. When this

country engages in international trade, most of the transactions are

denominated in foreign currency. For example, the small trading partners of

the U.S. deal primarily in dollars. Residents of such a country must hold

an inventory of foreign currency balances for international transactions, as

                                      4
well as domestic currency.              A more thorough analysis would identify the

economic motives for choosing an invoice currency (see, for example, Bilson

(1.83) or Krugman (l98L)), and would               construct an economic    motive for

ic1flng bn.ances of each           currency based on transactions   costs. Here the ad

hoc    assumption   that real money balances are in the utility function is made.

This assumption seems adequate for deriving the key insights in this paper.

The results here rest on two main premises -               - first,    that consumption

choices are made optimally and with knowledge of the correct budget

constraint (which includes capital losses on nominal assets from inflation),

and, second, that higher i.nflation of prices in one currency on the margin

makes that money less attractive to hold.                  A more rigorous but more

complicated analysis would still have these features.

       Because factors of production are not internationally mobile, there is

a fixed production possibility frontier for this economy.                    Output of

non-traded and traded goods is completely determined by the price of home

goods relative to non-traded goods. To introduce some notation, let

              the nominal price in home currency of traded goods,

              the nominal price in home currency of home goods,

and,

              H /   T
Real output of home goods, H' and real output of traded goods, T' are

functions only of p:

          =             Yj{ >   0; and T =           <



       Consumers get satisfaction from both goods, so instantaneous utility

depends on cH and cT,

       u =
             u(cH,cT).
Both monies are also in the utility function.                The utility function is

assumed separable in consumption goods and the money balances.               (This is a

                                               5
 simplifying assumption, but see Calvo (1985) and Feenstra (1986).) Nominal

 domestic money balances are deflated by the domestic home price of

non-traded     goods, while foreign nominal balances are deflated by   the foreign

 currency     price of traded goods.      (This assumption differs from Liviatan
 (1981) and Calvo      (1985), who deflate both monies by the traded goods price.)

This    choice of deflators seems    approximately correct if all transactions in

the   home good are denominated in the domestic currency and all international
dealings are in the foreign currency.         In practice, some buying or selling
of    the traded good will be in terms of the home currency, but it is assumed

this fraction is negligible.           So, the instantaneous utility of money

services, v, depends on m and f:

       v =   v(m,f),
where

       m M /
        £    F / P

and
       M     nominal domestic money balances,

       F     domestic nominal holdings of foreign money, and

              nominal price of traded goods in foreign currency terms.

The value of the foreign exchange rate is given by the ratio of traded goods

prices in home currency to traded goods prices in foreign currrency - -

            Foreigners do not hold the domestic money.    It will also be assumed

that Inada conditions hold on u and v so that positive amounts of both goods

are consumed, and positive amounts of both monies are held.

       Consumers in general can hold wealth in three forms - domestic money,

foreign money or an internationally traded bond, b, that is a claim on

traded goods and pays a given real interest rate r. The individual's total

assets, then,    are   given   by


                                          6
(1)                                          amp+f+b,
in terms of the traded good.                  Section 3 considers the case when bonds are

not traded, so b = 0.

       Consumers earn income from interest paid on bonds and (negative income)

from capital losses on nominal money holdings from inflation.                                  They also

earn income from the output of the goods, and they receive transfers of

money, r, from the government. So, their assets accumulate according to

(2)          a =   ra   -
                             (ir+r)mp   -
                                            (1r*+r)f       + r +   T -   CT
                                                                              +      -
                                                                                         cH)
where
                            .*
                IT*


and x represents the time derivative of x.

       Consumers are assumed to have a constant discount rate equal to the

world interest rate. They maximize

                                 f[u(cH,cT) + v(m,f)]ertdt

subject to (1) and (2). When bonds are traded there must be an additional

constraint

                                            lim atert > 0
                                            t-+

In    the absence of this condition, it would be optimal to borrow an

arbitrarily large amount from abroad at any time, and borrow more in the

future to meet interest obligations.

      Consumers set their marginal rate of substitution equal to the price

ratio, or

(3)                                 uH(cH,cT) = puT(cH,cT)

where the subscript refers to the derivative with respect to the

corresponding argument of the utility function.                               Equilibrium in the home

goods market requires that
                                                       =
                                                  CH
                                                           7
so that CH and from eq. (3), CT are functions only of p.               It also follows

from eq. (3) that u11 and UT are functions only of p.             It will be useful to

assume that


       c>O; u<O; andu>O.
If both goods are normal, the first of these two assumptions are met.

Slightly stronger conditions are required for the third.                (The Appendix

contains a short discussion of these conditions.)

       The other first order conditions can be written


(4)
                           vf/uT
                                   =   r   +       -
                                                       (up/uT),
and,


                            V/UH r + ir -
(5)
                                                       (up/uT).
These exhaust the optimality conditions when only foreign money and goods

are traded, but when bonds are traded there is the additional condition


(6)                                        p=O.

       It is worthwile considering eqs. (4), (5) and (6) together.              (These

equations can be thought of as either the steady-state of the economy

without bonds or as the state at any point in time of the economy with

traded bonds.) They give us home and foreign money demands as functions of

domestic and foreign nominal interest rates and consumption expenditures on

non-traded and traded goods.           Linearized money demand functions can be

gotten by totally differentiating (4) and (5) using (6) to get

           dm       [(vff(r+lr)uHH -   vf(r+1r)uHT)/DIdcH

                 + [(vff(r+)T -
                                       vf(r+)uTT)/D]dcT
                 + (vff/D)d(r+) -
                                               (vfuT/D)d(r+*),
and,




                                               8
             df
                         [(v(r+*)uHT vfm(r+)uHH)/DidcH

                       + [(v (r+/)uTT -     vf(r+)ulT)/DdcT
                       + (vuT/D)d(r+) -            (vfuH/D)d(r+),
where

              Dv mmff
                 v -V2fm >0.
Assuming    concavity        of the instantaneous utility functions, we have    v   < 0

Vff < 0, UHH < 0, and UTT < 0. Assuming homogeneity of gives us that UHT >

0.   This leaves us with the question of the sign of Vf. Inspection of the

money demand equations suggests that Vfm < 0 might be a reasonable

assumption. It would mean that home money demand is positively related to

expenditure on home goods and demand for foreign money is positively related

to expenditure on traded goods.              It would further mean that as foreign

inflation rises, demand for domestic money rises and vice-versa. It is this

shift from one money to the other that is the essence of the economic

behavior that we wish to describe so we will assume v < 0.
                                                                   fm

     It should be mentioned that the sign of v                  is critical to Liviatan's
                                                          fm

(1981) criticism of Calvo and Rodriguez (1977).                    He assumes that this

derivative has positive sign, and then shows that the Calvo-Rodriguez (CR)

results are reversed in an optimizing model.                   Had he assumed a negative

sign, as assumed here, the CR results would hold up. The negative sign is

consistent with the notion that demand for foreign real balances should rise

when home inflation rises, which CR assume.                Liviatan mistakenly argues

along the following lines that the positive derivative is consistent with

CR. He notes that the ratio of foreign to home money demand does not change

in CR if there is no change in nominal interest rates.                   He then totally

differentiates (4) using (6) while inexplicably ignoring eq. (5).                He sets

d(r+ir) =         =          0 to get
            dcH       dcT=

                                               9
                                v dm + V df = 0.
                                 mm     fm

Using the assumption that ni/f is constant, this implies


                           (v        + (f/m)v )dm = 0.
                                mm            fm

He then concludes from this equation that Vf must be positive. The problem

with this argument is that if (4), (5) and (6) hold, and the nominal

interest rates and consumption of the goods cannot change, then there is no

way for demand for either money to change.             It is not the coefficient in

front of dm in Liviatan's equation that must be zero, but instead dm itself

must vanish. Liviatan's argument then says nothing about the correct sign

for Vf.      In choosing a sign for this derivative, Liviatan's stated

principle is that it should be taken in such a way as to emulate the

behavior in CR's money demand function.               It is argued above that this

principle is consistent with a negative sign on the derivative, but perhaps

the most compelling argument that Liviatan chose the wrong sign according to

this guideline is that his conclusions are exactly the opposite of CR.

     Calvo (1985) essentially takes                the neutral position that the

derivatives of the instantaneous utility functions cannot be signed.             In

general the axioms underlying utility theory would not give any insight into

mundane questions about the sign of a cross-derivative.             But these same

axioms could also not justify putting real money balances in the utility

function to begin with. The only purpose of such an assumption is to derive

plausible ad hoc money demand functions in an otherwise utility maximizing

framework. To assume money is an argument of the utility function but then

to refuse to make the assumptions on the shape of the utility function that

render reasonable money demand functions is like pouring a glass of water

but then refusing to drink it. The assumption here that Vf is negative is

based solely on the premise that it yields well-behaved money demand

equations.

                                         10
      To complete the description of the model, the evolution of domestic

money and of foreign assets must be described. Monetary authorities keep a

constant growth rate of money p, so


(7)                            m m(u -        it - pip).
      The rate of accumulation of foreign assets is given by the current

account less the capital losses on foreign money from inflation of foreign

traded goods prices. The current account, in turn is the trade balance plus

interest receipts on holdings of foreign bonds. So,

                                                           *
(8)
                                 -
                                     cT(P)
                                              +   rz   -
                                                                r)f,
where

        z   b +   f.
In section 3, there are no foreign bonds so z              f.

        The equations in this section have been written in general enough form

that they apply whether or not foreign bonds are traded. The next section

examines short- and long-run behavior of the economy when only money is

traded, while section 4 considers the full complement of assets.



3. Foreign Noney is the Only Traded Asset



        Foreign money plays the dual role of a transactions medium and an

internationally traded store of value if there are no traded bonds.      When

might such a description of the economy be plausible? One case might be

when all the foreign assets held within the country are very liquid for the

purposes of making trades. For example, for a country that holds its

international assets almost exclusively in the form of very short term

Eurocurrency deposits, it would not be necessary to distinguish between

foreign money and bonds.

      Let money be defined as an asset that can be used as a medium of

                                         11
exchange, but that pays a lower (although not necessarily zero) rate of

return than less liquid assets. To examine the question of how the effects

of foreign inflation are transmitted in a model of currency substitution,

should   the model include both foreign money and bonds? The answer hinges on
how   the relative returns to money and bonds change with a change in

inflation.    For foreign inflation to have any real effect, it must change

the real return on one or both types of assets.       If it changes the real

return on both types of assets equally (i.e., the nominal interest rates on

foreign money and foreign bonds change equally, but not as much as the

foreign inflation rate), then there is no change in the desired mix of

foreign money and bonds. These could then be considered a composite asset.

The model of this section allows only foreign money, which for simplicity is

assumed to pay a zero nominal return.      The real return falls one for one

with an increase in foreign inflation.        (The models of Daniel (1985),

Liviatan (1981) and Calvo (1985) are also this type.)

      On the other hand, if higher foreign inflation does change the relative

returns on foreign money and bonds (such as when foreign money pays a zero

rate of return, and the real rate of return on bonds is unaffected by the

change in inflation) then money and bonds must both be in the model, as in

section 4.

      The primary concern of this section is how a change in foreign

inflation affects the real economic variables: the real exchange rate, the

current account, real domestic money demand, real hoarding and the demands

and supplies of the goods.    (We are concerned strictly with the effects of

an unanticipated permanent increase in foreign inflation.        The nominal

foreign price level is held constant, so the foreign monetary authorities

might be contracting the level of the money supply at the same time they

increase its rate of change.) First, steady-state relationships are derived
and then the dynamic response of these variables to foreign inflation rate
                                      12
and domestic money growth changes are studied.

          Setting in, p and z equal to zero in eqs. (4), (5) ,(7) and (8) yield

the following long-run conditions:


(9)                                                  -             -           — 0,
                                                         CT


(10)                                 Vf -        (r      +
                                                                  lr*)uT
                                                                           =    0, and


(11)                                         V - (r                +            =   0.
                                                                        p)uH
The fl?I     over a variable denotes its long-run level.                                     There are a couple of

things to note about these equations.                                      First, from eq. (9), the long-run

current account (which is the same as the long-run trade balance because

there are no interest earning assets that are traded) must be in surplus if

the foreign inflation rate is positive. The steady-state value of the real

exchange rate, p, depends only on the steady-state capital losses on nominal

foreign balances, ,t'.              Second, the long-run conditions for equilibrium in

the money markets are the same as the instantaneous equilibrium conditions

when bonds are traded.              When bonds are introduced, there is no adjustment

time -      the economy immediately jumps to its long-run equilibrium.
          If we assume that variables that are on the order of the square of the
                                                                     *    *
interest      rate -   i.e.   ,
                                  it*2   ,
                                             2
                                                 ,       r2   ,
                                                                   it p, it r, and ir - are approximately

zero, then the Appendix shows that f                                   falls    and in   rises   with an increase in

foreign inflation, as expected. The response of the long-run real exchange

rate is key to understanding the steady-state changes in other economic
                                               *
quantities.      This in turn depends on how it f changes:


                                     d                   +        *(/*)
                                                         (_)
(12)




Since     y -c is negative, p would fall with an increase in foreign inflation

if it *   were initally very small. An increase in foreign inflation would mean

                                                                   13
a capital loss on nominal foreign money holdings. To maintain real foreign

money holdings, the steady-state current account surplus must rise, which

calls for a real depreciation (a fall in p).                  It will be assumed that this
                                                      *
is   the normal case --   that   ir f rises when ir       rises.     However, since f also

falls, the change in r £ is in general ambiguous.                  So, normally there is a

long-run real depreciation if foreign inflation rises, but if initial

foreign inflation is high enough there may be a long-run real appreciation.

       If there is a long-run real depreciation, then domestic output of home

goods falls while output of traded goods rises.                 The consumption of traded

goods falls and of non-traded goods rises.

       The system of equations, (4),(5),(7) and (8), which describe the

dynamics is very complex and non-linear.              It is helpful to linearize the

system near the steady-state described in equations (9), (10) and (11):

(13)            p    (r+lr)(p-p) -
                                      (vf/u)(mrn)
                                                          -
                                                              (vff/u)(f)
(14)                                        +


                 +
                     (m/u.)[vff(uj/u)-vf         ](f-f), and


(15)                        f      (y-c)(p-p) -      *(ff)
By again assuming that constants that are of the same size as the square of

the interest rate are approximately zero, the system can be shown to be

saddle stable. We have

(16)                                  x — 8(x-x),

where x is the vector x' =       (p,m,f),   and 8 < 0.

       Foreign money balances cannot adjust instantaneously in this model.

Because of higher inflation of foreign prices, domestic residents wish to

shift out of foreign money balances.. They would, for example, prefer to

denominate more transactions in domestic currency since the cost of holding


                                            14
foreign balances has risen.              It follows immediately that df/dt must be

negative:
                                           *          -       *
                                      df/dir =   -O(df/div        ).



     Even though the country does begin to run down its foreign balances

immediately, it is not uxnambiguously clear that this implies the current

account must fall into deficit. There are two ways for the country to lose

real money balances -- by running a trade deficit, and by letting their

balances erode in real terms from the higher foreign inflation. Thus, there

need not be a real appreciation (an increase in p, the price of home goods

relative to traded goods) initially. Mathematically this is shown by the

two terms within the brackets of

                                  *               -       *
                         dp/dir         {f -   O(df/dit )]/(y-c).

Since the real exchange rate change is ambiguous, it is of course

not possible to say how real output or consumption of either good changes.

     It is possible to show, as in the Appendix (and assuming that initially

the inflation rates are the same at home and abroad), that if there is an

initial depreciation it is not as large as the eventual depreciation. That

is, in the case of depreciation, there is undershooting.                   In any event,

after the initial response the' exchange rate depreciates over time.

     Residents also acquire domestic money balances over time, so the

initial increase in home real balances is smaller than the long run rise.

Actually, the perverse result of an initial decline in domestic real money

balances cannot be ruled out.

     It is helpful to compare briefly the effects in this model of an

increase in domestic money growth on the real exchange rate with those

derived by Liviatan. The key difference arises from the fact that with the

assumption of Vf < 0, foreign money holdings increase in the long run with

an increase in long-run domestic inflation. As in Liviatan, we have

                                                 15
                         dp/dp   -[O(df/dp)]/(y -   c),
but here this derivative is negative, while in Liviatan it is greater than

zero.      So, under the assumption than Vf < 0,       an increase in p leads

unambiguously to a real depreciation in the short run.           This is the same

conclusion reached by Calvo and Rodriguez (1977). A minor difference with

Liviatan arises from the fact that an increase in domestic money growth

causes a long-run depreciation through its effect on ir f.        Since f rises, p

falls according to:


                         dp/dp   [*(d/dp)]/(y -     ci).



4. The Model with Traded Bonds



        The model of section 3 shows that when foreign inflation increases

domestic residents wish to decrease their real holdings of foreign money.

There are only two avenues to accomplish this - -          by   running a current

account deficit, or by allowing the real balances to erode through the

higher inflation of foreign prices.        This section shows that there is a

third channel if there is another traded asset --          in   this case, bonds.

Residents can divest their holdings of foreign money by exchanging them for

bonds.

     In the model presented here, because the rate of time preference is

constant and equal to the world rate of interest, people are always

satisfied with their current level of total wealth and claims on foreigners.

That is, they do not save or dissave, and they do not borrow or lend

internationally.      This assumption, though quite unrealistic, helps to
highlight the role of the availability of foreign bonds.             Because the

increase in foreign inflation does not affect overall saving, residents

                                      16
merely swap foreign money for bonds.                       The other two channels for disposing

of foreign real money balances that were of prime importance in the model of

section 3 are superfluous here.

          There may, however, be an effect on the trade balance and the real

exchange rate. From eq. (8), since z = 0

                                          -           =
                                                            *     r)f -   rz.
(17)
                                              cT(p)
Since rz will not change with higher inflation, the direction of change of

the trade balance and the real exchange rate depends on the change in
      *
(it    +r)f:
                               *                 *                 *
(18)                  dp/dir            [f + (,r + r)(df/dir )J/(y -            ci).
(Compare with eq. (12).)                Thus, if (w*+ r)f rises there will be a trade

surplus and a real depreciation.

          The equations describing this economy at any point in time closely
resemble the equations for steady state in the model without bonds.

Equations (4), (5), (6) and (8) imply eq. (17) and

(19)
                                              v/UH=ir+r

(20)                                          Vf/UT =      it +   r.



Notice the strong similarity of eqs. (9), (10) and (11) with eqs. (17), (19)

and (20).

          Because the transversality conditions of the optimization problem are

sufficient to guarantee an optimum (along with the first order conditions),

a path for the economy that goes to the steady state will be optimal. For

this economy, there is instability unless real money holdings adjust

instantaneously to their long-run level. Using eqs. (6), (7) and (19),

                                              (p + r -
                                   in
                                                           (v/u.))m.
Linearizing near steady-state and using eq. (20),


                                                      17
                                           in     a(m - in),


where a
             (m/vffuH)(vffv
                                       -
                                           v)    >   0.   Thus, nominal prices will adjust so

that in   always       equals its long-run value.

        Equation (20) shows that foreign money holdings, f, are a function of m

and p, both of which always equal their long-run levels.                           Equation (8) can

then be linearized as

                                             z =     r(z-z),
which shows that claims on foreigners, z, will not change over time (i.e., z

must equal z).           So, when there is a shock to the system --                 for    example, a

change in foreign inflation --             residents      may trade foreign money for bonds,

but their total foreign assets will not change ever.

        The result of this analysis is that the response of variables in the

short run to a change in foreign inflation is virtually identical to the

steady-state response of those variables in the model of section 3. Foreign

money holdings immediately decline, and the real value of domestic money

holdings, m, rises.

        The change in the real exchange rate is given by eq. (18), and the

explanation of this equation is very similar to that of eq. (12).                                   The
                  *
quantity    (it    +   r)f   represents the loss in real terms of holding foreign money

instead of bonds. As foreign inflation rises there are two effects on this

term.      On the one hand, there will be a greater inflation erosion of

existing money balances, but on the other hand the higher inflation induces

smaller holdings of foreign money which implies a smaller loss.                              The net

effect is ambiguous.             Since residents wish to maintain the value of their
                                               *
real    claims on the rest of the world, if (it                + r)f does   change it     must   induce

a change in the trade balance.                  If, for example, (1r*+       r)f   rises, then the

country must run a trade surplus and there must be a real depreciation.

        Turning to the question posed by Cuddington (1983), if there were no

                                                     18
foreign money held by domestic residents, would there be any difference in

the model?               For the particular issues studied here the answer is a most

definite yes.              This section has examined a change in the foreign rate of

inflation holding the real interest rate constant. If                    there   were no foreign

money, such a change would have no effect in this model. As it stands, the

only effect of higher foreign inflation is through its effect on lost real

returns from holding foreign money instead of foreign bonds --                     i.e.,   through
                *                                        *f
the   term it       f.    If f were zero, of course it        is zero.

       The essence of the difference with Cuddington can be seen by examining

his claim that nothing is lost by aggregating foreign money and bonds into a

single term for foreign assets. Equation (8) tells us that this cannot be

done in this model. The rate of accumulation of real foreign assets depends

on the mix between foreign money and bonds.                     Hence, the trade balance in

general depends upon both the rate of accumulation of real foreign assets

and the amount of each type of asset in investors' portfolio. These issues

do not arise with Cuddington because he completely separates the asset

choice problem from the rest of the economic system.

      Taking up the question posed by Calvo and Rodriguez (1977) and Liviatan

(1981), how does a change in domestic money growth affect the real exchange

rate? The answer here is that there must be a real depreciation (assuming

Vfm <    0),     but the reasons are entirely different than those explored by

either Calvo-Rodriguez or Liviatan. Here, because an increase in s causes a

shift into foreign money, there will be additional losses from foregone

interest. That is (,t*+r)f will rise, which implies a greater trade surplus

and a real depreciation.




                                                19
 5. Conclusion



           The models of sections 3 and 4 illustrate some points which can be made

more generally. The trade balance, which is determined by the real exchange

rate, equals the rate of accumulation of real traded assets less the real

return on traded assets.        (Here the real return is meant to be the nominal

interest rate on the asset less the rate of inflation.                     In particular, it

does not include such implicit returns that arise from the value of the

asset as a transactions medium.)            The effect of the foreign inflation on

real variables can be traced through its impact on these two components of

the trade balance.

           In a wide variety of models that exhibit saddle-stability, the total

value of traded assets in terms of traded goods will evolve according to an

equation

(21)                             z          -
                                                z),      <   0.

Since z itself cannot jump at the instant of a change in foreign inflation
-   - it   can only adjust gradually over time - -       the      change in the rate of real

traded asset accumulation, z, depends only on the change in long-run real

traded asset holdings, .             If   higher foreign inflation causes domestic

residents to wish to shift out of traded assets generally, that can only be

accomplished gradually as traded goods are purchased with these assets. The

term        can be thought of as their target holdings of traded assets, to which

they adjust slowly over time.

       Many dynamic models, although not all, yield an equation such as (21).

It certainly holds in the models of sections 3 and 4. When foreign money is

the only traded asset, as in section 3 (and the model of Daniel (1985)),

then higher inflation of foreign prices causes domestic residents to lower

their target traded asset holdings --           that   is, z =    f declines. In the model
                                            20
 of section 4, higher inflation does not induce any shift out of traded

 assets, so z is unchanged.

       A model similar to that presented in sections 2-4, but in which the

 discount rate is endogenized as in Obstfeld (1981) yields ambiguous results

 for the change in z (see Rogers (1986)). An equation such as (21) could

 appear in many types of descriptive models of economies with currency

substitution, with or without sticky prices.              These models would need to

specify a behavioral equation to determine z.

       Having determined z is not enough to tell how the trade balance and

real exchange rate react. We can write generally


(22)                         TB(p)      -
                                            (j*   -



where z is the vector of traded assets and i is the nominal rate of return
                                                      3

on the th asset. This equation shows that the trade balance, TB, and hence

the real exchange rate, p, depends not only on ,           but   also on the total real

returns from traded assets, (i -      *)          These real returns may change when

it   rises   for two reasons: 1) the real rate of return on asset j may change,

and 2) within the portfolio of traded assets there may be a shift toward

those whose real return has risen. In the models of both sections 3 and 4

the direction of this change was uncertain.

       The models of this paper suggest some previously unexplored avenues for

the transmission of foreign inflation.            Most previous studies of currency

substitution - -    particularly     the empirical ones (see,             for example,

Cuddington (1983) and the references cited therein) - -          ignore   the effects of

foreign inflation on flow economic variables, such as saving and the trade

balance. Yet the theoretical propositions developed here suggest that these

are the keys to understanding the role of currency substitution in

subjecting an economy to real consequences of foreign inflation shocks.




                                        21
                                           APPENDIX




       The appendix demonstrates the propositions in the text page-by-page.


page

       From the first-order condition, eq.            (3), and the condition for

equilibrium in the home goods market, one can derive expressions for CT, CH,

U, UT and UN as functions of p. Taking these derivatives we find

                                            -
                       c =   [UT + (puNT        U)Y}/(U}j   -
                                                                PUTT).

If both goods are normal, the two expressions in parentheses are positive

which implies c >      0.
       We also have

                                                                -
                                  UNHUTT)YH + UTTuT]/(UHT            PUTT).

This is negative, again assuming both goods are normal.

       The next derivative is given by

                                                                 -
                UN =               UHHUTT)YH + UNTUTI/(UNT           PUTT).

In general, the sign of this derivative is ambiguous.                         However, if

production effects are sufficiently small (so H is near zero) and u is

homogenous (so tiNT is positive), then under the normality assumption the

derivative is positive.

       These derivatives demonstrate how some functions of p change when p

itself changes.       These functions of p were derived assuming goods market

equilibrium (cH              On page 8 there is a derivative, UNT' which is taken

before imposing goods market equilibrium (so UH and UT are not functions of

p). For any homogenous function this cross derivative is positive.
page U

        Totally   differentiating eqs. (9), (10) and (11) with respect to i and

   yields

                                                                     -        *
                                          dp                         f dir



(A.l)                                     d            (A/D) UTdir

                                          df
                                                                     u.dj


where,

                                  -   -                                  *-
                          v-2fm -vmmff
                                   v                             -irV
                                                                              mm
                                                                                              irv
                                                                                                   fm
            A —
                  vf(ri1r)uTvff(r+p)u}                       vf(yTcT)                       Vff(yTcT)

                  VfTf1)UT V(yf CT)                                                         Vf(YC)
and,

                                      -        -       -2        -        -
                             D        (YfCT)fm -                 VffV)             > 0,


and the      represents the fact that it has been assumed that constants on the

order of the square of the interest rate are zero.

        It follows that

                                  -    *
                                 df/dir < 0 and dm/dir
                                                                     -            *>   0.


The expression for dp/d,r* in eq. (12) comes from differentiation of eq. (9).

page

       The dynamic system represented by eqs. (13), (14), and (15) can be

written as

                                                   x   B(x   -
                                                                  x)

where B is the matrix of coefficients. Again assuming the square of the

interest rate, etc., are zero we have

                                                                              -
                     det B
                                                    rn/u}UJ)(Vf                   VVff)     < 0,
                       tr B —   r   + (m
                                           H f(uH/uT) - 'mm
                                                            > °


Therefore, the system is saddle stable.

page j

        From eqs. (15) and (16)

(A.2)                     p         + [(0 +                     - )](f    -



The    expression in the text for dp/d,r* then follows immediately from eq.

(12), if we evaluate the derivative at the point where f equals f.

        It also follows that

                                                *           -    *
                                       dp/dir       > dp/dir


if 9 +          < 0.   If this is true, then as stated in the text, the initial

real depreciation is less than the eventual real depreciation, and, from

(16),
              *
         dp/dir < 0.    To see that 0 + ,r
                                                   *<                 .   .
                                                            0, assume initially /4    = ir* , and   then

note that

       det [B - 91]                                                           +0) +   det B = 0.

        Next,

                                        rn =    af,     where


          a =
                [(m/u)(vff(ujj/u)-vf)]/[O               -                                < 0.

           *
So din/dir > 0, from which it follows that

                                               *       -     *
                                      din/dir       < dm/dir

In   fact dm/dlr* < 0 cannot be ruled out.

page

       The expression for dp/dp comes from differentiation of eq. (9). Using

(A.2) and the expression for dp/dp yields dp/dp easily.
page j
     Total differentiation of eqs. (17), (19) and (20) using the fact that

dz = 0, yields a system identical to (A.l) except that the A12 element is
         *                                 *
now (r-lr )v    and the A    element is (ir -r)v
             mm           13                    fm
                                    REFERENCES



Bilson,    J.    "The Choice of an Invoice Currency in International
     Transactions". Economic Interdependence         Flexible Exchange Rates,

     eds. J. Bhandari and B. Putnam, 1983, Cambridge: The MIT Press.

Calvo, G. "Currency Substitution and the Real Exchange Rate: the Utility

     Maximization Approach". Journal        International Money and Finance 4,

     no. 2 (June 1985): 175-88.

Calvo, C., and Rodriguez, C.A..      "A Model of Exchange Rate Determination

     under Currency Substitution and Rational Expectations."            Journal

          Political Economy 85, no. 3 (June 1977): 617-25.

Cuddington, J.    "Currency Substitution, Capital Mobility and Money Demand".

     Journal of International Money and Finance 2, no. 2 (August 1985):

     111-33.

Daniel, B. "Monetary Autonomy and Exchange Rate Dynamics under Currency

     Substitution". Journal of International Economics 19, no. 1/2 (August

     1985): 119-39.

Feenstra, R. "Functional Equivalence between Liquidity Costs and the Utility

    of Money". Journal of Monetary Economics 17, no.2 (March 1986): 271-91.

Helpman, E. "An Exploration in the Theory of Exchange Rate Regimes".

    Journal       Political Economy 89, no. 5 (October 1981): 865-90.

Helpman, E. and A. Razin.     "Dynamics of a Floating Exchange Rate Regime".

    Journal      Political Economy 90, no. 4 (August 1982): 728-54.
Krugman,     P.   "Vehicle Currencies and the Structure of International

     Exchange". Journal         Money. Credit     Banking 12, no. 3 (August
     1980): 513-26.

Liviatan, N.      "Monetary Expansion and Real Exchange Rate Dynamics." Journal

           Political Economy 89, no. 6 (December 1981): 1218-27.

Obstfeld, M. "Macroeconomic Policy, Exchange-Rate Dynamics, and Optimal

     Asset Accumulation". Journal        Political Economy 89, no.6 (December

     1981): 1142-61.

Rogers, J. "Dissertation Proposal". Department of Economics, University of

     Virginia (December 1986).

Sen, P. "The Laursen-Metzler Effect under Currency Substitution". Bureau of

     Economic and Business Research Working Paper No. 1267, University

     of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign (July 1986).

Svensson, L. "Currency Prices, Terms of Trade and Interest Rates: A General

     Equilibrium Asset-Pricing Cash-in-Advance Approach".          Journal

     International Economics 18, no. 1 (February 1985): 17-41.

Tobin, J. "Money and Economic Growth". Econometrica 33, no. 4 (July 1965):

     671-84.
