                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 POOR LITTLE RICH KIDS? THE ROLE OF NATURE VERSUS NURTURE IN WEALTH
            AND OTHER ECONOMIC OUTCOMES AND BEHAVIORS

                                       Sandra E. Black
                                       Paul J. Devereux
                                       Petter Lundborg
                                        Kaveh Majlesi

                                     Working Paper 21409
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w21409


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                            July 2015, Revised May 2019




This paper was previously circulated under the titles, “Poor Little Rich Kids? The Determinants
of the Intergenerational Transmission of Wealth” as well as “Understanding Intergenerational
Mobility: The Role of Nature versus Nurture in Wealth and Other Economic Outcomes and
Behaviors.” The data used in this paper come from the Swedish Interdisciplinary Panel (SIP)
administered at the Centre for Economic Demography, Lund University, Sweden. This work was
partially supported by the Research Council of Norway through its Centres of Excellence
Scheme, FAIR project No 262675. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Sandra E. Black, Paul J. Devereux, Petter Lundborg, and Kaveh Majlesi. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Poor Little Rich Kids? The Role of Nature versus Nurture in Wealth and Other Economic
Outcomes and Behaviors
Sandra E. Black, Paul J. Devereux, Petter Lundborg, and Kaveh Majlesi
NBER Working Paper No. 21409
July 2015, Revised May 2019
JEL No. G0,G11,J13,J62

                                          ABSTRACT

Wealth is highly correlated between parents and their children; however, little is known about the
extent to which these relationships are genetic or determined by environmental factors. We use
administrative data on the net wealth of a large sample of Swedish adoptees merged with similar
information for their biological and adoptive parents. Comparing the relationship between the
wealth of adopted and biological parents and that of the adopted child, we find that, even prior to
any inheritance, there is a substantial role for environment and a much smaller role for pre-birth
factors and we find little evidence that nature/nurture interactions are important. When bequests
are taken into account, the role of adoptive parental wealth becomes much stronger. Our findings
suggest that wealth transmission is not primarily because children from wealthier families are
inherently more talented or more able but that, even in relatively egalitarian Sweden, wealth
begets wealth. We further build on the existing literature by providing a more comprehensive
view of the role of nature and nurture on intergenerational mobility, looking at a wide range of
different outcomes using a common sample and method. We find that environmental influences
are relatively more important for wealth-related variables such as savings and investment
decisions than for human capital. We conclude by studying consumption as an overall measure of
welfare and find that, like wealth, it is more determined by environment than by biology.

Sandra E. Black                                  Petter Lundborg
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
University of Texas at Austin                    Lund University
Austin, TX 78712                                 P.O. Box 7082
and IZA                                          SE-220 07 Lund
and also NBER                                    Sweden
sblack@austin.utexas.edu                         petter.lundborg@nek.lu.se

Paul J. Devereux                                 Kaveh Majlesi
School of Economics                              Department of Economics
and Geary Institute                              Lund University
University College Dublin                        P.O. Box 7082
Belfield, Dublin 4                               S-220 07 Lund, Sweden
Ireland                                          kaveh.majlesi@nek.lu.se
and IZA and CEPR
devereux@ucd.ie
1. Introduction

         Wealth inequality has increased dramatically in recent decades. Indeed, a recent study

found that, in the U.S., the median net worth of upper-income families doubled in a 30-year period,

but declined for lower-income families.2 This fact, in conjunction with the release of Thomas

Piketty’s Capital in the 21st Century that highlights the intergenerational transmission of wealth as

a key determinant of the nature of society more generally, has brought renewed interest in

understanding the determinants of the intergenerational correlation in wealth (Piketty 2014).

However, while there are many studies about the causes of the intergenerational transmission of

education and income, much less is known about wealth, even though wealth may be a better

measure of economic success than income or education.3 Wealth directly influences consumption

and investment possibilities, and greater wealth may enable parents to invest more in children’s

human capital by loosening budget constraints. Importantly, wealth is also much less equally

distributed than education and income and is highly correlated across generations.4

         Why is wealth correlated across generations? One possible pathway is through biology

(nature) -- genetic inheritance of skills, attitudes, and preferences that correlate with higher wealth

in each generation. 5 This channel suggests that intergenerational correlations arise because

children from wealthy families are inherently more talented and would be wealthier than others

even without the advantage of growing up with wealthier parents.

         Another pathway is environment (nurture) -- wealthier parents may invest more in their


2
  http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2014/12/17/wealth-gap-upper-middle-income/
3
  See Black and Devereux (2011) for a recent survey of the literature on intergenerational mobility.
4
  Charles and Hurst (2003) use U.S. data and find elasticities of about 0.37 for net wealth. More recently, Boserup,
Kopczuk, and Kreiner (2014) and Adermon, Lindahl, and Waldenström (2018) have used register data (from Denmark
and Sweden, respectively) and found strong positive intergenerational rank correlations ranging from 0.27 in Denmark
to as high as 0.4 in Sweden, though these rank correlations are not directly comparable to the elasticity estimates of
Charles and Hurst (2003) as the methodologies employed are quite different. Other related work includes Clark and
Cummins (2014), Mulligan (1997), and Pfeffer and Killewald (2015).
5
  Evidence on genetic effects in risk aversion and risk-taking behavior is found in Cesarini et al. (2010), Kuhnen and
Chiao (2009), Dreber et al. (2009), and Black et al. (2017).
                                                                                                                    2
children’s human capital, help their children get better jobs, provide funding for business start-ups,

give financial gifts, or affect child preferences or attitudes. This channel suggests that

intergenerational correlations arise through opportunities provided by the environment the child

grows up in, and any child given these opportunities would benefit. And these two forces may

interact, with environmental effects depending on biological endowments. The nature-nurture

distinction is of great importance for our perspective on the intergenerational wealth correlation,

as appropriate policy to address the high level of wealth inequality relies on an understanding of

the underlying causes.6 In this paper, we attempt to disentangle the role of nature versus nurture

and the role of nature/nurture interactions in the intergenerational transmission of wealth.

         It is difficult to distinguish between nature and nurture, however, because most children

are raised by their biological parents. We disentangle the role of nature versus nurture in the

intergenerational transmission of wealth using adoptees; adoption allows us to examine the effects

of environmental factors in a situation where children have no genetic relationship with their

(adoptive) parents. We estimate how the wealth of adoptive children is related to that of both their

biological and adoptive parents (and, in some specifications, to interactions between them).7 To

do so, we use Swedish administrative data on the net wealth and other characteristics of a large

sample of adopted children born between 1950 and 1970 merged with similar information for their

biological and adoptive parents--as well as corresponding data on own-birth children (children

raised by their biological parents).

         We also ask how wealth differs from other outcomes. Several studies have distinguished



6
  For example, a tax on parental wealth is likely to be less effective at improving intergenerational mobility if the
intergenerational wealth correlation is predominantly due to nature rather than nurture. However, even if the
intergenerational correlation was wholly due to nature, this does not imply that it could not be affected by policy.
7
  Note that the resources available to the biological parents could affect children through both genes and through in-
utero investments, which are known to affect long-run outcomes. (See Almond, Currie, and Duque (2017) for a review
of this literature.) Outcomes such as birth weight have been found to correlate with educational and labor market
outcomes (Black et al., 2007, Figlio et al., 2014).
                                                                                                                    3
the role of nature versus nurture in the intergenerational persistence of outcomes such as education,

income, and risk preferences. Given the importance of intergenerational persistence in wealth on

long-run inequality in society, do the forces that drive intergenerational wealth transmission look

similar to the forces driving the persistence of other economic outcomes such as income and

education?      In this paper, we attempt to provide a more comprehensive understanding of the

broader literature. To do so, we examine the relative roles of nature and nurture (and nature/nurture

interactions) across a range of variables—including some the literature has already considered

such as education and income, and others that are new, such as savings rates and consumption--

using a common sample and methodology.

         A large body of literature in economics has used data on adoptees to disentangle the relative

contribution of genes and environment to economic behavior.8 These studies have typically used

information on foreign-born adoptees, where the characteristics of the biological parents are

unknown to the researcher, and have therefore not been able to compare the relative influence of

biological and adoptive parents.9

         However, a recent literature has taken advantage of the unique Swedish register data that

identify both biological and adoptive parents. The seminal study by Björklund, Lindahl, and Plug

(2006) studied the relative roles of nature versus nurture in the intergenerational transmission of

educational attainment and earnings using cohorts born between 1962 and 1966. This was followed

by papers using a similar strategy to study voting behavior (Cesarini, Johannesson, and Oskarsson,



8 Another literature has compared fraternal and identical twins; given that both sets of twins grow up in the same
environment but only identical twins share the same genes, differences in correlations across twin pairs can be
attributed to different genes. Using this strategy but focusing primarily on savings behaviors, Cronqvist and Siegel
(2015) argue that genetic differences explain a substantial fraction of the variation in savings propensities as well as
wealth at retirement but find little role for shared environment. The twin approach relies on relatively strong
assumptions about the similarities in environment and genetics across fraternal and identical twins; our approach using
data on adoptees studies the intergenerational association and relies on an entirely different set of assumptions. The
approaches should, thus, be seen as complements rather than substitutes.
9
  See Sacerdote (2010) for a survey of this literature.
                                                                                                                      4
2014), crime (Hjalmarsson and Lindquist, 2013), entrepreneurship (Lindquist, Sol, and Van Praag,

2015), health (Lindahl et al. 2016), and risk-taking in financial markets (Black et al. 2017). In

general, these studies have found evidence that both characteristics of biological and adoptive

parents are predictive of child outcomes, though to a varying degree across outcomes.10 In addition

to examining wealth, an important—if not one of the most important--elements of inequality, we

also compare nature/nurture effects for a wide range of variables in order to obtain a more complete

picture of the role of nature versus nurture, and nature/nurture interactions, on measures of

children’s long-run behaviors and well-being.

         We find that, even before any inheritance has occurred, wealth of adopted children is more

closely related to the wealth of their adoptive parents than to that of their biological parents. This

suggests that wealth transmission is primarily due to environmental factors rather than because

children of wealthy parents are inherently more talented. These results are not driven by one

component of wealth, such as housing, as we see the same patterns when we disaggregate by type

of asset. We also examine the role played by bequests and find that, when they are taken into

account, the role of environment becomes much stronger.

         When we compare the intergenerational transmission of wealth to that of other outcomes

using a common sample and methodology, we find interesting differences. Human capital linkages

between parents and children appear to have stronger biological than environmental roots.

However, despite this, earnings and income are, if anything, more environmental. More directly

wealth-related variables (the share of financial wealth invested in risky assets and the savings rate)

are substantially environmentally driven, consistent with our finding that intergenerational


10
  Contemporaneous work by Fagereng, Mogstad, and Rønning (2015) uses Korean adoptees in Norway to determine
the effect of environment on child wealth and asset allocation. Consistent with our own results, they find evidence
that environment is important in the intergenerational transmission of wealth. An important advantage of our data is
that we observe the characteristics of the biological family and can therefore contrast the size of the coefficient on
adoptive wealth to that on biological wealth; this also enables us to test for nature/nurture interactions.
                                                                                                                    5
transmission of wealth, itself, is more related to nurture than nature.

       Finally, when we examine consumption, which might be viewed as a summary measure of

welfare that is less sensitive to temporary fluctuations than income or wealth, we find both

biological and, somewhat larger, environmental influences.

       Overall, our findings suggest that wealth transmission (particularly after bequests have

been received) is highly environmental despite the more biological effects on human capital

transmission. We conclude that biology is important for skill transfers but less important for

wealth, as dynasties can transfer wealth across generations regardless of their skills and abilities.

       The structure of the paper is as follows. In the next section, we describe the data and, in

Section 3, we outline the econometric methodology we use to study wealth. Section 4 provides our

estimates for the intergenerational transmission of wealth, where we consider various measures

and functional forms for net wealth, and Section 5 presents robustness checks. We examine

possible mechanisms of wealth transmission in Section 6. Section 7 then presents results for a

wide set of variables to enable us to compare the role of nature and nurture across measures of

human capital, earnings and income, investment behavior, savings rates, and consumption, and

Section 8 concludes.



2. Data

       We construct our database by merging several Swedish administrative registers. Our

starting point is an administrative dataset containing information on all Swedish citizens born

between 1932 and 1980. These data include information on educational attainment, county of

residence, and other basic demographic information. To this, we merge data from the Swedish




                                                                                                    6
multigenerational register, where we can identify Swedish-born adoptees using information on

both biological and adoptive parents of children.11

         Our data on wealth come from the Swedish Wealth Register Data (Förmögenhetsregistret).

These data were collected by the government’s statistical agency, Statistics Sweden, for tax

purposes between 1999 and 2007, at which point the wealth tax was abolished.12 For the years

1999 to 2006, the data include all financial assets held outside retirement accounts at the end of a

tax year, December 31st, reported by a variety of different sources, including the Swedish Tax

Agency, welfare agencies, and the private sector including financial institutions, even for persons

below the wealth tax threshold. Because the information is based on statements from financial

institutions, it is likely to have very little measurement error, and because the entire population is

observed, selection bias is not a problem.13

         From the wealth register, we observe different categories of wealth. This includes the

aggregate value of bank accounts, mutual funds, stocks, options, bonds, housing wealth, and

capital endowment insurance as well as total financial assets and total assets. We also observe the

individual assets themselves within the broad categories of wealth, which we combine with data




11
   We know the identity of biological fathers for only about 50% of adoptees. Previous studies that examined mother
characteristics and behavior have found no evidence of bias due to missing fathers. See, for example, Björklund,
Lindahl, and Plug (2006), Black et al. (2017), and Lindqvist et al. (2015). Our main analysis uses children for whom
both the biological mother and father are known. In Section 5, we show our conclusions are robust to relaxing this
restriction.
12
   During this time period, the wealth tax was paid on all the assets of the household, including real estate and financial
securities, with the exception of private businesses and shares in small public businesses (Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini
2007). In 2000, the tax rate was 1.5 percent on net household wealth exceeding SEK 900,000. The Swedish krona
traded at $0.106 at the end of 2000, so this threshold corresponds to $95,400. After 2000, the tax threshold was raised
to SEK 1,500,000 for married couples and non-married cohabitating couples with common children and 1,000,000
for single taxpayers. In 2002 the threshold rose again, this time to SEK 2,000,000 for married couples and non-married
cohabitating couples and 1,500,000 for single taxpayers. In 2005 the threshold rose once more but only for married
couples and cohabitating couples, this time to SEK 3,000,000. Because the wealth tax was repealed in 2006, data for
2007 are not considered reliable; as a result, we limit our analysis to 1999-2006.
13
   In the case of foreign assets, individuals were required to report these themselves. Evidence suggests that unreported
foreign assets likely represent a small fraction of total household assets. (Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini 2007)
                                                                                                                         7
on prices that we collect from third-party sources to calculate returns. 14 The wealth register also

contains data on total debt and net wealth. Nonfinancial assets are collected from the property tax

assessments and valuations are based on market prices.15

         Because it is transferable across generations, our primary analysis focuses on non-

retirement wealth in Sweden, which is principally held in real assets--primarily housing--and

financial wealth, including cash, stocks, and bonds; however, we also test for the robustness of our

results to the inclusion of accumulated pension wealth. Sweden has a mix of public and private

pension schemes, and individuals are allocated to different pension systems depending on the

public or private sector affiliation and the year of birth of the individual.16 While we do not have

a direct measure of total pension wealth, for parents, we can observe pension payments in the

Income Register once they have retired. We use this information to estimate pension wealth

(including both public and occupational pensions) in 1999 for all parents who we observe retiring

by 2011 (the last year we observe pension payments). For the children, we observe accumulated

public pension wealth as of December 2006 but do not observe private pension wealth; however,

public pension wealth accounts for approximately 70% of pension wealth. We describe the details

of the pension system and how we calculate our pension measures in Appendix 1. The descriptive

statistics there show that accumulated pension wealth is very large relative to non-pension net



14
   During the 1999-2005 period, banks were not required to report small bank accounts to the Swedish Tax Agency
unless the account earned more than 100 SEK (about $11) in interest during the year. From 2006 onwards, all bank
accounts above 10,000 SEK were reported. In our data, 47% of people do not have a reported bank account, which is
consistent with Calvet, Campbell and Sodini (2007). Since almost everybody has a bank account (in surveys, the
fraction of Swedes aged 15 and above that have a bank account has consistently been 99 percent (Segendorf and
Wilbe, 2014)), the people who are measured as having zero financial wealth probably in fact have some small amount
of financial wealth. We follow Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini (2007) and Calvet and Sodini (2014) and impute bank
account balances for persons without a bank account using the subsample of individuals for whom we observe their
bank account balance even though the earned interest is less than 100 kronor. Details are available in Black, Devereux,
Lundborg, and Majlesi (2017). In practice, whether or not we impute small bank balances makes very little difference
to the results.
15
   Statistics Sweden calculates tax-assessed property values using a hedonic housing price model, incorporating
information on house characteristics as well as geography. Because of this, housing prices are measured with error.
16 The retirement age is flexible and individuals can claim retirement benefits beginning at age 61.

                                                                                                                     8
wealth.

          We measure years of schooling using the information on highest educational degree

completed contained in the education register. 17 We measure labor earnings and income for our

sample by using data from the Swedish Income Register (available from 1968 onwards). We define

earnings as income from work including self-employment and sickness benefits. On the other

hand, income includes earnings, but also taxable benefits like unemployment insurance and

pensions as well as capital income and realized capital gains. For parents, earnings and income are

averaged over a twenty-year period running from 1970 to 1990. For children, we take a three-year

average around age 36. When calculating average earnings, we follow Bjorklund, Lindahl, and

Plug (2006) by first excluding observations for which annual earnings is missing, below 1000

dollars, or obtained when the person is younger than 30 or older than 60 (we use equivalent

restrictions when using income).

          We measure consumption at the household level by applying a methodology detailed in

Koijen, Van Nieuwerburgh, and Vestman (2014). They propose a measure of consumption that is

essentially the residual from the household’s budget constraint, where consumption is equal to the

amount of money taken in (including income and returns on assets) less the amount spent or saved.

(Details of the calculation are in Appendix 2). This calculation requires the detailed information

on asset portfolios that we have in our data.18 Because consumption can vary significantly by year


17
   We follow the coding of Holmlund, Lindahl, and Plug (2011) and impute years of schooling in the following way:
7 for (old) primary school, 9 for (new) compulsory schooling, 9.5 for (old) post-primary school (realskola), 11 for
short high school, 12 for long high school, 14 for short university, 15.5 for long university, and 19 for a PhD university
education. Since the education register does not distinguish between junior-secondary school (realskola) of different
lengths (9 or 10 years), it is coded as 9.5 years. For similar reasons, long university is coded as 15.5 years of schooling.
18
   Koijen, Van Nieuwerburgh, and Vestman (2014) validate this measure of consumption; to do so, they use a
subsample of the Swedish wealth data to calculate this consumption measure and then match it to two other measures
of consumption (including a more standard survey of individuals); when they compare their proposed measure to the
more traditional survey measure, they find that, while the mean and median of the consumption distributions are
similar, survey data overstate consumption of the bottom quintile of the distribution while understating consumption
at the top. They also match their data to administrative data on car purchases and find that a large fraction of the
individuals in the survey data on consumption fail to report car purchases, highlighting the benefits of the assets-based
measure of consumption.
                                                                                                                          9
due to the purchase of durables, we average consumption across the 2000 to 2006 period for each

household. We further use the consumption and income information to create a measure of the

savings rate for each household, defined as 1 – (Consumption/Disposable Income) where

disposable income is also averaged over the 2000 to 2006 period. Because consumption is

fundamentally measured at the household level (and savings rates are calculated using

consumption), we place an additional restriction on our sample that parents and children not live

in the same household and only measure consumption for those years in which both parents are

still alive. If parents are not living together in the same household, we average saving rates and

consumption across both households.19

         Stock market participation is defined as holding risky financial assets; these include stocks

or mutual funds that include stock components. Like wealth, we measure these using both parents:

The variables we consider are an indicator for risky market participation (whether either parent

owns stocks or mutual funds with a stock component) and, conditional on participation, the share

of financial assets held in these risky assets (we refer to this as the risky share). Market

participation and risky share are measured on December 31, 1999 for parents and December 31,

2006 for children.



Sample Selection

         For much of our analysis, we limit our sample to children born 1950-1970 with all

applicable parents alive in 1999 and for whom we have information on schooling, income, and

wealth. 20 In our analyses, we measure net wealth of the children in 2006 and net wealth of the


19
   This is a particular issue for biological parents of adoptees as very few of the biological mothers are in the same
household as the biological fathers.
20
   Appendix Table 1 shows the distribution of adoptees by birth cohort. We have relatively few adoptees from the
earliest cohorts because it is more likely that one of the adoptive or biological parents has died by 1999. There are
fewer adoptees from the later cohorts as the number of domestic adoptions started to fall in the mid-1960s.
                                                                                                                  10
parents in 1999.

         As we are interested in wealth as a measure of economic welfare, ideally we would measure

lifetime wealth or typical wealth over the lifecycle. Wealth has benefits at any age but the nature

of these benefits is likely to differ as people age. 21 In practice, we are constrained by data

availability to study wealth of children aged around 45 and parents aged around 65.

         The logic for restricting our sample to children born by 1970 and measuring their wealth

in the latest possible year, 2006, is to avoid having very young people in the sample who have not

yet had much opportunity to accumulate wealth. The average age of children in our sample is 44.

This compares with an average age of 38 in Charles and Hurst (2003), 33 in Fagereng et al. (2015),

47 for the third generation in Adermon et al. (2018), and 34 for the second generation in Boserup

et al. (2014). Later, we show that our estimates are not sensitive to the exact ages of the children

at wealth measurement. 22

         We focus primarily on pre-bequest wealth of children. Since children are likely to be well

into middle age when they receive bequests, pre-bequest wealth of children may better reflect their

wealth for most of their lives. In order to avoid the issue of inheritances, we further restrict the

sample so that at least one parent is alive in 2006 (for adoptees, we require that at least one adoptive

parent be alive in 2006); however, we also examine the role of bequests on the intergenerational

correlation by relaxing this constraint.

         During the 1950-1970 period, private adoptions were illegal, so all adoptions went through

the state.23 In order to adopt a child in Sweden between 1950 and 1970, a family had to satisfy



21
   For young people, greater wealth may enable them to buy a house without having to save for many years; at middle-
age, wealth may enable parents to pay college fees and accommodation costs for their children; at older ages, greater
wealth may provide insurance against health shocks and other adverse consequences of aging.
22
   Research by Boserup et al. (2014) has documented the relative insensitivity of intergenerational wealth correlations
to age of measurement using data from Denmark, while work by Adermon et al. (2018) using Swedish data finds
evidence that correlations are attenuated when children’s wealth is measured when the children are younger.
23
   See Nordlöf (2001), Bjorklund, Lindahl, and Plug (2006) and Lindquist, Sol, and Van Praag (2015) for more details.
                                                                                                                   11
certain requirements. The adoptive parents had to be married and be at least 25 years old, have

appropriate housing, and be free of tuberculosis and sexually transmitted diseases. The adoptive

father was required to have a steady income and the adoptive mother was expected to be able to

stay home with the child for a certain period of time.24 Overall, the adoption criteria meant that the

adoptive parents were positively selected relative to the general population.

         The state collected information on both the biological and adoptive parents; while it only

required information on the biological mother, in many cases, social workers were also able to

identify the biological fathers. While we do not observe how old the children were when they

were adopted, aggregate statistics suggest that, at that time, about 80% of children were adopted

in their first year of life (Bjorklund, Lindahl, and Plug, 2006).25

         We have information on over 1.2 million children who are raised by their biological parents

and 2598 adopted children for whom we have data available for both biological and adoptive

mothers and fathers. Descriptive statistics for wealth and some other characteristics of our sample

are shown in Table 1a. In the top panel, we show means for children, both biological and adoptive.

In 2006, when their assets and education are measured, the average child age is 44 for biological

children and 43 for adoptive children. On average, biological children have 0.4 of a year more

education and hold slightly higher net wealth (634K SEK vs. 610K SEK).

         In the second panel, we show means for biological parents, both parents who raised their

own biological children and parents who gave their children up for adoption. The two types of

parents are quite different in their characteristics, with biological parents of adoptees being much

less wealthy and having fewer years of schooling.


24
   Prior to 1974, there was no parental leave to care for adopted children. However, from 1955, mothers of biological
children had a right to 3 months of paid leave (SOU 1954).
25
   Upon turning 18, an adopted child has the legal right to obtain information from public authorities about the identity
of his or her biological parents (Socialstyrelsen 2014). However, according to Swedish law, there is no legal
requirement for parents to inform adopted children that they are adopted (SOU 2009).
                                                                                                                     12
       The bottom panel of Table 1a shows descriptive statistics for adoptive parents. For adopted

children, adoptive parents are, on average, older, wealthier, and better educated than the child’s

biological parents. Adoptive parents also appear positively selected when we compare them to

biological parents who raise their own children, although the differences here are much smaller.

Table 1b shows similar breakdowns when we look at the components of wealth. Again, adopted

children hold slightly less wealth in each of the categories of wealth (except for other real estate).

Biological parents of adopted children look significantly poorer across all components of wealth

relative to biological parents who raise their child, while adoptive parents are wealthier across all

dimensions.



3. Empirical Strategy using Wealth

Wealth in Sweden

       Because we study the individual wealth of children, it is important to note that there are no

tax incentives to transfer wealth holdings from one spouse to another. In the event of a divorce, in

the absence of a prenuptial agreement, all assets are split equally among spouses. For wealth tax

purposes, the value of jointly owned assets was split evenly between the two tax filers. Thus, there

are no incentives for husbands and wives to strategically allocate assets between themselves in

order to reduce their wealth tax bill.

       Our main variable of interest is net wealth, which is constructed by subtracting total debts

from total gross wealth. As our primary measure of net wealth, we construct within-cohort

measures of parents’ and children’s rank within the wealth distribution. As discussed in more

detail later, we base this choice on the fact that the relationship between child’s rank and parent’s

rank is approximately linear. However, we also test the sensitivity of our conclusions to the choice

of an inverse hyperbolic sine transformation of net wealth, as well as the untransformed value of

                                                                                                   13
net wealth (in levels).

           Our main specification relates the rank of net wealth of an adoptee to the rank of net wealth

of both his/her biological and adoptive parents. We estimate the following equation:

              !"# = %& + %( !" + %) !# + *%+ + ,"#                                                        (1)

where W, our main variable of interest, is the rank of net wealth, i indexes the biological family,

and j indexes the adoptive family. X refers to the set of control variables including a dummy

variable for the gender of the child, indicators for the region in which the parents lived in 1965,

year-of-birth dummies for the child, as well as the cohort dummies for parents, where the cohort

represents the average cohort of the two parents. To allow for non-linearities and nature/nurture

interactions, we also estimate regressions of the following form (in some specifications we exclude

the quadratic terms while continuing to include the interaction term):

               !"# = %& + %( !" + %) !# + %+ !") + %. !#) + %/ !" !# + *%0 + ,"#                          (2)

We measure child wealth at the individual level but measure parental wealth as the total of the

mother’s and father’s wealth; we also show estimates where child wealth is measured at the

household level. For each child, we compute his/her rank in the distribution of child wealth for

individuals born in the same year and so measured at the same age. Within an age cohort, ranks

are normalized to lie between 0 and 1.26 We use the child’s rank within the entire distribution of

their cohort throughout the analysis even when we are studying subgroups of children such as the

sample of adoptees. We carry out the same exercise for parental wealth basing the cohort on the

average cohort of the two parents.



Identifying Assumption




26
     Ranks are calculated as [(3 − 0.5)/:] where i denotes individuals sorted by wealth, and i = 1,2, . .. , N.
                                                                                                                  14
         A key assumption of our empirical strategy is that adoptees are randomly assigned to

adoptive families at birth. While matching of children to adoptive parents was at the discretion of

the caseworkers, the evidence from that period suggests that social authorities were not able to

systematically match babies to families based on family and child characteristics (see Lindquist,

Sol, and Van Praag 2015 for more details).27

         If the random assignment assumption holds, the coefficients on the wealth of biological

parents provide an estimate of the effect of pre-birth factors and the coefficient of adoptive parents

provide an estimate of the effects of post-birth factors. The assumption will be violated if adoptees

are systematically matched to adoptive parents that are similar to their biological parents. The fact

that we can observe and control for the wealth rank of the biological parents mitigates these

concerns, and previous studies using these adoption data have shown that, while children are not

assigned randomly to adoptive parents, the resultant biases are likely to be small.28 However, in a

later section, we will examine this issue in more detail.



4. Results for Wealth

         When considering the intergenerational correlation in wealth, the literature is agnostic as

to the appropriate functional form. Research in the area has used a variety of transformations of

net wealth, including levels, logs, the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation, and within-cohort

ranks. When we examine the data, the within-cohort rank specification best fits the linear model;

as a result, we use that as our preferred specification. However, in later analyses, we will show

that our conclusions are robust to the choice of the functional form of net wealth.

         Figure 1a plots the relationship between the within-cohort rank of net wealth of parents


27
   While children could be adopted by relatives, in practice this was very rare (41 children, or approximately 1.5% of
our sample). We drop these children from our sample.
28
   See, for example, the analysis in Björklund, Lindahl, and Plug (2006).
                                                                                                                  15
and children for the large own-birth sample using a local linear kernel regression with an

epanechnikov kernel and rule-of-thumb bandwidth.29 Importantly, we see that this relationship is

approximately linear from around the 5th percentile to the 95th percentile. Consistent with the

Swedish findings of Adermon et al. (2018), the slope is negative at the very bottom of the

distribution and more steeply positive at the top. The declining slope at the bottom is driven by

parents with large negative wealth. The increase in slope at the top is consistent with general

findings of greater persistence in economic status at the very top of the distribution (Björklund et

al. 2012). Figure 1b shows the equivalent picture when we drop the parents in the top and bottom

5% of their within-cohort distribution, and the linearity of the relationship becomes more

pronounced.

         Among adopted children, Figure 2 plots the within-cohort rank relationship between

children and biological and adoptive parents, respectively. Here, we see similar patterns to the full

sample.     However, confidence intervals become much wider at the tails, and this is more

pronounced at the top of the distribution among biological parents and at the bottom of the

distribution among adoptive parents. This highlights the fact that biological parents are primarily

negatively selected in terms of net wealth while adoptive parents are positively selected. When

we use the trimmed data (where trimming is done on the full sample and not the subsample of

adoptees), the relationship again becomes much more linear (Figure 3). It is also clear that the

slope is steeper for adoptive parents than for biological parents.



Baseline Results

         In Table 2, we report the regression results when we estimate equation (1) on the sample


29
  Adermon et al. (2018) also use this approach. An alternative, used by Boserup et al. (2014), is to plot average child
rank against parental wealth percentile. The local linear kernel regression is more efficient and this is important given
our sample of adoptees is not very large.
                                                                                                                     16
of own-birth children (top panel) and adoptees (bottom panel). As noted earlier, we include cohort

dummies for parents and children, region dummies for where the parents lived in 1965, as well as

the gender of the child in all specifications. 30 We show estimates for a variety of different

measures of wealth.

         Column 1 presents the rank-rank coefficient for own-birth and adopted children,

respectively, for our baseline measure of net wealth that does not include pension wealth. Among

own-birth children, the rank-rank coefficient is approximately 0.35. This implies that a one

percentile increase in the position of parents in the wealth distribution is associated with just over

one third of a percentile increase in the average position of their children. Among adoptees (bottom

panel), we find that child's wealth is predominantly associated with that of adoptive parents and

has a much weaker relationship with biological parents’ wealth. The rank coefficient for biological

parent wealth is 0.11 but that for adoptive parent wealth is 0.27.31

         We saw in Figures 1 and 2 that the rank-rank relationship is approximately linear except in

the tails of the parental wealth distribution -- for ranks up to the 5th percentile and in the very top

of the distribution. Therefore, in Column 2, we drop cases with parental wealth in the top or bottom

5 percentiles of the within-cohort parental wealth distribution. This is particularly important in the

adoptive sample, as biological parents are, on average, much poorer than adoptive parents. Not

surprisingly given the figures earlier, these exclusions affect our estimates, with an increase in the

effect of biological wealth and a decrease in the effect of adoptive wealth. Still, however, the


30
   Given wealth is measured in the same year for all parents and wealth is measured in the same year for all children,
the cohort dummies also serve as age dummies. The estimates without these dummies are quite similar. This is what
we would expect for the rank transformation as the ranks are computed by cohort.
31
   Adoptive parents might invest less or more in their adopted children than other parents. The former could occur if
adoptive parents don’t treat their children as well as they would if they were biological children; the latter could occur
if adoptive parents are “better” parents than average -- adoptive parents must, for instance, be approved before being
able to adopt and may have a particularly strong desire for children. By definition, we are limited in how much we
can assess the unobserved differences between adoptive and other parents. However, there are 495 own-birth children
of adoptive parents in our data. The estimated effect of parental wealth rank on their wealth rank is 0.35, which is the
same as that for the full sample of own-birth children.
                                                                                                                      17
adoptive coefficient is substantially larger than the biological one, and this difference is

statistically significant. The relatively weak relationship between biological parental wealth and

child wealth is interesting, as it suggests that most of the reason for the intergenerational

transmission of wealth is not because children from wealthier families are inherently more

talented. Instead, it appears that, even in a relatively egalitarian society like Sweden, wealth begets

wealth.

          The baseline net wealth measure we use equals total assets less total liabilities and excludes

pension wealth, as we consider it appropriate to measure wealth based on the resources available

to the individual at a given point in time. These may be illiquid but should, in principle, be

transferrable to other people or available for use to purchase economic or non-economic services.

An alternative approach would be to include accumulated pension wealth in our measure. In

Columns 3 and 4 we redo the analysis using a measure of net wealth that includes pension wealth,

both with and without trimming (column 4 has the trimmed estimates).32 We find that including

pension wealth reduces the intergenerational rank correlations for both biological and adoptive

parents. Indeed, the biological correlation now becomes small and borderline in statistical

significance. Our overall conclusion of stronger nurture rather than nature effects remains.

          In Column 5 of Table 2, we measure child wealth at the household level (excluding

pensions). Because household sizes can vary, we report estimates with controls for family size and

an indicator for whether the child is married (these controls have very little impact on the

estimates). Consistent with positive but imperfect assortative mating, the nurture coefficient is a

little smaller than when we measure child wealth at the individual level, but the conclusions are




32
  Because we do not have information on pension wealth for all parents (because some of the younger parents have
not retired by 2011 so we do not observe the pension payments they receive), we have verified that the baseline
estimates on the sample of those with pensions are similar to those for the whole sample.
                                                                                                            18
similar.33

         We next consider whether these relationships are the same for sons and daughters. We do

not have a strong prior in terms of whether adoptive or biological relationships should be stronger

for boys or girls. In Columns 7 and 8, we report the estimates for our preferred specification where

we use net wealth (without pensions) and exclude children whose biological or adoptive parents

have net wealth in the bottom or top 5% of the rank distribution. While the biological coefficient

is larger for boys than for girls and the environmental effect is larger for girls, the differences are

not statistically significant, suggesting there is not much evidence for gender differences in the

nature/nurture split.



Inheritances

         Piketty and Zucman (2014, 2015), among others, show that inheritances have important

effects on the distribution of wealth. We next consider the potential role of inheritances in

understanding intergenerational correlations in wealth.

         In Sweden, as in the United States, when a spouse dies their assets automatically transfer

to the surviving spouse. Because we have restricted the sample so that at least one parent is alive

when child wealth is measured in 2006, we are unlikely to have captured bequests. To test the

potential role of inheritances, we remove this restriction and allow the degree of intergenerational

transmission to vary depending on whether both parents have died by 2006. If this is the case, it is

likely that the child has received an inheritance in the interim. To estimate the potential effect of

inheritances, we add a dummy variable for whether both parents are deceased in 2006 plus an

interaction of this dummy variable with adoptive parental wealth.34 The estimates are in Table 3.


33
   Charles, Hurst, and Killewald (2013) show that, in the U.S., wealthier individuals are likely to marry wealthier
spouses.
34
   We assume that biological parents of adoptive children will not have bequest motives for the children they gave up.
                                                                                                                  19
While we have added just more than 100 extra adoptive families to the sample, we still find a

statistically significant interaction effect of 0.28 in the trimmed sample (0.23 in the untrimmed

sample). This suggests that the rank correlation with adoptive parent wealth increases from 0.23

to 0.51 once inheritances are included. 35 This large effect is consistent with the findings of

Adermon et al. (2018) who use wealth and inheritances data and find that inheritance is an

important component of the intergenerational wealth elasticity in Sweden.



Non-Linear Effects and Nature/Nurture Interactions

         We have thus far assumed that the effects of biological and adoptive parents are

independent of each other. However, this may be an oversimplification if there are nature/nurture

interactions, one building on the other.36 In Table 4, we present results for non-linear models

where we allow for an interaction between biological and adoptive parents. First, in the top panel

of Table 4, we allow for a quadratic effect of parental wealth rank for the large sample of own-

birth children. We find that the relationship is convex, with the rank-rank relationship becoming

stronger at higher parental wealth ranks. In the bottom panel of Table 4, we report both linear and

quadratic models for adoptees and allow for interactions between biological and adoptive parental

wealth. Our primary interest is in the interaction term; we find that, while always positive, and

sometimes sizable, it is never statistically significant. To increase statistical power, we also relax

our sample restriction that biological fathers are known and we use only mother’s wealth to

construct the wealth ranks in order to increase precision. However, the interaction terms remain


35
   There was an inheritance tax in Sweden until December 2004 when it was abolished. When it was in effect, heirs
paid a progressive tax rate of between 10% and 30% on inheritances above a 70,000 SEK deductible (about $8000).
This would tend to reduce the inheritance effect that we find.
36
   There are mixed findings in the literature about these types of interactions – Björklund, Lindahl, and Plug (2006)
find evidence of these interactions for mothers' education and fathers' earnings, although more recent work by
Branden, Lindahl, and Öckert (2018) finds that nature/nurture interactions for education, earnings, and cognitive skills
are either zero or non-positive. Lindquist, Sol, and van Praag (2015) find no evidence for these interactions when
studying entrepreneurship and Black et al. (2017) find no evidence for them when studying risky investment behavior.
                                                                                                                    20
statistically insignificant and are sometimes negative. (See Appendix Table 3.) Overall, we

conclude that there is little evidence of nature/nurture interactions in the transmission of parental

wealth, although we have limited statistical power to identify these effects.37



5. Robustness Checks

Non-Random Assignment

        As noted above, our identification strategy assumes that children are randomly assigned to

adoptive parents; this assumption will be violated if adoptees are systematically matched to

adoptive parents who are similar to their biological parents. The fact that we can observe and

control for the wealth rank of the biological parents mitigates these concerns, and previous studies

using these adoption data have shown that, while children are not assigned randomly to adoptive

parents, the resultant biases are likely to be small.

        The concern is that children may have been assigned to adoptive parents in such a way that

there are correlations between net wealth of adoptive (biological) parents and unobserved

characteristics of the biological (adoptive) parents that are correlated with child wealth after

controlling for biological (adoptive) parents’ wealth (in our trimmed sample, the correlation

between net wealth rank of adoptive and biological parents is 0.075).

        As a test, in Appendix Table 2, we follow much of the literature by showing that,

conditional on the wealth rank of biological parents, the coefficient on the wealth rank of adoptive

(biological) parents is not sensitive to adding controls for additional characteristics of biological

(adoptive) parents. These controls include education and within-cohort earnings rank included

separately for mothers and fathers. This suggests that our estimates are unlikely to be significantly



37
   We have also estimated nature/nurture interactions using a measure of wealth that includes pensions and found no
statistically significant effects.
                                                                                                               21
biased by non-random assignment. However, given that adding these variables has little effect on

the explanatory power of the regression, this test has little power.

       As a further robustness check, we conduct a Monte Carlo simulation based on the observed

data to illustrate the bias induced by non-random assignment. Instead of random assignment, the

simulation assumes that the adoption agency chooses adoptive parents that are similar to the

biological parents. The methodology and results are discussed in detail in Appendix 3, but again

we conclude that the bias is likely insignificant. The simulation highlights that a major advantage

of having information on biological parents is that we can control for biological parental wealth in

our specifications. To the extent that the adoption authorities attempt to match children to parents

who have similar characteristics to the biological parents, controlling for biological parental wealth

will reduce any bias in the coefficient on adoptive parental wealth resulting from non-random

assignment.



Age at Measurement of Wealth

       While we have chosen to measure wealth when the children were at their oldest (in 2006)

to avoid them being too young to have accumulated wealth and when the parents were at their

youngest (in 1999) in order to avoid issues of retirement, we next test the sensitivity of our

conclusions to these choices.

       By measuring child wealth in 2006, we are measuring it as late as possible in our data, and

all children are aged at least 36. However, there is still the concern that, because it is relatively

early in their career for many of these children, our measure of wealth may not be representative

of their wealth at later ages. Figure 4a plots child wealth by age. There is a clear life-cycle pattern

to wealth accumulation and our children (aged 36-56) are at ages at which wealth is still increasing.

However, the fact that we are not measuring child wealth at its maximum does not imply that our

                                                                                                    22
nature/nurture estimates are biased, as the relative importance of these factors may not change

much over these ages.38 Appendix Figure 1a shows the distribution of within-cohort net wealth

rank correlations estimated by child age in the large sample of biological parents and own-birth

children. These figures suggest that the rank correlation is not sensitive to the age of the child at

measurement.

        Figure 4b plots net wealth by age for the full sample of parents with children born between

1950 and 1970. We see that net wealth increases between age 50 and 60 and then is remarkably

stable from the late 50s to the mid-80s. Appendix Figure 1b shows the distribution of within-cohort

net wealth rank correlations estimated by parent age in the large sample of biological parents and

own-birth children. The estimates increase until about age 60 and then stabilize at about 0.35.

These figures are reassuring, as they imply that the fact that many of our adoptive parents are quite

old (the average age of adoptive parents is 68.6 in 1999) is unlikely to make their wealth levels

unrepresentative. If anything, it may be that the biological parents of our adoptive children are a

little young at measurement (average age is 59.6 in 1999); we show later that our results are robust

to measuring their wealth in 2006 when their average age is 65.5.

        In Table 5, we address these issues more formally by allowing for differential effects

depending on the age at which wealth is measured. For children, we create a dummy equal to 1 if

they are born between 1961 and 1970 (and so aged between 36 and 45 at wealth measurement)

and we interact this with wealth of both types of parents. We include these interactions in Column

1; in this specification, the main effects can be interpreted as the effects of parental wealth for

children aged between 46 and 56 at measurement. We see that the interaction effects are


38
   Research by Boserup et al (2014) using data from Denmark suggests that the intergenerational rank correlation of
wealth reaches its long-term value by the time children are in their teens, suggesting measurement in the child’s 30s
is unlikely to be a problem. This may be particularly true because we use within-cohort rank as our measure of net
wealth. Nybom and Stuhler (2017) show that, in the case of income, the intergenerational rank correlation is much
more robust to age at measurement than is the intergenerational elasticity.
                                                                                                                 23
statistically insignificant and the main effects are similar to those in Table 2 Column 2.39 This

suggests that our estimates are not sensitive to the age of child at wealth measurement.

        In Column 2 of Table 5, we similarly test whether the coefficient estimates depend on

parental age at measurement. Given our findings above, we define a younger group of parents who

are aged less than 60 at measurement and we interact this indicator with parental wealth. The main

effects can then be interpreted as the effects of parental wealth for the parents aged 60 or more.

Once again, the interaction terms are statistically insignificant and the main effects are very similar

to earlier estimates. In Column 3, we include interactions with the age dummies for both parents

and children and once again find insignificant interaction terms. It appears that the relative

contribution of nature and nurture is largely invariant to the exact age at measurement of wealth

of parents and children in our sample.

        Another potential issue is that biological parents are on average 9 years younger than the

adoptive parents in 1999 (average age of 59.6 versus 68.6). Given that there are life-cycle patterns

in wealth-holding, our conclusions may be sensitive to this difference. To address this, we measure

the wealth of adoptive parents in 1999 and biological parents in 2006, thus largely eliminating the

age gap at measurement. Column 4 of Table 5 reports these estimates. Once again, we find that

the estimates are similar to our main specification in Table 2 Column 2.



Components of Wealth

        We next examine whether the patterns we observe are driven by one type of wealth (for

example, real estate/housing wealth). Our primary measure (net wealth) equals gross wealth less

debts. However, for the individual components, we do not observe debts, only assets. We consider


39
   We have also tried interactions using a continuous child age variable and found the interactions to be small and
statistically insignificant.

                                                                                                               24
the following categories of gross wealth -- financial wealth held in "safe" assets, financial wealth

held in "risky" assets (stocks and mutual funds containing stocks), wealth held in the primary

home, and other real assets. Figure 5 shows the allocation of gross wealth across the four

categories. As expected, children hold a larger share of their gross wealth in residential housing

than their parents do, as do biological parents of adoptees relative to other parents.

       For each type of wealth, we again examine the relationship between the rank of that

component within cohort for parents and children using the trimmed sample, where the trimming

is based on net wealth as before (thus maintaining the same sample as in Table 2 Column 2).

Column 1 of Appendix Table 4 presents our net wealth results (from Table 2), while Column 2

presents our results when the within-cohort rank of gross wealth for both parents and children is

used; the intergenerational relationships for gross wealth are quite similar to those for net wealth,

suggesting that it may be reasonable to look at gross wealth in different categories in the absence

of measures of net wealth. For all the components of wealth (Columns 3-6), the estimates for

adoptive parents are positive, indicating that if adoptive parents hold a greater amount of a

particular type of asset, so do their children. Interestingly, the coefficients for each component are

lower than for gross wealth, suggesting less intergenerational persistence in any particular asset

class than in wealth as a whole. This is true for both biological and adoptive parents. Importantly,

the net wealth findings are not being driven by one type of wealth holding.



Different Transformations of Net Wealth

       Thus far, we have used the within-cohort rank as our measure of net wealth as this

transformation fits the linear model best in our data. However, we next test the sensitivity of our

conclusions to this choice. In addition to within-cohort rank, we consider the inverse hyperbolic

sine transformation as well as the level of net wealth.

                                                                                                   25
         Charles and Hurst (2003) use a log transformation for both parent and child wealth.

However, this requires excluding all cases in which either parent or child has negative net wealth,

and many individuals have non-positive net wealth. 40 To avoid using a selected sample, we use

the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation (IHS) rather than logs.41 The IHS transformation of

wealth, W, is < = =>?@! + √! ) + 1C and behaves as log(!) for positive values.

         Appendix Table 6 presents the results when we estimate equation (1) using these alternative

measures of net wealth as our variables of interest. The IHS estimates for own-birth children

(Columns 1 and 3) suggest an intergenerational elasticity of about 0.25—the results are relatively

constant whether the data are trimmed or not. Among adoptees, (Columns 2 and 4), we find

coefficients of 0.08 on biological parents’ wealth and 0.24 on adoptive parents’ wealth, and these

relative patterns change little when we trim the data (although the adoptive effect increases to

0.33).42

         Columns 5-8 show the relationship between parental and child net wealth when wealth is

simply reported in levels.        The levels estimate among own-birth children is about 0.2 in the full

sample but jumps to 0.3 when we exclude wealth levels in the bottom and top 5% of the distribution

of ranks (Columns 5 and 7). This large change reflects the underlying non-linearities in the data.

Finally, when we consider adoptees, the adoptive parent coefficient is 0.21 and the biological

coefficient is 0.03 in the full sample; once we trim the data, the coefficient on biological parental



40
   Appendix Table 5 provides a breakdown of the proportions of sample members who have positive and negative net
wealth. In the sample of own-birth children, 25% have negative wealth. For adoptive children, this number is 31%.
As discussed by Boserup et al. (2014), standard life-cycle theory would predict negative wealth for young persons
with increasing earnings profiles. Unsurprisingly, the proportions with negative wealth are lower for parents, both
because they are older and because we are adding the wealth of the father and the mother. Among parents of own-
birth children, 9.4% have negative wealth; this percentage is 4.4% for adoptive parents and 26.1% for biological
parents of adoptees. This provides further evidence that biological parents of adoptees are negatively selected.
41
   The IHS is advocated by Pence (2006) as a superior alternative to using logs when studying wealth data.
42
   Due to the nature of the transformation, IHS estimates vary depending on the units of wealth used but the general
conclusions stand. For example, if wealth is measured in 1000 Krona rather than Krona, the IHS estimate for biological
parents in the trimmed sample equals 0.1 and the adoptive estimate equals 0.4.
                                                                                                                  26
wealth almost triples to 0.09 compared with 0.22 for adoptive parental wealth. We place limited

credence on the untrimmed estimates for the levels specification, however, given the sensitivity to

outliers.43 Overall, our conclusions of the greater importance of adoptive parent’s wealth relative

to that of biological parents are robust to the choice of specification for net wealth.



Missing Fathers

         As described above, we are missing information on a substantial number of biological

parents because the identity of the father was not recorded at the time of the adoption. To assess

whether our results are sensitive to this missing information, we have run the regression estimating

only the adoptive coefficient for all adoptees, regardless of whether the information for the

biological father is present. The results, presented in Appendix Table 7 Columns 1 and 2, show

that the environmental effects are similar in the less selected sample.



Other Robustness Checks

         We report further robustness checks in Appendix Table 7. Column 3 presents the baseline

results for the trimmed sample from Table 2 Column 2 for comparison. In Column 4, we consider

whether our conclusions are sensitive to correlations between wealth and residence. It may be that

the wealth of parents and children are correlated because both live in an area that has high wealth

levels -- for example, they may both live in an area with high property values. To examine this, in

Column 4, we add controls for county of residence of parents in 1999 and children in 2006. This

has no effect on the estimates.

         While our wealth data are high quality and unlikely to suffer from significant measurement



43
  We have tried implementing median regression, which is less sensitive to outliers, and found estimates for the level
of biological and adoptive parental wealth that are similar to OLS, even when using the full untrimmed sample.
                                                                                                                  27
error, there could be transitory shocks to wealth that lead our estimates based on single years of

wealth data to be misleading. Therefore, in Column 5 of Appendix Table 7, we measure child

wealth as the average in 2004-06 and parental wealth as the average over 1999-2001. We find that

the averaging makes no appreciable difference to the estimates.44



6. Why Does Parental Wealth Matter?

        While we have established the relative importance of environment over nature for the

intergenerational transmission of wealth, the exact mechanisms of wealth transmission are more

difficult to ascertain.

        Wealthier parents tend to be better educated and earn higher earnings--among adoptive

parents, the correlation between wealth rank and earnings rank is 0.22 and that between wealth

rank and average education is 0.28. Higher parental education and income could lead to the

increased wealth of their children through, for example, teaching them about investment

opportunities or providing the right opportunities in the labor market. However, as we saw in

Column 3 of Appendix Table 2, the inclusion of controls for adoptive parents’ education and

within-cohort earnings rank, included separately for mothers and fathers, has negligible effects on

the coefficients on adoptive parental wealth, suggesting that adoptive parental wealth is not simply

proxying for other parental characteristics that correlate with child wealth.

        In Table 6, we examine how parental wealth relates to other child outcomes that may affect

child wealth. Wealthy parents may invest more in their child’s education, which could then lead

to higher child wealth accumulation--either directly through increased educational attainment or


44
   Given we only have wealth data for 7 years, we cannot follow some of the earnings literature that has compared
estimates from earnings averaged over the whole life course to estimates using a smaller time span (e.g. Nybom and
Stuhler, 2017). However, wealth is very highly correlated across years. Our conclusions are insensitive to using
different years of data or averaging over all 7 years of wealth data, suggesting again that they are not driven by
transitory shocks to wealth.
                                                                                                              28
indirectly through higher earnings. Similarly, wealthy parents could help their children obtain

better (high earning) jobs, either directly through networks or indirectly through investments in

education. If so, we would expect positive relationships between adoptive parental wealth and

child educational attainment, earnings, and income. We show the effects of parental wealth on

these outcomes in the first three columns of Table 6. Interestingly, while the effect of adoptive

parental wealth on these variables is positive, it is not very large and is smaller than the effect of

biological parental wealth.

        Wealthy parents may also affect the financial decision-making behavior of their children.

Wealth of parents and children may be correlated because wealthy parents teach their children to

save a larger fraction of their income, thereby leading them to accumulate more wealth. To

examine this, we study the savings rate of the child’s household.45 In Column 4 of Table 6, we

see that a child’s savings rate rank is actually negatively related to adoptive parent’s wealth;

children of wealthy parents save less for a given level of disposable income, perhaps anticipating

future gifts or bequests from their adoptive parents.

        Another possible mechanism is through investment behavior. Wealthier parents may teach

their children to invest their assets differently, which could over time lead to different levels of

wealth accumulation. 46 To examine this, we calculate the within-cohort rank of the share of

children’s assets in each of four different categories: Safe financial wealth, Risky financial wealth,

Residential wealth, and Other real estate wealth. We can also directly calculate the return on

investment in financial assets using our detailed asset-level information on the securities held. We

see in Columns 5 to 9 of Table 6 that, among adoptees, wealthier biological and adoptive parents



45
   Note that we have fewer observations for the measure of the savings rate as it is derived from consumption and we
cannot calculate consumption for all households (see Appendix 2 for details).
46
   Fagereng et al. (2016) show that there is a mild positive correlation between the return on wealth of parents and
children in Norway.
                                                                                                                29
tend to have children who invest more in risky financial assets and have a higher return on their

financial investments.47

         Can these effects of parental wealth on various child outcomes “explain” the effects on

child wealth? This is difficult to answer given the endogeneity of all these variables, but we can

get some idea by adding controls for these child outcomes into the regression of child wealth on

parental wealth and seeing what effect this has on the parental wealth coefficients. When we do

this, we can “explain” almost 50% of the effect of the biological parent’s wealth effect on

children’s wealth, while we are able to “explain” only about 28% of the adoptive parent’s wealth

effect.48 Given that most of the environmental effect remains unexplained by earnings, savings

rates, and investment returns, direct financial transfers from parents to children are a likely

explanation for much of the environmental effect. 49 Unfortunately, we do not have data on

financial transfers that would allow us to study this directly.



7. How Is Wealth Different?

         Given the strong environmental component of the intergenerational transmission of wealth,

how does this fit into our understanding of the role of environment in intergenerational mobility

more broadly? We next provide a more comprehensive picture of the role of nature versus nurture


47
   This is consistent with the findings of Charles and Hurst (2003) as well as recent research of our own showing that
financial risk-taking has both nature and nurture components (Black, et al, 2017).
48
   Note too that this 28% figure reflects what we can account for in a mechanical sense; it does not imply that we have
unearthed causal pathways. For example, the reduction in the adoptive coefficient when we include child’s asset
allocation does not necessarily result from a higher return on investment for the child. It could just reflect the fact that
wealthier people tend to have higher portfolio shares in risky financial wealth and in non-residential real estate and so
these variables, in part, proxy for child wealth.
49
   Inter-vivos transfers from adoptive parents to their children after 1999 (when parental wealth is measured) will show
up in the measured wealth of both parents and children, prior to 1999, it will appear in only the children’s wealth.
Conceptually, inter-vivos transfers from adoptive parents to their children that took place before 1999 could lead us
to estimate either a higher or lower environmental effect. If it is the relatively wealthy parents who give to already
relatively wealthy children, this selection effect of who gives will tend to increase the positive correlation between the
wealth rank of adoptive parents and that of their children. Offsetting this, any transfer will reduce parental wealth rank
and increase child wealth rank, leading to a tendency towards a negative relationship. If the selection effect dominates,
inter-vivos transfers will lead to larger environmental effects.
                                                                                                                        30
in intergenerational mobility by examining how this conclusion compares to those for other child

outcomes. In this section, we examine how the wealth results compare to estimates for a variety

of characteristics and outcomes, some previously considered in other papers using adoption data,

but using a common sample and methodology. To ensure comparability with our wealth estimates,

we impose the same sample restrictions that we used in the wealth analysis.

       Intergenerational correlations can arise for a number of reasons. These include pathways

related to genetics (nature), such as genetic transmission of abilities (e.g. IQ) and /or preferences

(e.g. time preferences and attitudes towards risk), as well as pathways related to

environment. Environmental factors (nurture) can include parental investments in children

(through time or resources), parental influences on behavior through role model effects or

imitation, parental non-financial assistance in labor or financial markets such as information

provision, contacts, networks, and career advice, or parental financial assistance such as gifts and

loans. We expect the relative role of nature and nurture to vary across outcomes based on the

relative importance of these channels for each particular outcome. For human capital, genetic

transmission of IQ and time preferences are likely to be important, as are parental investments and

role model effects. We might expect environmental influences to be more important for

earnings/income than for human capital as career help from parents through contacts and networks

becomes more relevant. For wealth, we expect a larger environmental effect as there is the

additional channel of parents giving direct financial assistance to children, and this effect should

become stronger after bequests. The relative role of nature and nurture for risky market investment

should depend partly on the relative importance of genetic inheritance of risk attitudes versus the

role of parents in providing information and shaping attitudes towards risk. Likewise for the

savings rate, findings should depend in part on the relative importance of genetic transmission of

time preferences versus raising parental influence on attitudes towards saving and on the child’s

                                                                                                  31
financial situation.

        We first examine educational attainment.                When we consider the average years of

schooling of parents (Table 7 Column 1), we find that child education is more closely related to

the education of the biological rather than the adoptive parents. This finding—that nature is more

important for human capital accumulation than is nurture—is consistent with the earlier work by

Björklund, Lindahl and Plug (2006).

        When we examine income and earnings ranks of fathers (Columns 3 and 4), we find that

nurture is more important--the adoptive effect is about 50% larger than the biological one and the

differential for income is similar.50 We find similar but more precise estimates when we increase

the sample size by not restricting to persons in our wealth sample (Appendix Table 8). For these

variables, Björklund, Lindahl and Plug (2006) also find larger adoptive than biological effects but

they find bigger differences, particularly for income.51

         We next turn to the intergenerational correlation in investment behavior. The variables

we consider are an indicator for risky market participation (whether either parent owns stocks or

mutual funds with a stock component) and the share of financial assets held in these risky assets

(Columns 4 and 5). When we study risky market participation, we find somewhat larger effects

for adoptive parents than for biological parents, but the difference is not statistically significant.

When we examine the share of financial wealth invested in risky assets, we focus on the intensive

margin by restricting the sample to children who hold risky assets and controlling for indicator

variables for whether the parents’ have any investments in risky financial assets. We find that the

adoptive effects are much larger than the biological effects; these estimates are consistent with our


50
   We study fathers’ earnings and income because labor force participation was relatively low for mothers during this
period (Björklund, Lindahl and Plug (2006) also focus on earnings and income of fathers).
51 Our measures are somewhat different from theirs as we use ranks while they use logs. We have replicated their

estimates using their sample period (1962-1966) and sample restrictions and we find estimates that are very close to
theirs. These results are available from the authors upon request.
                                                                                                                 32
earlier work (Black et al. 2017) where we used a broader range of cohorts (1950-1980).

         Finally, in Columns 6 and 7 of Table 7, we consider the intergenerational relationships for

two variables that have not previously been studied in this literature – household savings rates and

consumption.52

         Since Friedman (1953), variation in the savings rate has been considered an important

determinant of cross-sectional variation in wealth accumulation; as a result, understanding the

determinants of an individual’s savings rate provides insight into the causes of the substantial

wealth inequality we observe in society. Lusardi (1998) shows that savings behavior is linked to

individual characteristics including time and risk preferences. But are these preferences genetic or

are they shaped by nurture as parental behaviors lead to transmission of their own preferences to

their children? Importantly, when we study the savings rate rank of the household (Column 6), we

find no evidence that it is biological but find a clear environmental effect, suggesting a strong role

for raising parents in influencing savings behavior.53

         Finally, we complete the picture by examining the intergenerational transmission of

consumption—a summary measure of economic well-being—and distinguish the role of nature

versus nurture. The results when we regress the rank of child’s household consumption on that of

the children’s adoptive and biological parents are presented in Column 7.                                Given child

consumption is likely to be strongly influenced by household size, in addition to the usual controls,

we include an indicator variable for whether the child is married and a control for the family size

of the child. Among own-birth families, our estimate is 0.18. Panel 2 presents the results from our


52
   As noted earlier, consumption can vary significantly by year due to the purchase of durables, so we average
consumption across the 2000 to 2006 period for each household. Because consumption is fundamentally measured at
the household level (and savings rates are calculated using consumption), we place an additional restriction on our
sample that parents and children not live in the same household and only measure consumption for those years in
which both parents are still alive. If parents are not living together in the same household, we average saving rates and
consumption across both households.
53
   This result is quite different from Cronqvist and Siegel (2015) who argue that genetic differences explain a
substantial fraction of the variation in savings propensities in a study of fraternal and identical twins.
                                                                                                                     33
sample of adoptees. The rank correlation for adoptive parents and children is 0.13, a little larger

than that of 0.09 for biological parents, suggesting again a stronger role for environment over

biology.



Nonlinearities and Nature/Nurture Interactions in Other Outcomes

         Given the existing attention to non-linearities and complementarities in childhood

investments (See, for example, Cunha, Heckman, Lochner, and Masterov 2006; Cunha and

Heckman 2007), a natural next question is whether these effects are nonlinear and whether nature

and nurture interact. Is the effect of adoptive parental income on child income, for example, higher

when children have biological parents with relatively high income? In Tables 8a and 8b, we allow

for quadratics and nature/nurture interactions in these models. While there are some non-

linearities, consistent with our earlier findings for wealth, across all these variables there is very

little evidence that nature/nurture interactions are important, with none of the interactions being

statistically significant. This finding remains when we examine education, earnings, and income

using the largest sample available (Appendix Table 9), suggesting the statistical insignificance is

not purely due to lack of power in the wealth samples. This finding differs from Björklund, Lindahl

and Plug (2006) but is consistent with the recent analysis of the Swedish register data by Branden

et al. (2018) who find that nature/nurture interaction terms for education and income/earnings tend

to be very small or negative.54

         Taken together with our new estimates for wealth, these findings paint an interesting

picture. In Figure 6, we plot the biological and adoptive coefficients for the variables we study,


54
  When we restrict the analysis to the exact same cohorts used in Björklund, Lindahl and Plug (2006), we are able to
replicate their result of a positive nature/nurture interaction found in some specification. These results are available
on request. Since Björklund, Lindahl and Plug (2006) only use cohorts born during the latter part of our study period
(1962-1966), one interpretation is that the interaction may have become more important over time. Future research
should revisit the issue of nature/nurture interactions using larger samples and in other settings.
                                                                                                                    34
also including the 45-degree line. Points above the line imply a larger adoptive coefficient; points

below the line have greater biological coefficients. Human capital linkages between parents and

children appear to have stronger biological than environmental roots, suggesting a potentially

important role for innate ability. However, despite this, earnings and income are, if anything, more

environmental, suggesting that persistence in earnings and income across generations is not pre-

ordained but a function of opportunity at birth. Outcomes and behaviors that are more directly

related to wealth, such as savings and investment behavior, are disproportionately environmental,

with wealth including inheritances at the extreme. The difference in results between the

transmission of wealth and human capital is striking, and the greater environmental contribution

in the transmission of wealth is consistent with dynasties that transfer wealth and labor market

advantages across generations regardless of abilities.



8. Conclusions

         There is an extensive body of research documenting a correlation in wealth across

generations, with limited understanding of the underlying causes of this relationship. Taking

advantage of unique data from Sweden that link adopted children to both their biological and

adoptive parents, we disentangle the role of nature versus nurture in the intergenerational

transmission of wealth.

         We find a substantial role for environmental influences with a smaller role for biological

factors, suggesting that wealth transmission is not primarily because children from wealthier

families are inherently more talented or more able. Instead, it suggests that pre-birth endowment

is a relatively small factor in this intergenerational relationship.55 We also find that the role of



55
  The adoption estimates remove transmission due to genetic factors as well as factors related to prenatal environment
and the pre-adoption post-natal environment (if measured through biological parent’s wealth). Hence, our finding of
                                                                                                                  35
adoptive parental wealth becomes much stronger when bequests are taken into account.

Importantly, our conclusions are robust to a variety of specification and robustness checks.

        We find that the intergenerational wealth relationship between children and their adoptive

parents is unaffected by adding controls for adoptive parental earnings and education, suggesting

that wealth is not just proxying for other parental characteristics. The relationship is only partly

explained by child outcomes such as earnings, education, savings behavior, or investment returns.

Indeed, the effect of adoptive parental wealth on child education and earnings are not very strong

and savings rates are lower for children of wealthier parents. These results suggest that financial

transfers from parents to children may be an important factor, even before children receive

bequests. However, we have no information on financial gifts to study this directly.

        We also provide a more comprehensive view of the determinants of intergenerational

mobility more generally. In addition to wealth, we examine the role of nature versus nurture for

intergenerational transmission of a range of variables that have been studied with the Swedish data

before (years of schooling, earnings, income, risky market participation, and risky share) and two

important variables that have not (savings rates and consumption). By using a common set of

cohorts and methods, we determine that biology is relatively important for human capital

accumulation but environment is more important for wealth-related variables such as investment

behavior and savings rates and for wealth itself, particularly after bequests have transferred to

children. We conclude that biology is important for skill transfers but less important for wealth, as

dynasties can transfer wealth across generations regardless of their skills and abilities.

        When we study consumption as an overall measure of welfare, we find that it is also more

related to environment than to biology. As such, we conclude that environmental factors are



a large environmental contribution to the overall wealth transmission is probably a lower bound of the total
environmental contribution.
                                                                                                        36
important for well-being. Overall, our results suggest that the children with wealthy, high-

consuming parents benefit not just from good genetics but, more importantly, benefit from growing

up with more advantages. As wealth and consumption become more unequally distributed,

children from poorer families have fewer opportunities relative to children from wealthier families,

suggesting a potential role for policy to equalize opportunities and to mitigate intergenerational

disparities.




                                                                                                 37
References

Adermon, A., Lindahl, M., & Waldenström, D. (2018). Intergenerational Wealth Mobility and the
Role of Inheritance: Evidence from Multiple Generations. forthcoming, Economic Journal.

Almond, D., Currie, J., & Duque, V. (2017). Childhood Circumstances and Adult Outcomes: Act
II (No. w23017). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Björklund, A., Lindahl, M., & Plug, E. (2006). The origins of intergenerational associations:
Lessons from Swedish adoption data. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 999-1028.

Björklund, A., Roine, J., and Waldenström, D. (2012). Intergenerational top income mobility in
Sweden: Capitalist dynasties in the land of equal opportunity? Journal of Public Economics, 96:
474-484.

Black, S. E., & Devereux, P. J. (2011). Recent developments in intergenerational
mobility. Handbook of labor economics, eds. O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, 1487-1541. Amsterdam:
Elsevier.

Black S.E., Devereux, P.J., Lundberg P., and K. Majlesi (2017). On the Origins of Risk-Taking in
Financial Markets. Journal of Finance 2017.

Black S.E., Devereux, P. J., & Salvanes, K. G. (2007). “From the Cradle to the Labor Market? The
Effect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1), 409-439.

Boserup, S. H., W. Kopczuk and C. Thustrup Kreiner (2014). Intergenerational Wealth Mobility:
Evidence from Danish Wealth Records of Three Generations. Working Paper, University of
Copenhagen.

Branden, G., M. Lindahl, and B. Ockert (2018). The Importance of Nature-Nurture Interactions
for Socioeconomic Outcomes: Evidence from a Large Sample of Adoptees. Working Paper.

Calvet, L. E., Campbell, J. Y., & Sodini, P. (2007). Down or Out: Assessing the Welfare Costs of
Household Investment Mistakes. Journal of Political Economy, 115(5), 707-747.

Calvet, L. E., & Sodini, P. (2014). Twin Picks: Disentangling the Determinants of Risk-Taking in
Household Portfolios. The Journal of Finance, 69(2), 867-906.

Cesarini, D., Johannesson, M., Lichtenstein, P., Sandewall, Ö., & Wallace, B. (2010). Genetic
Variation in Financial Decision-Making. The Journal of Finance, 65(5), 1725-1754.

Cesarini, D., Johannesson, M., & Oskarsson, S. (2014). Pre-birth factors, post-birth factors, and
voting: Evidence from Swedish adoption data. American Political Science Review, 108(01), 71-
87.

Charles, K.K., & Hurst, E. (2003). The Correlation of Wealth across Generations. Journal of
Political Economy, 111(6).

                                                                                              38
Charles, K. K., Hurst, E., & Killewald, A. (2013). Marital sorting and parental
wealth. Demography, 50(1), 51-70.

Clark, G. and N. Cummins (2014). Intergenerational Wealth Mobility in England, 1858–2012:
Surnames and Social Mobility. Economic Journal 125(582): 61–85.

Cronqvist, H., & Siegel, S. (2015). The Origins of Savings Behavior. Journal of Political
Economy, 123(1), 123-169.

Cunha, Flavio, and James J. Heckman (2007), “the Technology of Skill Formation,” American
Economic Review, Volume 97, Issue 2, pp. 31-47.

Cunha, Flavio, James J. Heckman, Dimitryi Masterov, and Lance Lochner (2006), “Interpreting
the Evidence on Life Cycle Skill Formation” in The Handbook of Econmics of Education, edited
by E. Hanushek and F. Welch, pp. 697-812. Amsterdam: North Holland.

Dreber, A., Apicella, C.L., Eisenberg, D.T.A., Garcia, J.R., Zamore, R.S., 2009. The 7R
polymorphism in the dopamine receptor D4 gene (DRD4) is associated with financial risk-taking
in men. Evolution and Human Behavior 30, 85–92.

Fagereng, A., Mogstad, M., & Rønning, M. (2015). Why do wealthy parents have wealthy
children? unpublished manuscript.

Fagereng, A., Guiso, L., Malacrino D., and L. Pistaferri (2016). Heterogeneity and Persistence in
Returns to Wealth. Working Paper.

Figlio, D., Guryan, J., Karbownik, K., & Roth, J. (2014). The effects of poor neonatal health on
children's cognitive development. The American Economic Review, 104(12), 3921-3955.

Friedman, M. 1953. “Choice, Chance, and the Personal Distribution of Income.” Journal of
Political Economy, 61: 277–90.

Hjalmarsson, R., & Lindquist, M. J. (2013). The origins of intergenerational associations in crime:
lessons from Swedish adoption data. Labour Economics, 20, 68-81.

Holmlund, H., Lindahl, M., & Plug, E. (2011). The causal effect of parents' schooling on children's
schooling: a comparison of estimation methods. Journal of Economic Literature, 49(3), 615-651.

Koijen RSJ, Van Nieuwerburgh S, Vestman R. 2014. Judging the quality of survey data by
comparison with "truth" as measured by administrative records: Evidence from Sweden. In
Improving the Measurement of Consumer Expenditures. University of Chicago Press

Kuhnen, C.M. and Chiao, J. (2009). Genetic determinants of financial risk taking. PLoS ONE 4.

Lindahl, Mikael, Evalina Lundberg, Marten Palme, and Emilia Simeonova. (2016). Parental
Influences on Health and Longevity: Lessons from a Large Sample of Adoptees. NBER Working
Paper No. 21946.
                                                                                       39
Lindquist, M. J., Sol, J., & Van Praag, M. (2015). Why Do Entrepreneurial Parents Have
Entrepreneurial Children? Journal of Labor Economics, 33(2), 269-296.

Lusardi, A. 1998. “On the Importance of the Precautionary Saving Motive.” American Economic
Review 88: 449–53.

Mulligan, C. B. (1997). Parental priorities and economic inequality. University of Chicago Press.

Nordlöf, B. (2001). Svenska adoptioner i Stockholm (Swedish adoptions in Stockholm 1918–
1973, FOU-rapport 2001:8 Socialtjanstforvaltningen, Stockholm.

Nybom M & Stuhler J (2017) Biases in standard measures of intergenerational income
dependence. The Journal of Human Resources 52(4):800–825.

Pence, K. M. (2006). The role of wealth transformations: An application to estimating the effect
of tax incentives on saving. The BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 5(1).

Pfeffer, F. T., & Killewald, A. (2015). How Rigid is the Wealth Structure? Intergenerational
Correlations of Family Wealth. Unpublished Manuscript.

Piketty, Thomas. (2014). Capital in the Twenty-First Century. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.

Piketty, T., & Zucman, G. (2014). Capital is Back: Wealth-Income Ratios in Rich Countries 1700–
2010. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(3), 1255-1310.

Piketty, T., G. Zucman (2015). Wealth and Inheritance. Forthcoming as chapter in Atkinson, A.B.,
F. Bourguignon (eds.), Handbook of Income Distribution. Vol. 2, Amsterdam, North-Holland.

Sacerdote, B. (2010). Nature and nurture effects on children’s outcomes: What have we learned
from studies of twins and adoptees. Handbook of social economics, 1, 1-30.

Segendorf, B., A. Wilbe. (2014). Har kontanter någon framtid som lagligt betalningsmedel?
Ekonomiska kommentarer nr 9. Stockholm: Sveriges Riksbank.

Socialstyrelsen (2014). Adoption. Handbok för socialtjänstens handläggning av internationella och
nationella adoptioner. Falun: 2014.

SOU (1954). Moderskapsförsäkring mm. Socialförsäkringsutredningens betänkande II. Statens
Offentliga Utredningar 1954:4. Stockholm: Socialdepartementet.

SOU (2009). Modernare adoptionsregler. Betänkande av 2008 års adoptionsutredning. Statens
Offentliga Utredningar 2009:61. Stockholm: Socialdepartementet.

Thörnqvist, T., & Vardardottir, A. (2014). Bargaining over Risk: The Impact of Decision Power
on Household Portfolios. Manuscript.


                                                                                              40
Figure 1a: Within-Cohort Wealth Rank Relationship between Parents and Own-birth Children




Figure 1b: Within-Cohort Wealth Rank Relationship between Parents and Own-birth Children
    Parents in the top and bottom 5% of the within-cohort wealth distribution are dropped




                                                                                            41
Figure 2: Within-Cohort Wealth Rank Relationship between Adopted Children and Their Biological and Adoptive Parents




         Notes: Line represents local linear approximation and shading represents the 95% confidence interval.




                                                                                                                      42
Figure 3: Within-Cohort Wealth Rank Relationship between Adopted Children and Their Biological and Adoptive Parents (Trimmed Sample)




                  Notes: Line represents local linear approximation and shading represents the 95% confidence interval.




                                                                                                                                       43
               Figure 4a: Net Wealth by Age for Children Born between 1950 and 1970.




Notes: Child Net Wealth in 1000 SEK. Line represents local linear approximation and shading
represents the 95% confidence interval.

Figure 4b: Net Wealth by Age for the Full Sample of Parents with Children Born between 1950 and
1970.




Notes: Parental Net Wealth in 1000 SEK. Line represents local linear approximation and shading
represents the 95% confidence interval.




                                                                                                  44
45
Figure 6: Coefficients on Adoptive versus Biological Parents




                                                               46
47
                                        Table 1a: Summary Statistics

                                               Own-birth children                    Adopted children
                                             Mean              SD                   Mean            SD
                                                                      Children
  Net Wealth Rank                           0.50                 0.29               0.48                0.30
  Net Wealth*                              634,413            3,138,855            610,218           1,650,647
  Age in 2006                               43.96                5.59               43.48               4.74
  Years of Schooling                        12.57                2.38               12.19               2.23
  Female                                    0.51                 0.50               0.53                0.50
  Earnings                                 215,490             134,889             197,700            132,695
  Income                                   225,433             492,036             207,098            157,081
  Market Participation                      0.57                 0.49               0.50                0.50
  Risky Share                               0.29                 0.34               0.24                0.33
  Mean Saving rate                          0.06                0.583               0.07               0.496
  Mean Consumption                         341,786             375,149             192,713            136,602
  Observations                                       1,219,014                               2,598
                                                                 Biological parents
  Net Wealth Rank                            0.50                0.29               0.34                0.27
  Net Wealth                              1,297,127           4,063,940          499,808             1,332,740
  Average Age in 1999                       64.16                7.46              60,04                6.69
  Average Years of Schooling                10.12                2.62               9.63                2.08
  Earnings, Father                         235,539             112,483           189,810              75,505
  Income, Father                           237,750             140,266           194,663              80,754
  Market Participation                       0.75                0.43               0.57                0.50
  Risky Share                                0.40                0.35               0.27                0.33
  Mean Saving rate                           0.06               0.683              0.115               0.559
  Mean Consumption                         302,342             268,370           236,662              171,694
                                                                  Adoptive parents
  Net Wealth Rank                                                                   0.55                0.28
  Net Wealth                                                                    1,660,851            4,415,320
  Average Age in 1999                                                              68.94                6.43
  Average Years of Schooling                                                       10.50                2.79
  Earnings, Father                                                               264,142              134,326
  Income, Father                                                                 271,755              146,856
  Market Participation                                                              0.80                0.40
  Risky Share                                                                       0.45                0.35
  Mean Saving rate                                                                  0.05               0.728
  Mean Consumption                                                               325,667              287,940

Notes: Net wealth is measured as of December 31, 1999 for parents and December 31, 2006 for children.
Monetary values are reported in Swedish Krona using December 31, 2000 values. At the time, the exchange
rate was 1 USD = 9.42 SEK. Parental wealth is calculated as combined wealth of the mother and father. Market
participation is defined as holding risky financial assets; stocks or mutual funds that include stock components.
Risky share is the share of risky assets in financial wealth. Risky share is not conditional on participation. For
parents, earnings and income are averaged over a twenty-year period running from 1970 to 1990. Earnings is
the total earnings of the parents. Income is the total income of the parents. For children, we take a three-year
average around age 36. Mean Consumption and Saving rates are measured as the average of the variable in the
mother’s household and the variable in the father’s household between 2000 and 2006.




                                                                                                        48
                  Table 1b: Summary Statistics: Components of Wealth

                                       Own-birth children         Adopted children
                                       Mean          SD          Mean          SD
                                                         Children
  Gross Wealth                       1,069,256 3,465,159 1,017,804 1.888,072
  Financial Wealth                    210,003    1,972,627      189,126     928,391
  Safe Financial Wealth               98,450      444,185       85,487      425,560
  Risky Financial Wealth              111,554    1,829,687      103,639     761,949
  Primary Residential Wealth          648,102     810,576       585,621     777,055
  Other Real Estate Wealth            190,747    1,563,112      215,423     923,313
  Observations                             1,219,014                   2,598
                                                    Biological parents
  Gross Wealth                       1,560,176 4,574,511        767,173    1,560,646
  Financial Wealth                    605,782    2,922,245      259,873     677,786
  Safe Financial Wealth               201,186    1,047,209      107,285     209,492
  Risky Financial Wealth              404,596    2,602,400      152,588     590,928
  Primary Residential Wealth          560,249     638,998       338,278     505,074
  Other Real Estate Wealth            284,137    2,188,296      132,919    1,002,663
                                                     Adoptive parents
  Gross Wealth                                                 1,887,799 4,804,067
  Financial Wealth                                              803,130    2,762,107
  Safe Financial Wealth                                         237,804     485,547
  Risky Financial Wealth                                        565,327    2,503,375
  Primary Residential Wealth                                    617,358     630,090
  Other Real Estate Wealth                                      313,506    1,943,038
Notes: Monetary variables are measured as of December 31, 1999 for parents and December 31,
2006 for children. Monetary values are reported in Swedish Krona using December 31, 2000
values. At the time, the exchange rate was 1 USD = 9.42 SEK. Parental wealth is calculated as
combined wealth of the mother and father.




                                                                                          49
                                                   Table 2: Intergenerational Wealth Relationships
                                        Dependent Variable: Child Rank in Within-Cohort Net Wealth Distribution
                                  (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)               (5)            (6)               (7)               (8)
                                                                     All Children                                                    Male             Female
                             Net Wealth       Net Wealth       Net Wealth       Net Wealth       Net Wealth Net Wealth            Net Wealth        Net Wealth
                             w/o Pensions     w/o Pensions    with Pensions with Pensions        w/o Pensions w/o Pensions        w/o Pensions      w/o Pensions
                                               Trimmed                           Trimmed          HH-level     HH-level            Trimmed           Trimmed
                                                                                                               Trimmed
 Own-birth Children

 Rank Parental                   0.344            0.328            0.219            0.191            0.334          0.319             0.346              0.309
 Net Wealth                   (0.001)***       (0.001)***       (0.001)***       (0.001)***       (0.001)***     (0.001)***        (0.001)***         (0.001)***

 Observations                 1,219,014         1,097,191       1,117,636         1,008,984       1,219,014      1,097,191          561,670            535,521
 R-squared                      0.152             0.124           0.100             0.083           0.142          0.115             0.128              0.116
 Adopted Children

 Rank Biological                 0.109            0.130           0.047             0.038            0.117          0.143             0.135              0.128
 Parents' Net Wealth          (0.022)***       (0.026)***       (0.024)**          (0.028)        (0.021)***     (0.026)***        (0.039)***         (0.037)***

 Rank Adoptive                   0.273            0.227            0.237            0.192            0.250          0.199             0.214              0.249
 Parents' Net Wealth          (0.021)***       (0.027)***       (0.024)***       (0.029)***       (0.021)***     (0.027)***        (0.037)***         (0.041)***

 Sum Biological &                0.382            0.357            0.284            0.230            0.367          0.342             0.349              0.377
 Adoptive Parents             (0.028)***       (0.035)***       (0.033)***       (0.039)***       (0.028)***     (0.035)***        (0.050)***         (0.054)***

  Observations                    2,598            2,027             2,059            1,684           2,598           2,027            1,069               958
  R-squared                       0.128            0.112             0.116            0.107           0.123           0.103            0.151              0.156
Notes: Columns 1 and 2 show the results where net wealth does not include pension wealth either for the parents or children. Columns 3 and 4 show the results for
the same sample where we have an estimate of pension wealth for the parents in 1999 and net wealth includes the imputed pension wealth for both parents and
children. In columns 5 and 6, we use the rank of children’s household wealth as the outcome variable. In columns 7 and 8, we run the regressions separately for
males and females. In columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 the top and bottom 5 percent of parental wealth distribution have been dropped. In Column 4, trimming is based on net
wealth of parents that includes imputed pension wealth. All specifications include cohort dummies for parents and children and controls for 25 region dummies of
where the parents lived in 1965. Specifications in Columns 1-6 include a control for child gender. Parental wealth is measured in 1999 and child wealth is measured
in 2006. All parents are alive in 1999. Parental wealth is calculated as combined wealth of the mother and father. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05. Standard errors clustered
by raising family.




                                                                                                                                                               50
                                Table 3: Intergenerational Wealth Relationships -- The Role of Inheritance
                                 Dependent Variable: Child Rank in Within-Cohort Wealth Distribution
                                                                                                (1)                         (2)
                                                                                                    Net Wealth w/o Pensions
                                                                                           Full sample                Trimmed sample
 Own-birth Children
 Rank Parental Net Wealth                                                                      0.344                            0.328
                                                                                            (0.001)***                       (0.001)***

 Both Parents Died by 2006*                                                                    0.122                            0.110
 Rank Parental Wealth                                                                       (0.005)***                       (0.006)***

 Both Parents Died by 2006                                                                    -0.031                           -0.024
                                                                                            (0.003)***                       (0.003)***

 Observations                                                                               1,253,369                         1,128,117
 R-squared                                                                                    0.154                             0.125
 Adopted Children
 Rank Biological Parents' Net Wealth                                                           0.108                            0.125
                                                                                            (0.021)***                       (0.025)***

 Rank Adoptive Parents' Net Wealth                                                             0.274                            0.226
                                                                                            (0.021)***                       (0.027)***

 Both Adoptive Parents Died by 2006*                                                           0.229                            0.283
 Rank Adoptive Parental Wealth                                                              (0.086)***                       (0.095)***

 Both Adoptive Parents Died by 2006                                                           -0.024                            -0.027
                                                                                             (0.046)                           (0.054)

  Observations                                                                                2,728                             2,131
  R-squared                                                                                   0.137                             0.124
Notes: All specifications include controls for child gender, cohort dummies for parents and children and 25 region dummies of where the parents
lived in 1965. Parental wealth is measured in 1999 and child wealth is measured in 2006. All parents are alive in 1999. Parental wealth is calculated
as combined wealth of the mother and father. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors clustered by raising family.




                                                                                                                                                 51
                                      Table 4: Non-linear Effects in Intergenerational Wealth Relationships

                                                                                           Full sample                           Trimmed Sample
                                                                                   (1)                    (2)                 (3)              (4)
 Own-birth Children

 Rank Biological Parents' Net Wealth                                              0.344                0.102                 0.328                0.187
                                                                               (0.001)***           (0.003)***            (0.001)***           (0.004)***
 Rank Biological Parents' Net Wealth Squared                                                           0.242                                      0.141
                                                                                                    (0.003)***                                 (0.004)***

 Observations                                                                  1,219,014             1,219,014            1,097,191            1,097,191
 R-squared                                                                       0.152                 0.156                0.124                0.124
 Adopted Children

 Rank Biological Parents' Net Wealth                                              0.088                0.139                 0.075                0.034
                                                                                (0.045)*              (0.087)               (0.062)              (0.121)
 Rank Biological Parents' Net Wealth Squared                                                           -0.044                                     0.049
                                                                                                      (0.086)                                    (0.117)
 Rank Adoptive Parents' Net Wealth                                                0.261                -0.022                0.193                0.164
                                                                               (0.033)***             (0.082)             (0.045)***             (0.120)
 Rank Adoptive Parents' Net Wealth Squared                                                             0.278                                      0.030
                                                                                                    (0.079)***                                   (0.115)
 Rank Biological Parents*                                                         0.037                0.014                 0.097                0.093
 Rank Adoptive Parents                                                           (0.075)              (0.076)               (0.105)              (0.106)

 Observations                                                                     2,598                  2,598              2,027                 2,027
 R-squared                                                                        0.128                  0.133              0.113                 0.113
Notes: All specifications include controls for child gender, cohort dummies for parents and children and 25 region dummies of where the parents lived in 1965.
Parental wealth is measured in 1999 and child wealth is measured in 2006. All parents are alive in 1999. Parental wealth is calculated as combined wealth of the
mother and father. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors clustered by raising family.




                                                                                                                                                            52
                                                Table 5: Measuring Wealth at Different Ages
                                     Dependent Variable: Child Rank in Within-Cohort Wealth Distribution
                                                                  (1)            (2)             (3)                                     (4)
                                                                                                                                  Biological Parents'
                                                                                                                                       Wealth
                                                                                                                                  Measured in 2006

  Rank Biological Parental Wealth                                        0.128              0.124              0.126                     0.085
                                                                       (0.048)**         (0.040)***          (0.047)**                (0.027)***
                                                                           *                                     *

  Rank Adoptive Parental Wealth                                          0.261              0.230              0.261                     0.246
                                                                       (0.046)**         (0.029)***          (0.046)**                (0.030)***
                                                                           *                                     *

  Rank Biological Parent Wealth * Child Aged 36-45                       0.003                                 -0.005
                                                                        (0.055)                                (0.066)

  Rank Adoptive Parent Wealth * Child Aged 36-45                         -0.052                                -0.049
                                                                        (0.057)                                (0.059)

  Rank Bio Parent Wealth*Bio Parent Aged less than 60                                       0.010               0.013
                                                                                           (0.052)             (0.062)

  Rank Ad Parent Wealth *Ad Parent Aged less than 60                                       -0.037              -0.020
                                                                                           (0.079)             (0.082)

  Observations                                                           2,027              2,027               2,027                     1,541
  R-squared                                                              0.113              0.112               0.113                     0.142
Notes: The top and bottom 5 percent of the parental wealth distribution have been dropped. All specifications include controls for child gender, cohort dummies
for parents and children and 25 region dummies of where the parents lived in 1965. Column (1) included indicator variables for children being aged 36-45, Column
(2) includes indicator variables for parents being aged less than 60, and Column (3) includes both these sets of indicators. Child wealth is measured in 2006.
Parental wealth is measured in 1999 except in Column (4) where biological parental wealth is measured in 2006. All parents are alive in 1999 and at least one




                                                                                                                                                            53
adoptive parent is alive in 2006. In Column (4), we require that both biological parents are alive in 2006. Parental wealth is calculated as combined wealth of the
mother and father. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors clustered by adoptive family.




                                                                                                                                                               54
  Table 6: Effects of Parental Wealth on Children’s Education, Earnings, Portfolio Allocation, Savings Rate and Return on Financial Investments
                                (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)             (8)              (9)

                              Years of      Earnings        Income       Saving          Safe          Risky       Value of        Value of Other     ROI Rank
                             Schooling       Rank            Rank       Rate Rank      Financial      Financial   Residential           Real
                                                                                        Wealth       Wealth Share  Wealth          Estate Wealth
                                                                                         Share          Rank        Share              Share
                                                                                         Rank                       Rank               Rank

   Own-birth Children
   Rank Parental               1.907          0.118          0.139     -0.075           -0.085           0.229          0.022           0.080            0.101
   Net Wealth               (0.008)***     (0.001)***     (0.001)*** (0.001)***       (0.001)***      (0.001)***     (0.001)***      (0.001)***       (0.001)***

   Observations              1,097,191      1,049,749     1,082,861     1,072,889      1,097,191       1,097,191      1,097,191       1,097,191       1,097,191
   R-squared                   0.082          0.215         0.224         0.016          0.007           0.057          0.010           0.012           0.017

   Adopted Children
   Rank Bio. Parental          1.606          0.088          0.100        -0.037        -0.047           0.119          0.014           0.035            0.072
   Net Wealth               (0.195)***     (0.024)***     (0.025)***     (0.027)        (0.029)       (0.025)***       (0.028)         (0.027)        (0.026)***

   Rank Ad. Parental           0.950          0.049          0.052        -0.151        -0.101           0.119          0.041           0.049            0.070
   Net Wealth               (0.200)***      (0.025)**      (0.025)**    (0.027)***    (0.030)***      (0.026)***       (0.029)         (0.026)*       (0.026)***

   Sum Biological &            2.556          0.137          0.151     -0.188            -0.148          0.238          0.055           0.084            0.142
   Adoptive Parents         (0.267)***     (0.034)***     (0.034)*** (0.037)***        (0.39)***      (0.033)***       (0.038)        (0.036)**       (0.035)***

    Observations                2,027         1877            1.987       1,980           2,027          2,027          2,027           2,027             2,027
    R-squared                   0.120         0.196           0.187       0.070           0.062          0.079          0.054           0.047             0.065
Notes: The top and bottom 5 percent of parental net wealth distribution have been dropped. All shares represent share of gross wealth. In Column 4, the dependent
variable is the average within cohort-year rank of child's household saving (disposable income minus consumption) divided by average disposable income between
2000 and 2006. Children who live with their parents in 2006 have been dropped from the sample. In Column 9, Return on Investment (ROI) is the average return
on risky financial assets during the 1999 to 2006 period (those with no risky financial assets have been assigned a zero return). All specifications include controls
for child gender, cohort dummies for parents and children and 25 region dummies of where the parents lived in 1965. Parental wealth is measured in 1999 and
child wealth is measured in 2006. All parents are alive in 1999 and at least one of the (adoptive) parents of (adopted) biological children is alive in 2006. Parental
wealth is calculated as combined wealth of the mother and father. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors clustered by raising family.




                                                                                                                                                                   55
                                            Table 7: Intergenerational Relationships for Various Outcomes
                                            (Child Outcome Regressed on Equivalent Variable for Parents)
                                    (1)                (2)                 (3)                (4)               (5)               (6)                (7)
                                  Years of           Earnings            Income          Risky Market       Risky Share       Saving Rate        Consumption
                                 Schooling            Rank                Rank           Participation         Rank              Rank               Rank
 Own-birth Children

 Biological Parents                 0.341              0.177              0.193              0.220              0.096             0.098              0.177
                                 (0.001)***         (0.001)***         (0.001)***         (0.001)***         (0.001)***        (0.001)***         (0.001)***


 Observations                    1,219,014          1,162,512          1,202,401           1,219,014           702,598         1,161,161          1,161,161
 R-squared                         0.172              0.232              0.236               0.050              0.019            0.023              0.385
 Adopted Children

 Biological Parents                 0.184              0.063              0.064              0.116              -0.009            0.007              0.085
                                 (0.022)***         (0.020)***         (0.020)***         (0.020)***           (0.030)           (0.030)          (0.021)***

 Adoptive Parents                   0.143              0.092              0.108              0.147              0.138             0.129              0.134
                                 (0.016)***         (0.018)***         (0.018)***         (0.024)***         (0.025)***        (0.023)***         (0.023)***

 Sum Biological &                   0.327              0.156              0.172              0.263              0.129             0.135              0.220
 Adoptive Parents                (0.025)***         (0.025)***         (0.025)***         (0.030)***         (0.039)***        (0.038)***         (0.031)***

 Observations                       2598               2379               2534               2,598              1287              2,363              2,363
 R-squared                          0.138              0.187              0.179              0.080              0.092             0.070              0.405
Notes: All specifications include controls for child gender, parents' place of residence in 1965, and cohort dummies for parents and children. Ranks are calculated
within-cohort. For parents, earnings and income refer to fathers and are averaged over a twenty-year period running from 1970 to 1990. For children, we take a
three-year average around age 36. Market participation is defined as holding risky financial assets; stocks or mutual funds that include stock components. Risky
share is defined as share of financial wealth and we have included dummies for risky shares of parents being non-zero. In Columns 6 and 7, if the two parents do
not live in the same household, we have used the average ranking of mother and father's household variables. In these columns, we also require that parents and
children not live in the same household. In Column 7, we control for whether the child is married and family size of children. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Standard errors clustered by raising family.




                                                                                                                                                               56
                              Table 8a: Intergenerational Relationships for Various Outcomes - Non-linear Effects
                                            Years of Schooling                             Earnings Rank                               Income Rank

                                          (1)                   (2)                  (3)                   (4)                   (5)                  (6)
 Own-birth Children

 Biological Parent                       0.341                0.170                 0.177                0.058                 0.193                 0.036
                                      (0.001)***           (0.006)***            (0.001)***           (0.003)***            (0.001)***            (0.002)***
 Biological Parent                                            0.008                                      0.120                                       0.165
 Squared                                                   (0.001)***                                 (0.003)***                                  (0.002)***

 Observations                         1,219,014             1,219,014            1,162,512             1,162,512             1,202,401            1,202,401
 R-squared                              0.172                 0.173                0.232                 0.233                 0.236                0.241
 Adopted Children

 Biological Parent                       0.129                -0.150                0.016                 -0.018               0.011                 -0.024
                                        (0.084)              (0.159)               (0.041)               (0.074)              (0.044)               (0.074)
 Biological Parent                                             0.017                                       0.050                                      0.057
 Squared                                                    (0.008)**                                    (0.079)                                    (0.079)
 Adoptive Parent                         0.093                0.009                 0.063                 -0.031               0.070                 -0.066
                                        (0.074)              (0.132)              (0.030)**              (0.076)             (0.030)**              (0.077)
 Adoptive Parent                                              0.006                                        0.096                                      0.134
 Squared                                                     (0.006)                                     (0.071)                                   (0.071)*
 Biological*                             0.005                -0.001                0.079                 0.060                0.109                 0.084
 Adoptive Parent                        (0.007)              (0.008)               (0.063)               (0.065)             (0.066)*               (0.068)

 Observations                            2,598                2,598                 2,379                2,379                 2534                  2534
 R-squared                               0.138                0.140                 0.188                0.189                 0.182                 0.183
Notes: All specifications include controls for child gender, parents' place of residence in 1965, and cohort dummies for parents and children. Ranks are calculated
within-cohort. For parents, earnings and income refer to fathers and are averaged over a twenty-year period running from 1970 to 1990. For children, we take a
three-year average around age 36. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors clustered by raising family.




                                                                                                                                                               57
                              Table 8b: Intergenerational Relationships for Various Outcomes - Non-linear Effects
                                Risky Market             Risky Share Rank              Saving Rate Rank              Consumption
                                 Participation
                                      (1)               (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)          (6)           (7)
 Own-birth Children

 Biological Parent                    0.220                 0.096             0.007             0.098              0.281             0.177           -0.052
                                   (0.001)***            (0.001)***        (0.006)***        (0.001)***         (0.004)***        (0.001)***       (0.004)***

 Biological Parent                                                            0.064                               -0.180                              0.198
 Squared                                                                   (0.004)***                           (0.004)***                         (0.003)***

 Observations                      1,219,014              702,598            702,598          1,161,161         1,161,161         1,161,161         1,161,161
 R-squared                           0.048                 0.019              0.019             0.023             0.024             0.385             0.387
 Adopted Children

 Biological Parent                    0.113                 -0.027             0.137            0.021              -0.042            0.011             0.008
                                   (0.043)***              (0.055)           (0.179)           (0.057)            (0.141)           (0.072)           (0.102)
 Biological Parent                                                            -0.128                               0.061                               0.016
 Squared                                                                     (0.139)                              (0.122)                             (0.086)
 Adoptive Parent                      0.146                 0.127             -0.150            0.147              0.357             0.088             -0.107
                                   (0.034)***            (0.040)***          (0.161)          (0.064)**         (0.105)***         (0.048)*           (0.121)
 Adoptive Parent                                                               0.218                               -0.212                              0.161
 Squared                                                                    (0.125)*                             (0.085)**                           (0.090)*

 Biological*                          0.003                 0.028             0.017             -0.033             -0.033            0.105             0.085
 Adoptive Parent                     (0.048)               (0.077)           (0.077)           (0.108)            (0.107)           (0.099)           (0.099)

 Observations                         2,598                 1,287             1,287             2,363              2,363             2,363            2,363
 R-squared                            0.080                 0.093             0.096             0.070              0.073             0.405            0.406
Notes: All specifications include controls for child gender, parents' place of residence in 1965, and cohort dummies for parents and children. Ranks are calculated
within-cohort. Market participation is defined as holding risky financial assets; stocks or mutual funds that include stock components. Risky share is defined as
share of financial wealth and we have included dummies for risky shares of parents being non-zero. In Columns 4-7, if the two parents do not live in the same
household, we have used the average ranking of mother and father's household variables. In these columns, we also require that parents and children not live in the
same household. In Columns 6 and 7, we control for whether the child is married and family size of children. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors
clustered by raising family.



                                                                                                                                                                58
Appendix Table 1: Number of Adoptees by Birth Cohort

      Year of Birth    Number of Adoptees
         1950                 16
         1951                 29
         1952                 33
         1953                 53
         1954                 56
         1955                 80
         1956                 76
         1957                 88
         1958                 96
         1959                 131
         1960                 148
         1961                 153
         1962                 183
         1963                 192
         1964                 240
         1965                 231
         1966                 228
         1967                 198
         1968                 139
         1969                 114
         1970                 114




                                                       59
                              Appendix Table 2: Addressing the Non-Random Assignment of Adoptees
                               Dependent Variable: Child Rank in Within-Cohort Wealth Distribution

                                                                (1)                      (2)                         (3)

Rank Biological                                                0.130                    0.105                       0.130
Parental Wealth                                             (0.026)***               (0.028)***                  (0.026)***

Rank Adoptive                                                  0.227                    0.224                       0.224
Parental Wealth                                             (0.027)***               (0.027)***                  (0.028)***

Observations                                                   2,027                    2,027                       2,027
R-squared                                                      0.112                    0.117                       0.115

 Biological Parents' Chars                                      NO                       YES                          NO
 Adoptive Parents' Chars                                        NO                        NO                         YES
Notes: The top and bottom 5 percent of parental wealth distribution have been dropped. All specifications include controls for child
gender, parents' place of residence in 1965, and cohort dummies for parents and children. Parental wealth is measured in 1999 and child
wealth is measured in 2006. All parents are alive in 1999. Parental wealth is calculated as combined wealth of the mother and father.
Parental Characteristics include schooling and within-cohort earnings rank, entered separately for both mother and father. *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors clustered by adoptive family.




                                                                                                                                    60
                              Appendix Table 3: Non-linear Effects in Intergenerational Wealth Relationships
                                           Including Adoptees with Missing Biological Father

                                                                                     Full sample                         Trimmed Sample
                                                                               (1)                  (2)                (3)            (4)
 Adopted Children

 Rank Biological Parents' Net Wealth                                         0.119               0.089               0.170                0.056
                                                                          (0.035)***            (0.061)           (0.045)***             (0.082)
 Rank Biological Parents' Net Wealth Squared                                                     0.043                                    0.152
                                                                                                (0.060)                                  (0.093)
 Rank Adoptive Parents' Net Wealth                                           0.230              -0.008               0.221                0.145
                                                                          (0.025)***            (0.064)           (0.032)***            (0.087)*
 Rank Adoptive Parents' Net Wealth Squared                                                       0.226                                    0.138
                                                                                              (0.058)***                                (0.083)*
 Rank Biological Parents*                                                    0.003              -0.020              -0.038                0.079
 Rank Adoptive Parents                                                      (0.053)             (0.054)             (0.072)              (0.080)

 Obs                                                                         5,504                 5,504             4,397               4,397
 R-squared                                                                   0.099                 0.102             0.094               0.094
Notes: All specifications include controls for child gender, parents' place of residence in 1965, and cohort dummies for parents and children. Parental
wealth is measured in 1999 and child wealth is measured in 2006. All parents are alive in 1999. We only use mothers' wealth to construct parents'
ranks. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors clustered by raising family.




                                                                                                                                                   61
                      Appendix Table 4: Components of Wealth Analysis: Parent-Child Rank-Rank Relationship
                                            Same Outcome for Parents and Children

                                 (1)             (2)             (3)               (4)                (5)                  (6)

                             Net Wealth    Gross Wealth     Safe Financial Risky Financial         Value of          Value of Other
                                                               Wealth          Wealth             Residential             Real
                                                                                                   Wealth            Estate Wealth

Rank Biological Parents         0.130           0.148           0.115            0.136               0.114                0.043
                             (0.026)***      (0.025)***      (0.024)***       (0.023)***          (0.025)***             (0.027)

Rank Adoptive Parents           0.227           0.235           0.143            0.200               0.093                0.065
                             (0.027)***      (0.028)***      (0.024)***       (0.022)***          (0.025)***           (0.021)***

 Observations                    2,027           2,027          2,027            2,027               2,027                2,027
 R-squared                       0.112           0.122          0.085            0.118               0.073                0.055
Notes: The top and bottom 5 percent of parental net wealth distribution have been dropped. All specifications include controls for child
gender, parents' place of residence in 1965, and cohort dummies for parents and children. Parental wealth is measured in 1999 and child
wealth is measured in 2006. All parents are alive in 1999 and at least one of the adoptive parents is alive in 2006. Parental wealth is
calculated as combined wealth of the mother and father. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors clustered by adoptive family.




                                                                                                                                      62
                                 Appendix Table 5: Incidence of Negative Net Wealth

                                                       Observations              Obs with Negative Net Wealth
Own-birth Children                                      1,219,014                      308,313 (25.3%)


Parents of Own-birth Children                           1,219,014                      114,251 (9.4%)



Adoptees                                                  2,598                          808 (31.1%)



Biological Parents of Adoptees                            2,598                          678 (26.1%)


Adoptive Parents of Adoptees                              2,598                          115 (4.4%)




                                                                                                                63
                                  Appendix Table 6: Using Various Transformations of Wealth
                                   Inverse Hyperbolic Sine                                    Levels
                           Full Sample           Trim Bottom/Top 5%             Full Sample         Trim Bottom/Top 5%
                     Own-birth    Adoptees     Own-birth    Adoptees      Own-birth    Adoptees    Own-birth    Adoptees
                     Children                   Children                   Children                 Children

 IHS Biological        0.251          0.082          0.272           0.078
 Parental Wealth     (0.001)**     (0.022)***     (0.002)***      (0.030)***
                         *

 IHS Adoptive                         0.237                          0.328
 Parental Wealth                   (0.044)***                     (0.089)***

 Biological                                                                        0.192         0.028           0.303         0.088
 Parental Wealth                                                                 (0.001)**      (0.016)*      (0.002)***     (0.033)**
                                                                                     *                                           *

 Adoptive                                                                                         0.205                        0.219
 Parental Wealth                                                                               (0.027)***                    (0.036)**
                                                                                                                                 *

 Observations         1,219,014       2,598         1,097,191         2,027       1,219,014         2,598       1,097,191      2,027
 R squared              0.057         0.080           0.050           0.075          0.071          0.335         0.051        0.117
Notes: All specifications include controls for child gender, parents' place of residence in 1965, and cohort dummies for parents and
children. Parental wealth is measured in 1999 and child wealth is measured in 2006. All parents are alive in 1999 and at least one of the
(adoptive) parents of (adopted) biological children is alive in 2006. Parental wealth is calculated as combined wealth of the mother and
father. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors clustered by raising family.




                                                                                                                                      64
                                                Appendix Table 7: Robustness Checks
                                  Dependent Variable: Child Rank in Within-Cohort Wealth Distribution
                                       (1)                           (2)                           (3)           (4)                   (5)

                                    Baseline             Including Adoptees with                Baseline       County           Wealth averaged
                                                         Missing Biological Father                            Dummies            over 3 years

Rank Biological Parental                                                                         0.130          0.129                 0.128
Wealth
                                                                                               (0.026)**     (0.026)***            (0.026)***
                                                                                                   *

Rank Adoptive Parental Wealth         0.278                         0.244                        0.227          0.225                 0.241
                                    (0.021)**                    (0.015)***                    (0.027)**     (0.027)***            (0.026)***
                                        *                                                          *


Observations                          2,598                         5,504                        2,027          2,027                 2,018
R-squared                             0.107                         0.079                        0.112          0.121                 0.112

 Child County of Residence 06            NO                            NO                          NO            YES                   NO
 Parents County of Residence 99          NO                            NO                          NO            YES                   NO
Notes: Column 1 only includes observations with non-missing information on biological fathers. Column 2 adds observations with missing
information on biological fathers. In Columns 3-5, the top and bottom 5 percent of parental wealth distribution have been dropped. All specifications
include controls for child gender, parents' place of residence in 1965, and cohort dummies for parents and children. In Columns 1-4, parental wealth
is measured in 1999 and child wealth is measured in 2006. In Column 4, we add region dummies of where the parents lived in in 1999 and children
in 2006. In Column 5, parental wealth is averaged over 1999-2001 and child wealth is averaged over 2004-2006. All parents are alive in 1999 and
at least one adoptive parent is alive in 2006. Parental wealth is calculated as combined wealth of the mother and father. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1. Standard errors clustered by adoptive family.




                                                                                                                                                  65
                                Appendix Table 8: Intergenerational Relationships for Various Outcomes
                           Child Outcome Regressed on Equivalent Variable for Parents - Unrestricted Samples

                                                        Years of Schooling                    Earnings                         Income
                                                                                               Rank                             Rank

                                                                 (1)                             (2)                              (3)
 Own Birth Children

 Biological Parents                                            0.356                            0.173                           0.185
                                                            (0.001)***                       (0.001)***                      (0.001)***

 Observations                                                1,872,248                       1,773,141                        1,842,890
 R-squared                                                     0.166                           0.221                            0.234
 Adopted Children

 Biological Parents                                            0.193                            0.061                           0.079
                                                            (0.014)***                       (0.012)***                      (0.012)***

 Adoptive Parents                                              0.155                            0.089                           0.100
                                                            (0.011)***                       (0.011)***                      (0.011)***
 Sum Biological &                                              0.348                            0.150                           0.179
 Adoptive Parents                                           (0.016)***                       (0.015)***                      (0.015)***

 Observations                                                  6790                             6170                            6614
 R-squared                                                     0.115                            0.171                           0.170
Notes: All specifications include controls for child gender, parents' place of residence in 1965, and cohort dummies for parents and children. Ranks
are calculated within-cohort. For parents, earnings and income refer to fathers and are averaged over a twenty-year period running from 1970 to
1990. For children, we take a three-year average around age 36. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors clustered by raising family.




                                                                                                                                                66
                      Appendix Table 9: Intergenerational Relationships for Various Outcomes - Nonlinear Effects
                         Child Outcome Regressed on Equivalent Variable for Parents - Unrestricted Samples
                                   Years of Schooling                     Earnings Rank                     Income Rank

                                      (1)                 (2)                (5)                 (6)                (7)                 (8)
 Own-birth Children

 Biological Parent                   0.356              0.242               0.173              0.045               0.185               0.020
                                  (0.001)***         (0.005)***          (0.001)***         (0.003)***          (0.001)***          (0.002)***
 Biological Parent                                      0.005                                  0.129                                   0.177
 Squared                                             (0.001)***                             (0.003)***                              (0.001)***

 Observations                     1,872,248           1,872,248          1,773,141           1,773,141           1,842,890          1,842,890
 R-squared                          0.166               0.167              0.221               0.222               0.234              0.240
 Adopted Children

 Biological Parent                   0.203              -0.015              0.053               0.012              0.056              0.032
                                  (0.051)***           (0.104)            (0.025)**            (0.045)           (0.027)**           (0.045)
 Biological Parent                                       0.013                                  0.054                                 0.038
 Squared                                              (0.006)**                                (0.049)                               (0.048)
 Adoptive Parent                     0.165               0.205              0.084               0.070              0.096               0.08
                                  (0.046)***          (0.082)**          (0.018)***            (0.045)          (0.017)***           (0.047)
 Adoptive Parent                                        -0.001                                  0.017                                 0.087
 Squared                                               (0.004)                                 (0.043)                              (0.044)**
 Biological*                         -0.001             -0.005              0.013               0.004              0.044               0.029
 Adoptive Parent                    (0.005)            (0.005)             (0.039)             (0.040)            (0.040)             (0.041)

 Observations                        6790               6790                6170               6170                6614                6614
 R-squared                           0.115              0.116               0.171              0.171               0.173               0.174
Notes: All specifications include controls for child gender, parents' place of residence in 1965, and cohort dummies for parents and children. Ranks
are calculated within-cohort. For parents, earnings and income refer to fathers and are averaged over a twenty-year period running from 1970 to
1990. For children, we take a three-year average around age 36. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors clustered by raising family.




                                                                                                                                                 67
Appendix 1: Data on Pensions


       The Swedish pension system consists of three parts: public pensions, occupational

pensions and private pension savings. In 1999, when we measure wealth of parents, the

public pension system almost entirely consisted of a national pension plan financed on a

pay-as-you-go basis (an individual account system known as the Premium Pension System

(PPS) was introduced in 1999). In addition, most people receive an occupational pension

from their employer. According to the Swedish Pensions Agency, about 90% of employees

receive some pension benefits from their employer as a condition of employment. On

average, around 4.5% of the employee's salary is put into employer provided schemes

(Thörnqvist and Vardardottir, 2014). Swedish residents also have tax incentives to invest

in private pension savings that are only accessible after retirement. However, as mentioned

earlier, individuals still hold a substantial fraction of their wealth in non-retirement wealth.

There is also a guaranteed pension for those who have had little or no income from work,

and the size of this guaranteed pension is based on how long the person has lived in

Sweden. In 2000, the maximum guaranteed pension, which applies to those who have lived

in Sweden for at least 40 years, is 2394 SEK per month ($254) before taxes for those who

are married, and 2928 SEK per month ($311) for a single person. A tax rate of 30 percent

is then applied.



Public Pension

       For most people in Sweden, total pension wealth is primarily comprised of public

pension wealth. Sweden changed the structure of its public pension system in 1999; as a




                                                                                             68
result, the parents we study are primarily covered by the old system and the children are

covered by the new system.

       The new public pension system was implemented gradually. People born before

1938 receive all their pension benefits from the old system. People born between 1938 and

1953 receive benefits partly from the old system and partly from the new system. Those

born in 1938 receive 80 % of their benefits from the old system and 20 % from the new

system, those born in 1939 receive 75 % from the old system and 25 % from the new

system and so on. Therefore, those born in 1954 constitute the first cohort that fully

participates in the new system.

       The current Swedish public pension system, which includes an individual account

system known as the Premium Pension System (PPS), was introduced in 1999. The

mandatory contribution is 18.5 % of earnings, which are credited into two components: A

defined contribution scheme funded on a pay-as-you-go basis (16 %) and funded individual

accounts called the Premium Pension plan (2.5 %). The retirement age is flexible and

retirement benefits can be claimed from the age of 61. The system keeps track of all the

individual contributions to the system and individual pension payments depend on

individual contributions.

Occupational Pensions

       The second most important part of the Swedish pension system is the occupational

pension, which in general is based on collective-bargaining agreements between labor-

market organizations that cover about 90% of workers in Sweden (Sundén, 2006). On

average, around 4.5% of the employee's salary is put into employer provided schemes

(Thörnqvist and Vardardottir, 2014). The occupational pension primarily depends on




                                                                                      69
sector, year of birth and years spent working. There are specific agreements for four

sectors: national government workers, local government workers (municipality and

county), private sector white-collar workers and private sector blue-collar workers. In

contrast to the public pension scheme, in which contributions are limited by a ceiling, the

occupational pension schemes provide pension rights for earnings above the ceiling. This

is an important feature of the occupational pension which results in high-income workers

receiving a larger share of their pension benefits from occupational pension schemes.

However, even for the highest paying groups, occupational pensions account for less than

40 percent of total pension income. Because we impute parents' pension wealth from their

retirement income stream, we are able to calculate the value of occupational pensions for

parents. Unfortunately, we do not have a measure of occupational pension wealth for

children.

Private Pensions

        Swedish residents also have tax incentives to invest in private pension savings that

are only accessible after retirement. This is a very small component of total pensions wealth

(it constitutes about 5% of disbursements) and, unfortunately, we do not have information

about it.

        Below, we discuss how we create measures of pension wealth for children and

parents.

Pension Wealth of Children

        We have information on public pension wealth accumulated under the new public

pension system by individuals who are not retired. This implies that we have information

on accumulated public pension wealth for the children in our sample (who are born in 1950




                                                                                          70
or later) but not for the parents (who are predominantly born before 1950).56 None of our

children are retired by 2006, so we use accumulated public pension wealth as our measure

of children's pension wealth. We have no information on occupational or private pension

wealth of children.

Pension Wealth of Parents

         Our parents are predominantly born before 1950 and so are covered by the older

public pension system. Under that system, there was a much looser relationship between

contributions to the system and pension entitlements, and there is no information on

accumulated pension wealth for individuals. However, we observe most of our parents

retired in our data and so can observe their actual pension receipts. We use this information

to impute pension wealth (including both public and occupational pensions) for parents in

our data. We use the following process:

1. First we determine whether the person is retired in 1999. In year 1999, a person is

considered retired if she/he receives any type of public, occupational, or disability and

injury pension income.57

2. If the person is retired in 1999, we use total pension income (including occupational

pension income) in that year and multiply by an annuitization divisor to get a measure of

pension wealth in 1999. The annuitization divisor is provided by the Swedish Pension

Agency and incorporates life expectancy and a discount rate of 1.6%. This is the interest

rate that Sweden uses in making pension calculations.



56
   Our pension wealth for children born between 1950 and 1953 is incomplete but in practice this is not an
important issue as almost all pension wealth for these cohorts is under the new system (80% for the 1950
cohort, 85% for the 1951 cohort, 90% for the 1952 cohort, and 95% for the 1953 cohort).
57
   Before 2005 it was possible to be “partly” retired. We do not count those on partial pension as retired, since
imputing based on their pension income would be misleading. Instead, we treat them like other non-retired
people and impute their pension wealth when they are fully retired.


                                                                                                             71
3. Most people retire by age 65, so, for those not retired in 1999 but retired by age 65, we

impute pension wealth at age 65 and discount this back to the year 1999 using an interest

rate of 1.6% (the same rate as the one used in calculating the annuitization divisor).

4. If a non-retired person in 1999 is still not retired when we observe her/him at age 65, we

follow that person until they retire, impute their pension wealth at their retirement, and then

discount accordingly back to 1999.

5. If a parent does not retire by 2011 (the last year we observe information on pension

payments), we are not able to impute pension wealth. As a result, the observation is

dropped from the sample when we do the robustness check including pension wealth in net

wealth.

References

Sundén, Annika (2006), “The Swedish Experience with Pension Reform”, Oxford Review
of Economic Policy, vol. 22, no. 1, 133-148.

Thörnqvist, T., & Vardardottir, A. (2014). Bargaining over Risk: The Impact of Decision
Power on Household Portfolios. Manuscript.




                                                                                            72
                                Pension Summary Statistics

                                          Own-birth children         Adopted children
                                          Mean           SD         Mean            SD
                                                           Children
   Pension wealth rank                     0.50         0.29         0.44          0.29
   Pension wealth*                      1,022,581     342,320      975,590       333,827
   Net wealth rank**                       0.50         0.29         0.46          0.30
   Net wealth*                          1,689,891    3,041,622 1,596,234 1,692,227
   Observations                               1,114,045                    2,047
                                                      Biological parents
   Average pension wealth ranking          0.51         0.29         0.56          0.29
   Average pension wealth*              3,821,536    2,038,263 4,374,297 2,144,699
   Average net wealth rank**               0.51         0.29         0.47          0.29
   Average net wealth*                  5,416,901    5,119,743 5,161,883 2,768,623
                                                       Adoptive parents
   Average pension wealth ranking                                    0.55          0.28
   Average pension wealth*                                        3,471,545 1,821,330
   Average net wealth rank**                                         0.56          0.28
   Average net wealth*                                            5,305,602 5,663,802
Notes: * Monetary values are reported in Swedish Krona on December 31, 2000. At the time,
the exchange rate was 1 USD = 9.42 SEK. ** Net wealth includes pension wealth. Parental
wealth is calculated as combined wealth of the mother and father. These statistics relate to
children for whom we have an estimate of pension wealth for all their parents.




                                                                                         73
Appendix 2: Calculating Household Consumption

To impute household consumption (or, more accurately, expenditures) for children in our

sample, we follow the approach proposed by Koijen, Van Nieuwerburgh and Vestman

(2014). The idea behind this methodology is that more income that isn’t invested or used

to reduce debt leads to higher measured consumption, as do net increases in debt.

Specifically, we impute consumption expenditure from the household budget constraint by

combining information from the Swedish registry data on income, detailed asset holdings

from the wealth register, and asset returns that we collect from third-party sources. For

each household i, we employ the following identity to compute consumption:

                      !"# = %"# + '"# − )1 + +"#, -'"#./ − 0"# + 0"#./ (1 + +"#3 )

where %"# represents after-tax labor and financial asset income (plus transfers plus rental

income from renting out owned houses) for household i in period t. It also includes the

consumption value of residential real estate for the homeowners. (For homeowners there

is an intangible gain from owning a property rather than renting the same property that

needs to be imputed.58)

         In the equation above, '"# is the total debt at the end of year t and +"#, is the household-

specific interest rate on debt between t-1 and t. 0"# represents the total value of the asset

portfolio at the end of year t, and +"#3 represents the household-specific return on the asset

portfolio between t-1 and t. Estimating a household-specific return on the asset portfolio is

important, since one needs to measure the active portfolio rebalancing of households and


58
     See Fagereng and Halvorsen (2017) for more details.




                                                                                                 74
not just a change in total portfolio value that could be the result of a passive return with no

effect on consumption. In other words, if a household does not change its portfolio between

t-1 and t, the change in total portfolio value should have no effect on the imputed

consumption.

      To compute the household-specific return on the asset portfolio, using each security’s

ISIN, we collect data on the prices and returns for each stock, coupons for each bond, and

net asset values per share for each mutual fund in the database from a number of sources,

including Datastream, Bloomberg, SIX Financial Information, Swedish House of Finance,

and the Swedish Investment Fund Association (FondBolagens Förening). 0"# also includes

real assets and to get a reasonably accurate measure of expenditures one needs to 1) identify

households that have been involved in real estate transactions (since a passive gain in real

estate value should not contribute to the measure of consumption) and 2) have an accurate

measure of real estate cash flow for those households. To do so, we merge our sample with

the real estate transaction registry that lists real estate transactions and identifies the

buyer(s) and seller(s) as well as the transaction value. Finally, we will also deduct

contributions to private pension accounts from the disposable income.

      One should note that since stock holdings are observed at an annual frequency, we

have to ignore stock price changes and active portfolio rebalancing within a year, as well

as gifts and transfers. However, as shown in Eika et al. (2017), conditional on having

information on real estate transactions, accounting for stock transactions within each year

does not reduce measurement error by much.



References:




                                                                                            75
Eika, L., M. Mogstad, and O. Vestad. What can we learn about household consumption
from information on income and wealth. Mimeo, 2017.

Koijen, Ralph, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Roine Vestman. "Judging the Quality of
Survey Data by Comparison with" Truth" as Measured by Administrative Records:
Evidence From Sweden." In Improving the Measurement of Consumer Expenditures, pp.
308-346. University of Chicago Press, 2014.

Fagereng, Andreas, and Elin Halvorsen. "Imputing consumption from Norwegian income
and wealth registry data." Journal of Economic and Social Measurement 42, no. 1 (2017):
67-100.




                                                                                    76
Appendix 3: Monte Carlo on Non-Random Assignment

       As another test for the influence of non-random assignment of children into

families, we conduct a Monte Carlo simulation in an effort to bound the effect of selection

on our estimates.

       When we estimate the following regression model,

5"6 = 78 + 7/ 5" + 79 56 + :"6 ,

if :"6 is uncorrelated with 5" (wealth rank of biological parents) and 56 (wealth rank of

adoptive parents), then our 7 parameters are consistently estimated. The problem arises if

the Ws are correlated with the error.

       Abstracting from nature/nurture interactions, we can think of the error as having

two components, :"6 = :" + :6 , where :" refers to unobserved genetic endowments that

affect wealth and :6 refers to unobserved environmental factors that affect wealth. Because

we are not attempting to isolate the causal effect of parent’s wealth on child’s wealth but

instead are simply trying to isolate the correlation, we do not need the 56 to be uncorrelated

with :6 or 5" to be uncorrelated with :" . However, to estimate 5" , we would like to

perfectly control for :6 (or have these be uncorrelated with each other) and, to estimate 56

we would like to perfectly control for :" (or have these be uncorrelated with each other).

       Ideally, we would have random assignment of biological children to adoptive

parents, as this would remove the link between parental wealth and the other parent’s

unobserved characteristics.

       In the absence of random assignment, we can simulate a simple model describing

the likely bias introduced by the non-random assignment of children. In this simple model,

the biological parents have some quality θb that we don’t observe but the adoption agency



                                                                                           77
does. Their child genetically inherits quality ; < = =/ ; > + ?/ . Instead of random

assignment, the adoption agency chooses adoptive parents that are similar to the biological

parents such that ; 3 = =9 ; > + ?9 where ; 3 is the quality of the adoptive parents and =9 >

0 (=9 = 0 would imply random assignment). Subsequently, the child gets an unobserved

environmental endowment from their adoptive parents (; <3 ) so ; <3 = =B ; 3 + ?B . Each set

of parents accumulate wealth based on their quality ;, such that 5 > = ; > + C/ and 5 3 =

; 3 + C9 .

Simulation of Adoptive Parent Coefficient

        First, consider estimating the coefficient for adoptive parents. The model we would

like to estimate is 5 < = 78 + 7/ 5 > + 79 5 3 + 7D ; < + CB , where ; < is unobserved and

CB is an i.i.d. error. That is, we want to estimate the effect of adoptive parent wealth, while

controlling for the child's genetic inheritance. Without random assignment, the estimator

of 79 is biased because 5 3 is correlated with ; < . To see the potential bias induced by this

correlation, we consider four regression specifications: (1) just including 5 3 , (2) including

5 3 and 5 > , (3) including 5 3 and ; < , and (4) including 5 3 and 5 > and ; < . Note that,

while we can control for ; < in this Monte Carlo, it is not observable in our real data but

can be proxied by controls for education and earnings of biological parents.

Simulation of Biological Parent Coefficient

        Next, consider estimating the coefficient for biological parents. The model we

would like to estimate is 5 < = 78 + 7/ 5 > + 79 5 3 + 7E ; <3 + CD , where ; <3 is

unobserved and CD is an i.i.d. error. That is, we want to estimate the effect of biological

wealth, while controlling for the child's environmental endowment. Without random

assignment, the estimator of 7/ is biased because 5 > is correlated with ; <3 . To see the



                                                                                            78
potential bias induced by this correlation, we consider four regression specifications (1)

just including 5 > , (2) including 5 3 and 5 > , (3) including 5 > and ; <3 , and (4) including

5 3 and 5 > and ; <3 . Note that, while we can control for ; <3 in the Monte Carlo, it is not

observable in our real data and can be proxied by controls for education and earnings of

adoptive parents.

Monte Carlo Simulation

       We have done a Monte Carlo simulation, choosing coefficient values that are

similar to our wealth ones. We choose the true value of 7/ = 0.13 and the true value of 79

= 0.23. The parameter values we chose are =/ = =B = 0.5, =9 = 0.15, 7D = 0.1, and

7E = 0.2. These values imply the correlation between 5 3 and 5 > is 0.075, which is what

we observe in our data.       We draw C/ , C9 , CB , ?/ , ?9 , ?B , ; > from independent J(0,1)

distributions.

       Rather than do a large number of Monte Carlo replications, we draw one extremely

large sample (10 million observations) so that the sampling variation is negligible. Our

estimates in each of the four specifications are as follows:




                                                                                            79
Monte Carlo Estimates

Adoptive Parent Coefficient
 Variables Included                       Coefficient on 5 3 (true value 0.23)

 Including only 5 3                       .243
 Including both 5 3 and 5 >               .232
 Including both 5 3 and ; <               .238
 Including 5 3 and 5 > and ; <            .230

Biological Parent Coefficient
 Variables Included                        Coefficient on 5 > (true value 0.13)

 Including only 5 >                        .155
 Including both 5 3 and 5 >                .134
 Including both 5 > and ; <3               .144
 Including 5 3 and 5 > and ; <3            .130



The last specification estimates the true parameter exactly, by design. What is interesting

is that while there are sizeable biases due to non-randomness, these are almost completely

eliminated when the other type of wealth is included in the regression. In fact, adding ; <

to the regression has almost no effect on the 5 3 coefficient once a control for 5 > is

included.




                                                                                        80
