                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            BARGAINING, SORTING, AND THE GENDER WAGE GAP:
     QUANTIFYING THE IMPACT OF FIRMS ON THE RELATIVE PAY OF WOMEN

                                             David Card
                                          Ana Rute Cardoso
                                            Patrick Kline

                                        Working Paper 21403
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21403


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2015




We are grateful to five anonymous referees, and to Laura Giuliano, Michael Ransom, Jesse Rothstein,
Andrea Weber, seminar participants at California Polytechnic State University, Harvard, Northwestern,
Princeton, RAND, University College Dublin, the Universities of Mannheim, Potsdam, and Venice for
many helpful comments and suggestions. We are also grateful to Alex Fahey for her expert assistance.
We thank the Spanish Ministry of the Economy and Competitiveness (grant CO2012-38460) and the
Severo Ochoa Programme for Centres of Excellence in R&D (SEV-2011-0075) as well as the Center
for Equitable Growth and the Center for Labor Economics at UC Berkeley for generous funding support.
An earlier version of this paper circulated under the title “Bargaining and the Gender Wage Gap: A
Direct Assessment.” The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by David Card, Ana Rute Cardoso, and Patrick Kline. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Bargaining, Sorting, and the Gender Wage Gap: Quantifying the Impact of Firms on the Relative
Pay of Women
David Card, Ana Rute Cardoso, and Patrick Kline
NBER Working Paper No. 21403
July 2015, Revised November 2015
JEL No. J16,J31,J71

                                           ABSTRACT

There is growing evidence that firm-specific pay premiums are an important source of wage inequality.
These premiums will contribute to the gender wage gap if women are less likely to work at high-paying
firms or if women negotiate (or are offered) worse wage bargains with their employers than men. Using
longitudinal data on the hourly wages of Portuguese workers matched with income statement information
for firms, we show that the wages of both men and women contain firm-specific premiums that are
strongly correlated with simple measures of the potential bargaining surplus at each firm. We then
show how the impact of these firm-specific pay differentials on the gender wage gap can be decomposed
into a combination of sorting and bargaining effects. We find that women are less likely to work at
firms that pay higher premiums to either gender, with sorting effects being most important for low-
and middle-skilled workers. We also find that women receive only 90% of the firm-specific pay premiums
earned by men. Importantly, we find the same gender gap in the responses of wages to changes in
potential surplus over time. Taken together, the combination of sorting and bargaining effects explain
about one-fifth of the cross-sectional gender wage gap in Portugal.


David Card                                        Patrick Kline
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall, #3880                             University of California at Berkeley
University of California, Berkeley                530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                           Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER                                          and NBER
card@econ.berkeley.edu                            pkline@econ.berkeley.edu

Ana Rute Cardoso
IAE (CSIC) and Barcelona GSE
08193 Bellaterra
Barcelona
Spain
anarute.cardoso@iae.csic.es
    Despite rapid advances in the educational attainment and job experience of women, there is still a substantial

gender wage gap in most countries (OECD, 2015a). Though some analysts argue that the gap is primarily

driven by male-female differences in productivity (e.g., Mulligan and Rubinstein, 2008), a more expansive

view, consistent with models of frictional labor markets (e.g., Manning, 2011) is that equally productive men

and women also face different job prospects and strike different wage bargains with their employers. Concern

for such possibilities permeates the legal system in both the U.S. and the E.U., where laws require equal access

to job openings for men and women and equal treatment of male and female employees within a firm.

    Two long-established strands of research suggest that firm-specific pay policies may in fact be important for

understanding the gender wage gap. One focuses on potential differences in the fractions of men and women

employed at different firms (Blau, 1977; Groshen 1991; Petersen and Morgan, 1995), and in the rates that men

and women move to higher-paying jobs (e.g., Loprest, 1992; Hospido, 2009; Del Bono and Vuri, 2011). The

other emphasizes the wage-setting power of firms and the possibility that women are offered (or negotiate)

systematically lower wages at a given firm.1 These studies point to two complementary channels for generating

gender disparities: a sorting channel that arises if women are less likely to be employed at higher-wage firms,

and a bargaining channel that arises if women obtain a smaller share of the surplus associated with their job.

    In this paper we provide the first comprehensive analysis of the impact of firm-specific pay premiums on

the gender wage gap, using matched worker-firm data from Portugal merged with financial information for

employers.2 Building on a simple rent-sharing model, we develop an approach to measuring the sorting and

bargaining channels via an Oaxaca-style decomposition (Oaxaca, 1973; Fortin, Lemieux and Firpo, 2011) of

gender-specific firm wage effects. Like Abowd, Kramarz and Margolis (1999) – hereafter, AKM – our model

includes fixed effects for individual workers and fixed effects for employers that measure the wage premium

paid by each firm relative to some reference firm or group of firms. A key issue for assessing the contribution of

the bargaining channel is the need to define the relevant reference group for each gender (Oaxaca and Ransom,

1999). We use the mapping between measures of the potential surplus at each firm and the estimated wage

premiums to define a normalization that yields a lower-bound estimate of the differential bargaining power of

women. We verify our results using an a priori assumption on the degree of rents available in the hotel and
    1 Robinson’s (1933) monopsonistic wage-setting model was motivated in part by trying to explain why a firm might pay lower

wages to women than men. As pointed out by Barth and Dale-Olsen (2009), this framework has been largely ignored in the gender
wage literature. Lang and Lehmann (2012) discuss models of employer wage setting in a racial discrimination context. Bertrand (2011)
presents a review of recent work emphasizing the relative negotiating abilities of men and women.
    2 Nekby (2003) relates male and female wages to measured profitability in a cross section of Swedish firms, but does not address

the potential selectivity issues caused by non-random sorting of men and women with different unobserved skill characteristics to more
profitable firms. Barth and Dale-Olsen (2009) examine firm-specific gender wage differences in a monopsony framework.




                                                                  2
restaurant sector – a traditional low-wage industry.

    Since our analysis builds directly on AKM’s assumption that different firms pay different wage premiums

relative to the overall labor market, we begin our empirical analysis by providing some descriptive evidence

on the presence of these premiums, and on the plausibility of the exogenous mobility assumptions needed to

measure them via ordinary least squares (OLS) methods. Corroborating earlier exercises by Card, Heining

and Kline (2013) with German data, and by Macis and Schivardi (2013) with Italian data, we find that these

assumptions are approximately satisfied for both men and women in Portugal. Comparing the average wage

gains and losses for men and women who move between matched sets of firms we also show that women benefit

less from firm-to-firm mobility than men.

    We then estimate separate AKM models for male and female workers in Portugal. We find that firm-specific

pay premiums explain about 20% of wage variation among both men and women, while positive assortative

matching (i.e., the positive covariation between worker and firm effects) explains another 10%. We also show

that the pay premiums offered to men and women are highly correlated across firms. We use a simple decom-

position method to assess the contribution of firm-specific wage setting to the overall gender wage gap, and

to the wage gap among workers with different levels of age and education, and in different occupations and

industries. Overall we find that the under-representation of women at firms that offer higher wage premiums for

both gender groups – the sorting effect – explains about 15% of the overall 23 log point gender gap in Portugal.

Another 5% is attributable to the fact that women gain less than men from higher-wage firms – the bargain-

ing effect. We find that sorting effects rise with age, and are more important among less educated workers,

while bargaining effects are larger for highly-educated workers. Both components vary by occupation, with the

largest contribution of sorting for traditional skilled and semi-skilled blue collar jobs and clerical jobs. To check

whether the relative pay of women is distorted by the minimum wage, we also conduct a separate analysis of

workers with at least a high school education.

    We then narrow our focus to the component of the firm-specific wage premiums paid to men and women

that is directly related to a simple proxy for the average bargaining surplus available at each firm. We find that

women’s wages are only 90% as responsive to observable measures of the surplus per worker as men’s, and

can easily reject the hypothesis of equal responsiveness, thus confirming that women gain a smaller share of

firm-wide rents than their male co-workers. We also confirm that women are under-represented at firms with

higher measured surplus levels. Bargaining and sorting based on the observable component of surplus account

for about 80% of the overall impact of firm-specific pay premiums on the gender wage gap.



                                                         3
      As a final step in our analysis we examine the effects of changes in the average surplus per worker on

the wages of men and women who remain with the firm over a multi-year period. This approach, which

mirrors the design employed in the modern rent-sharing literature (e.g., Guiso, Pistaferri, and Schivardi, 2005;

Carlsson, Messina and Skans, 2011; Card, Devicienti and Maida, 2014), uses an entirely different component

of wage variation than our analysis of firm-specific pay premiums. Reassuringly, we obtain a nearly identical

90% estimate of women’s relative bargaining power, suggesting that a simple wage setting model with gender-

specific bargaining parameters can successfully explain both the between-firm structure of relative wages for

men and women, and the variation over time at a given firm in male and female wages.



I.     Firm-specific Determinants of the Gender Wage Gap

In traditional competitive labor market models, wages are determined by market-level supply and demand fac-

tors rather than by the wage-setting policies of particular firms.3 This perspective is central to Becker’s (1957)

model of employer-based discrimination, which asserts that the market-wide discriminatory wage premium de-

pends on the preferences of the marginal employer of women.4 Building on this framework, most studies of the

gender wage gap focus on measured skill differences between men and women and attribute any unexplained

component to a combination of discriminatory factors and unobserved skill gaps (see Altonji and Blank, 1999

and Blau and Kahn, 2000, for reviews).5

      Despite the market-level focus of most economic studies, legislation aimed at eliminating gender discrimi-

nation is primarily directed at firms. In the U.S., for example, the Equal Pay Act requires that employers offer

equal pay to men and women for “substantially equal” work, while Title VII of the Civil Rights Act prohibits

firms from discriminating against women (and other protected groups) in decisions over hiring, layoffs, and pro-

motions. In Portugal, articles 9, 13, 26, and 59 of the Constitution ban discrimination and guarantee equality of

access to jobs and the right to equal pay for equal work.

      To the extent that firms have some control over the wages offered to a given worker, the average wages of

women relative to men will be affected by two factors. The first is whether firms that tend to pay higher wages

are more or less likely to hire women. The second is whether firms offer different average wage premiums for
     3 Wagescan vary across firms if there are market-based compensating differentials for firm-wide amenities or disamenities, such as
long hours of work (Bertrand, Goldin and Katz, 2010). We examine the correlation between firm-specific wage variation and average
hours of work later in the paper.
   4 See Charles and Guryan (2008, 2011) for a recent application to the black-white wage gap and reviews of related work.
   5 An interesting exception is audit-based studies of potential discrimination (e.g., Heckman and Siegelman, 1993; Neumark, Bank

and Van Nort, 1996; Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2004), which focus on the hiring practices of individual employers.



                                                                  4
men and women relative to the “market” (or a reference employer).

      The potential importance of the between-firm sorting channel to the gender wage gap was noted by Blau

(1977), who used wage data for white collar workers at different establishments in three cities and concluded

that establishments with higher average wages tended to employ fewer women. Subsequent research, including

Groshen (1991), Petersen and Morgan (1995), and Bayard et al. (2003), suggests that the differential sorting

of females and males to higher and lower paying workplaces explains some fraction of the gender wage gap.6

A concern with these studies is that they do not control for unobserved characteristics of workers, thus con-

founding segregation by ability with segregation by gender. This concern is addressed by studies of inter firm

mobility (Loprest, 1992; Hospido, 2009; Del Bono and Vuri 2011) which show that women are about as likely

to move between firms as men, but experience smaller average wage gains with each move. Nevertheless, these

studies cannot distinguish between the hypothesis that women are less likely to find jobs at higher-paying firms

and the alternative that the wage gain for a given firm-to-firm transition is smaller for women than men. Car-

doso, Guimarães and Portugal (2012) also focus on differential sorting using an AKM style model but imposing

the assumption that the firm effects are the same for men and women.

      The possibility that equally productive women and men are paid differently by firms with some wage-

setting power was suggested by Robinson (1933) in her seminal analysis of imperfect labor markets, and arises

in wage posting models in which women’s and men’s turnover rates are differentially responsive to firm-specific

wage premiums, or in search and matching models in which women and men have different relative bargaining

power.7 The relative bargaining power interpretation is also emphasized in the social psychology literature,

which argues that women are less likely to initiate negotiations with their employers (Babcock and Laschever,

2003; Bowles, Babcock and Lai, 2007), and are on average less successful negotiators.8



II.     Institutional Setting and Data Overview

Our analysis relies on an annual census of employees in Portugal that includes data on earnings and hours

of work, as well as firm-specific information that allows us to link workers to the income statements of their
    6 One piece of evidence suggesting that the exclusion of women is driven by employer preferences comes from studies of banking

(Ashenfelter and Hannan, 1986; Black and Strahan, 2001) which find that deregulation led to a rise in the share of female employees in
the industry. Neumark, Bank and Van Nort (1996) also report that higher-wage restaurants are less likely to interview female applicants.
    7 Manning (2011, section 3) shows that these two alternatives are observationally equivalent.
    8 Stuhlmacher and Walters (1999) present a meta-analysis of lab-based studies of the effect of gender in bargaining, and conclude

that on average women obtain a smaller share of the surplus than men. Save-Soderbergh (2007) found that female college graduates
who were asked to submit a salary demand at the start of their first job tended to ask for lower salaries and ended up receiving lower
salaries than men.



                                                                   5
employers. Although our focus on Portugal is driven by the richness of these data, three features suggest that

our findings may be broadly generalizable to other settings. First, Portuguese women have relatively high labor

force participation rates. Fifty eight percent of adult women in the country were in the labor force in 2010

(ILO, 2011), comparable to the rates in the U.S. and Northern Europe. Second, the vast majority of women in

Portugal (over 90% of those in private sector jobs) work full time, reducing concerns that the gender wage gap

is confounded by differences between full-time and part-time jobs. Third, the gender wage gap in Portugal is

within a few percentage points of the gaps in the U.S. and U.K., and is very close to the OECD-wide average.9

    During our sample period roughly 90% of private sector jobs in Portugal were covered by sector-wide col-

lective agreements negotiated by employer associations and trade unions (Addison, Portugal and Vilares, 2015).

Bargaining is synchronized and most wage clauses are renegotiated annually in January. Since these contracts

set pay on a gender-neutral basis they arguably exert some equalizing effect on the relative pay of women (Blau

and Kahn, 2003). On the other hand, firms have wide latitude in assigning employees to job categories, and

most workers also earn substantial wage premiums over the base pay rates for their job category (Cardoso and

Portugal, 2005). The minimum wage is also relatively high in Portugal, potentially raising women’s wages

relative to men’s – an issue we address in detail below. Nevertheless, Portugal has very high levels of overall

wage inequality, suggesting that wage setting is relatively unconstrained by institutional forces.10


II.A.    Data Sources

Our main data source is Quadros de Pessoal (QP), a census of private sector employees conducted each October

by the Portuguese Ministry of Employment. Firms with at least one paid employee are required to submit

information on their full workforce as of the survey reference week. Government employees and independent

contractors are excluded from coverage, as are people who are unemployed or out of the labor force in the

survey week.11 Over our 2002-2009 sample period we have information on roughly 4 million workers who are

observed between 1 and 8 times, with firm and establishment identifiers for their jobs in the survey week. Since

our financial data are firm-based, we aggregate establishments to the firm-level for the small fraction (4%) of

multi-plant firms.

    The QP asks employers to report each employee’s gender, education, occupation, regular monthly salary,
   9 The gender gap in median full time earnings was 16% in Portugal, 19% in the U.S., and 16% on average across 26 OECD countries

(OECD, 2012).
  10 Martins and Pereira (2004) tabulate the 90/10 gap in hourly wages and in the returns to education for 16 countries, including the

U.S., the U.K. and other European countries, and find that Portugal is highest in both measures of inequality.
  11 Firm owners and employees on temporary leave are included in the data set but do not report wages, and so are excluded from our

analysis.


                                                                  6
regular wage supplements, and hours of work. Information is also collected on the industry, location, and

founding date of the firm, as well as gross sales in the preceding calendar year. We construct hourly wages by

dividing the sum of a worker’s base salary plus any regular earnings supplements by his or her normal hours

of work, yielding a “straight time” hourly wage.12 The availability of hours information is a unique strength of

the QP and allows us to address concerns that the gender wage gap is driven in part by differences in hours of

work by men and women (e.g., Wood, Corcoran and Courant, 1993; Bertrand, Goldin and Katz, 2010).

    We augment this information with financial data from the “SABI” (Sistema de Analisis de Balances Iberi-

cos) database. Businesses in Portugal are required to file income (or profit and loss) statements and balance

sheet information annually with the Conservatoria do Registo Comercial.13 These reports are publicly acces-

sible and are collected by financial service firms and assembled into the SABI database by Bureau van Dijk.

Information in SABI includes the firm’s name, address, industry, founding date, and total employment, as well

as income statement and balance sheet items. SABI data are available from 2000 onward, but coverage of the

database was limited before 2006.

    Since the QP does not include firm names or tax identifiers we use a combination of variables that are

reported in both QP and SABI to match the data sets. Specifically, we use location, industry, firm creation date,

annual sales, and year-end shareholder equity as matching variables. Additional details regarding the matching

process are provided in Card, Cardoso, and Kline (2015), hereafter referred to as the Online Appendix. As

described in section A of the Online Appendix, we successfully match about 53% of firms that appear in our

analysis sample between 2002 and 2009 to a firm with at least one year’s information in SABI. Overall we have

current-year employer financial data for about 66% of the person-year observations in our QP sample from

2006-2009.


II.B.    Descriptive Overview

We begin with a brief overview of the differences between male and female employees in Portugal. We focus

on individuals who are between 19 and 65 years of age, have more than one year of potential labor market
   12 All legal jobs in Portugal are covered by some form of contract, which specifies among other things the normal hours of work (Reis

and Barbosa, 2010). For employees at firms that have signed a sectoral or firm-specific collective bargaining contract, normal hours
are part of the collective agreement. For others, normal hours are specified by their individual contract. Regular earnings supplements
are payments such as meal allowances that are received regularly. Overtime work is allowed in Portugal, but until recent reforms was
subject to a 50% pay premium for the first hour of overtime, and higher premiums for longer hours. Total annual hours of overtime are
also limited by law.
   13 Based on informal discussions with firm owners we believe that the penalties for non-filing are small, presumably accounting for

missing data for many firms. Currently this information is collected as part of the Integrated System of Company Accounts (SCIE -
Sistema de Contas Integradas das Empresas).




                                                                   7
experience, and worked as a paid employee in the QP reference week. Our primary analysis sample – described

in columns 1 and 2 of Table I – contains annual wage observations from 2002 to 2009 for 2.1 million men and

1.7 million women.14

    Comparisons between the two columns show that female workers in Portugal are slightly younger than their

male counterparts but are more likely to have completed secondary or tertiary education. Despite the education

gap, women earn about 18% less per hour than men – very similar to the gender gap in median hourly wages

in the U.S. in 2007 (EPI, 2010).15 Women also work slightly fewer hours per month than men, though the

3% difference is small by international standards.16 The dispersion in monthly hours is larger for women than

men while the dispersion in hourly wages is smaller for women. Thirty-five percent of both male and female

employees work in the Lisbon area, another 13 percent work in the Porto area, and the remainder work in

smaller cities and rural areas.

    Comparing the characteristics of their workplaces, women work at slightly larger firms than men (858

employees vs. 730), a feature that is also true in the U.S. and the U.K.17 More striking is the difference in the

share of female employees at women’s and men’s workplaces – 70% vs. 24%. This gap indicates that there is

significant gender segregation across firms.18 Indeed, about 21% of men work at all-male firms, while 19% of

women work at all-female firms.19 The presence of single-gender firms poses a problem for assessing the role

of firms in the gender wage gap, since we cannot observe the wages that would be offered to women at all-male

firms, or to men at all-female firms. For most of our analysis below we therefore limit attention to firms that

hire at least one worker of each gender at some point in our sample period. Since the wage gap between men

and women at single-gender firms is relatively small, eliminating employees at these firms leads to a slightly

larger gender gap in the remaining subsample than in the labor market as a whole.
  14 See  section A of the Online Appendix for details on the derivation of this sample, and Appendix Table A1 for comparisons with
the overall population of 16-65 year old workers in the QP. In the small number of cases where an individual is employed at two or
more firms in the reference week, we assign them to their job with the highest hours.
   15 The wage gap narrowed over our sample period, falling from 21% in 2002 to 16% in 2009 – see Appendix Figure B1.
   16 Data reported by the OECD (2012) for Portugal (based on labor force survey data that include government and independent contract

workers excluded from QP) show part-time employment rates for men and women of 8% and 14%, respectively. The same source shows
part-time employment rates for men and women in the US of 8% and 17%.
   17 Papps (2012) and Mumford and Smith (2008) report roughly 10% larger workplace sizes for women than men in the U.S. and

U.K., respectively.
   18 Hellerstein, Neumark and McInerney (2008) report that in 2000, the average fractions of female co-workers for female and male

workers at larger establishments in the U.S. were 61% and 41%, respectively. Mumford and Smith (2008, online Appendix Table A2)
report that in the U.K. in 2004 the average fraction of female employees at the workplace was 70% for women and 34% for men. These
comparisons suggest that Portuguese firms may be more segregated by gender than those in the U.S. or U.K., though we caution that
estimates of segregation rates are potentially sensitive to the range of firm sizes included in the analysis.
   19 About 20% of workers at single-gender firms are the only (paid) employee at their workplace. Construction and trade account for

43% and 20%, respectively, of the person-year observations at all-male jobs. All-female workplaces are prevalent in trade (23% of
person-years at all female firms), health services (17%), hotels (14%), and textiles (13%). Mean log wages of workers at single gender
firms are relatively low: 1.28 for men and 1.19 for women.


                                                                  8
    An important issue for an analysis of between-firm wage differentials is the rate of job mobility, since these

differentials are identified by the wage changes of job movers. Appendix Table B1 shows that the distributions

of the number of jobs held by men and women in our QP sample are very similar. Approximately 73% of

men and 74% of women hold only 1 job during our sample period; 19% of both groups have 2 jobs; and 6%

have 3 jobs. The remaining 2% of men and 1% of women hold 4-8 jobs. We also examined survival rates of

new jobs that are observed starting during our sample period, and found that these are very similar. As shown

in Appendix Figure B2, about 40% of new jobs last less than 1 year for both groups. We conclude that job

mobility rates are very similar for women and men in Portugal.



III.    Modeling Framework

In this section we present a very simple model that allows us to evaluate the effect of firm-specific pay premiums

on the observed wages of women and men. Assume that we observe point-in-time wages for workers (indexed

by i ∈ {1, ..., N}) in multiple periods (indexed by t ∈ {1, ..., T }). We denote worker i’s gender by G (i) which

takes on values in the set {F, M}, and the identity of his or her employer in a given year by J (i,t) which takes

on values in the set {1, ..., J}. We refer to a particular gender as g and a particular firm as j.

    We posit a wage-setting model in which the logarithm of the real wage earned by individual i in period t

(wit ) is given by:

                                               wit = ait + γ G(i) SiJ(i,t)t .                                      (1)

Here, ait represents the outside option available to worker i in period t (e.g. the wage in self employment),

SiJ(i,t)t ≥ 0 is the match surplus between worker i and firm J (i,t) in period t, and γ g ∈ [0, 1] is a gender-specific

share of the surplus captured by a worker of gender g ∈ {F, M}. We are specifically interested in the question

of whether women get a smaller share of the surplus associated with their job (i.e. γ F < γ M ).

    We assume that SiJ(i,t)t can be decomposed into three components:


                                         SiJ(i,t)t = S̄J(i,t) + φJ(i,t)t + miJ(i,t) .                              (2)


The first term, S̄J(i,t) , captures time-invariant factors like market power or brand recognition that raise the

average surplus for all employees at the firm. The second component, φJ(i,t)t , represents time-varying factors

that raise or lower the average surplus for all employees. The third component, miJ(i,t) , captures a person-

specific component of surplus for worker i at his or her current employer, attributable to idiosyncratic skills or

                                                              9
characteristics that are particularly valuable at this job.

    We assume that the outside option ait can be decomposed into a permanent component αi (due, for example,

to ability or general skills), a time-varying component associated with an observed set of characteristics Xit (e.g.,

labor market experience and changing returns to education), and a transitory component εit :


                                                ait = αi + Xit0 β G(i) + εit ,                                         (3)


where β g is a gender specific vector of coefficients.

    Equations (1) through (3) imply the wage of worker i in period t can be written:


                                                          G(i)
                                           wit = αi + ψJ(i,t) + Xit0 β G(i) + rit ,                                    (4)


       G(i)
where ψJ(i,t) ≡ γ G(i) S̄J(i,t) and rit ≡ γ G(i) φJ(i,t)t + miJ(i,t) + εit is a composite error. Equation (4) is consistent
                                                                    

with an additive “two-way” worker-firm effects model of the type considered by Abowd, Kramarz and Margolis

(1999) and many subsequent authors, with person effects, gender-specific firm effects, and gender-specific

returns to the covariates Xit . We use this model as the basis for our main analysis, though as explained below,

we also explore the possibility that the share of surplus received by workers varies between occupations –

specifically, between “typically female” occupations and “typically male” occupations.


III.A.    Exogeneity

We estimate models based on equation (4) by OLS, yielding estimated gender-specific effects for each firm.

For these estimates to be unbiased, the following orthogonality conditions must hold:

                                  h                             i
                                 E (rit − r̄i ) Ditj − D̄ij |G (i) = 0 ∀ j ∈ {1, ..., J} ,                             (5)


where Ditj ≡ 1 [J (i,t) = j] is an indicator for employment at firm j in period t and bars over variables represent

time averages. To gain some insight into the restrictions implied by equation (5), it is useful to consider the

special case where T = 2. With two periods, fixed effects estimation is equivalent to first differences estimation

and (5) reduces to:
                                 h                            i
                                E (ri2 − ri1 ) Di2j − Di1j |G(i) = 0 ∀ j ∈ {1, ..., J}.                                (6)




                                                             10
                              
Using the fact that Di2j − Di1j takes on values of +1 for workers who move to firm j in period 2, −1 for those

who leave firm j in period 1, and 0 for all others, we can write:

                   h                            i   h                                   i
                  E (ri2 − ri1 ) Di2j − Di1j |G(i) = E ri2 − ri1 |Di2j = 1, Di1j = 0, G(i)
                                                                                  
                                                     ×P Di2j = 1, Di1j = 0|G (i)
                                                        h                                   i
                                                     −E ri2 − ri1 |Di2j = 0, Di1j = 1, G(i)
                                                                                  
                                                     ×P Di2j = 0, Di1j = 1|G (i) .

                h                                  i
    The term E ri2 − ri1 |Di2j = 1, Di1j = 0, G(i) is the mean change in the unobserved wage determinants for
                                     h                                 i
joiners of firm j, while the term E ri2 − ri1 |Di2j = 0, Di1j = 1, G(i) is the corresponding change for leavers of

this firm. Hypothetically, it is possible that these two terms are roughly comparable in magnitude since the

decision to leave one firm is a decision to join another. In such a case, the mean bias associated with joiners and

leavers would cancel whenever the number of firm joiners and leavers is equal, as would occur when the firm’s

employment is in steady state. However, while joining and leaving firms may yield similar average biases, the

joiner and leaver bias associated with any particular firm may be quite different, which would lead to a violation

of (6).

    Since

                        ri2 − ri1 = γ G(i) φJ(i,2)2 − φJ(i,1)1 + miJ(i,2) − miJ(i,1) + εi2 − εi1 ,
                                                                                   


there are three channels though which the changes may be related to firm specific mobility. The first is a

connection between firm-wide shocks φ jt and mobility rates. For example, workers may be more likely to leave

firms that are experiencing negative shocks and join firms that are experiencing positive shocks. If this is true,

then we would expect to see a systematic “Ashenfelter dip” in the wages of leavers just prior to their exit, and

unusual wage growth for recent joiners. We look for such patterns below and find no evidence that they are

present in the data.

    A second potential channel arises if mobility is related the idiosyncratic match effects (mi j ). Many search

and matching models assume that workers search over jobs that differ by a match effect in pay. An implication

is that the wage gains of movers will overstate the gains for a typical worker. For example, suppose that firm

A offers a 10% larger average wage premium than firm B. If mobility is independent of the match effects, then

movers from firm B to firm A will experience a 10% average wage gain, while movers from firm A to firm B

will experience a 10% average wage loss. If instead mobility is based in part on comparative advantage then the


                                                           11
expected wage losses associated with moving from A to B will tend to be offset by an improvement in match

effects. In the limit, if all firm transitions are voluntary and selection is based solely on the match components,

all moves will lead to wage gains, as in the dynamic matching model of Eeckhout and Kirchner (2011). In our

analysis below we examine workers moving in opposite directions between groups of high and low wage firms,

and find that their wage changes exhibit the approximate symmetry (i.e., equal magnitude and opposite sign)

predicted by an additive model with exogenous mobility. This symmetry is inconsistent with selective mobility

based on the match component of wages.

    A third channel arises if the direction of firm-to-firm mobility is correlated with the transitory wage shock

εit . For example, a worker who is performing well and receiving promotions may be more likely to move to a

higher wage firm, while workers who are stalled in their job may be more likely to move down the job ladder

to a lower-paying firm. Systematic mobility of this form implies that people moving to higher-wage firms will

have different trends prior to moving than those who move to lower-wage firms. Again, in our analysis below

we find no evidence for any of these predictions.

    What drives firm-to-firm mobility if it is not related to the elements in rit ? The most straightforward expla-

nation is that worker-firm matching is based on a combination of the permanent component of worker ability

(the αi component in equations 3 and 4) and the average wage premiums offered by firms. Skilled workers, for

example, are more likely to engage in on-the-job search (Pissarides and Wadsworth, 1994; Hall and Krueger,

2012) suggesting that they will be more likely to move to high-wage firms over time. Skilled workers also

may have networks of friends and family members that are more likely to work at high wage firms, leading to

network-based sorting (as in Kramarz and Skans, 2013). These forms of sorting create no bias for our estima-

tion strategy because we condition on time-invariant worker and firm characteristics. Finally, sorting based on

non-wage dimensions such as the location of the firm or its recruiting effort creates no bias provided that these

factors are uncorrelated with the time varying error component in (4).


III.B.   Normalization

As explained by Abowd, Creecy and Kramarz (2002) the firm effects in a two-way fixed effects model such

as (4) are only identified within a “connected set” of firms linked by worker mobility. In our analysis below

we limit attention to workers and firms in the largest connected set for each gender. Even within these sets we

still require a linear restriction to normalize the firm effects, since the wage premium for any given firm is only

identified relative to a reference firm or set of firms.


                                                           12
    According to our model the true firm effects for each gender are non-negative, and will be zero at firms

that offer no surplus above an employee’s outside option. We therefore normalize the firm effects by setting
                                                                                                  o
the average wage premium for a set of “low-surplus” firms to 0. More precisely, letting S j denote an observed

measure of average surplus per worker at firm j, we assume that:

                                                h                    i
                                                  g        o
                                               E ψJ(i,t) |SJ(i,t) ≤ τ = 0 , g ∈ {F, M}                          (7)

where τ is a threshold level such that firms with observed surplus per worker below τ pay zero rents on average.

If (7) is correct then imposing this condition will yield a set of normalized firm effects that coincide with the

true firm effects (apart from sampling errors). Otherwise, the normalized effects for each gender will be equal
                                                                                                           o
to the true firm effects, minus the average value of the firm effects for that gender group at firms with S j < τ.

    As discussed below, we use mean log value added per worker for all years the firm is observed in the

SABI data set as our primary measure of surplus per worker. Value added is reported for most firms, and is

constructed as the sum of wage payments, non-wage labor costs, depreciation, interest costs, taxes, and profits

(i.e., the sum of payments to labor and capital, plus taxes).20 Under standard assumptions, value added will be

equal to revenues minus the costs of all intermediate inputs. We also repeat our analysis using mean log sales

per worker as an alternative measure of surplus and obtain very similar results.

    While the normalized effects could, in principle, be estimated in a single step, we opt instead for a two-step

approach. We first estimate the gender specific firm effects via unrestricted OLS, arbitrarily setting the effects

for a particular large firm to 0. We then re-normalize the effects by subtracting off the average value of the

gender-specific firm effects at low surplus firms. We explain how we estimate the threshold τ in Section V.C.,

below.

    As a check on this procedure we normalize the firm effects by assuming that firms in the hotel and restaurant

industry pay zero surplus on average. This assumption is motivated by the extensive literature on industry wage

differences (e.g., Dickens and Katz, 1987; Krueger and Summers 1988) which suggests that these differentials

are, at least in part, driven by rents. We observe that firms in the hotel and restaurant sector have the smallest

wage premiums on average, so we simply assume that rents are on average zero in this sector.
  20 This   is the standard national accounts definition (see e.g., Strassner and Moyer, 2002).




                                                                     13
III.C.   Decomposing the Effect of Firm-Level Pay Premiums

Equation (4) provides a simple framework for measuring the impact of firm-level pay premiums on the gender

wage gap. Using male and f emale as shorthand for the respective conditioning events that G (i) = M and
                                                                       M |male] and the average premium
G (i) = F, we can denote the average pay premium received by men as E[ψJ(i,t)
                        F | f emale]. As in the traditional Oaxaca wage decomposition (see e.g., Oaxaca,
received by women as E[ψJ(i,t)

1973; Fortin, Lemieux and Firpo, 2011), we can decompose the difference in pay premiums into a combination

of bargaining power and sorting effects in either of two ways:


                    M                  F                      M         F
                 E[ψJ(i,t) |male] − E[ψJ(i,t) | f emale] = E[ψJ(i,t) − ψJ(i,t) |male]                            (8)
                                                                  F                  F
                                                              +E[ψJ(i,t) |male] − E[ψJ(i,t) | f emale]
                                                             M         F
                                                        = E[ψJ(i,t) − ψJ(i,t) | f emale]                         (9)
                                                                  M                  M
                                                              +E[ψJ(i,t) |male] − E[ψJ(i,t) | f emale].


The first term in equation (8) is the average bargaining power effect, calculated by comparing ψ M       F
                                                                                                 j and ψ j

across the distribution of jobs held by men. The second line of (8) gives the average sorting effect, calculated by

comparing the average value of ψ Fj across the jobs held by men versus women. In the alternative decomposition

(equation 9) the bargaining power effect is calculated using the distribution of jobs held by women, and the

sorting effect is calculated by comparing the average value of the male pay premiums across jobs held by men

versus women.

    It is worth emphasizing that the estimated sorting effects in (8) and (9) are invariant to the particular normal-

ization chosen for the firm effects. In contrast, the estimated bargaining effects depend on the normalization:

subtracting different constants from the male and female effects will obviously lead to different values for the

first line of either equation (8) or (9). Provided that the rents received by female workers at low surplus firms

are no larger than the rents received by male workers at these firms, however, our choice of normalization will

yield a lower bound estimate of the bargaining effect, and the overall decomposition will lead to a lower bound

estimate of the effect of firm-specific pay premiums on the gender wage gap.


III.D.   Relating the Estimated Firm Effects to Measures of the Bargaining Surplus

An alternative approach to measuring the sorting and bargaining components of the gender wage gap is to look

directly at how the estimated wage premiums offered by a given firm vary with the measured surplus per worker


                                                         14
at the firm. Specifically, building on our normalization approach, we assume that:

                                      h                 i       n              o
                                                  o                  o
                                     E S̄J(i,t) |SJ(i,t) = κ max 0, SJ(i,t) − τ .                             (10)


In other words, actual average surplus per worker is linearly related to the deviation of the observed surplus
                                                         o
measure from the threshold level τ for firms with S j > τ, and is 0 otherwise. For simplicity we refer to the
             o
quantity max 0, S j − τ as firm j’s “net surplus” NS j . Given a value for τ (which we estimate in a prior step,

as explained in Section V.C.) we can write:


                                            g                        g
                                           ψJ(i,t) = π g NSJ(i,t) + νJ(i,t)                                   (11)

                       h                         i
                         g
where π g ≡ γ g κ and E νJ(i,t) |NSJ(i,t) , G (i) = 0. Notice that π F /π M = γ F /γ M . By taking the ratio of the

estimated gender specific slopes after estimating equation (11) for male and female workers we obtain a direct

estimate of the bargaining power ratio γ F /γ M .

    Using this setup, we can decompose the difference in the average value of the first term of equation (11) for

male relative to female workers as:


                    E[π M NSJ(i,t) |male] − E[π F NSJ(i,t) | f emale]
                                                                                                    
                                                                              E[NSJ(i,t) |male]
                             = (π M − π F )E[NSJ(i,t) |male] + π F                                           (12)
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                     
                                                                            −E[NSJ(i,t) | f emale]
                                                                                                    
                                                                              E[NSJ(i,t) |male]
                          = (π M − π F )E[NSJ(i,t) | f emale] + π M                                 .       (13)
                                                                                                    
                                                                            −E[NSJ(i,t) | f emale]


Focusing only on the part of the firm surplus that is explained by our observed measure of net surplus, the

contribution of the bargaining channel to the male-female wage gap is simply the difference in coefficients

(π M − π F ), weighted by the measured net surplus at men’s jobs (equation 12) or women’s jobs (equation 13).

The corresponding contribution of the sorting channel is the difference in average net surplus at men’s jobs and

women’s jobs, weighted by either π F (equation 12) or π M (equation 13).




                                                             15
III.E.   Within-Firm Changes in Wages Over Time

While our main focus is on gender differences in between-firm wage differentials, our model also implies that

the wages of male and female employees who are observed working at the same firm over time will respond

differently to changes in firm surplus. Define S jt ≡ S̄ j +φ jt as the actual surplus per worker in period t, and Sojt

as the observed surplus measure for firm j in year t. We assume that these are related by:


                                                  = λ max 0, Sojt − τ + ς jt
                                                         
                                           S jt                                                                   (14)

                                                  ≡ λ NS jt + ς jt ,


where the error ς jt has mean zero when we condition on the firm’s observed net surplus and the characteristics

of workers observed working at the firm continuously between an initial period t = 1 and a later period t = T

(i.e., “stayers”). Using equation (4) we can therefore write:

                                                                                           
                            E wiT − wi1 |NSJ(i,1)1 , NSJ(i,1)T , Xi1 , XiT , G (i) , stayer                       (15)

                                  = (XiT − Xi1 )0 β G(i) + θ G(i) [NSJ(i,1)T − NSJ(i,1)1 ],


where θ g = γ g λ and stayer is shorthand for the conditioning event that worker i is continuously employed at the

same firm throughout the sample period. Estimating this equation by OLS separately by gender yields estimates

of the slope parameters θ M and θ F which can be used to form another estimate of the relative bargaining power

ratio γ F /γ M , based on the differential reactions of male and female wages to changes in surplus.

    To actually estimate the relative bargaining power ratio (and its sampling error) we rely on the insight from

our model that:
                         E wiT − wi1 − (XiT − Xi1 )0 β F | f emale, stayer, J (i, 1) = j
                                                                                        
                                                                                             γF
                                                                                           =
                          E wiT − wi1 − (XiT − Xi1 )0 β M |male, stayer, J (i, 1) = j
                                                                                      
                                                                                             γM

That is, the covariate-adjusted average wage changes of male and female stayers at the same firm are determin-

istically related by the gender bargaining power ratio. Given the small size of most firms in our sample, we

estimate this relationship using a two-step instrumental variables (IV) procedure. For each gender, we regress

the change in wages on covariates and firm dummies to obtain adjusted average firm wage changes by gender.

We then regress the adjusted average change in female wages at each firm on the corresponding average male

change using the change in measured surplus as an instrument and weighting by the total number of stayers at

each firm. Similarity of this estimate, based on within-firm changes in wages and measured surplus, with the


                                                             16
estimate from equation (11) based on between-firm variation in wages and surplus, provides support for the

simple rent-sharing model specified by equations (1)-(3).



IV.    Descriptive Evidence on Firm-Specific Pay Premiums

Although the two-way effects model specified in equation (4) has been widely used over the past decade, the

additive structure of the model and the restrictive assumptions needed for OLS estimation have been strongly

criticized by some authors (e.g., Lopes de Melo, 2009; Eeckhout and Kirchner, 2011). Following Card, Heining

and Kline (2013), we present some descriptive evidence on the patterns of wage changes for people who move

between jobs with higher- and lower-paid co-workers. We document five basic facts that are all consistent

with equation (4) and the exogenous mobility condition (5). First, men and women who move between jobs

with higher- and lower-paid co-workers experience systematic wage gains and losses, suggesting that there are

significant firm-specific pay premiums for both genders. Second, there is no indication that movers to firms with

higher- or lower-paid co-workers experience differential wage trends prior to their move. Third, wage changes

for people who move between firms with similarly-paid co-workers experience little or no excess wage growth

relative to job stayers. Fourth, the gains and losses from moving between jobs with higher-paid and lower-

paid co-workers are approximately symmetric, suggesting that the firm-specific pay premiums are additively

separable (in logarithms) from other pay components and that mobility patterns are not driven by comparative

advantage in wages. Fifth, women gain less than men from moving to jobs with more highly paid co-workers,

as predicted by a rent-sharing model in which women get a smaller share of the rents than men.

    We begin by selecting men and women from the overall analysis sample described in columns 1 and 2 of

Table I who are employed at firms with at least one worker of each gender at some point in our sample period.

We construct mean log co-worker wages for each person in each year (i.e., the leave-out mean log wage at their

firm including both male and female co-workers), and assign each person in each year the quartile of their mean

co-worker wages. (We do not adjust wages for time effects or any worker characteristics). For job changers

who are observed for at least two years at their origin firm and two years at their destination firm, we then

classify the move based on their co-worker wage quartile in the last year at the old job and their co-worker

wage quartile in the first year at their new job. Finally, we construct average wages in the years before and after

the move for each of the 16 groups of male and female job changers.

    Figures I and II plot the wage profiles before and after the job change for men and women who moved from

jobs in the lowest (1st) quartile of co-worker wages, and for those who moved from jobs in the highest (4th)

                                                        17
quartile. The figures show that men and women who move from jobs with highly paid co-workers to jobs with

poorly-paid co-workers experience large average wage losses, while those who move in the opposite direction

experience large wage gains.21 Moving within a quartile group, by comparison, is associated with relatively

small wage changes. Moreover, although the levels of wages on the old job differ between people from the same

origin quartile who move to different destination quartiles, the trends prior to moving are very similar across

groups. Likewise, the trends after moving are similar across groups. These observations imply that inter-firm

mobility is correlated with the permanent component of individual wages (i.e., the αi component of equation 4)

but not with the transitory error components (i.e., φ jt or εit ).

    Appendix Table B2 summarizes all 16 groups of men and women, including information on the numbers of

observations in each origin/destination group, the fractions of each origin group that move to each of the four

possible destination groups, and the average wage change experienced by each group from two years before to

two years after the move. The table also reports an average regression-adjusted wage change for job changers,

using the coefficients from a model of wage changes fit to the sample of job stayers who remain on the same job

over a given four-year interval. The average adjusted wage changes for job changers who stay in the same co-

worker wage quartile are all relatively small – e.g., 0.5% for male movers from quartile 1 jobs to other quartile

1 jobs, and -1.2% for female movers from quartile 2 jobs to other quartile 2 jobs – suggesting that mobility per

se has little effect on wage growth. The only exception is for movers among firms in quartile 4, who experience

relatively modest wage gains (6.1% for men and 7.0% for women) relative to stayers.

    Movers between quartiles, on the other hand, experience relatively large wage gains or losses, even control-

ling for experience. Moreover, while not precisely symmetric, the mean wage changes for people who move in

opposite directions between quartile groups (e.g, from quartile 1 to quartile 2, versus from quartile 2 to quartile

1) are of similar magnitude and uniformly of opposite sign. This is illustrated in Appendix Figures B3 and

B4, where we graph the mean adjusted wage changes for downward movers (e.g., from quartile 4 to quartile 3

firms) against the adjusted wage changes for symmetric upward movers (e.g. from quartile 3 to quartile 4). The

wage changes of matched upward- and downward movers lie very close to a line with slope -1, consistent with

the symmetry implications of an AKM model with exogenous mobility, though for both men and women we

can formally reject the hypothesis of symmetry.22
  21 The  QP does not collect information that allows us to distinguish the reasons for job changes, though we suspect that many
transitions to higher-quartile firms are voluntary moves, while many of the transitions to lower-quartile firms arise from layoff and
firing events. As documented in Appendix Table B2, moves up are more common than moves down.
   22 The null hypothesis of symmetry is equivalent to the restriction that the sum of each upward and downward change in a quartile-

to-quartile pair is zero. To account for the first stage regression adjustment of wage changes, we used a block bootstrap procedure
to compute the standard error of the sum of each transition pair allowing for two-way clustering on worker and firm. This was



                                                                18
     Comparisons between Figures I and II point to another important fact, which is that the wage changes for

female movers in a given origin-destination group tend to be smaller in absolute value than the corresponding

changes for men. This is illustrated graphically in Figure III, where we plot the adjusted wage changes for

each of the 16 origin-destination quartiles for women against the corresponding adjusted changes for men. The

points lie very tightly clustered around a line with a slope significantly less that 1, confirming that women gain

less from moving to jobs with more highly paid co-workers, and lose less from moving in the opposite direction.

Equation (4) implies that the expected wage change for men who move from firm j to firm k is ψkM − ψ M
                                                                                                     j , while

the expected change for women making the same transition is ψkF − ψ Fj = (γ F /γ M )(ψkM − ψ M
                                                                                             j ). The slope of

the line in Figure III (0.77) can therefore be interpreted as an estimate of the relative bargaining power ratio.23

     To summarize, our descriptive analysis confirms that firm-specific wage premiums are an important feature

of the wage structure, and that firm mobility is (at least over the horizon we study) related to time invariant

person components of wages but not to time varying or match components of wages. Furthermore, moves

between matched groups of firms affect the wages of men proportionally more than the wages of women – a

pattern we interpret as strong qualitative evidence that men have greater average bargaining power than women.



V.     Estimation of Worker-Firm Models

V.A.     Estimation Sample

We turn now to a more systematic analysis of the firm-specific pay premiums for men and women. Building on

equation (4), we fit models that include person effects, gender-specific firm effects, and a set of time-varying

observable covariates with gender-specific coefficients. For simplicity, we restrict our analysis to the largest

connected set of firms for each gender. The estimation samples are described in columns 3 and 4 of Table I.

Overall, 91% of all person-year observations for male workers and 88% of all person-year observations for

female workers are included in the largest connected sets. The included workers are very similar to those in our

overall analysis sample, and in particular have only slightly higher average wages. After estimating the AKM

models separately using these samples, we then narrow our focus to workers who are employed at firms that are

in the connected sets for both men and women. This dual-connected sample of men and women – described in
accomplished by running three bootstraps: one resampling workers, one firms, and one worker-firm matches. The three asymptotic
variances were then combined according to equation 2.11 of Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2011). We then used the estimated
covariance matrix of the quartile-to-quartile sums to compute a Wald test of the hypothesis that the six sums were jointly zero. The test
statistics were 17.6 for men and 87.9 for women, both of which possess an asymptotic χ 2 (6) distribution (1% critical value is 16.8).
   23 This estimate should be regarded as suggestive rather than definitive, since women and men are not equally distributed across the

firms in each quartile group. We present estimates based on firm-specific comparisons below.



                                                                  19
columns 5 and 6 of Table I – includes just over two thirds of the person-year observations from columns 1 and

2. Individuals in the dual-connected set have higher education than in the workforce as a whole, and also have

somewhat higher average wages. The gender wage gap is also larger in this sample than in our overall sample

(23% versus 18%), reflecting the omission of the single-gender firms, which as noted earlier have a relatively

small gender gap.


V.B.       Estimation Results

Columns 1 and 2 of Table II summarize the parameter estimates and fit of our models for men and women in

the largest connected sets of workers of each gender.24 The models include fixed effects for workers and firms

as well as year dummies, fully interacted with 4 education dummies (for 6, 9, 12 and 16 years of education),

and quadratic and cubic terms in age interacted with education dummies.25
                                                                                                               
    We show the standard deviations of the estimated person and firm effects and the covariate indexes Xit0 βbg

for each observation, as well as the correlation of the person and firm effects, the residual standard deviation

of the model, the adjusted R2 statistics, and the (worker-year weighted) correlation of the estimated male and
                                 
                      M , ψF
female firm effects ψJ(i,t) J(i,t) . For both males and females, the standard deviations of the person effects are

nearly twice as big as the standard deviations of the firm effects, implying that a relatively large share of wage

inequality for both genders is attributed to worker characteristics that are equally rewarded at all firms. The

correlations between the estimated person and firm effects are both positive, implying that more highly-skilled

men and women are disproportionately employed at firms that pay higher wages to all their workers. Such

positive assortative matching has been found in many recent studies of wage determination.26 Our estimates

of the male and female firm effects are also strongly positively correlated (ρ = 0.59), indicating that firms that

pay higher wage premiums to men tend to pay more to women as well. Since the firm effects contain sampling

errors and are estimated on disjoint samples, their sample correlation is a downward biased estimate of the true

correlation between the gender-specific wage premiums.

    The middle panel of Table II shows fit statistics for a generalized model that includes dummies for each

worker-firm match. This model, which relaxes the additive structure of equation (4), provides only a slight
  24 Estimates   were computed using a preconditioned conjugate gradient algorithm as in Card, Heining and Kline (2013).
  25 For  each education group, we omit the 2002 year effect and re-center the quadratic and cubic terms around age 40. Since year
and age are perfectly colinear when we include person effects, we exclude the linear age term. This normalization yields interpretable
estimates of the year and person effects if the age profile is flat at age 40, which appears to be approximately true.
   26 See e.g., Card, Heining and Kline (2013) for West Germany, Maré and Hyslop (2006) for New Zealand, Skans, Edin and Holmlund

(2008) for Sweden, and Bagger, Sorensen and Vejelin (2012) for Denmark. The sampling errors in the estimated person and firm effects
from a model such as (4) are in general negatively correlated (see e.g., Maré and Hyslop, 2006; Andrews, Schank and Upward 2008),
implying that the correlations between the estimated effects are downward biased estimates of the degree of assortative matching.


                                                                 20
improvement in fit, with about a 1 percentage point rise in the adjusted R2 statistics. By comparing the residual

standard error of the generalized model to the corresponding standard error for the AKM model we can construct

an estimate of the standard deviation of the permanent job match effects (the miJ(i,t) ) that are absorbed in the

job match model but included in the residual of an AKM model. The estimates are 0.062 for men and 0.054

for women – only about one-quarter as big as the standard deviations of the firm effects for the two genders.

Evidently, the part of the wage premium that is shared by all workers at a given firm is much larger, on average,

than the worker-specific match component.

   We have also conducted a series of additional specification checks of the fit of our basic models. In one

check, we examine the mean residuals from equation (4) for subgroups of observations classified by the decile

of the estimated person effect and the decile of the estimated firm effect. As shown in Appendix Figures B5 and

B6, we find that the mean residuals are very small in all 100 cells for both genders, supporting our conclusion

that the additive structure of (4) provides a good approximation to the wage-setting process. In a second check,

we examined the mean residuals for workers who transition between groups of firms, classified by the quartile

of the (gender-specific) estimated firm effects. We find that the mean residuals are small in magnitude for all

groups of movers.

   The bottom rows of Table II present the main components of a simple decomposition of the variance of

wages across workers implied by the fitted version of equation (4):

                                                                                
                                                    G(i)                   G(i)
                    Var (wit ) = Var (α̂i ) +Var ψ̂J(i,t) + 2Cov α̂i , ψ̂J(i,t)                             (16)
                                                                                    
                                                                  G(i)
                                 +Var Xit0 β̂ G(i) + 2Cov α̂i + ψ̂J(i,t) , Xit0 β̂ G(i) +Var (r̂it ) .


Among both male and female workers, person effects account for about 60% of overall wage variation, firm

effects account for about 20%, and the covariation in worker and firm effects accounts for an additional 10%.

The contribution of the measured covariates (including the main effects and the covariances with the person

and firm effects) is relatively small, and the residual component is also small (<5%), reflecting the high R2

coefficients for the underlying models.


V.C.   Normalizing the Estimated Firm Effects

The next step in our analysis is to renormalize the estimated firm effects from the models in Table II. Following

the approach outlined in Section III.B., we identify a threshold level for our measure of the size of the surplus



                                                           21
available at a firm – value added per worker – such that firms below that threshold are “zero surplus” firms.

Figure IV shows the relationship between average log value-added per worker and the estimated firm effects

for men and women (which were normalized for purposes of estimation by setting the effects to zero for the

largest firm in the sample). We group firms into percentile bins of value-added and plot the average male and

female firm effects in each bin against mean log value-added per worker for firms in the bin.

    A striking feature of this figure is the piecewise linear nature of the relationship between the estimated firm

effects and value-added. Firms in the bottom 15 or so percentiles pay very similar average wages, while at

higher percentiles the wage premiums for both men and women are linearly increasing in log value-added per

worker, suggesting a constant elasticity relationship between wages and value-added above a kink point. To

identify the kink point more formally, we fit a series of bivariate regression models of the form:

                                                               n              o
                                         M                           o
                                       ψ̂J(i,t)                                    M
                                                = π0M + π M max 0, SJ(i,t) − τ + νJ(i,t)                                                (17)
                                                               n              o
                                         F                          o
                                       ψ̂J(i,t)                                   F
                                                = π0F + π F max 0, SJ(i,t) − τ + νJ(i,t) .


                       o
where (as above) S j is the average of log value-added per worker at firm j and τ is a threshold beyond which the

firm begins to share rents. We estimated these equations using firm-level data for all firms in the dual connected

sample that can be matched to the financial data set.27 We then selected the value of τ that minimized the

mean squared error of the system of two equations. This procedure selects a value of τ̂ = 2.45, which visually

matches the pattern in the figure. The estimated values of the coefficients π M and π F are 0.156 and 0.137,

respectively.28 We show the fitted relationships in Figure IV.
                                                                             o
    The implied set of “no surplus” firms (i.e., those with S j < τ̂) account for 9% of all person-years at dual-

connected firms with financial information. As documented in Appendix Table B3, these firms are relatively

small, have relatively low sales per worker, tend to employ more women than men, and are disproportionately

concentrated in the hotel and restaurant sector. Given the estimate of τ̂ we then normalized the estimated firm
                                                                                                                       o
effects for both genders to have employment-weighted averages of zero across all firms with S j < τ̂.29 To check

the sensitivity of our normalization procedures, we used a nonparametric bootstrap procedure to estimate the

sampling error of τ̂, which yielded an estimated standard error of 0.09. We then re-calculated the normalizing
   27 We fit these equations to firm-level data using the 47,477 dual connected firms with matched financial data, weighting each firm by

the total number of person-years of employment at the firm in our data set. These firms account for 63% of the person-year observations
at dual-connected firms.
   28 Appendix Figure B7 shows the adjusted R2 from the bivariate system for a range of values of τ and the associated estimates of the

coefficients π M , π F .
                       
   29 This is essentially the same as subtracting the estimated values of the constants (π̂ M and π̂ F ) in equation (17) from ψ̂ M and ψ̂ F ,
                                                                                           0        0                             j        j
respectively.


                                                                     22
constants using the upper and lower bounds of the 95% confidence interval for τ. We obtained normalizing

constants that are quite close to the baseline constants for τ̂ = 2.45, suggesting that our procedure is relatively

insensitive to uncertainty about the location of τ̂. As described below, we also confirm this insensitivity using a

normalization that assumes the mean wage premiums paid by firms in the hotel and restaurant sector are zero,

and by replicating the procedure from (17) using sales per worker instead of value added per worker as the

indicator of surplus.

    Figure V graphs the normalized firm effects for women against the corresponding effects for men, using

the same 100 groups as in Figure IV. As noted in Table II there is a strong relationship between the aver-

age premiums paid to male workers in each group and the average premiums paid to female workers – the

employment-weighted correlation of ψ̂ Fj and ψ̂ M                                                 F       M
                                                j is 0.59, and the corresponding regression of ψ̂ j on ψ̂ j has a

slope of 0.56. Given the presence of sampling errors in the estimated firm effects, however, this is a downward-

biased estimate of the rent-sharing ratio γ F /γ M . Grouping firms into cells based on their average value added

per worker averages out the sampling errors and yields a relatively precisely estimated slope coefficient of 0.89.



VI.     Firm-specific Pay Premiums and the Gender Wage Gap

VI.A.    Basic Decompositions

Next, we use the normalized firm effects for men and women to quantify the impact of firm-specific pay pre-

miums on the gender wage gap, using the framework of equations (8) and (9). The top row of Table III shows

the terms involved in these alternative decompositions for all workers in the dual connected sample. As shown

in column (1), the gender wage gap for this sample is 0.234. Columns 2 and 3 show the mean values of the

estimated firm wage premiums among men and women, respectively. These can be interpreted as estimates of

the average rents received by men and women relative to jobs at no-surplus firms. The difference in column 4

(0.049) is the overall contribution of firm-specific pay premiums to the gender wage gap, and accounts for 21%

of the overall gender wage gap.

    The part of this total that is attributable to the sorting channel can be calculated by evaluating the difference

in the average of the male wage premiums weighted by the shares of men versus women at each firm, or by

calculating a corresponding difference in the average of the female wage premiums. The first of these two

estimates is shown in column 5, and amounts to 0.035 (or 15% of the overall gender wage gap), while the

second is shown in column 6, and amounts to 0.047 (or 20% of the gap). Likewise, the contribution of the



                                                         23
bargaining channel can be calculated either by taking the average difference in the estimated male and female

wage premiums, weighted by the fraction of men at each firm (column 7), or by taking the average difference in

the two premiums, weighted by the fraction of women at each firm (column 8). The first method yields a very

small estimate of the bargaining effect (0.003 or 1.2% of the wage gap) while the second yields a somewhat

larger estimate (0.015 or 6.3% of the gender gap).30

    To interpret the magnitude of the bargaining effect, note that our estimate of the average rents received by

male workers in Portugal is modest (14.8%). If women and men had the same distribution across firms, but

women earned only 90% of the wage premiums received by men (i.e., γ F /γ M = 0.9), then we would obtain an

estimate of the bargaining effect equal to 1.5%. This is about equal to the estimate in column 8 based on the

female distribution of workers across firms. The estimate of the bargaining effect based on the male distribution

is smaller, implying that men are relatively concentrated at firms where the gap ψ̂ M      F
                                                                                    j − ψ̂ j is small.

    The lower rows of Table III present a parallel set of decompositions for different age and education sub-

groups. Comparing across age groups (rows 2-4) the entries in column 1 show that the male-female wage gap

in Portugal widens dramatically with age. Firm-specific pay differentials contribute to this pattern, with most

of the increase attributable to a rise in the sorting effect with age. A higher-resolution summary is provided in

Figure VI, which shows the overall gender gap (plotted with triangles) and the components of our decomposi-

tion for 2-4 year age bins. Our estimate of the average rents received by men (plotted with squares) shows that

these rise with age until the mid-thirties, and then are relatively stable until the mid-fifties, when they begin to

fall off. The age profile of average rents for women (plotted with circles) is flatter and peaks earlier. Thus our

estimate of the total contribution of firm wage premiums to the gender wage gap (plotted with diamonds) rises

until the mid-fifties, peaking at around 7.5 percentage points. As shown by the dotted lines at the bottom of the

figure, the sorting component explains between 75% and 95% of the overall contribution.

    Comparisons across education groups in the bottom rows of Table III show that the gender wage gap is

roughly constant across education groups, but the average pay premiums received by both men and women are

increasing with years of schooling, confirming that there is positive assortative matching between higher-skilled

workers and higher-paying firms. As shown in column 4, the net effect of firm-specific pay premiums on the

gender wage gap is about the same for workers with less than high school or high school education, but is

somewhat smaller for university-educated workers, reflecting a much smaller sorting effect for these workers,
  30 In the wage decomposition literature (e.g., Jann, 2008) the sorting effect is often called an “endowment” effect, since it evaluates

the differences in the shares of men and women at different firms, using the “returns” to each firm calculated for either men or women.
The bargaining effect is often called a “coefficient” effect, since it evaluates the differences in the estimated “returns” to working at a
given firm for men versus women using the “endowments” of men or women.



                                                                   24
coupled with a larger bargaining effect.


VI.B.       Decompositions by Occupation and Industry

Men and women tend to work in different occupations (see e.g. Manning and Swaffield, 2008, and Goldin, 2014

for recent analyses, and Cardoso, Guimarães and Portugal, 2012 for a discussion in the Portuguese context).

This raises the question of whether some of the differences identified in Table III are actually due to occupation

rather than gender. We investigate this issue in Table IV, assigning each worker to his or her modal occupation.

Notice first that the gender wage gap varies widely across occupations, from around 15% for professionals,

technicians, clerks, and service workers to 40% for craft occupations. The average size of the firm-specific

wage premiums received by male and female workers also varies substantially, with a net contribution to the

gender wage gap that ranges from 1% for managers and service workers to 6% or more for technicians, clerks,

and craft workers. For most occupations the sorting effect is larger than the bargaining effect, though for

managers and professionals– the two groups with the highest fraction of university-educated workers – the

bargaining effect is relatively large, consistent with the patterns in Table III.

    A potential concern with these comparisons is that some of the differential bargaining power we measure

for women may actually be due to differential rent sharing across occupations. To investigate this possibility we

fit separate AKM models for male and female workers who work in “mainly male” or “mainly female” occupa-

tions, allowing unrestricted firm effects for gender and occupation group.31 We then investigated whether there

is a systematic difference in bargaining power between men and women who work in a given occupation group.

The results are summarized in Appendix Table B4, and show that while between-firm sorting is an impor-

tant component of the gender gap for workers in both occupation groups, the bargaining effect is concentrated

among workers in traditionally male occupations.

    We have also examined the contributions of the sorting and bargaining channels to the gender wage gap

for workers in different major industries. The results, summarized in Appendix Table B5, show that in most

industries women are under-represented at firms that pay higher wage premiums for men and women, with

particularly large sorting effects in the chemical, non-metallic mineral, business services, and utility industries.

Likewise, the wage premiums paid to women are smaller than the premiums for men in most sectors, with

relatively large bargaining effects in the food products, paper and publishing, and chemical industries. An
  31 More detail is provided in section B of the Online Appendix. We classify individuals as having “mainly female” or “mainly male”
occupations depending on whether the average share of females in the occupations they are observed holding in our sample is above or
below the median for all occupations. Using this approach, 85% of women and 27% of men have mainly female occupations; 15% of
women and 73% of men have mainly male occupations.


                                                                25
interesting exception to these patterns is construction, which has the lowest fraction of female workers among

the major industries (11%). Females in construction are better-educated than males, earn higher average wages,

and tend to be sorted to firms that pay higher wages to both men and women (i.e., a sorting effect of the “wrong

sign”).


VI.C.      An Alternative Normalization

Our estimates of the relative bargaining effect rely on a normalization that allows us to estimate the average rents

earned by men and women. To check the robustness of our findings we considered an alternative normalization

based on the assumption that firms in the hotel and restaurant industry pay zero rents to workers on average.

Firms in this sector pay the lowest average wage premiums of all major industries (see Appendix Table B5).

Job turnover rates are also high, suggesting that workers are able to find a job in the industry relatively easily.

We therefore normalized the estimated wage premiums for men and women such that the weighted average

of both premiums is 0 in the sector (weighting by the total number of workers at each firm). Appendix Table

B6 reproduces the decompositions in Table III using this alternative normalization assumption. The estimated

sorting effects are invariant to normalization and are therefore the same as in Table III. The estimated bargaining

effects, however, are uniformly larger, reflecting the fact that the mean of the estimated wage premiums for

male workers is about the same under the baseline and alternative normalizations, but the mean of the estimated

premiums for female workers falls by about 2 percentage points under the alternative normalization. As a result

the estimated bargaining power effects are all increased by 0.021 relative to those presented in Table III.32

Under this alternative normalization, firm-specific wage premiums explain about 30% of the gender wage gap

for workers as a whole, with 15-20% explained by sorting effects and 10-15% explained by relative bargaining

effects. This alternative normalization therefore suggests that our baseline procedure leads to a conservative

estimate of the bargaining power effect.


VI.D.     Compensating Differentials for Hours?

A recent literature (e.g., Bertrand, Goldin and Katz, 2010; Goldin, 2014) suggests that part of the gender wage

gap is due to compensating differentials for long hours of work. If some firms offer packages of high wages and

long hours that are relatively unattractive to female workers, we would attribute the resulting pattern of wage

and employment outcomes to the sorting channel. To assess the potential role of hours differences in accounting
  32 Inspection
              of expressions (8) and (9) shows that if the estimated female premiums are all adjusted downward relative to the male
premiums, then the estimated bargaining effect for any subgroup of workers is raised by the difference in the adjustment factors.


                                                                26
for differences in firm-specific pay premiums we calculated two alternative measures of average hours worked

by the male and female employees at each firm - one based on regular contractual hours, the other based on total

hours, including regular hours and overtime. We then regressed the estimated wage premiums for each gender

on the alternative measures of mean hours. We fit OLS models with and without controls for major industry,

and IV models in which we used hours of the other gender group as an instrument for each group’s hours

to address the “division bias” problem (Borjas, 1980) that arises because wages are constructed by dividing

monthly earnings by monthly hours.33 The results, summarized in Appendix Table B7, show no evidence that

differences in mean hours (excluding or including overtime) are significant determinants of the wage premiums

offered by different firms to either men or women, once we account for systematic differences across industries.

    Of course there may be other features of the hours “packages” offered by different firms – for example,

requirements for flexibility in responding to seasonal demand shocks – that we cannot measure, since we only

see hours in the survey reference week of the QP. Thus we cannot rule out that part of the variation in the

firm-specific wage premiums offered to men and women is driven by differences in hours-related requirements,

or other unobserved features of the job.


VI.E.     Confounding Effects of the Minimum Wage?

During our sample period the minimum wage in Portugal was typically set at 50% of the median wage of

full-time workers (OECD, 2015b). This is higher than in the U.S. or the U.K. and potentially high enough

to compress the gender wage gap (see DiNardo, Fortin, and Lemieux, 1996). Indeed, among workers in our

dual-connected sample, 7% of men and 18% of women have a wage in at least one year that is within 5% of the

minimum wage. Upward pressure from the minimum wage might constrain some firms that would otherwise

offer lower wages to female workers, pushing up ψ Fj relative to ψ M
                                                                   j and leading us to conclude that the relative

bargaining effect is small. To examine this possibility, we re-estimated our AKM models using workers who

are at least 25 years old with a high school education or more. Among this subgroup (who represent 24% of

all men and 31% of all women in our analysis sample), only 2% of the men and 3% of the women ever have a

wage within 5% of the minimum wage. We then repeated the normalization exercise described in Section V.C.

and formed a new set of decompositions. The results are presented in section C of the Online Appendix.

    Eliminating younger and less educated workers leads to a reduction in the fraction of the remaining workers

in the connected sets for each gender group, since many of the links between firms are formed through mobility
  33 This procedure will not eliminate all the bias if the measurement errors in male and female hours at the same firm are correlated,

for example by misreporting practices that lead to over- or understatement of the hours of all workers at a firm.


                                                                 27
of these groups. The selective loss of firms that mainly hire less-educated workers leads to an attenuation of

the between-firm sorting effect on the gender wage gap (see Appendix Table C2). The estimated impact of

the bargaining channel, however, is larger in this subsample than in the workforce as a whole, and comparable

to the estimate we obtain for university educated workers in our main analysis – around 2 percentage points.

Interestingly, the estimated bargaining power effect for university-educated workers is similar whether we use

firm effects estimated for all workers (as in our main analysis) or the firm effects estimated only for higher-

educated workers. This suggests that the firm effects for women in our main analysis are not significantly

attenuated by inclusion of younger and less educated workers whose wages are constrained by the national

minimum wage.34



VII.       Firm Wage Premiums and Measured Surplus

VII.A.      Estimates of Rent Sharing Models

In this section we turn to the question of how the estimated wage premiums for different firms are related to

measures of the potential surplus at the firm. As a starting point, we note that the simple correlation coefficients

between mean log value added per worker and the firm effects are 0.42 for men and 0.38 for women, while the

corresponding correlations with mean log sales per worker are 0.38 and 0.36. Given the presence of sampling

errors in the estimated wage premiums, and potential noise in measures of value added and sales (particularly

for the small firms that comprise the bulk of our sample), these correlations are reassuringly strong.

    Table V presents estimates of the rent-sharing coefficients π M and π F based on equation (11), using three

alternative measures of surplus. The models in row 1 use the net surplus measure from our baseline normal-

ization procedure, which is based on mean log value added per worker. The estimation sample includes all

firms in the dual connected set that can be linked to SABI and have at least one year of value added data. By

construction, the estimates are identical to the estimates obtained from equation (17) at the optimized value for

τ̂, and yield elasticities of 0.16 for men and 0.14 for women.35 To estimate the sampling error for the ratio, note
  34 To  test the attenuation hypothesis directly we regressed the estimated firm effects for women from our main analysis on the
estimated effects obtained using only older and more educated workers, instrumenting the right hand side variable with the estimated
firm effect for men from our main analysis. The model was estimated at the firm level, weighting by the number of person-year
observations for females at the firm. The estimated coefficient is 1.02 (standard error 0.01), suggesting that there is minimal attenuation
of the firm effects from our main analysis.
   35 These coefficients are slightly bigger than the IV estimates of the elasticity of wages with respect to value added per worker

reported by Card, Devicienti and Maida (2014, hereafter CDM) based on matched worker-firm data for Italy (e.g., 0.09 in Table A4 of
CDM). Using the average ratio of quasi-rents to value added reported by CDM, the coefficients in Table V imply elasticities of wages
with respect to quasi rents per worker of about 0.07 – comparable to the estimates reported by Arai and Heyman (2009) for Swedish
workers, Martins (2009) for Portuguese workers, Guertzgen (2009) for German workers, and Guiso, Pistaferri and Schivardi (2005) for



                                                                   28
that π̂ F /π̂ M is the two-stage least squares estimate of the parameter δ1 from a simple model of the form:


                                                  F                  M
                                                ψ̂J(i,t) = δ0 + δ1 ψ̂J(i,t) + eJ(i,t) ,


using net surplus as an instrumental variable for ψ̂ M
                                                     j . We therefore use the conventional standard error of the

two-stage least squares estimator as our estimated standard error for the ratio. The estimated ratio is 0.88 with a

standard error of 0.03 (column 4). We can therefore rule out the null hypothesis of equal rent-sharing (π F = π M )

in favor of the alternative that women receive a smaller share of the component of firm-wide rents that is directly

related to excess value-added.

    In row 2 we check the robustness of this conclusion using mean log sales per worker as an alternative proxy

for the potential surplus at each firm. Since sales (for the previous calendar year) are reported in QP we are

able to expand the sample to include all firms in the dual connected set with reported sales in at least one year.

Sales are also measured independently of labor costs at the firm, so a finding that our conclusions are robust to

using sales per worker provides a check that there is not a measurement-related problem in using value added

per worker.

    As expected, given that sales per worker are significantly noisier than value added per worker, the estimated

rent sharing elasticities in row 2 are smaller in magnitude than the elasticities in row 1.36 Nevertheless their

ratio is virtually the same, and is again significantly different from 1. The models in row 3 use a third indicator

which is derived from an alternative normalization procedure in which we define net surplus using the excess

of sales per worker over a minimum threshold level (see the next section). This choice leads to a slight increase

in the rent sharing coefficients relative to the specifications in row 2, but again their ratio is nearly invariant.

    To probe the robustness of the results in Table V we re-estimated the models including controls for industry

(20 dummies), location (dummies for firms located in Lisbon or Porto) and a quadratic in firm size (based on

average total employment in all years). Estimates from these models are presented in Appendix Table B8. In

brief, the addition of controls leads to a slight attenuation (on the order of 10-15%) in the estimated rent-sharing

coefficients, with a slightly bigger attenuation of the coefficients for women than men. These models therefore

reinforce our conclusion that women get a smaller share of rents than men, though in all cases the estimated
Italian workers, but only about one-quarter as large as elasticities estimated by Abowd and Lemieux (1993) and Van Reenen (1996)
using firm-level data without controls for worker quality. See CDM for a more detailed summary of the recent rent sharing literature.
   36 A regression of mean log value added per worker on mean log sales per worker has a coefficient of 0.39 across firms with valid

data for (trimmed) value added per worker. Interestingly, the reverse regression of mean log sales per worker on mean log value added
per worker has a coefficient of 1.08, suggesting that log sales per worker is (approximately) equal to log value added per worker plus
noise.



                                                                 29
ratios are within a standard error of the ratios in Table V.

    In summary, we find that the estimated firm-specific wage premiums for men and women are highly corre-

lated with measures of the surplus per worker at the firm. Importantly, the estimated correlations are uniformly

smaller for women than men, providing strong support for the view that women get a smaller share of the

surplus than men.


VII.B.    Decompositions of the Gender Wage Gap using Observed Measures of Surplus

The component of the firm-specific wage premium received by male workers that is directly attributed to observ-

able surplus is π̂ M E[NSJ(i,t) |male], while the corresponding component for female workers is π̂ F E[NSJ(i,t) | f emale].

Their difference gives the contribution of the observable component of surplus to the gender wage gap, and can

be decomposed into bargaining and sorting channels using equations (12) and (13). In Appendix Table B9

we present estimates of the terms in these two alternative decompositions, using the overall sample of dual-

connected workers. We find that the component of the firm effects that is explained by our observed measure of

surplus accounts for about 80% of the total rent premiums received by both men and women, and 80% of the

impact of firm-specific premiums on the gender wage gap. Applying the decompositions in equations (12) and

(13) we find that differential sorting of men to high surplus firms accounts for about two-thirds of the total effect

of our surplus indicator, while the lower bargaining power of women accounts for about one-third, or 1-1.5 log

points of the overall gender gap. This evidence on the differential sharing of observed surpluses reinforces our

conclusion that the lower relative bargaining power of women contributes to the gender wage gap, particularly

for subgroups of workers who are most likely to work at high-surplus firms (e.g., higher-educated workers).


VII.C.     Sales per Worker as an Alternative Measure of Surplus

In our main analysis we use data on value added per worker to choose the normalization for the estimated

firm-specific wage premiums, and to measure the relative bargaining power of male and female workers. To

check the robustness of our procedures, we redid our analysis using sales per worker as an alternative indicator

of surplus. As discussed above, an advantage of sales is that it is reported in QP for most firms (89% of the

84,720 firms in our dual-connected sample).

    Section D of the Online Appendix summarizes the results from this alternative approach. Appendix Figure

D1 graphs the (unnormalized) firm effects for men and women against mean log sales per worker. As we found

using mean log value added per worker as a measure of the surplus, there is a clear visual kink in the relationship


                                                          30
between the estimated firm effects and mean log sales per worker. Using the procedure described in Section
                                                                                              
V.C., we identified the kink point τs . We then define excess mean log sales per worker as max 0, S j − L j − τ̂s
               
where S j − L j represents mean log sales per worker, calculated using annual sales data in QP for all years in

which it is available for a given firm. Appendix Table D1 presents a series of decompositions parallel to those

in Table III but using the normalization that mean firm premiums for workers at firms with S j − L j ≤ τ̂s equal

zero. Reassuringly, this alternative normalization yields estimates of the bargaining effect that are essentially

identical to the estimates from our baseline procedure. Finally, as reported in row 3 of Table V, use of excess

mean log sales per worker as a measure of surplus yields estimates of the rent sharing coefficients for male and

female workers that are about 60% as large as the estimates based on excess mean log value added per worker

(consistent with the fact that sales per worker is substantially noisier than value added per worker) but have the

same ratio as we found using value added per worker. Overall, we conclude that our results are highly robust

to the use of either value added per worker or sales per worker as an indicator of the surplus available at each

firm.



VIII.     Within Firm Changes in Profitability and Wages

As a final step in our analysis, we use observations from the last four years of our analysis sample to measure the

effects of changes in the measured surplus at each firm on the wages of male and female job stayers. Our base

sample includes information on some 280,000 men and 200,000 women who were employed continuously at a

firm that can be linked to value added information for 2006 and 2009 in SABI. These workers have similar age,

education and wages as men and women in our overall analysis sample (see Appendix Table B10). Moreover,

the wage gap between male and female stayers is 22 log points in both 2006 and 2009 - about the same as in

our dual connected set.

    Table VI presents a series of models based on equation (15) that show the relationship between the change

in excess log value-added at a firm and the wage changes of male and female stayers. We estimate these models

in two steps, first regressing individual wage changes on a quadratic in age (separately by gender) and firm

indicators, then in a second stage regressing the estimated firm-specific coefficients on the change in excess log

value added at the firm, weighted by the number of workers at the firm in the gender group. Given the large

variability in measured value-added, our main specifications Winsorize the change in excess value-added at +/-

0.50. As shown in row 1 of the table, the resulting estimates of the rent sharing coefficients for male and female

stayers are 0.049 and 0.045, respectively. Their ratio, shown in column 4 of the table, is 0.91 (with a standard

                                                        31
error of 0.09). The point estimate of the relative bargaining power of women is therefore quite consistent with

estimates based on between firm comparisons (in Table V), though we cannot rule out a value of 1 for the

ratio. Row 2 shows the same specification, estimated without Winsorizing the change in excess value added.

Although the rent sharing coefficients become about 30% smaller – as would be expected if some of the very

large changes are due to measurement error – their ratio remains very close to 0.9.

    Row 3 uses a larger sample of stayers, observed over the period from 2005 to 2008, for which we have data

on sales from the QP. (The earlier sample period reflects the fact that the QP data report sales from the previous

calendar year, so the latest sales data is for 2008). Using excess log sales per worker (defined in Section VII.C.)

as our measure of surplus, we again estimate significant rent sharing coefficients for men and women, with a

ratio of 0.88, though the standard error is relatively large.

    Compared to the rent-sharing coefficients from the between-firm analysis Table V, the estimates for stayers

are only about 30% as large (e.g., 0.049 for men in row 1 of Table VI versus 0.156 for men in row 1 of

Table V). There are several plausible explanations for the discrepancy. First, we suspect that our measures

of surplus are relatively noisy, and that taking the difference over a 4 year period leads to a decrease in the

signal-to-noise ratio relative to the average over the same period. Second, contrary to equation (1), it may be

that wages are less responsive to transitory fluctuations in rents than to permanent differences. Guiso, Pistaferri

and Schivardi (2005), for example, analyze the relationship between wages and firm value added using Social

Security earnings record for Italian workers, and find smaller impacts of short run changes in value added than

for long-run changes. A third possibility is that the rent sharing coefficients are attenuated because we are

focusing on a selected sample of job stayers. To evaluate this possibility we constructed a simple grouped data

control function (Gronau, 1974) for selection bias for the male and female stayers at each firm, based on the

fractions of workers employed at the firm in 2006 who stayed to 2009, and re-estimated the models including

this control.37 The results, presented in Appendix Table B11, give no indication of selectivity bias.

    Overall, the estimates in Table VI, while limited by the relatively short sample period over which we can

observe job stayers, are supportive of the hypothesis that female workers gain less than their male co-workers

when their employer becomes more profitable. Indeed, our estimates of the ratio γ F /γ M are centered around

0.9 - very similar to the ratios in Table V. We have estimated a variety of additional models for other subgroups

of male and female stayers, including workers in larger and smaller firms, workers in firms with larger and
   37 The control function is φ (Φ −1 (p))/p, where p is the fraction of stayers among the (gender-specific) set who were at the firm in the

base period, φ is the normal density function, and Φ is the normal cumulative density function. This is an appropriate control function
if the individual probability of staying is determined by a latent index with a firm-specific component and a normally distributed error,
and individual wage changes have a normally distributed error.



                                                                    32
smaller fractions of female employees, and workers in firms with higher and lower within-firm wage inequality.

Unfortunately, as suggested by the standard errors for the estimated ratios in Table VI, our ability to precisely

estimate the relative bargaining power of women is limited, and none of the estimates of the relative ratio of

female to male bargaining power are significantly different from 0.9 – the average ratio across firms.



IX.    Conclusions

A growing body of research argues that firm-specific wage premiums are a pervasive and economically im-

portant feature of labor market earnings. These premiums will contribute to the gender wage gap if women

tend to work at firms that offer smaller premiums, or if female employees tend to earn smaller premiums than

their male colleagues when employed at the same firms. Our analysis of Portuguese data finds that female

employees receive about 90% of the wage premiums that men earn at equivalent firms. Moreover, women are

disproportionately likely to work at low surplus firms paying small premiums to both genders. We conclude

that the sorting and bargaining channels together explain about 20% of the gender wage gap in Portugal, with

roughly two-thirds of this 20% explained by sorting and one-third by the shortfall in relative bargaining power.

   Our approach to combining worker-firm fixed effects models with Oaxaca-style decompositions into sort-

ing and bargaining components is potentially applicable to other classic wage gaps including the black/white

wage gap, the immigrant/native wage gap, the experience profile of wages, and wage gaps based on various

measures of intelligence – explanations for which have traditionally relied upon a market price perspective.

The proliferation of rich employer-employee data sets offers the opportunity to determine the extent to which

these heavily studied sources of wage inequality are in fact mediated by heterogeneity across firms.

   Department of Economics, UC Berkeley

   Barcelona Graduate School of Economics

   Department of Economics, UC Berkeley



References

Abowd, John, Robert Creecy, and Francis Kramarz, "Computing Person and Firm Effects Using Linked

Longitudinal Employer-Employee Data," Mimeo, 2002.

Abowd, John, Francis Kramarz, and David Margolis, "High Wage Workers and High Wage Firms,"

Econometrica, 67 (1999), 251-333.

                                                       33
Abowd, John, and Thomas Lemieux, "The Effects of Product Market Competition on Collective Bargaining

Agreements: The Case of Foreign Competition in Canada," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108 (1993),

983-1014.


Addison, John T., Pedro Portugal, and Hugo Vilares, "Unions and Collective Bargaining in the Wake of the

Great Recession," Bank of Portugal Working Paper No. 2015-6, 2015.


Altonji, Joseph, and Rebecca Blank, "Race and Gender in the Labor Market," in Handbook of Labor

Economics, Vol. IIIc, Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds. (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1999).


Andrews, M.J., L. Gill, T. Schank, and R. Upward, "High Wage Workers and Low Wage Firms: Negative

Assortative Matching or Limited Mobility Bias?," Journal of the Royal Statistical Society (Series A), 171

(2008), 673-697.


Arai, Mahmood, and Fredrik Heyman, "Microdata Evidence on Rent-Sharing," Applied Economics, 41 (2009),

2965-2976.


Ashenfelter, Orley, and Timothy Hannan, "Sex Discrimination and Product Market Competition: The Case of

the Banking Industry." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 101 (1986), 149-174.


Babcock, Linda, and Sarah Laschever, Women Don’t Ask: Negotiation and the Gender Divide. (Princeton, NJ:

Princeton University Press, 2003).


Bagger, Jesper, Kenneth Sorensen, and Rune Vejelin, "Wage Sorting Trends," School of Economics and

Management University of Aarhus Working Paper No. 2012-17, 2012.


Barth, Erling, and Harald Dale-Olsen, "Monopsonistic Discrimination, Worker Turnover, and the Gender

Wage Gap," IZA Discussion Paper No. 3930, 2009.


Bayard, Kimberly, Judith Hellerstein, David Neumark, and Kenneth Troske, "New Evidence on Sex

Segregation and Sex Differences in Wages from Matched Employer-Employee Data," Journal of Labor

Economics, 21 (2003), 887-922.


                                                      34
Becker, Gary, The Economics of Discrimination, second edition 1971. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,

1957).


Bertrand, Marianne, "New Perspectives on Gender," in Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. IVb, Orley

Ashenfelter and David Card, eds.(Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2011).


Bertrand, Marianne, Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence F. Katz, "Dynamics of the Gender Gap for Young

Professionals in the Financial and Corporate Sectors," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2

(2010), 228-255.


Bertrand, Marianne, and Sendhil Mullainathan, "Are Emily and Greg More Employable than Lakisha and

Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination," American Economic Review, 94 (2004),

991-1013.


Black, Sandra E., and Philip E. Strahan, "The Division of Spoils: Rent-Sharing and Discrimination in a

Regulated Industry," American Economic Review, 91 (2001), 814-831.


Blau, Francine D., Equal Pay in the Office. (Lexington MA: Lexington Books, 1977).


Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn, "Gender Differences in Pay," Journal of Economic Perspectives,

14 (2000), 75-99.


Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn, "Understanding International Differences in the Gender Pay Gap,"

Journal of Labor Economics, 21 (2003), 106-144.


Borjas, George. J., "The Relationship between Wages and Weekly Hours of Work: The Role of Division

Bias," Journal of Human Resources, 15 (1980), 409-423.


Bowles, Hannah R., Linda Babcock, and Lei Lai, "Social Incentives for Sex Differences in the Propensity to

Initiate Bargaining: Sometimes It Does Hurt to Ask," Organizational Behavior and Human Decision

Processes, 103 (2007), 243-273.




                                                     35
Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller, "Robust Inference with Multiway Clustering,"

Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 29 (2011), 238-249.

Card, David, Cardoso, Ana Rute, and Patrick Kline. 2015. “Online Appendix to Bargaining, Sorting, and the

Gender Wage Gap: Quantifying the Impact of Firms on the Relative Pay of Women”

Card, David, Francesco Devicienti, and Agata Maida, "Rent-Sharing, Holdup, and Wages: Evidence from

Matched Panel Data," Review of Economic Studies, 81 (2014), 84-111.


Card, David, Joerg Heining, and Patrick Kline, "Workplace Heterogeneity and the Rise of West German Wage

Inequality," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128 (2013), 967-1015.


Cardoso, Ana Rute, Paulo Guimarães, and Pedro Portugal, "Everything You Always Wanted to Know About

Sex Discrimination," IZA Discussion Paper No. 7109, 2012.


Cardoso, Ana Rute, and Pedro Portugal, "Contractual Wages and the Wage Cushion under Different

Bargaining Settings," Journal of Labor Economics, 23 (2005), 875-902.


Carlsson, Mikael, Julian Messina, and Oskar Nordstrom Skans, "Wage Adjustment and Productivity Shocks,"

Sveriges Riksbank Working Paper No. 253, 2011.


Charles, Kerwin K., and John Guryan, "Prejudice and Wages: An Empirical Assessment of Becker’s The

Economics of Discrimination," Journal of Political Economy, 116 (2008), 773-809.


Charles, Kerwin K., and John Guryan, "Studying Discrimination: Fundamental Challenges and Recent

Progress," Annual Review of Economics, 3 (2011), 479-511.


Del Bono, Emilia, and Daniela Vuri, "Job Mobility and the Gender Wage Gap in Italy," Labour Economics, 18

(2011), 130-142.


Dickens, William, and Lawrence F. Katz, "Inter-Industry Wage Differences and Industry Characteristics," in

Unemployment and the Structure of Labor Markets, Kevin Lang and Jonathan Leonard, eds. (London: Basil

Blackwell, 1987).


                                                    36
DiNardo, John, Nicole M. Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux, "Labor Market Institutions and the Distribution of

Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric Approach," Econometrica, 64 (1996), 1001-1044.


Eeckhout, Jan, and Philipp Kirchner, "Identifying Sorting – In Theory." Review of Economic Studies, 78

(2011), 872-906.


EPI (Economic Policy Institute), The State of Working America 2008-10. (Washington DC: EPI, 2010).


Fortin, Nicole, Thomas Lemieux, and Sergio Firpo, "Decomposition Methods in Economics," in Handbook of

Labor Economics, Vol. IVa, Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds. (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2011).


Goldin, Claudia, "A Grand Gender Convergence: Its Last Chapter," American Economic Review, 104 (2014),

1091-1119.


Gronau, Reuben, "Wage Comparisons - A Selectivity Bias," Journal of Political Economy, 82 (1974),

1119-1143.


Groshen, Erica L., "The Structure of the Female/Male Wage Differential: Is It Who You Are, What You Do, or

Where You Work?," Journal of Human Resources, 26 (1991), 457-472.


Guertzgen, Nicole, "Rent-Sharing and Collective Bargaining Coverage: Evidence from Linked

Employer-Employee Data," Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 111 (2009), 323-349.


Guiso, Luigi, Luigi Pistaferri, and Fabiano Schivardi, "Insurance within the Firm," Journal of Political

Economy, 113 (2005), 1054-1087.


Hall, Robert E., and Alan B. Krueger, "Evidence on the Incidence of Wage Posting, Wage Bargaining, and

On-the-Job Search," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 4 (2012), 56-67.


Heckman. James J., and Peter Siegelman, "The Urban Institute Audit Studies: Their Methods and Findings,"

in Clear and Convincing Evidence: Measurement of Discrimination in America, Michael Fix and Raymond

Struyk, eds. (Washington DC: Urban Institute Press, 1993).


                                                      37
Hellerstein, Judith, David Neumark, and Melissa McInerney, "Changes in Workplace Segregation in the

United States between 1990 and 2000: Evidence from Matched Employer-Employee Data," in The Analysis of

Firms and Employees: Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches, Stefan Bender, Julia Lane, Kathryn Shaw,

Fredrik Andersson, and Till von Wachter, eds. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2008).


Hospido, Laura, "Gender Differences in Wage Growth and Job Mobility of Young Workers in Spain,"

Investigaciones Economicas, 33 (2009), 5-37.


ILO (International Labour Organization), Key Indicators of the Labour Market Database, 7th Edition.

(www.ilo.org/empelm/pubs/WCMS 114060/lang{en/index.htm , 2011).


Jann, Ben, "The Blinder-Oaxaca Decomposition for Linear Regression Models," Stata Journal, 8 (2008),

453-479.


Kramarz, Francis, and Oskar Nordstrom Skans, "When Strong Ties are Strong: Networks and Youth Labor

Market Entry," Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming, 2013.


Krueger, Alan B., and Lawrence H. Summers, "Efficiency Wages and the Inter-Industry Wage Structure,"

Econometrica, 56 (1988), 259-293.


Lang, Kevin, and Jee-Yeon K. Lehmann, "Racial Discrimination in the Labor Market: Theory and Empirics,"

Journal of Economic Literature, 50 (2012), 959-1006.


Lopes de Melo, Rafael, "Sorting in the Labor Market: Theory and Measurement," Mimeo, 2009.


Loprest, Pamela J., "Gender Differences in Wage Growth and Job Mobility," American Economic Review, 82

(1992), 526-532.


Macis, Mario, and Fabiano Schivardi, "Exports and Wages: Rent Sharing, Workforce Composition or Returns

to Skills?," Mimeo, 2013.


Manning, Alan, "Imperfect Competition in the Labor Market," in Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. IVb,

Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds. (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2011).

                                                    38
Manning, Alan, and Joanna K. Swaffield, "The Gender Gap in Early-Career Wage Growth," Economic

Journal, 118 (2008), 983-1024.


Maré, David C., and Dean R. Hyslop, "Worker-Firm Heterogeneity and Matching: An Analysis Using Worker

and Firm Fixed Effects Estimated from LEED," Statistics New Zealand Working Paper, no number, 2006.


Martins, Pedro, "Rent-sharing Before and After the Wage Bill," Applied Economics, 41 (2009), 2133-2151.


Martins, Pedro S., and Pedro T. Pereira, "Does Education Reduce Wage Inequality? Quantile Regression

Evidence from 16 Countries," Labour Economics, 11 (2004), 355-371.


Mulligan, Casey B., and Yona Rubinstein, "Selection, Investment, and Women’s Relative Wages over Time,"

Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123 (2008), 1061-1110.


Mumford, Karen, and Peter N. Smith, "What Determines the Part-time and Gender Earnings Gaps in Britain:

Evidence from the Workplace," Oxford Economic Papers, 61 (2008), i56-i75.


Nekby, Lena, "Gender Differences in Rent Sharing and Its Implications for the Gender Wage Gap: Evidence

from Sweden," Economics Letters, 81 (2003), 403-410.


Neumark, David, Roy J. Bank, and Kyle D. Van Nort, "Sex Discrimination in Restaurant Hiring: An Audit

Study," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111 (1996), 915-941.


Oaxaca, Ronald, "Male-Female Wage Differentials in Urban Labor Markets," International Economic Review,

14 (1973), 693-709.


Oaxaca, Ronald L., and Michael R. Ransom, "Identification in Detailed Wage Decompositions," Review of

Economics and Statistics, 81 (1999), 154-157.


OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development), OECD Family Database.

(www.oecd.org/social/family/database, 2012).




                                                   39
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development), Gender Wage Gap.

(http://www.oecd.org/gender/data/genderwagegap.htm, 2015a).

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development), Minimum Relative to Average Wages of

Full-Time Workers. (http://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=MIN2AVE, 2015b).

Papps, Kerry L., "Spillovers and Wage Determination Within Firms," Mimeo, 2012.

Petersen, Trond, and Laurie A. Morgan, "Separate and Unequal: Occupation-Establishment Sex Segregation

and the Gender Wage Gap," American Journal of Sociology, 101 (1995), 329-365.

Pissarides, Christopher, and Jonathan Wadsworth, "On-the-job Search: Some Empirical Evidence from

Britain," European Economic Review, 38 (1994), 385-401.

Reis, Ines and Bruno Soeiro Barbosa, "Portugal," in The Littler Mendelson Guide to International

Employment and Labor Law. (San Francisco: Littler Mendelson, 2010).

Robinson, Joan, The Economics of Imperfect Competition. (London: Macmillan, 1933).

Save-Soderbergh, Jenny, "Are Women Asking for Low Wages? Gender Differences in Wage Bargaining

Strategies and Ensuing Bargaining Success," Swedish Institute for Social Research Working Paper No.

7/2007, 2007.

Skans, Oskar Nordstrom, Per-Anders Edin, and Bertil Holmlund, "Wage Dispersion Between and Within

Plants: Sweden 1985-2000," in The Structure of Wages: An International Comparison, Edward P. Lazear and

Kathryn L. Shaw, eds. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2008).

Strassner, Erich H., and Brian C. Moyer, "An Analysis of the Composition of Intermediate Inputs by Industry,"

U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis Working Paper No. 2002-05, 2002.

Stuhlmacher, Alice F., and Amy E. Walters, "Gender Differences in Negotiation Outcome: A Meta-analysis,"

Personnel Psychology, 52 (1999), 653-677.

Van Reenen, John, "The Creation and Capture of Rents: Wages and Innovation in a Panel of U.K.

Companies," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111 (1996), 195-226.

Wood, Robert G., Mary E. Corcoran, and Paul N. Courant, "Pay Differences among the Highly Paid: The

Male-Female Earnings Gap in Lawyers’ Salaries," Journal of Labor Economics, 11 (1993), 417-441.


                                                     40
                                           Figure I: Mean Log Wages of Male Job Changers, Classified by Quartile
                                                  of Mean Co‐Worker Wage at Origin and Destination Firm
                          2.6

                          2.4

                                                      4 to 4
                          2.2
                                                      4 to 3
                          2.0
Mean Log Wage of Movers




                                                      4 to 2

                          1.8                         4 to 1

                          1.6                         1 to 4

                                                      1 to 3
                          1.4
                                                      1 to 2
                          1.2
                                                      1 to 1

                          1.0
                                                                        ‐2                          ‐1                          0                            1
                                                                                   Time (0=first year on new job)

                          Notes: figure shows mean wages of male workers at mixed‐gender firms who changed jobs in 2004‐2007 and held the preceding job for 2 or more
                          years, and the new job for 2 or more years. Each job is classified into quartiles based on mean log wage of co‐workers of both genders in the last
                          year of the old job (for origin firm) and in the first year on the new job (for the destination firm). See text for additional details.
                                           Figure II: Mean Wages of Female Job Changers, Classified by Quartile
                                                 of Mean Co‐Worker Wage at Origin and Destination Firm
                          2.4

                          2.2
                                                     4 to 4
                          2.0
                                                     4 to 3

                          1.8                        4 to 2
Mean Log Wage of Movers




                                                     4 to 1
                          1.6
                                                     1 to 4
                          1.4
                                                     1 to 3
                          1.2
                                                     1 to 2

                          1.0                        1 to 1

                          0.8
                                                                       ‐2                          ‐1                          0                           1
                                                                                  Time (0=first year on new job)

                          Notes: figure shows mean wages of female workers at mixed gender firms who changed jobs in 2004‐2007 and held the preceding job for 2 or more
                          years, and the new job for 2 or more years. Each job is classified into quartiles based on mean log wage of co‐workers of both genders in the last
                          year of the old job (for origin firm) and in the first year on the new job (for the destination firm). See text for additional details.
                                                  Figure III: Comparison of Adjusted Wage Changes of Male and Female Job Movers by Quartile
                                                                       of Coworker Wages at Origin and Destination Firms
                                          50
Adjusted Wage Changes of Females (pct.)




                                          40
                                          30
                                                                                                                                            1 to 3                    1 to 4
                                          20                                                                 4 to 4        1 to 2                      2 to 4
                                          10                                                2 to 1,
                                                                                                                                            3 to 4
                                                                                            3 to 2,
                                           0                                                4 to 3
                                                                                                                 1 to 1,           2 to 3
                                          ‐10                                                                    2 to 2,            dashed line = 45 degree line
                                                                      4 to 2
                                          ‐20                                                                    3 to 3             solid line = fitted regression line
                                                      4 to 1                       3 to 1                                             slope = 0.77 (0.02)
                                          ‐30                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                      R = 0.99
                                          ‐40
                                          ‐50
                                                ‐50          ‐40          ‐30          ‐20            ‐10         0           10             20         30           40           50
                                                                                            Adjusted Wage Change of Males (pct.)
                                                      Notes: points represent regression adjusted mean log wage changes of male and female job movers in different origin/
                                                      destination quartiles of mean coworker wages. For example "4 to 1" point shows mean wage changes for men and women
                                                      who move from 4th quartile of coworker wages to 1st quartile. Fitted line is estimated by OLS to 16 points in the Figure.
                                                                       Figure IV: Firm Fixed Effects vs. Log Value Added/Worker
                                              0.0                                                                                                                     0.2


                                              ‐0.1                                                                                                                    0.1
                                                                                                                        Male firm effects
                                                                                                                        (fitted slope=0.156)




                                                                                                                                                                             Female Firm Effects (Arbitrary Normalization)
Male Firm Effects (Arbitrary Normalization)




                                              ‐0.2                                                                      left scale                                    0


                                              ‐0.3                                                                                                                    ‐0.1


                                              ‐0.4                                                                                                                    ‐0.2


                                              ‐0.5                                                                                                                    ‐0.3


                                              ‐0.6                                                                                                                    ‐0.4
                                                                                                                                          Female firm effects
                                              ‐0.7                                                                                        (fitted slope = 0.137)      ‐0.5
                                                                                                                                          right scale
                                              ‐0.8                                            Best‐fitting normalization:                                             ‐0.6
                                                                                              Rent sharing starts at Log(VA/L) > 2.45
                                              ‐0.9                                                                                                                    ‐0.7
                                                 1.60   1.80    2.00    2.20   2.40    2.60   2.80    3.00    3.20    3.40    3.60      3.80   4.00    4.20    4.40
                                                                                                     Mean Log VA/L
                                              Note: points shown represent mean estimated firm‐specific wage premiums from AKM models for men and women,
                                              averaged across firms with value added data available in 100 percentile bins of mean log value added per worker. See text
                                              for explanation of arbitrary normalization of the firm effects.
                                                             Figure V: Estimated Firm Effects for Female and Male Workers:
                                                                Firm Groups Based on Mean Log Value Added per Worker
                                        0.40

                                        0.35
Estimated Female Effects (normalized)




                                        0.30

                                        0.25

                                        0.20

                                        0.15

                                        0.10                                                                             Note: 45 degree line shown
                                                                                                                         Estimated slope = 0.89
                                        0.05
                                                                                                                         (standard error = 0.03)
                                        0.00

                                        ‐0.05
                                            ‐0.05          0.00         0.05          0.10      0.15       0.20       0.25                 0.30         0.35          0.40
                                                                                      Estimated Male Effects (normalized)
                                                Note: figure shows bin scatter plot of estimated firm effects for female workers against estimated firm effects for
                                                male workers. Firm‐level data is grouped into 100 percentile bins based on mean log value added per worker at
                                                the firm. Estimated slope is estimated across percentile bins by OLS.
                                                Figure VI: Evolution of Gender Wage Gap and Its Components Over the Lifecycle
                              0.40
                                               Male‐Female Wage Gap
                              0.35             Mean Male Wage Premium Among Men
                                               Mean Female Wage Premium Among Women
                              0.30
Log Wage Levels/Differences




                                               Gender Gap in Mean Premiums
                              0.25             Sorting Component, Based on Female Premiums
                                               Sorting Component Based on Male Premiums
                              0.20

                              0.15

                              0.10

                              0.05

                              0.00
                                 19‐20    21‐22    23‐24    25‐26    27‐28   29‐30    31‐32 33‐35 36‐38          39‐42   43‐46    47‐50    51‐55    56‐60    61‐65
                                                                                           Age Interval
                                     Notes: figure shows unadjusted male‐female wage gap, means of firm‐specific wage premiums earned by men and women,
                                     and the difference in mean premiums, which is the total contribution of firm‐specific wage components to the gender wage
                                     gap. Dashed lines show the effect of differential sorting of males and females to specific firms, evaluated using male and
                                     female firm‐specific wage premiums.
Table I: Descriptive Statistics for Various Samples of Employees in Quadros de Pessoal (QP), 2002‐2009

                                                                           Connected Sets of Workers/Firms                  Analysis Sample with
                                 Overall Analysis Sample                   All                   Dual‐Connected              Value Added Data
                                  Males         Females          Males         Females         Males       Females          Males       Females
                                   (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)          (6)             (7)           (8)
Age:
  Mean Age                         38.1           36.9           38.0            36.5          38.0           36.4           37.9           36.3
  Fraction ≤ 30 years old          0.30           0.33           0.30            0.34          0.30           0.34           0.31           0.35
  Fraction ≥ 50 years old          0.19           0.14           0.18            0.13          0.19           0.13           0.18           0.13
Education:
  Mean Years Schooling              8.0            8.8            8.0             8.9           8.6            9.1            7.8            8.6
  Fraction with High School        0.18           0.23           0.18            0.23          0.21           0.24           0.17           0.24
  Fraction with Degree             0.09           0.13           0.09            0.14          0.11           0.15           0.07           0.11

Mean Log Real Hourly Wage           1.59          1.41            1.62           1.43           1.71          1.48           1.54           1.36
 (standard dev.)                   (0.55)        (0.50)          (0.55)         (0.51)         (0.58)        (0.53)         (0.48)         (0.43)
Mean Monthly Hours                162.6          158.0          162.5           157.9         162.8          157.1          164.1          159.9
 (standard dev.)                  (24.7)         (30.1)         (24.8)          (29.9)        (24.0)         (30.5)         (23.6)         (29.4)

Fraction in Lisbon                 0.35           0.35           0.36            0.37          0.42           0.40           0.32           0.34
Fraction in Oporto                 0.13           0.13           0.13            0.13          0.13           0.13           0.13           0.14
Mean Firm Size (No. emp's)         730            858            804             978           1,091         1,230           500            886
Fraction Females at Firm           0.24           0.70           0.24            0.70          0.30          0.64            0.24           0.67
Mean Log VA/Worker                                                                                                           3.05           2.88
Number person‐year obs.          9,070,492     7,226,310       8,225,752      6,334,039      6,012,521     5,012,736      5,786,108      4,204,828
Number of persons                2,119,687     1,747,492       1,889,366      1,505,517      1,450,288     1,247,503      1,441,608      1,082,052
Number of firms                  349,692        336,239         216,459        185,086        84,720        84,720         153,994        141,887
Notes: Overall analysis sample in columns 1‐2 includes paid workers age 19‐65 with potential experience ≥ 2, and consistent employment histories. See
section A of online appendix. Wages are measured in real (2009=100) Euros per hour. Value added (VA) is measured in thousands of real Euros per
year. All statistics are calculated across person‐year observations. See text for definitions of connected and dual connected sets.
Table II: Summary of Estimated Two‐way Fixed Effects Models for Male and Female Workers

                                                            All Males           All Females
                                                                (1)                  (2)

 Standard deviation of log wages                              0.554               0.513
 Number of person‐year observations                         8,225,752           6,334,039

 Summary of Parameter Estimates:
 Number person effects                                      1,889,366           1,505,517
 Number firm effects                                         216,459             185,086
 Std. dev. of person effects (across person‐yr obs.)         0.420                0.400
 Std. dev. of firm effects (across person‐yr obs.)           0.247                0.213
 Std. dev. of Xb (across person‐yr obs.)                     0.069                0.059
 Correlation of person/firm effects                          0.167                0.152
 RMSE of model                                               0.143                0.125
 Adjusted R‐squared of model                                 0.934                0.940

 Correlation of estimated male/female firm effects                      0.590
 Comparison job‐match effects model:
 Number of job‐match effects                                2,689,648           2,087,590
 RMSE of match‐effects model                                  0.128               0.113
 Adjusted R‐squared of match‐effects model                    0.946               0.951
 Std. deviation of job match effect                           0.062               0.054

 Inequality decomposition of two‐way fixed effects model:
 Share of variance of log wages due to:
       person effects                                         57.6                 61.0
       firm effects                                           19.9                 17.2
       covariance of person and firm effects                  11.4                 9.9
       Xb and associated covariances                          6.2                  7.5
       residual                                               4.9                  4.4
Notes: See text. Models includes dummies for individual workers and individual firms, year
dummies interacted with education dummies, and quadratic and cubic terms in age interacted
with education dummies (total of 44 parameters). Comparison job‐match effects models
include dummies for each worker‐firm job match as well as other covariates in basic model.
Samples include only observations in largest connected set.
Table III: Contribution of Firm‐Specific Pay Premiums to the Gender Wage Gap at Dual Connected Firms
                               Means of Firm Premiums:                                Decompositions of Contribution of Firm Component:
                                                            Total
                            Male               Female   Contribution of                      Sorting                          Bargaining
                 Gender   Premium             Premium        Firm                 Using Male      Using Female     Using Male       Using Female
                Wage Gap Among Men          Among Women Components                  Effects          Effects       Distribution     Distribution
                   (1)       (2)                 (3)          (4)                     (5)              (6)              (7)              (8)
All               0.234         0.148            0.099            0.049             0.035              0.047          0.003                0.015
                                                                  (21.2)            (14.9)             (19.9)         (1.2)                (6.3)
By Age Group:
Up to Age 30      0.099         0.114            0.087            0.028             0.019              0.029          ‐0.001               0.009
                                                                  (28.1)            (18.9)             (29.3)          (‐1.2)              (9.3)

Ages 31‐40        0.228         0.156            0.111            0.045             0.029              0.040          0.004                0.016
                                                                  (19.7)            (12.6)             (17.8)         (1.9)                (7.0)

Over Age 40       0.336         0.169            0.099            0.069             0.050              0.064          0.005                0.019
                                                                  (20.6)            (15.0)             (19.1)         (1.5)                (5.6)

By Education Group:
< High School    0.286          0.115            0.055            0.059             0.045              0.061          ‐0.002               0.015
                                                                  (20.8)            (15.6)             (21.4)          (‐0.6)              (5.2)

High School       0.262         0.198            0.137            0.061             0.051              0.051          0.010                0.010
                                                                  (23.3)            (19.6)             (19.5)         (3.8)                (3.7)

University        0.291         0.259            0.213            0.047              0.025             0.029          0.018                0.022
                                                                  (16.1)             (8.7)             (9.9)          (6.2)                (7.4)
Notes: Sample includes male and female workers in dual connected set (Table I, columns 5‐6). Entry in column 1 is the difference in mean log
wages of males and females, estimated over all workers in the subset of the dual connected set indicated by the row heading. Estimated firm
effects are from models described in columns 1 and 2 of Table II. Entry in column 4 is the total contribution of firm‐specific wage premiums to
the gender wage gap reported in column 1. Entries in columns 5‐8 are the contributions of sorting effect and bargaining effect to gender wage
gap, calculated using method described in text. Entries in parentheses represent the percent of the overall male‐female wage gap (in column 1)
that is explained by the source described in column heading.
Table IV: Contribution of Firm‐Level Pay Components to Gender Wage Gap, by Modal Occupation
                                Means of Firm Premiums:                                 Decompositions of Contribution of Firm Component:
                                                             Total
                                 Male           Female   Contribution of                     Sorting                           Bargaining
                  Gender       Premium         Premium        Firm                 Using Male      Using Female      Using Male       Using Female
                 Wage Gap     Among Men      Among Women Components                  Effects          Effects        Distribution      Distribution
                    (1)           (2)             (3)          (4)                     (5)              (6)               (7)               (8)
All                0.234         0.148            0.099             0.049             0.035            0.047            0.003            0.015
                                                                    (21.2)            (14.9)           (19.9)           (1.2)            (6.3)
By Modal Occupation:
Managers           0.238         0.219            0.210             0.010             ‐0.005           ‐0.003           0.013            0.014
(69% male)                                                          (4.0)              (‐2.1)           (‐1.4)          (5.4)            (6.1)

Professionals      0.153         0.253            0.221             0.032             0.007            0.016            0.016            0.025
(51% male)                                                          (20.9)            (4.3)            (10.3)           (10.6)           (16.6)

Technicians        0.157         0.238            0.179             0.059             0.040            0.039            0.020            0.019
(65% male)                                                          (37.5)            (25.4)           (24.5)           (13.0)           (12.1)

Clerks             0.128         0.217            0.161             0.056             0.044            0.047            0.009            0.012
(41% male)                                                          (43.8)            (34.4)           (36.6)           (7.1)            (9.4)

Services           0.145         0.055            0.046             0.008             0.009            0.020           ‐0.012            0.000
(32% male)                                                          (5.8)             (6.0)            (13.9)           (‐8.0)           (0.2)

Craft              0.389         0.088            0.016             0.072             0.041            0.078           ‐0.006            0.031
(68% male)                                                          (18.6)            (10.5)           (20.1)           (‐1.5)           (8.1)

Operatives         0.303         0.150            0.104             0.045             0.032            0.036            0.009            0.013
(75% male)                                                          (15.0)            (10.6)           (11.9)           (3.1)            (4.4)

Elementary          0.196          0.109              0.055             0.054          0.033            0.066            ‐0.012           0.022
(47% male)                                                              (27.6)         (16.6)           (33.7)            (‐6.1)          (11.0)
Notes: see notes to Table III. Workers are classified into their most common occupation during years they are observed. Farm and fishing workers
are included with operatives.
Table V: Estimated Relationship Between Gender‐specific Firm Effects and Measures of Surplus per Worker

                                                  Regressions of Firm Effects on Measure of
                                    Number of                      Surplus:                             Ratio:
                                      Firms         Male Firm Effects   Female Firm Effects     Column (3) / Column (2)
                                       (1)                 (2)                 (3)                        (4)

Surplus Measure:
1. Excess Mean Log Value Added        47,477              0.156                0.137                      0.879
per Worker                                               (0.006)              (0.006)                    (0.031)


2. Mean Log Sales per Worker          75,163              0.072                0.064                      0.897
                                                         (0.005)              (0.004)                    (0.036)




3. Excess Mean Log Sales per          75,163              0.092                0.081                      0.883
Worker                                                   (0.006)              (0.006)                    (0.038)

Notes: Columns 2‐3 report coefficients of surplus measure indicated in row heading in regression models in which the
dependent variables are the estimated firm effects for males or females. All specifications include a constant, and are
estimated at the firm level, weighting by the total number of male and female workers at the firm. Ratios in column 4 are
estimated by instrumental variables, treating the firm effect in female wages as the dependent variable, the firm effect in
male wages as the endogenous explanatory variable, and the surplus measure as the instrument. Standard errors,
clustered by firm, in parentheses.
Table VI: Effects of Changes in Measured Surplus per Worker on the Change in Wages of Stayers

                                                                        Estimated Rent Sharing Coefficients:
                                                                                                                          Ratio:
                                                 Number of Firms        Male Stayers         Female Stayers       Column (3) / Column (2)
                                                        (1)                  (2)                   (3)                       (4)

Surplus Measure and Sample:

1. Excess Log Value Added per Worker                  33,104                0.049                 0.045                     0.911
   (Winsorized at +/‐ 0.50). Sample = Stayers                              (0.007)               (0.008)                   (0.086)
   at Firms with Value Added Data, 2006‐9

2. Excess Log Value Added per Worker                  33,104                0.035                 0.031                     0.894
   (Not Winsorized). Sample = Stayers at Firms                             (0.006)               (0.006)                   (0.091)
   with Value Added Data, 2006‐9


3. Excess Log Sales per Worker                        44,266                0.021                 0.018                     0.876
   (Winsorized at +/‐ 0.50). Sample = Stayers                              (0.006)               (0.005)                   (0.182)
   at Firms with Sales Data, 2005‐8

Notes: Dependent variables are average change in wages of male or female workers at a firm (regression‐adjusted for quadratic in age).
Table entries are coefficients of the measured change in surplus per worker, as defined in row heading. Ratios in column 4 are estimated by
instrumental variables, treating average change in wages of female stayers as the dependent variable, average change in wages of male
stayers as the endogenous explanatory variable, and the change in surplus measure as the instrument. Standard errors, clustered by firm, in
parentheses.
 Online Appendix to “Bargaining, Sorting and the Gender Wage Gap: Quantifying the
                     Impact of Firms on the Relative Pay of Women”
                     David Card, Ana Rute Cardoso, and Patrick Kline
                                     September 2015


A: Data Sources, Definitions, and Matching Procedure
i. Quadros de Pessoal
       The Quadros de Pessoal (QP) is an annual census of employees at private sector
firms in Portugal. Firms with at least one paid employee are required to submit
information on their full workforce as of the survey reference week (in October).
Individuals working as independent contractors are excluded from coverage.
(Information on the QP survey universe and other details are reported in Institute for
the Study of Labor, 2010). For multi‐plant firms we aggregate employees at different
establishments to the firm level to reflect the fact that our financial data are firm‐wide,
using the unique firm identifier that is available in the data.
       The QP asks firms to report each employee's gender, education, occupation, and
date of hire, as well as information on pay and hours. Pay rates in Portugal are normally
expressed in Euros per month, net of all payroll taxes. We construct a "regular monthly
salary" by summing an individual's monthly base salary and any reported regular salary
supplements. The latter include payments for meals, tenure‐related premiums, and
other payments that are received regularly. Employers also report "normal" hours,
which are monthly contractual hours, as set by the prevailing collective bargain or firm
regulations, and do not include overtime. We define the hourly wage as (monthly base
salary + regular supplements)/ normal hours of work. This corresponds to a "straight
time" hourly wage exclusive of overtime, as is used for example in the Bureau of Labor
Statistics' Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) Survey (see US Department of
Labor, 2005).
       The QP dataset for 2002‐2009 includes over 20 million observations on 4.5
million workers. To construct our analysis sample we drop the entire history for a



                                              1
person if: (1) the hiring date for any job is missing or inconsistent across observations
(0.6% of observations); (2) the individual is observed in two consecutive years at
different firms, but the hiring date for the second job is the same as the hiring date for
the first job (6.9% of observations); the hourly wage in any year is extremely high or
extremely low (0.3% of observations); the change in the log hourly wage from one year
to the next is less than ‐1 or greater than 1 (1.6% of observations). After these deletions
we retain only person‐year observations in which the worker is between the ages of 19
to 65 (dropping 1.6% of observations), with at least two years of potential labor market
experience (i.e., age‐education‐6>1) (dropping 0.7% of observations) and is employed as
a wage‐earner rather than an owner or unpaid family worker (dropping 9.3% of
observations).
           Appendix Table A1 shows the characteristics of the male and female
observations in the entire QP, and our analysis sample as summarized in Table I of the
paper. The two samples are quite similar in terms of age, education, location, mean
hourly wage, and mean monthly hours of work.


ii. SABI
           Bureau van Dijk's SABI (Sistema de Analisis de Balances Ibericos) data base has
annual data for non‐financial firms including: a firm tax identifier; income statement
information (including sales revenue and other items); total employment; the firm's
name, address, industry, shareholder capital; and date of formation. The data are
available from 2000 onward, but coverage expanded substantially in 2005, and
information on employment is missing for many firms prior to 2006.
           Bureau van Dijk constructs value added (VA) for firms in SABI as follows:
            VA = After‐tax Profit + Employee Expenses (including pension costs) +
                  Depreciation + Interest Paid + Taxes Paid.
This definition corresponds to the economic concept of value added, which is the sum of
payments to labor and capital.




                                               2
iii. Matching QP and SABI
       The following variables are common to QP and SABI and can be used to match
observations for a given firm in a given year in the two data sets: (1) location ‐‐ zip code
and county (concelho) in SABI, parish (freguesia) and county in QP; (2) 5 digit industry;
(3) year of firm creation; (4) shareholder capital; (5) annual sales. We do not use
employment in our matching procedure, but we use it as a check variable.
       In QP, total sales of the firm are reported for the previous calendar year. We
therefore use sales in year t‐1 from SABI to match observations between the two data
sets in each year. In SABI, both sales and shareholder capital are reported in thousands
of euro, whereas in QP they are reported in euros. We therefore round both variables in
QP to the thousands. Sales and shareholder capital are treated as missing if the reported
values are zero. The zip codes reported in SABI were converted to parishes, with the
exception of a few codes that cross parish boundaries and a few that appear to be non‐
existent codes.
       We use a multi‐step matching procedure which uses exact matching at each
stage, and sequentially relaxes the number of variables that have to match exactly.
Firms that are matched at one step are removed from both data sets, leaving
unmatched observations for the next step. The steps are as follows:
   1. Exact match based on 5 variables: location, industry, year of firm creation, sales
   and shareholder capital. We first attempt an exact match using sales and shareholder
   capital for 2009 (the other variables are time‐invariant), then work backwards to
   2005. We initially use parish and 5‐digit industry to look for exact matches. We then
   repeat the process using county and 3‐digit industry.


   2. Exact match based on 4 variables: location, industry, and any two of: year of firm
   creation, annual sales, or shareholder capital. As in step 1, we initially use parish and
   5‐digit industry to look for exact matches, then use county and 3‐digit industry.




                                              3
  3. Exact match based on 3 variables: location, industry, and any one of: year of firm
  creation, annual sales, or shareholder capital. As in step 1, we initially use parish and
  5‐digit industry to look for exact matches, then county and 3‐digit industry.


  In this step, once a potential match was found, we compared data from QP and SABI
  to check the plausibility of the match. Specifically, we checked annual observations on
  sales and shareholder capital for all years from 2005 to 2009 in which non‐missing
  data were available in both data sets. A match was validated only if the deviation
  between SABI and QP did not exceed 1% in any year for either sales or shareholder
  capital, or, in cases with a larger deviation in any one year, if the values in all other
  years were exactly the same in both data sets.


  4. Exact match based on 2 variables: location and any one of industry, year of firm
  creation, annual sales, or shareholder capital. As in step 3, potential matches were
  evaluated and only retained if the same criterion was met.


       We successfully matched a total of 301,417 firms between QP and SABI ‐
representing about 80% of the firms that ever appear in SABI, and 53% of firms that
appear at least once (with a worker in our analysis sample) in QP from 2002 to 2009. Of
the matches, 54% were matched on all five variables, 30% were matched on four
variables, 11% were matched on three variables, and the remaining 5% were matched
on two variables. The match rate by firm size (based on average number of employees
in QP) are as follows: 1‐10 workers ‐ 50.7%; 11‐50 workers ‐ 68.5%, 51‐100 workers ‐
66.7%, 101‐500 workers ‐ 69.3%, over 500 workers ‐ 61.0%. Appendix Table A2 shows
the match rates by major industry and by gender, calculated across person‐year
observation in our main QP analysis sample.
       As a check on the differential quality of the matches, we used different subsets
of firms to estimate the relationship between the estimated gender‐specific wage
premiums at each firm, and mean log value added per worker. The results are reported



                                              4
in Appendix Table A3. The top row of the table reproduces the specifications from Table
V of the paper, which are based on data from 47,477 firms. Row 2 shows the same
specifications dropping firms matched in step 4 of our matching procedure; row 3 shows
the results after dropping firms matched in steps 3 or 4; and row 4 shows the estimated
models using only the observations that were matched on 5 variables in the first step of
our process. The estimated effects of mean log value added per worker are slightly
higher when the lower‐quality matches are dropped, but the ratio of the estimated
effects for females and males is quite stable. Based on these results we do not believe
that the inclusion of the lower quality matches has any substantive effect on our
conclusions.




B. Additional Analyses
i. Estimation of Models for Mainly Male and Mainly Female Workers
       To classify workers as mainly male or mainly female, we began by calculating the
fraction of female workers in each of the 110 3‐digit occupations identified in the QP
data set (based on person‐year level data). Next, we assigned each individual the
average fraction of female workers in his or her occupation in each year. We then
classified workers as having a mainly female or mainly male occupation depending on
whether the average fraction of female workers in his or her occupation(s) is above or
below the median across all occupations. We classify 85% of women and 27% of men as
having mainly female occupations, and a complementary 15% of women and 73% of
men as having mainly male occupations.
       On average men in mainly male and mainly female occupations earn about the
same wages. In contrast, women in mainly male occupations earn substantially more
(+20%) than those in mainly female occupations, in part because those in mainly male
occupations are 10 percentage points more likely to hold a university degree.




                                            5
       Estimated AKM models for men and women in the two occupation groups are
similar to the models presented in Table II and yield similar conclusions about the
relative importance of worker and firm effects in the overall variation of wages.
       Appendix Table B4 summarizes the results of our comparisons between men and
women in mainly female and mainly male occupations. For reference, panel A of the
table reproduces the results from Table III for all men and women at dual connected
firms. Panel B presents a comparison between men and women with mainly female
occupations (confining attention to those who work at firms that employ both groups).
The total contribution of firm‐specific pay premiums to the gender gap (column 4) is
about two‐thirds as large as in the overall sample, reflecting a small reduction in the
sorting component and a larger reduction in the relative bargaining power component,
which is estimated to be close to zero. In contrast, for workers in mainly male
occupations (panel C) the bargaining effect is relatively large, explaining 12‐21% of the
overall gender wage gap. Overall, this analysis suggests that the sorting effect is
important for workers in mainly female and mainly male occupations, while the
bargaining effect is concentrated among workers in traditionally male occupations,
which tend to employ more highly educated women.




C. Estimated Models Using Only Workers with High School or More Education Age 25
or Older
       In this appendix we re‐estimate a series of models, using only workers with high
school or more education who are age 25 or older. As shown in the following table, this
sample restriction leads to a substantial reduction in the fraction of workers who are
ever observed at any time in the 2002‐2009 period earning an hourly wage within 5% of
the minimum wage:




                                             6
                                              Percent Ever Near Min. Wage
                                              Males                  Females
Dual‐connected Sample                            7.3                   17.7
Higher Education/Age Sample                      1.7                    3.1
(dual connected)


Appendix Table C1 presents estimated two‐way fixed effects models for the higher
education/age sample. For ease of comparison, the first two columns show the models
for our main sample (reproduced from Table II). Columns 3 and 4 show parallel models
estimated on the largest connected subsets of higher education/age men and women.


Appendix Figure C1 graphs the unnormalized estimated firm effects for men and women
from the higher education/age sample against mean log value added per worker. This
figure shares many features with the corresponding figure for the overall sample (Figure
IV). In particular, there is a clear visual "kink" in the relationship between the estimated
firm effects and mean log value added per worker. Using the same procedure as we
describe in the text for our main sample, we identified the kink point as occurring when
mean log value added per worker is above 2.80 (versus the kink at 2.45 indentified in
our main sample). We then define "excess value added per worker" as min[ 0 , VA/L ‐
2.80 ] where "VA/L" is mean log value added per worker.


Appendix Table C2 presents decompositions similar to those in Table III of the paper,
but restricting attention to higher education/age men and women in the corresponding
dual‐connected set, and normalizing the firm effects by assuming that firms with VA/L <
2.80 pay a zero wage premium, on average.


Appendix Table C3 presents models that relate the estimated male and female firm
effects to VA/L, estimated at the firm level. For reference the first row reproduces the
results from our main sample, taken from row 1 of Table V. The second row presents a



                                             7
parallel set of models using the firm effects estimated for men and women in the higher
education and age sample.


D: Estimated Models Using Sales per Worker Instead of Value Added per Worker
In this section we re‐estimate a series of models using information on log sales per
worker as an alternative to log value added per worker.


Appendix Figure D1 graphs the unnormalized estimated firm effects for men and
women against mean log sales per worker. This figure shares many features with the
corresponding figure using mean log value added per worker as a measure of the
surplus available for bargaining (Figure IV). In particular, there is a clear visual "kink" in
the relationship between the estimated firm effects and mean log sales per worker.
Using the same procedure as we describe in the text for our main sample, we identified
the kink point as occurring when mean log sales per worker is above 3.35 (versus the
kink at 2.45 in the relationship with mean log value added per worker indentified in our
main sample). We then define "excess sales per worker" as min[ 0 , S/L ‐ 3.35 ] where
"S/L" is mean log sales per worker.


Appendix Table D1 presents decompositions of the importance of firm‐specific wage
premiums of the gender wage gap, using the same format as Table III in the paper, but
normalizing the firm effects by assuming that firms with S/L < 3.35 pay a zero wage
premium, on average.




                                               8
References


Institute for the Study of Labor. "Study Documentation for Quadros de Pessoal," 2010.
Accessed at http://idsc.iza.org/metadata/PDF/401.pdf, April 19, 2015.


Kline, Patrick M. "A Note on Variance Estimation for the Oaxaca Estimator of Average
Treatment Effects." Economics Letters 122 (2014): 428‐431.


U.S. Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics. "Appendix B. Survey Methods and
Reliability Statement for the May 2005 Occupational Employment Statistics Survey,”
2005.
Accessed at http://www.bls.gov/oes/2005/may/appendixb.pdf, April 19, 2015.




                                           9
                                    Appendix Figure B1: Trends in Real Hourly Wage of Men and Women

                   1.7



                                                        Male workers
                   1.6



                                                                                                                         0.16 gap in 2009
Real Hourly Wage




                   1.5
                                  0.21 gap in 2002



                   1.4



                                                                  Female workers
                   1.3




                   1.2
                           2002             2003          2004           2005            2006           2007              2008              2009




                         Note: figure plots mean log wages of male and female workers in main analysis sample by year.
                                                  Appendix Figure B2: Job Survival Rates for New Jobs Starting 2002‐2008

                                        1
Fraction of Jobs Surviving to Year t




                                                                               Females
                                       0.8
                                                                               Males

                                       0.6


                                       0.4


                                       0.2


                                        0
                                             0              1             2              3             4             5              6            7
                                                                                         Duration (years)

                                                 Note: figure plots Kaplan‐Meier estimates of job survival rates for male and female employees
                                                 starting new jobs in 2002‐2008 period.
                                                            Appendix Figure B3: Regression‐Adjusted Changes in Wages for Male Movers
                                                                                 Across Coworker Wage Quartiles

                                             0
Mean Log Wage Change for Downward Movers




                                                                           Q1 to Q2,
                                                                           Q2 to Q1
                                           ‐0.1                                         Q3 to Q4,
                                                         Q2 to Q3,                      Q4 to Q3
                                                         Q3 to Q2
                                           ‐0.2
                                                                                                                Q2 to Q4,
                                                                                                                Q4 to Q2
                                                                                                Q1 to Q3,
                                           ‐0.3
                                                                                                Q3 to Q1


                                           ‐0.4
                                                                                                                             Q1 to Q4,
                                                                                                                             Q4 to Q1

                                           ‐0.5
                                                  0                  0.1                      0.2                  0.3                    0.4                   0.5

                                                                                       Mean Log Wage Change For Upward Movers



                                            Note: Figure plots regression adjusted mean wage changes over 4 year interval for job changers who move across
                                            coworker wage quartile groups indicated. Dashed line represents symmetric changes for upward and downward movers.
                                                             Appendix Figure B4: Regression‐Adjusted Changes in Wages for Female Movers
                                                                                   Across Coworker Wage Quartiles

                                             0

                                                                   Q1 to Q2,
Mean Log Wage Change for Downward Movers




                                                                   Q2 to Q1
                                                                                   Q3 to Q4,
                                           ‐0.1
                                                                                   Q4 to Q3
                                                      Q2 to Q3,
                                                      Q3 to Q2                                       Q2 to Q4,
                                                                                                     Q4 to Q2
                                           ‐0.2

                                                                               Q1 to Q3,
                                                                               Q3 to Q1
                                           ‐0.3
                                                                                                            Q1 to Q4,
                                                                                                            Q4 to Q1
                                           ‐0.4




                                           ‐0.5
                                                  0                  0.1                       0.2                      0.3               0.4                   0.5

                                                                                      Mean Log Wage Change For Upward Movers



                                            Note: Figure plots regression adjusted mean wage changes over 4 year interval for job changers who move across
                                            coworker wage quartile groups indicated. Dashed line represents symmetric changes for upward and downward movers.
     Appendix Figure B5: Mean Residuals for Males by Decile of Worker and Firm Effects



            0.02



            0.01



                0



             ‐0.01
                                                                                    9
                                                                               7
             ‐0.02                                                         5
                                                                                   Decile of Worker Effects
                     1                                                 3
                         2   3    4   5                            1
                                              6   7   8   9   10
                     Decile of Firm Effects



Note: figure plots mean residuals from wage model for male workers (column 1 of Table II), for
100 bins, classified by decile of estimated firm effect and decile of estimated worker effect.
Appendix Figure B6: Mean Residuals for Females by Decile of Worker and Firm Effects



  0.02




  0.01




      0




   ‐0.01
                                                                                 9
                                                                            7
                                                                        5
   ‐0.02                                                                        Decile of Worker Effects
                                                                    3
           1    2    3    4                                     1
                               5    6    7    8    9    10
               Decile of Firm Effects


 Note: figure plots mean residuals from wage model for female workers (column 2 of Table II), for
 100 bins, classified by decile of estimated firm effect and decile of estimated worker effect.
                                       Appendix Figure B7: Goodness of Fit and Estimated Rent Sharing Coefficients for Alternative
                                                             Choices of Minimum Rent Sharing Threshold τ


                         0.102                                                                                                                       0.22

                                       R‐squared for system of 2 equations
                         0.100                                                                                                                       0.20
                                       (left scale)




                                                                                                                                                            Rent Sharing Coefficeints
R‐squared (SUR system)




                         0.098                                                                                                                       0.18


                         0.096                                                                                                                       0.16


                         0.094                                                                                 Rent sharing coefficients             0.14
                                                                                                               (right scale):
                         0.092
                                                                                                                male                                 0.12
                                                                                                                female

                         0.090                                                                                                                       0.10
                                 1.5          1.7          1.9          2.1          2.3           2.5           2.7           2.9             3.1
                                                     Value of τ (Minimum value of log VA/L at which rent sharing starts)


                            Note: figure shows R‐squared for system of 2 equations and coefficient estimates of male and female rent sharing
                            models for alternative values of parameter τ. Best fitting value is τ=2.45, shown by vertical line.
                                                                       Appendix Figure C1: Firm Fixed Effects vs. Mean Log Value Added/Worker
                                                                              for Workers with High School or More, Age 25 and Older

                                              0.0                                                                                                                        0.3
                                                                                                                     Male firm effects
                                              ‐0.1         Best‐fitting normalization:                               (fitted slope=0.161)                                0.2
                                                           rent sharing starts at Log(VA/L) > 2.8




                                                                                                                                                                                Female Firm Effects (Arbitrary Normalization)
                                                                                                                     left scale
Male Firm Effects (Abritrary Normalization)




                                              ‐0.2                                                                                                                       0.1

                                              ‐0.3                                                                                                                       0.0

                                              ‐0.4                                                                                                                       ‐0.1

                                              ‐0.5                                                                                                                       ‐0.2

                                              ‐0.6                                                                                                                       ‐0.3
                                                                                                                                            Female firm effects
                                              ‐0.7                                                                                                                       ‐0.4
                                                                                                                                            (fitted slope=0.133)
                                                                                                                                            right scale
                                              ‐0.8                                                                                                                       ‐0.5

                                              ‐0.9                                                                                                                       ‐0.6
                                                     1.6      1.8      2       2.2     2.4     2.6   2.8      3       3.2     3.4     3.6    3.8      4      4.2   4.4
                                                                                                           Mean Log VA/L
      Note: points shown represent mean estimated firm‐specific wage premiums from AKM models for men and women with high school or
      more education, age 25 or older, averaged across firms with value added data available in 100 percentile bins of mean log value added per
      worker. Firm effects are arbitrarily normalized for estimation of the AKM models.
                                                                   Appendix Figure D1: Firm Fixed Effects vs. Mean Log Sales per Worker

                                               ‐0.1                                                                                           0.3




                                                                                                                                                     Female Firm Effects (Arbitrary Normalization)
                                                          Best‐fitting normalization:
 Male Firm Effects (Arbitrary Normalization)




                                               ‐0.2                                                      Male firm effects                    0.2
                                                          rent sharing starts at
                                                                                                         (fitted slope=0.092)
                                               ‐0.3       Log(Sales/L) > 3.35                                                                 0.1
                                                                                                         left scale
                                               ‐0.4                                                                                           0.0

                                               ‐0.5                                                                                           ‐0.1
                                                                                                             Female firm effects
                                               ‐0.6                                                                                           ‐0.2
                                                                                                             (fitted slope=0.081)
                                               ‐0.7                                                          right scale                      ‐0.3

                                               ‐0.8                                                                                           ‐0.4

                                               ‐0.9                                                                                           ‐0.5

                                               ‐1.0                                                                                           ‐0.6
                                                      2           2.5           3       3.5         4          4.5              5   5.5   6
                                                                                              Mean Log Sales/Worker

Note: points shown represent mean estimated firm‐specific wage premiums from AKM models for men and women, averaged
across firms with sales data available in 100 percentile bins of mean log sales per worker. Firm effects are arbitrarily normalized for
estimation of the AKM models. Data for one percentile group with apparent outlier in sales data not shown.
Appendix Table A1: Descriptive Statistics for Overall QP and Analysis Sample
                                             Overall Population of
                                               Employees in QP                   Analysis Sample
                                             Males        Females              Males        Females
                                              (1)            (2)                (3)           (4)
Age:
  Mean Age                                   38.9            37.0               38.1          36.9
  Fraction ≤ 30 years old                    0.28            0.32               0.30          0.33
  Fraction ≥ 50 years old                    0.21            0.16               0.19          0.14
Education:
  Mean Years Schooling                       8.0             8.8                8.0           8.8
  Fraction with High School                  0.18            0.23               0.18          0.23
  Fraction with University Degree            0.10            0.14               0.09          0.13
Mean Log Real Hourly Wage                     1.61           1.42               1.59          1.41
 (standard dev.)                             (0.58)         (0.52)             (0.55)        (0.50)
Mean Monthly Hours                          161.9           156.7              162.6         158.0
 (standard dev.)                            (25.9)          (31.8)             (24.7)        (30.1)

Fraction in Lisbon                           0.35            0.36               0.35          0.35
Fraction in Oporto                           0.13            0.13               0.13          0.13
Mean Firm Size (Number employees)             668            839                730           858
Fraction Female Workers at Firm              0.25            0.66               0.24          0.70

Number person‐year obs.                   11,651,615      9,011,089         9,070,492      7,226,310
Number of persons                          2,550,576      2,040,863         2,119,687      1,747,492
Number of firms                            431,991         391,982             349,692      336,239

Notes: Overall sample in columns 1‐2 includes all observations available in QP with consistent data for
age, gender and education. Analysis sample in columns 3‐4 excludes individuals with inconsistent
employment histories. Person‐year observations are also conditioned on being a paid worker in the
year, age 19‐65, with potential experience ≥2 and no outlier wage observations. Wages are measured
in real (2009=100) Euros per hour. Lisbon refers to Greater Lisbon and Setubal, Oporto refers to
Greater Oporto (NUTS‐3 classifications).
Appendix Table A2: Matching Rates of Observations in QP to Firms in SABI

                           Percent of       Percent of         Percent of         Percent Matched by
                       All Observations    Observations      Observations               Gender
                           in Industry       Matched         from Females         Male        Female
                                (1)            (2)                (3)              (4)          (5)

All Industries               100.0              70.9              44.3             73.3          67.8

Agriculture                   1.7               52.0              40.6             50.9          53.7
Fishing                       0.1               84.2              27.1             82.2          89.5
Mining                        0.4               80.8              9.7              80.5          83.7
Food Products                 3.5               75.2              49.1             74.9          75.6
Textiles                      8.0               81.3              71.7             80.9          81.5
Wood Products                 2.8               78.3              27.0             76.7          82.6
Paper                         1.5               79.3              34.5             77.4          82.8
Chemicals                     1.8               82.2              34.2             80.8          84.9
Other Mineral Products        2.0               81.4              29.3             81.0          82.4
Metal Fabrication             7.0               80.4              25.8             80.0          81.6
Utilities                     0.8               86.5              17.7             87.3          82.7
Construction                 12.4               69.5              8.3              69.0          74.1
Trade                        19.5               79.4              46.6             79.8          78.9
Hotels                        6.6               75.7              62.4             78.2          74.3
Transportation                6.0               71.9              22.9             72.9          68.5
Finance                       2.9               27.5              44.4             27.6          27.3
Business Services            10.6               82.6              49.1             83.5          81.6
Education                     2.1               42.8              76.2             44.1          42.5
Health                        5.9               35.9              88.3             44.1          34.8
Recreation Services           1.0               64.2              44.2             66.4          61.5
Other                         3.6               30.6              67.1             32.4          29.7

Note: All statistics are calculated across person‐year observations in QP analysis sample for 2002‐2009.
"Matched" means that employer of person in given year can be matched to firm in SABI. Sample
contains 9,070,492 person‐year observations for males and 7,226,310 for females.
Appendix Table A3: Comparison of Models Relating Estimated Firm Effects for Male and Female Workers to
Mean Log Value Added per Worker, Estimated on Subsamples with More Restrictive Matching Criteria
Between QP and SABI


                                                     Regressions of Firm‐Specific
                                                     Wage Premiums on log(VA/L)
                                       Number                                          Ratio: Females to
                                        Firms            Males         Females               Males
                                         (1)              (2)            (3)                   (4)



1. All Available Matched Firms          47,477           0.156           0.137               0.879
                                                        (0.006)         (0.006)             (0.031)

2. Firms Matched with 3 or More         46,679           0.159           0.139               0.878
   Exact Matching Variables                             (0.006)         (0.006)             (0.031)


3. Firms Matched with 4 or More         44,552           0.162           0.143               0.878
   Exact Matching Variables                             (0.006)         (0.006)             (0.031)

5. Firms Matched with 5 Exact           30,023           0.170           0.148               0.868
   Matching Variables                                   (0.006)         (0.007)             (0.039)

Notes: Columns 2‐3 report coefficients of mean log value‐added per worker in excess of 2.45 in regression
models in which the dependent variables are the estimated firm‐specific wage premiums for the gender
group identified in the column headings. All specifications include a constant. Models are estimated at the
firm level, weighted by the total number of male and female workers at the firm. Ratio estimates in columns
4 are obtained by IV method. Standard errors in parentheses.
Appendix Table B1: Distributions of Number of Jobs Held in Sample Period, by Gender, and Mean Log Wage by
Number of Jobs Held

            Distribution of Number      Distribution of Number
            of Jobs Held 2002‐2009      of Jobs Held 2002‐2009       Mean Log Wage of Persons, By Number of Jobs
            (Person‐year weighted)         (Person‐weighted)                      Held 2002‐2009
             Males        Females         Males        Females         Males         Females      Male‐Female Gap
# Jobs         (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)             (6)              (7)
   1          67.81        70.37          72.50         74.29           1.56           1.38             0.17
   2          20.93        20.42          18.71         18.51           1.45           1.31             0.15
   3          7.91         6.84           6.39          5.53            1.43           1.29             0.14
   4          2.52         1.87           1.85          1.35            1.41           1.28             0.13
   5          0.68         0.41           0.46          0.27            1.39           1.27             0.12
   6          0.13         0.08           0.08          0.05            1.39           1.26             0.13
   7          0.02         0.01           0.01          0.01            1.37           1.22             0.14
   8          0.00         0.00           0.00          0.00            1.39           1.48             ‐0.09

# Obs.     9,070,492     7,226,310      2,119,687     1,747,492      2,119,687      1,747,492             ‐‐
Notes: tabulations based on analysis sample of male and female employees in QP data set ‐‐ see columns 1 and 2 of
Table I. There are 15 males and 7 females with 8 jobs in the sample, accounting for 120 person‐year observations for
men and 56 person‐year observations for women.
Appendix Table B2: Wages of Job Changes for Movers with 2+ Years of Data Before/After Job Change
                                       Mean Log Real Wages of Movers:
  Origin/   Number Pct. Of          2 years 1 year     1 year   2 years               3 Year Change (%)
destination Changes Changes         before    before    after    after           Raw      Adjusted* (Std Err)
 quartile     (1)     (2)             (3)       (4)      (5)      (6)             (7)         (8)       (9)
Males
  1 to 1     13,787      43.2         1.14      1.14       1.16      1.20        5.6         0.5        (0.5)
  1 to 2      9,139      28.7         1.19      1.18       1.35      1.37        17.6        11.6       (0.6)
  1 to 3      6,283      19.7         1.20      1.19       1.48      1.51        30.6        23.9       (0.7)
  1 to 4      2,682      8.4          1.28      1.27       1.71      1.75        47.3        39.0       (1.2)
    2 to 1    7,293      21.2         1.34      1.35       1.22      1.27        ‐6.5        ‐12.0      (0.6)
    2 to 2   12,326      35.8         1.37      1.38       1.40      1.42         5.0         ‐0.8      (0.6)
    2 to 3   10,356      30.0         1.41      1.42       1.54      1.57        15.9          9.3      (0.5)
    2 to 4    4,496      13.0         1.49      1.49       1.81      1.84        35.3         27.0      (0.9)

    3 to 1    4,356      11.9         1.49      1.52       1.24      1.30        ‐19.4       ‐25.6      (0.7)
    3 to 2    8,835      24.2         1.54      1.55       1.45      1.48         ‐5.8       ‐12.2      (0.6)
    3 to 3   15,107      41.3         1.61      1.63       1.65      1.67          6.4        ‐0.3      (0.5)
    3 to 4    8,246      22.6         1.73      1.75       1.94      1.97         24.7        16.0      (0.7)
    4 to 1    1,634      5.4          1.79      1.83       1.39      1.43        ‐36.2       ‐43.3      (1.6)
    4 to 2    3,245      10.7         1.82      1.86       1.58      1.61        ‐20.9       ‐28.1      (1.2)
    4 to 3    6,589      21.7         1.93      1.97       1.85      1.88         ‐5.2       ‐13.1      (0.9)
    4 to 4   18,830      62.1         2.29      2.32       2.41      2.45         15.9        6.1       (0.9)
Females
  1 to 1     24,130      60.9         1.05      1.04       1.05      1.08        2.9         ‐0.6       (0.4)
  1 to 2      9,094      23.0         1.10      1.10       1.21      1.23        13.2         8.4       (0.5)
  1 to 3      4,490      11.3         1.13      1.14       1.35      1.37        23.6        17.6       (0.6)
  1 to 4      1,888      4.8          1.25      1.26       1.59      1.62        37.0        29.6       (1.2)
    2 to 1    6,705      29.8         1.20      1.22       1.12      1.16        ‐4.5        ‐9.1       (0.5)
    2 to 2    7,711      34.3         1.26      1.28       1.28      1.31         4.2        ‐1.2       (0.5)
    2 to 3    5,495      24.5         1.33      1.35       1.44      1.46        12.6         6.4       (0.8)
    2 to 4    2,562      11.4         1.44      1.45       1.69      1.73        29.0        20.7       (0.9)
    3 to 1    3,283      16.7         1.38      1.40       1.15      1.20        ‐17.4       ‐23.0      (1.3)
    3 to 2    4,762      24.2         1.42      1.45       1.34      1.37         ‐4.5       ‐10.9      (1.1)
    3 to 3    7,245      36.8         1.51      1.53       1.54      1.56          5.3        ‐1.2      (0.7)
    3 to 4    4,381      22.3         1.64      1.66       1.81      1.86         22.0        13.4      (0.9)
  4 to 1       1,014       6.2           1.60       1.64   1.32       1.36       ‐24.6       ‐31.3      (2.8)
  4 to 2       1,516       9.2           1.72       1.76   1.54       1.58       ‐13.7       ‐21.2      (1.3)
  4 to 3       2,844       17.3          1.82       1.86   1.76       1.81        ‐1.3        ‐9.3      (0.9)
  4 to 4      11,064       67.3          2.14       2.18   2.27       2.31        16.1         7.0      (0.8)
Notes: entries are mean log real wages for job changers to/from mixed‐gender firms with at least 2 years of
wages at the old job and the new job. Origin/destination quartiles are based on mean wages of coworkers in
year before (origin) or year after (destination) job move.
*
 Four year wage change is regression‐adjusted, using coefficient estimates from model fit to job stayers. Model
includes dummies for age and education, and quadratic in age fully interacted with education. Standard errors of
adjusted changes (in column 9) are two‐way clustered across workers and firms and account for sampling errors
in regression adjustment model using method of Kline (2014).
Appendix Table B3: Comparison of Firms in Dual Connected Set with Low Average Value
                 Added per Worker Versus Other Firms
                                             Firms with       Firms with      Firms with
                                              Low VA/L        Higher VA/L     Missing VA/L

Mean Firm Characteristics (Each firm weighted equally)
Mean Size (# employees per year)                13.4              22.7            18.4

Median Size (# employees per year)               4.9              7.4              5.0

Mean Education of Workers                        7.7              9.0              8.7

Mean Percent Female                             52.1              41.9            49.3

Mean Log Wage of Workers                        1.19              1.48            1.39

Mean Log Sales/Worker                           3.35              4.24            3.81

Industry Distribution:
Pct. in Hotels and Restaurants                  28.3              10.0            16.1

Pct. in Textiles and Apparel                    11.2              3.9              5.2

Pct. in Trade                                   18.6              30.4            23.4
Note: sample includes firms in dual connected set only. There are 84,720 firms in total in
this set: 11,731 with low mean log value added per worker (VA/L), 35,746 with higher
VA/L, and 37,243 without data on VA/L. Low VA/L is defined as having VA/L < 2.45.
 Appendix Table B4: Contribution of Firm‐Level Pay Components to Gender Wage Gap: All Workers versus
 Workers in "Female" and "Male" Occupations

                                                Total
                                                                                       Decompositions
               Means of Firm Premiums:       Contribution                  Sorting                        Bargaining
  Gender       Male Prem.    Female Prem.      of Firm           Using M             Using F      Using M          Using F
 Wage Gap      Among Men    Among Women      Components          Effects             Effects    Distribution     Distribution
    (1)           (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)                 (6)          (7)                (8)

A. All Workers at Dual Connected Firms
  (6,012,521 males and 5,012736 females at 84,720 firms)
   0.234         0.148          0.099           0.049            0.035               0.047        0.003            0.015
                                                (21.2)           (14.9)              (19.9)       (1.2)            (6.3)


B. Workers with "Female" Occupations at Firms that have Males and Females in "Female" Occupations
  (1,572,387 males and 3,403,802 females at 43,239 firms
   0.240         0.127          0.097           0.031            0.026               0.043        ‐0.012           0.005
                                                (12.8)           (10.8)              (17.9)        (‐5.1)          (1.9)


C. Workers with "Male" Occupations at Firms that have Males and Females in "Male" Occupations
   (2,935,719 males and 801,113 females at 21,969 firms)
   0.137         0.177          0.133           0.044            0.015               0.027        0.016            0.028
                                                (31.9)           (11.1)              (20.0)       (11.9)           (20.8)

Notes: see notes to Table III. Sample in panel A includes male and female workers who are employed at dual connected firms.
Sample in panel B includes male and female workers who mainly work in "female" occupations, and are employed at "dual‐
connected female‐occupation" firms. Sample in panel C includes male and female workers who mainly work in "male"
occupations, and are employed at "dual‐connected male‐occupation" firms. See text for explanation of dual connected sets.
Workers are classified into gender‐occupation groups based on the female share of the occupation(s) they hold in all years.
Decompositions in panel A are based on estimated two‐way fixed effects models fit to all men and all women; those in panel B
are based on estimated models fit to men and women in mainly female occupations; those in panel C are based on estimated
models fit to men and women in mainly male occupations.
Appendix Table B5: Contribution of Firm Level Pay Components to Gender Wage Gap at Firms in Different Industries
                                                                                  Mean Firm Premiums:                                               Decompositions:
                                                                                                  Female         Total                    Sorting                Bargaining
                      Fraction of              Male‐Female Wage Gap                Male          Premium      Contribution
                      All Workers    Female                                      Premium          Among         of Firm          Using M.      Using F.      Using M.    Using F.
                      in Industry     Share     Unadjusted     Adjusted         Among Men        Women        Components          Effects      Effects        Distrib.   Distrib.
   Industry               (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)               (5)            (6)            (7)              (8)             (9)        (10)       (11)

All                      100.0         45.5         0.234        0.249              0.148          0.099           0.049          0.035       0.047        0.003       0.015
Agriculture                1.2         48.8         0.224        0.216              0.054          0.021           0.033          0.032       0.020        0.014       0.001
Food Products              4.3         49.2         0.314        0.283              0.119          0.041           0.078          0.036       0.040        0.038       0.042
Textiles                   8.6         66.7         0.263        0.223              0.047          0.012           0.035          0.002       0.032        0.003       0.033
Wood Products              2.5         35.8         0.202        0.208              0.055          0.056          ‐0.001          ‐0.023      0.005        ‐0.005      0.022
Paper and Publ.            1.7         35.0         0.221        0.291              0.211          0.149           0.062          0.039       0.027        0.035       0.023
Chemicals                  2.3         35.1         0.261        0.295              0.285          0.183           0.102          0.060       0.041        0.061       0.042
Non‐Met. Minerals          2.1         34.6         0.319        0.301              0.197          0.123           0.074          0.046       0.084        ‐0.010      0.029
Metals                     7.9         30.2         0.252        0.245              0.154          0.165          ‐0.012          ‐0.013      ‐0.010       ‐0.002      0.001
Utilities                  1.1         17.2         0.117        0.213              0.403          0.284           0.119          0.104       0.036        0.083       0.015
Construction               8.2         10.8        ‐0.047        0.192              0.072          0.100          ‐0.028          ‐0.015      ‐0.004       ‐0.024      ‐0.013
Trade                     18.0         48.9         0.212        0.213              0.105          0.083           0.022          0.015       0.016        0.006       0.007
Hotels and Rest.           6.6         59.1         0.164        0.157              0.004          0.018          ‐0.015          0.002       0.011        ‐0.026      ‐0.017
Transport                  7.0         25.4        ‐0.081        0.134              0.288          0.312          ‐0.024          ‐0.050      ‐0.032       0.008       0.027
Finance                    4.0         43.6         0.209        0.151              0.415          0.389           0.026          0.008       0.006        0.019       0.018
Business Services         12.4         46.3         0.217        0.194              0.121          0.065           0.056          0.045       0.067        ‐0.011      0.011
Education                  2.2         72.3         0.238        0.106              0.309          0.238           0.070          0.007       0.017        0.053       0.063
Health                     5.3         85.1         0.242        0.163              0.088          0.054           0.034          0.029       0.043        ‐0.008      0.005
Recreation                 1.1         42.9         0.226        0.245              0.270          0.192           0.078          0.058       0.039        0.040       0.020
Other                      3.3         61.8         0.135        0.182              0.176          0.150           0.026          0.010       0.021        0.005       0.016
Notes: See note to Table III. Adjusted wage gap in column 4 is coefficient of male in a pooled OLS model for log wages that also controls for years of education, a cubic in
potential experience, and year dummies. Fishing and mining industries, which together account for 0.4 percent of employment, are excluded from table. In columns 8‐11,
"M." refers to males and "F." refers to females.
Appendix Table B6: Contribution of Firm‐Level Pay Components to Gender Wage Gap ‐‐ Alternative Normalization
                              Means of Firm Premiums:                                                    Decompositions:
                                                           Total
                            Male              Female   Contribution of                       Sorting                          Bargaining
                 Gender   Premium            Premium        Firm                 Using Male       Using Female    Using Male        Using Female
                Wage Gap Among Men         Among Women Components                  Effects           Effects      Distribution      Distribution
                   (1)       (2)                (3)          (4)                     (5)               (6)             (7)               (8)
All               0.234        0.146            0.076             0.070             0.035              0.047         0.023                 0.035
                                                                  (29.9)            (14.9)             (19.9)        (10.0)                (15.0)
By Age Group:
Up to age 30      0.099        0.112            0.064             0.048             0.019              0.029         0.019                 0.030
                                                                  (48.8)            (18.9)             (29.3)        (19.5)                (29.9)

Ages 31‐40        0.228        0.153            0.088             0.065             0.029              0.040         0.025                 0.036
                                                                  (28.7)            (12.6)             (17.8)        (10.9)                (16.0)

Over Age 40       0.336        0.166            0.076             0.090             0.050              0.064         0.025                 0.039
                                                                  (26.6)            (15.0)             (19.1)        (7.6)                 (11.7)

By Education Group:
< High School    0.286         0.112            0.032             0.080             0.045              0.061         0.019                 0.035
                                                                  (27.9)            (15.6)             (21.4)        (6.5)                 (12.3)

High School       0.262        0.195            0.114             0.082             0.051              0.051         0.031                 0.030
                                                                  (31.1)            (19.6)             (19.5)        (11.7)                (11.5)

University        0.291        0.257            0.189             0.067             0.025              0.029         0.038                 0.042
                                                                  (23.1)            (8.7)              (9.9)         (13.2)                (14.4)
Notes: see notes to Table III. Numbers in parentheses represent the percent of the overall male female wage gap (in column 3) that is explained
by source described in column heading. In this table only, firm‐specific wage premiums are normalized by assuming that the mean surplus for
workers of both genders working in the hotel and restaurant industry is 0.
Appendix Table B7: Relationship Between Estimated Firm Effects and Mean Hours of Workers of Same Gender

                                      Models for Males                                    Models for Females
                        No Industry Controls       Industry Controls        No Industry Controls       Industry Controls
                          OLS          IV           OLS          IV            OLS          IV          OLS          IV
                           (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)            (5)         (6)           (7)         (8)
A. Using Regular Contractual Hours
                         ‐0.23        ‐0.13        ‐0.11        0.01          ‐0.06       ‐0.24         0.02        ‐0.07
Log Mean Hours of
Workers at Firm          (0.04)      (0.05)       (0.03)       (0.05)         (0.03)      (0.05)       (0.02)      (0.05)
(Same Gender)
First Stage Coeff.         ‐‐         0.52           ‐‐         0.43            ‐‐         0.68          ‐‐         0.63
                                     (0.00)                    (0.00)                     (0.00)                   (0.00)

B. Using Total Hours
Log Mean Hours of         ‐0.16       ‐0.12        ‐0.06        0.02           ‐0.05       ‐0.13        0.02        0.02
Workers at Firm          (0.03)      (0.05)       (0.03)       (0.05)         (0.03)      (0.05)       (0.02)      (0.04)
(Same Gender)

First Stage Coeff.         ‐‐         0.54           ‐‐         0.45            ‐‐         0.65          ‐‐         0.60
                                     (0.00)                    (0.00)                     (0.00)                   (0.00)

Notes: Dependent variable in columns 1‐4 is estimated firm‐specific wage premium for male employees at a firm.
Dependent variable in columns 5‐8 is estimated firm‐specific wage premium for female employees. Entries represent
coefficients of log mean hours of the gender group at the firm. Hours measure in Panel A is regular contractual hours.
Hours measure in Panel B is total hours. Models in columns 3‐4 and 7‐8 include dummies for 20 major industries. All
specifications include a constant. Models in even‐numbered columns are estimated by IV, using the log mean hours of
workers at the same firm in the other gender group as an instrument. Estimated first stage coefficients are reported in
second row of the table. All models are fit to micro data for workers in the dual‐connected set (n=11,025,257), with
standard errors (in parentheses) clustered by firm (n=84,720 firms).
Appendix Table B8: Estimated Relationship Between Estimated Firm Effects and Measures of Surplus per Worker,
Controlling for Industry, Location, and Firm Size

                                                  Regressions of Firm Effects on Measure of
                                     Number                         Surplus
                                      Firms               Males               Females             Ratio : Col (3) / Col (2)
                                       (1)                 (2)                  (3)                         (4)

Surplus Measure:
1. Excess Mean Log Value Added        47,477              0.140                 0.117                      0.840
per Worker                                               (0.006)               (0.007)                    (0.036)


2. Mean Log Sales per Worker          75,163              0.070                 0.061                      0.865
                                                         (0.003)               (0.003)                    (0.041)




3. Excess Mean Log Sales per          75,163              0.086                 0.072                      0.837
Worker                                                   (0.004)               (0.005)                    (0.043)

Notes: Columns 2‐3 report coefficients of surplus measure indicated in row heading in regression models in which the
dependent variables are the estimated firm effects for males or females. All specifications include 20 dummies for major
industry, dummies for location in Lisbon and Porto, and linear and quadratic controls for mean employment at the firm.
Models are estimated at the firm level, weighting by the total number of male and female workers at the firm. Ratios in
column 4 are estimated by IV, treating the firm effect for females wages as the dependent variable, the firm effect for males
as the endogenous explanatory variable, and the surplus measure as the instrument. Standard errors, clustered by firm, in
parentheses.
Appendix Table B9: Decomposition of Male‐Female Wage Gap Using Observable Measure of Surplus

                                                                                                     Male‐Female
                                                                  Males            Females            Difference
                                                                    (1)               (2)                 (3)

1. Total Firm‐specific Component of Wages (from Table III)        0.148             0.099                0.049
                                                                                                         (21.2)

2. Rent sharing coefficient (from row 1 of Table V)               0.156             0.137                0.019


3. Mean net surplus (based on excess mean log value added         0.743             0.566                0.178
        per worker)

4. Firm‐specific Component of Wages Attributable to               0.116             0.078                0.038
  Measured Productivity (= row 2 × row 3)                                                                (16.5)


5. Share of Total Firm‐specific Component Attributable to         0.784             0.785                  ‐‐
  Measured Productivity (= row 4 ÷ row 1)

Counterfactuals:

a. Assign females the male firm effects                           0.116             0.088                0.028

 (sorting effect, using male coefficients)                                                               (11.9)


b. Calculate mean female firm effect using male distribution      0.116             0.102                0.014

 (bargaining effect, using male distribution)                                                            (6.0)


c. Assign males the female firm effects                           0.102             0.078                0.024

 (sorting effect, using female coefficients)                                                             (10.4)


d. Calculate mean male firm effect using female distribution      0.088             0.078                0.011
 (bargaining effect, using female distribution)                                                          (4.6)
Note: decomposition based on regression models presented in row 1 of Table V. Entries in parentheses in column 3
represent the share of the overall male‐female wage gap (0.234) that is explained by the rent sharing component under
alternative counterfactuals.
Appendix Table B10: Descriptive Statistics for Job Stayers at Firms with Value Added Data
Available for 2006‐2009


                                                       All Firms with Male and Female Stayers
                                                             Males               Females
                                                              (1)                  (2)


Mean Age                                                     38.25                 37.21

Mean Education                                                7.99                 8.49

Mean Firm Size (workers in QP)                                631                  1024

Mean Fraction of Females at Firm                              0.29                 0.59


Mean Log Real Hourly Wage 2006                                1.62                  1.40
 (standard deviation)                                        (0.48)                (0.44)

Mean Log Real Hourly Wage 2009                                1.70                  1.48
 (standard deviation)                                        (0.48)                (0.44)

Mean Excess Log Value Added/Worker 2006                       0.76                  0.59
 (standard deviation)                                        (0.50)                (0.49)

Mean Excess Log Value Added/Worker 2009                      0.76                  0.58
 (standard deviation)                                        (0.51)                (0.50)

Number of Workers                                           283,346               200,907


Number of Firms                                                        33,104

Note: Sample in columns 1‐2 contains workers at dual connected firms with financial data for
2006‐2009 who were employed at the firm continuously from 2006 to 2009. Age, education,
firm size and fraction female refer to 2006.
Appendix Table B11: Effects of Changes in Excess Log Value Added per Worker on Wages
of Stayers, with Selection Correction
                                                     Estimated Rent Sharing
                                                          Coefficients:                    Ratio:
                                                                                        Column (2) /
                                                    Males             Females            Column (1)
                                                     (1)                (2)                  (3)

Baseline Models (from Row 1 of Table VI):
Coefficient on Change in Log Value                  0.049               0.045              0.912
 Added per Worker                                  (0.007)             (0.008)            (0.086)


Models With Selection Correction:
Coefficient on Change in Log Value                  0.049               0.045              0.911
 Added per Worker                                  (0.007)             (0.008)            (0.086)

Coefficient on Inverse Mills Ratio                 ‐0.007              ‐0.013                ‐‐
 (based on fraction of stayers at firm)            (0.005)             (0.005)

Notes: See notes to Table VI. Sample includes job stayers over the period from 2006 to 2009 at firms
with data on value added per worker. Dependent variable is average change in wages of male or female
workers from 2006 to 2009 at a firm (regression‐adjusted for quadratic in age). Inverse Mills ratio term
in selection corrected models is constructed using the fraction of all workers at the firm in 2006 who are
still employed at the firm in 2009. Standard errors, clustered by firm, in parentheses.
 Appendix Table C1: Comparison of Estimated AKM Models for All Worker and Those with High School or More Education

                                                                                               High School or More Education,
                                                            All Workers in Connected Sets                 Age ≥25
                                                             All Males        All Females         Males            Females
                                                                 (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)
 Standard deviation of log wages                              0.554             0.513              0.659            0.583
 Number of person‐year observations                         8,225,752         6,334,039          1,760,208        1,843,182
 Summary of Parameter Estimates:
 Number person effects                                      1,889,366         1,505,517           405,819          451,496
 Number firm effects                                         216,459           185,086             57,054           70,090
 Std. dev. of person effects (across person‐yr obs.)          0.420             0.400              0.564             0.492
 Std. dev. of firm effects (across person‐yr obs.)            0.247             0.213              0.279             0.268
 Std. dev. of Xb (across person‐yr obs.)                      0.069             0.059              0.083             0.066
 Correlation of person/firm effects                           0.167             0.152              0.022            ‐0.009
 RMSE of model                                                0.143             0.125              0.151             0.140
 Adjusted R‐squared of model                                  0.934             0.940              0.947             0.942
 Comparison job‐match effects model:
 Number of job‐match effects                                2,689,648         2,087,590           550,229          607,974
 RMSE of match‐effects model                                  0.128             0.113              0.135            0.126
 Adjusted R‐squared of match‐effects model                    0.946             0.951              0.958            0.953
 Std. deviation of job match effect                           0.062             0.054              0.068            0.062
 Inequality decomposition of two‐way fixed effects model:
 Share of variance of log wages due to:
       person effects                                          57.6              61.0               73.3             71.0
       firm effects                                            19.9              17.2               18.0             21.0
       covariance of person and firm effects                   11.4               9.9               1.6              ‐0.7
       Xb and associated covariances                            6.2               7.5               3.3               4.5
       residual                                                 4.9               4.4               3.9               4.2
Notes: See text. Models includes dummies for individual workers and individual firms, year dummies interacted with education
dummies, and quadratic and cubic terms in age interacted with education dummies (total of 44 parameters). Comparison job‐match
effects models include dummies for each worker‐firm job match as well as other covariates in basic model. Samples include only
observations in largest connected set.
Appendix Table C2: Contribution of Firm‐Level Pay Components to Gender Wage Gap ‐‐‐ Workers with High School or More
Education, Age 25 or Older
                                Means of Firm Premiums:                                                    Decompositions
                                                                Total
                                                            Contribution of                   Sorting                           Bargaining
                 Gender Male Premium         Female Premium      Firm               Using Male      Using Female      Using Male       Using Female
                Wage Gap Among Men            Among Women    Components               Effects          Effects        Distribution      Distribution
                   (1)       (2)                   (3)            (4)                   (5)              (6)               (7)               (8)
All                0.272         0.170             0.131             0.038             0.015            0.020            0.018            0.023
                                                                     (14.0)            (5.4)            (7.4)            (6.6)            (8.6)
By Age Group:
Up to age 30       0.115         0.127             0.097             0.030             0.008            0.016            0.014            0.023
                                                                     (26.4)            (6.6)            (14.0)           (12.4)           (19.8)

Ages 31‐40         0.226         0.174             0.140             0.034             0.011            0.015            0.019            0.023
                                                                     (14.9)            (4.6)            (6.6)            (8.2)            (10.2)

Over Age 40        0.313         0.212             0.180             0.032             0.006            0.010            0.021            0.026
                                                                     (10.1)            (1.9)            (3.3)            (6.8)            (8.2)

By Education Group:

High School        0.274         0.152             0.100             0.052             0.031            0.035            0.018            0.022
                                                                     (19.1)            (11.2)           (12.7)           (6.5)            (7.9)

University         0.287         0.195             0.170             0.025             0.000            0.007            0.018            0.026
                                                                     (8.9)             (0.0)            (2.5)            (6.4)            (9.0)
Notes: see note to Table III. Numbers in parentheses represent the percent of the overall male female wage gap (in column 1) that is explained by
source described in column heading.
Appendix Table C3: Comparison of Models for Firm Effects Using Base Sample and Workers with High
School or More Education, Age 25 or Older

                                                     Regressions of Firm Effects on
                                                               log(VA/L)
                                       Number                                         Ratio: Column (3) /
                                        Firms            Males         Females            Column (2)
                                         (1)              (2)            (3)                  (4)

1. Base Sample ‐‐ Dual Connected        47,477           0.156           0.137              0.879
   Firms                                                (0.006)         (0.007)             (0.031)

2. Restricted Sample ‐‐ Only Dual       15,499           0.161           0.133              0.825
Connected Firms, Based on Workers                       (0.004)         (0.004)             (0.023)
with High School or Higher
Education, Age 25 or Older

Notes: Columns 2‐3 report coefficients of excess mean log value‐added per worker in regression models in
which the dependent variables are the estimated firm effects for the gender group identified in the column
headings. Models are estimated at the firm level, weighted by the total number of male and female workers
at the firm. Ratio estimates in columns 4 are obtained by IV method ‐‐ see note to Table V. Standard errors,
clustered by firm, in parentheses.
Appendix Table D1: Contribution of Firm‐Level Pay Components to Gender Wage Gap ‐‐ Sales per Worker Normalization
                              Means of Firm Premiums:                                                     Decompositions
                                                             Total
                            Male                         Contribution of                     Sorting                          Bargaining
                 Gender   Premium         Female Premium      Firm               Using Male       Using Female     Using Male       Using Female
                Wage Gap Among Men         Among Women    Components               Effects           Effects       Distribution     Distribution
                   (1)       (2)                (3)            (4)                   (5)               (6)              (7)              (8)
All               0.234        0.110            0.059             0.052             0.035              0.047          0.005                0.017
                                                                  (22.2)            (14.9)             (19.9)         (2.3)                (7.3)
By Age Group:
Up to Age 30      0.099        0.076            0.046             0.030             0.019              0.029          0.001                0.011
                                                                  (30.1)            (18.9)             (29.3)         (0.8)                (11.2)

Ages 31‐40        0.228        0.118            0.071             0.047             0.029              0.041          0.006                0.018
                                                                  (20.8)            (12.7)             (17.8)         (2.8)                (8.1)

Over Age 40       0.336        0.131            0.059             0.072             0.050              0.064          0.007                0.021
                                                                  (21.3)            (15.0)             (19.1)         (2.2)                (6.3)

By Education Group:
< High School    0.286         0.077            0.015             0.062             0.045              0.061          0.001                0.017
                                                                  (21.6)            (15.6)             (21.4)         (0.2)                (6.0)

High School       0.262        0.160            0.096             0.064             0.051              0.051          0.013                0.013
                                                                  (24.3)            (19.6)             (19.5)         (5.0)                (4.8)

University        0.291        0.221            0.172             0.049             0.025              0.029          0.020                0.024
                                                                  (17.0)            (8.7)              (9.9)          (7.0)                (8.2)
Notes: see note to Table III. Numbers in parentheses represent the percent of the overall male female wage gap (in column 1) that is explained
by source described in column heading. In this table only, firm‐specific wage premiums are normalized by assuming that firms with mean log
sales per worker less than 3.35 have no surplus on average.
