                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              EXPORTER HETEROGENEITY AND PRICE DISCRIMINATION:
                            A QUANTITATIVE VIEW

                                          Jae Wook Jung
                                         Ina Simonovska
                                         Ariel Weinberger

                                       Working Paper 21408
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21408


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2015




We are indebted to Andres Rodriguez-Clare for extremely insightful comments that were critical to
the analysis in this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Jae Wook Jung, Ina Simonovska, and Ariel Weinberger. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Exporter Heterogeneity and Price Discrimination: A Quantitative View
Jae Wook Jung, Ina Simonovska, and Ariel Weinberger
NBER Working Paper No. 21408
July 2015
JEL No. F12,F14,F17,F6

                                              ABSTRACT

We quantify a class of commonly-employed general equilibrium models of international trade and
pricing-to-market that feature firm-level heterogeneity and consumers with nonhomothetic preferences.
We demonstrate theoretically that the models lack the flexibility to match salient features of US firm-level
data. Consequently, we outline a theoretical framework that can reconcile the documented price dispersion
across firms and markets, while maintaining consistency with cross-sectional observations on firm
productivity and sales. We calibrate the model’s parameters to match bilateral trade flows across 71
countries as well as the productivity and sales advantages of US exporters over non-exporters. We
find that the calibrated model accounts for the majority of the dispersion in prices of tradables across
countries of different income levels, while maintaining a tight quantitative fit to firm-level data. Given
its additional flexibility, the model quantitatively outperforms the existing alternatives and yields welfare
gains for the US that are 14-54% higher, but at the cost of loss of tractability.


Jae Wook Jung                                         Ariel Weinberger
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
University of California, Davis                       University of Oklahoma
One Shields Avenue                                    308 Cate Center Drive
Davis, CA 95616                                       Norman, OK 73019
jwjung@ucdavis.edu                                    penarol49@gmail.com

Ina Simonovska
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
inasimonovska@ucdavis.edu
1         Introduction
The empirical international trade literature has documented two sets of stylized facts that shed
light on the role that heterogeneous firms play in shaping prices and flows of goods across
borders. On the one hand, Bernard et al. (2003) demonstrate that: (i) exporters enjoy a
large productivity and size advantage over non-exporters; (ii) exporters constitute the minority
among producing plants; (iii) exporter sales abroad account for a small portion of their total
sales. On the other hand, De Loecker and Warzynski (2012) show that more productive firms,
and especially exporters, extract higher mark-ups than less productive ones, while Simonovska
(2015) finds that a typical exporter enjoys higher mark-ups in richer over poorer destinations.
    We outline a theoretical framework that can reconcile these facts, both qualitatively and
quantitatively. In particular, we analyze a general equilibrium model of international trade
that features monopolistically competitive heterogeneous firms and identical consumers whose
preferences are represented by a generalized CES utility function—Dixit-Stiglitz utility with
displaced origin. According to the model, the marginal utility that each consumer derives from
positive consumption is bounded, which implies the existence of a choke price above which
demand is zero. Hence, only firms with sufficiently high productivity draws that offer their
products at prices below the choke price survive in a given market, and the marginal firm
realizes zero sales. Iceberg trade barriers raise the cost to serve foreign markets, which implies
that a subset of productive firms constitute the set of exporters. These firms enjoy a sales and
value-added advantage over non-exporters, while constituting a minority when trade barriers
are high. In turn, for the majority of exporters, high trade barriers erode foreign relative to
domestic sales. Finally, consumers that reside in countries characterized by higher income levels
are less responsive to price changes than those that live in poorer ones, so firms optimally price
identical products higher in more affluent markets.
    Having reconciled theory and fact, we examine the ability of the model to quantitatively
account for the observations in the data. Under the assumption that firm productivities are
Pareto distributed, the framework falls within the class of models investigated in Arkolakis
et al. (2015) (ACDR); therefore, it is easily quantifiable.1 We rely on the model’s predicted
gravity equation of trade as well as bilateral trade-flow data for 71 countries to uncover all, but
two of, the parameters necessary to simulate moments at the firm level. The two key remaining
parameters constitute the Pareto shape parameter and the utility curvature parameter. We
identify these parameters by matching the measured-productivity and sales advantage of U.S.
exporters over non-exporters documented in Bernard et al. (2003) (BEJK). The focus on these
two moments is intentional as they are directly informative about the two parameters in ques-
    1
        We are indebted to Andres Rodriguez-Clare for pointing this out to us.



                                                         1
tion.2 On the one hand, lower values of the Pareto shape parameter increase the variability in
firm productivity, thus raising the exporters’ value-added advantage over non-exporters. On
the other hand, higher values of the utility curvature parameter raise product substitutability,
thus reducing the market power of each firm. More productive firms charge lower prices than
less productive ones and earn a higher sales advantage with more substitution across varieties,
while enjoying higher value added and mark-ups.
    We conduct a variety of out-of-sample tests to evaluate the model’s fit to data. Consistent
with firm-level facts, only the minority of firms are exporters (41%), the majority of these
exporters sell mostly domestically, and the standard deviation of log domestic sales is broadly
in line with the data. More importantly, we test the model’s fit to the observed price dispersion
across firms and markets. The model yields markups consistent with the empirical literature—
the average markup is 31%. In addition, the model yields a positive relationship bwtween prices
of tradable goods and destination per-capita income. Among highly productive exporters that
serve at least half the markets in the dataset, a linear regression of log relative price on log
per-capita income yields a slope of 0.12, which compares favorably to the statistic obtained
from standard cross-country price datasets such as the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) and
the International Comparison Program (ICP).
    Furthermore, because the model falls within the ACDR framework, we can rely on welfare
results derived by the authors to compute the welfare gains from trade. We calculate the
welfare gains of moving from autarky to the observed trade equilibrium in year 2004. The
model predicts that the gains for the US economy would be 4%, while the average gains across
65 countries would amount to 16%.
    The discussion above suggests that the generalized CES model represents a plausible quan-
titative framework that can be used to study the welfare gains from trade in the presence of
pro-competitive effects. While the framework’s aggregate outcomes are easily quantifiable, the
model does not yield analytical representations of firm-level variables, which incurs computa-
tional costs to the researcher. In addition, the model shares key qualitative predictions with
three existing frameworks: Melitz and Ottaviano (2008) (MO), Behrens et al. (2014) (BMMS),
and Simonovska (2015) (SIM).3 The distinctive features of these models are that consumer
preferences are non-homothetic and monopolistically competitive firms are heterogeneous in
their productivities, which are Pareto distributed.4 Therefore, when framed in a multi-country
   2
     The focus on the actual statistics reported in BEJK is simply due to data availability constraints.
   3
     Feenstra and Weinstein (2010) also examine firm-level price variation in a monopolistically competitive
world that features heterogeneous firms; however, the authors rely on translog preferences, which fall within a
homothetic class.
   4
     Dhingra and Morrow (2012) and Weinberger (2014) examine the welfare consequences of variable markups
and incomplete pass-through in similar frameworks.



                                                      2
general equilibrium setting, these models are qualitatively in line with all of the stylized facts
described above. If, in addition, the MO model is parameterized appropriately, the three mod-
els satisfy the assumption of separable preferences so that the choke price in all the models is
identical to the one generated by the generalized CES model.5
    Given a unique set of gravity variables and choke price that can be computed for all the mod-
els, we show that the three existing models cannot jointly account for the observed measured-
productivity and sales advantage of exporters over non-exporters, unlike the flexible generalized
CES model. We demonstrate theoretically that, in general equilibrium with free entry and un-
der the assumption that firm productivity is unbounded from above and Pareto distributed,
the three existing non-homothetic models rely on a single parameter, the Pareto shape param-
eter, to match the two moments, which renders the task theoretically impossible. Furthermore,
for a given Pareto shape parameter value, all models—existing as well as the generalized CES
one—yield identical productivity cutoffs and macro aggregates, but differing firm mark-up and
sales distributions. Therefore, the models yield differing predictions about price dispersion and
ultimately consumer welfare. Consequently, if firm-level data rejects these moments, but the
models are used to quantify the welfare gains from trade, the latter could be mismeasured.
    To quantify the potential costs of welfare mismeasurement, we replicate the quantitative
analysis from above within the context of these models and we compute the predicted welfare
gains. First, we find that all three models can match the measured productivity advantage of US
exporters over non-exporters (under model-specific values for the Pareto shape parameter), but
the result is that the models predict too low of a sales advantage of exporters.67 Quantitatively,
the parsimonious frameworks underpredict the welfare gains from trade for the US by 14-54%
relative to the flexible one. Second, we show that all three models can match the sales advantage
of exporters under relatively high (model-specific) Pareto shape parameters. In this case: (i)
the measured productivity distribution in the models is misaligned with respect to the data;
and (ii) the welfare gains, which are falling in the value of the Pareto shape parameters, are
further underestimated relative to the first case.
    The above analysis does not imply that the existing models do not constitute plausible
benchmarks for quantitative analysis. Admittedly, we evaluate the performance of the models
   5
     In particular, in the MO model, the parameter denoted by η must be set to zero. For completeness, we also
examine MO’s general non-separable case qualitatively and quantitively.
   6
     In contrast, the unrestricted MO model can reconcile the sales and value-added advantage of exporters over
non-exporters, but this flexibility comes at a high cost: the calibrated model predicts that exporters are in the
majority, which is in contrast to the data, and that the firm sales variance is too low, while the average mark-up
and the elasticity of price with respect to income are too high.
   7
     Feenstra (2014) examines the role that the upper bound of the Pareto distribution for productivity plays
in governing welfare in a large class of models. In results available upon request, we show that incorporating
a Pareto productivity distribution that is bounded above into all the models examined in this paper further
restricts the sales advantage of exporters over non-exporters.


                                                        3
along a limited number of dimensions. A natural question arises: why focus the analysis on
these moments in the data? For example, another strategy could be to identify the models’
parameters by matching moments from the price distribution in each model as suggested by
Simonovska and Waugh (2014b). We believe that, by focusing on moments that do not relate
to prices, we put the existing (and the generalized CES) models to a more difficult test because
these models were developed precisely so as to reconcile pricing observations in the data. In
addition, the cross-sectional moments from firm data that we examine constitute the core
moments traditionally examined by the quantitative international trade literature of micro-
level heterogeneity (see BEJK, Arkolakis (2010), Behrens et al. (2014), and ACDR among
others). We leave it for future work to examine the performance of these models along other
dimensions.
    We contribute to a large and important existing literature that emphasizes the role that
heterogeneous productivity firms play in shaping international prices and trade flows. Most
notably, to reconcile the documented facts about US exporters, BEJK develop a model in
which suppliers with heterogeneous productivities compete within and across countries à la
Bertrand and sell to consumers with homothetic (CES) preferences. A key prediction of the
model is that, on average, more efficient suppliers have greater cost advantage over their rivals,
set higher mark-ups and enjoy higher measured productivity. Furthermore, on average, the more
productive firms compete with more productive rivals, charge lower prices, and enjoy higher
sales. Their model is not only able to quantitatively account for the first set of documented
facts, but it is also highly tractable and lends itself useful for quantitative analysis. The
models examined in the present paper are distinct from theirs in that consumer preferences are
assumed to be non-homothetic and the market structure is monopolistically competitive. These
two features allow us to derive testable predictions about individual firms’ price discrimination
practices within and across countries and to quantitatively account for the positive relationship
between prices of tradables and per-capita income documented by Alessandria and Kaboski
(2011) and by Simonovska (2015).8
    Finally, our paper relates to a large literature that quantitatively examines the role of
heterogeneous firms in the global economy. Most notably, the workhorse model by Melitz
(2003), parameterized as in Chaney (2008), features firms with heterogeneous productivity
levels that incur fixed domestic and (in addition) export market access costs, thus accounting for
the size and productivity advantage of exporters over non-exporters. Dispensing with Melitz’s
(2003) fixed market access cost formulation and incorporating into the model Arkolakis’s (2010)
   8
     Notably, deBlas and Russ (2015) and Edmond et al. (2014) generalize the BEJK model and derive richer
predictions about aggregate pass-through and welfare, albeit under the same market structure assumption as
BEJK.



                                                    4
advertising technology that allows firms to reach only a fraction of consumers in each market
enables the framework to rationalize the co-existence of few exporters with exporters’ tiny sales
per export market. Adding to the last model firm- and market-specific shocks enables Eaton
et al. (2011) to reconcile the entry and sales patterns across different types of firms and markets
that were documented for French exporters in Eaton et al. (2004) and Eaton et al. (2011).
    The unifying feature of the models described above is the assumption that consumer pref-
erences are of the homothetic (CES) form. The formulation makes the models tractable, but it
yields the theoretical prediction that firms charge identical prices across different destinations,
net of trade costs. However, Waugh (2010) relies on the gravity equation of trade predicted by
a large class of models, including the ones described above, and shows that, if trade costs are
estimated from bilateral trade data, they are, at best, uncorrelated with destination income.
This implies that the models yield no systematic link between a country’s level of development
and prices of tradables, which is at odds with the data.9 Nonetheless, the theoretical tools
developed by these pioneering studies can be incorporated into the generalized CES model in
order to explore the important firm- and market-specific dimensions that we abstract from in
the present paper.
    We organize the remainder of the paper as follows. We provide the details of the framework
that will apply to all non-homothetic heterogeneous-firm models and outline the flexible model
in Section 2. We describe the solution algorithm for the model and generate moments for
calibration in Section 3. We outline the existing non-homothetic models and we examine their
predicted distributions of sales and mark-ups in Section 4. We quantify the models in Section 5.
We conclude in Section 6.


2       Generalized CES Model
In this section, we outline the generalized CES model. We begin by describing the market
structure, which applies to all existing models, and we proceed to derive predictions from the
generalized model.


2.1     Framework
The environment is static. Goods are differentiated by the producers’ identity as well as the
country of origin. I countries are engaged in trade of final goods, where I is finite. Let
i represent an exporter and j an importer, that is, i is the source country, while j is the
    9
    The author demonstrates that an alternative trade-cost specification proposed by Eaton and Kortum (2002)
results in estimates of trade barriers that are systematically negatively related to destination income, which
results in a negative relationship between per-capita income and prices of tradables.


                                                      5
destination country. In every country, i, there exists a pool of potential entrants who pay a one
time cost, fe > 0, in order to get a single draw from a distribution, Gi (φ), with support [bi , ∞).
                                θ                           θ
We assume that Gi (φ) = 1 − bφi , so that dGi (φ) = θ(b    i)
                                                         φθ+1
                                                                . Therefore, the (unbounded above)
productivity distribution is Pareto with shape parameter θ and lower bound bi , which governs
average productivity in i. A measure Ji of firms that are able to cover their marginal cost of
production enter the world market and a subset of entrants, Nij , produce and sell to market
j. Thus, a subset of entrants immediately exit and, in equilibrium, the expected profit of an
entrant is zero. Hence, aggregate profit rebates to each consumer are also zero. Assuming that
each consumer has a unit labor endowment which, when supplied (inelastically) to the local
labor market earns a wage rate of wi —per-capita income in country i necessarily equals wi .
    Labor is the only factor of production. The production function of a monopolistically-
competitive firm with productivity draw φ is x(φ) = φl, where l is the amount of labor used
toward the production of final output. Moreover, each firm from country i wishing to sell to
destination j faces an iceberg transportation cost incurred in terms of labor units, τij ≥ 1, with
τii = 1(∀i). For a firm with productivity draw φ, we define the marginal cost to produce in
                                             wτ
country i and ship to country j by cij = iφ ij . Then, the cdf of firms from i who can deliver
their good to j at a unit cost below c is:
                                                     θ
                                               cij                          wi τij
                               µij (c) =                   , where ĉij =          .            (1)
                                               ĉij                          bi

We show below that there exists a good produced by a firm from country i with cost draw c̄ij
whose demand is zero in market j and the firm producing it earns zero profits from its sale.
Then the subset Nij of entrants from i whose cost is below the threshold c̄ij is:

                                           Nij = Ji (µij (c̄ij )),                              (2)

The total measure of goods consumed in j is the sum across sources that sell to it: Nj =
PI
  i=1 Nij .
   We maintain the above assumptions throughout the remainder of the paper. In Section 4
we explore the role that utility parameterizations as in the SIM, MO (with η = 0), and BMMS
models play in governing cutoff costs as well as mark-up and sales distributions of firms. In
Appendix E we repeat the analysis for the non-separable/flexible MO model. Below, we outline
the generalized CES model.




                                                            6
2.2    Consumer and Firm Problems
The generalized CES utility function corresponds to a Dixit-Stiglitz utility function with a
displaced origin. One special case of it is the CES utility function found in Melitz (2003).
Another special case of it was introduced into a heterogeneous-firm model of international
trade by Simonovska (2015). Relative to the SIM specification, the generalized CES utility
function features an extra parameter that governs the curvature of the utility function and
therefore the elasticity of substitution across goods. Specifically, the utility function is:
                                       Z                                       σ
                                                                              σ−1
                                                                  σ−1
                              Uc =              (q c (ω) + q̄)     σ    dω           ,           (3)
                                          ω∈Ω


where q (ω) is individual consumption of good ω, Ω is a compact set containing all potentially
produced goods, q̄ > 0 is a (country-aspecific) constant, and σ ≥ 1 governs curvature.
   The preference relation described above is non-homothetic. Moreover, the marginal utility
from consuming a good is bounded from above at any level of consumption. Hence, a consumer
does not have positive demand for all goods as there exists a choke price such that demand is
zero for all goods whose prices exceed it.
   It can be shown that demand for a good ω originating in i that is consumed in a positive
amount in j is:
                                                                                         !
                                             (wj + q̄Pj )(pij (ω))−σ
                           qij (ω) = Lj                 1−σ          − q̄                        (4)
                                                     Pjσ

where pij (ω) is the good’s price, and Pj = Ii=1 ω∈Ωij pij (ω)dω and Pjσ
                                                                      1−σ
                                                                          = Ii=1 ω∈Ωij (pij (ω))1−σ dω
                                           P R                             P R

are aggregate price statistics.
    Relabeling each good by the productivity of its supplier and substituting for the demand
function using expression (4), the profit maximization problem of a firm with cost draw cij is:
                                                                                             !
                                                             (wj + q̄Pj )(pij )−σ
                    πij (cij ) = max (pij − cij )Lj                  1−σ          − q̄           (5)
                              pij ≥0                               Pjσ

The total profits of the firm are simply the summation of profits flowing from all destinations
it sells its good to:

                                                            I
                                                            X
                                   πi (ci1 , ..., ciI ) =         πij (cij ).
                                                            j=1


From (5), notice that there exists a good produced by a firm with cost draw c̄ij whose demand is


                                                      7
zero in market j and whose price equals the choke price in that destination. The firm producing
this good earns zero profits from its sale. This cutoff cost is the maximum cost that enables
firms to serve market j:

                                                 qij (c̄ij ) = 0
                                                               wj + q̄Pj
                                               ⇐⇒ (c̄ij )σ =        1−σ                                (6)
                                                                 q̄Pjσ

Since the RHS of (6) is entirely determined by the market conditions of the destination j, it
must be that c̄ij = c̄jj ≡ c̄j , ∀i 6= j.
    Each firm takes as given the aggregate price statistics and wages. Taking FOCs of (5) and
using expression (6) yields the following implicit equation that characterizes the unique optimal
price that a firm charges for a good supplied in a positive amount:

                                                                      −σ
                                        (1 − σ)pij + σcij = pσ+1
                                                             ij (c̄j )                                 (7)

Furthermore, the quantity of a good sold and a firm’s sales are:
                                                        σ     
                                                c̄j
                   xij (cij ) = Lj q̄                          −1                                      (8)
                                             pij (cij )
                   rij (cij ) = pij (cij ) xij (cij ) = Lj q̄ (c̄j )σ (pij (cij ))1−σ − pij (cij )
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       (9)

By restricting the domain of (7) to cij ∈ [0, c̄j ], notice that a firm with cost cij → 0 will charge
a price pij (cij ) → 0, which is the only non-negative price that satisfies the FOC for σ > 1. Any
firm with a higher cost draw will charge a higher price. Finally, the firm with a cost draw c̄j
charges a price that equals its marginal cost, a solution that satisfies (7) and yields zero profits.
For any cij ∈ [0, c̄j ], the RHS of (7) is increasing and convex in pij while the LHS is linear
and decreasing. For each cij ∈ [0, c̄j ] there exists a unique pij ∈ [0, c̄j ], which characterizes the
unique real number that constitutes the optimal price that a firm charges.10
    A few key predictions of the model follow. There is incomplete pass-through of costs onto
prices. Using the implicit function theorem in expression (7), it follows that dpij /dcij > 0, so
high cost firms charge higher prices. However, price rises by less than proportionally with cost.
To see this, define the mark-up as mij = pij /cij and use the implicit function theorem once
again to find the sign for dmij /dcij . In Appendix A we show that the range for mark-ups is
[1, σ/(σ − 1)], and that in this range dmij /dcij < 0.
    Notice that the upper bound on mark-ups is the Dixit-Stiglitz markup found in the Melitz
  10
    We ignore complex solutions and other solutions which occur in the negative quadrant since they violate
the non-negativity constraint on prices.


                                                                8
(2003) model. This is in contrast to the implications that follow from imposing the restriction
that σ = 1, which corresponds to the SIM model. In that case, expression (7) above yields a
closed-form solution for individual firm prices and a prediction that the most productive firm
charges an infinite mark-up. The upper bound on mark-ups in the generalized CES model,
together with the fact that sales are unbounded above (see expression (9)), has the following
implications: the most productive firm can only have infinite sales if it demands infinite labor.
Because this would bid up the wage to infinity, only measure zero of firms can attain this
outcome. In contrast, in the σ = 1 model, the infinitely productive firms charge infinitely high
mark-ups, without having to demand infinite labor. This means that there can be many such
firms—thus firm size is quite large in the tail, which bounds above differences in sizes between
exporters and non-exporters. We explore the quantitative implications of this limitation in
Section 5.


2.3    Equilibrium
To derive aggregate predictions, we follow the insights by Arkolakis et al. (2015) (ACDR) and
                               p
we define a new variable tij ≡ c̄ijj . This strategy will greatly simplify the analysis as all integrals
will become country-aspecific, thus resulting in very tractable aggregate equilibrium objects.
To start, we rewrite the implicit function that characterizes optimal prices as:
                                                                               
                                                                          cij
                                      (1 − σ)tij −    tσ+1
                                                       ij    = −σ                                     (10)
                                                                          c̄j

To solve the model in general equilibrium, we characterize average profits of firms from country
i, total sales from a source i in destination j, and the aggregate price statistics (details of the
derivation can be found in Appendix A):

                         I Z    c̄υ                    I                 θ               1−θ
                         X                             X            c̄υ     Lυ q̄θ      1
                  πi =             πiυ (c)dµiυ (c) =        c̄υ                θ+1
                                                                                                 β1   (11)
                       υ=1    0                        υ=1
                                                                   ĉiυ     σ         σ − 1
                       Z c̄j                              θ                        1−θ
                                                            c̄j     Lj q̄θ         1
                 Tij =       Ji rij (c)dµij (c) = Ji c̄j                                    β2        (12)
                        0                                  ĉij       σθ        σ−1
                        I Z c̄j                            I
                       X                                  X         c̄θ+1
                                                                      j    bθυ
                 Pj =             Jυ pυj (c)dµυj (c) =          Jυ               β
                                                                               θ P
                                                                                                      (13)
                       υ=1    0                           υ=1      (τ υj w υ )
                        I Z c̄j                               I
                1−σ
                       X                                   X        c̄θ+1−σ bθυ
               Pjσ   =            pυj (c)1−σ dµυj (c) =          Jυ               β
                                                                                 θ σP
                                                                                                      (14)
                       υ=1    0                            υ=1      (τ  υj w υ )

where β1 , β2 , βP and βσP are constants that depend on θ and σ. The change of variables was
an essential step that allowed us to arrive at the closed-form solutions for the integrals above

                                                        9
as it changed the range of integration to be country-aspecific and in particular equal to [0, 1].
    Next, we use the aggregates above to characterize equilibrium wages and cost cutoffs. The
free-entry (FE) and income-spending (IS) conditions pin down the measure of entrants:

                                             w i f e = πi                                           (15)
                                                           I
                                                           X
                                             wi Li =             Tυi                                (16)
                                                           υ=1


Specifically, plugging (11) and (12) into (15) and (16) yield the measure of entrants: Ji =
βJ Li /fe , where βJ is a constant (see Appendix A). To solve for wages, we first impose the
income-spending equality (via trade balance), which yields the following characterization for
trade shares:

                                      Tij                   Li (wi τij /bi )−θ
                           λij = PI               = PI                                              (17)
                                    υ=1     Tυj            υ=1   Lυ (wυ τυj /bυ )−θ

We then combine market clearing with the expression for trade shares to obtain the following
implicit solution for wages:

                                            I
                                            X
                                Li wi =           Lj wj λij                                         (18)
                                            j=1
                                             I
                                                                                            !
                           wθ+1 X                                    wj Lj
                         ⇐⇒ i θ =                                                                   (19)
                                                                     Lυ bθυ (wυ τυj )−θ
                                                           PI
                            bi    j=1               τijθ     υ=1


Lastly, substituting aggregate objects into the cutoff costs yields:
                                                                                          1
                                                                                         θ+1
                                                     1
                                                   −1 − θ+1               wj
                      c̄j = (βσP − βP )βj q̄fe                   P
                                                                       I     Lυ bθυ
                                                                                               .   (20)
                                                                       υ=1 (τυj wυ )θ


Cost cutoffs are a product of a (model-specific constant) and a general equilibrium object that
involves wages, population sizes, trade costs, productivities as well as the Pareto shape param-
eter θ. In Section 4 below, we show that this cost cutoff expression (modulo proportionality
constant) holds for all existing models with separable preferences. This implies that, for a
given set of “macro variables” and θ, we can construct cutoff costs in each model, relative to a
benchmark country.




                                                      10
2.4     Income Per-Capita and Prices
A key prediction of the model is that prices of identical goods are higher in richer destinations.
To see this, apply the implicit function theorem to expression (7) to verify that dpij /dc̄j > 0.
Furthermore, differentiating the cutoff in expression (20) with respect to the destination’s per-
capita income, wj , yields a positive elasticity. Combining the two elasticities, as verified in
Appendix A.3, implies that the price of each good is increasing in the per-capita income of the
destination.


3     Solution Algorithm
As discussed in the introduction, the qualitative predictions of the model are shared by three
existing models in the literature. Hence, the contribution of the generalized model would draw
from its quantitative fit to data. In order to derive quantitative cross-sectional and aggregate
predictions, we need to solve the model via simulation. In principle, the numerical algorithm is
cumbersome as it involves a large number of firms and countries. However, if we follow insights
by Eaton et al. (2011) and relabel firm-level indicators from costs into “inherent efficiency”, we
can simulate the latter from a parameter-free uniform distribution only once and re-use them
throughout the entire quantitative analysis.
    We are interested in deriving predictions for firms from all countries i = 1, ..., I that operate
in equilibrium; namely, firms with costs cii ∈ [0, c̄i ]. In the presence of trade costs, all exporters
are a subset of these firms. We proceed as follows. We draw 5,000,000 realization of the uniform
distribution on the [0, 1] domain, U ∼ [0, 1], we order them in increasing order, and find the
                                                            u                          1
maximum realization, denoted by umax . Define s = umax          . Then, we let cii = s θ c̄i . Notice that
                                                                          θ
cii ∈ [0, c̄i ] by construction, and it has a pdf of dµii (cii ) = θcθ−1
                                                                     ii
                                                                          bi
                                                                          wi
                                                                              ; yet the normalization
allows us to utilize all draws in the subsequent analysis. Multiplying each cii by the appropriate
trade cost yields the cost to serve each market. Comparing the cost (inclusive of trade costs)
to the cost cutoff for each source-destination pair determines the set of exporters to every
destination.


3.1     From Model to Data
To simulate predictions from the model, we need (i) values for the following parameters Θ ≡
(θ, σ, {Li }i=1,...,I−1 , {τij }i,j=1,...,I ) and (ii) values for the endogenous objects, most notably wages
and cost cutoffs ({wi , c̄i }i=1,...,I−1 ). We normalize population Li relative to a numeraire country.
Similarly, we compute wages and cost cutoffs relative to a numeraire country.



                                                    11
    To reduce the computational burden, we leverage equation (17). Since trade shares yield a
standard log-linear gravity equation, we first specify a parametric functional form that relates
bilateral trade barriers to country-pair-specific characteristics, and we estimate the coefficients
that govern the function directly from bilateral trade data, up to a constant, θ. Specifically,
motivated by Waugh (2010), we assume a functional form for bilateral trade costs:

                 log(τij ) = α + exi + γh dh + γd log(dist)ij + γt log(tdij ) + γg cepiiij

where α is a constant, exi is an exporter-specific fixed effect, dh is an indicator that takes
on the value of one if trade is internal (i = j), dist is the distance between country pairs,
tdij is the time zone difference between country pairs, and cepiiij is a matrix that contains
vectors of indicator variables that capture country-pair-specific characteristics collected from
CEPII including: shared border, language (official), language (ethnic), common colony, colony
in 1945, legal system, currency, free trade agreements, hegemony of origin/destination over the
trade partner. We substitute this functional form for trade costs into the gravity equation, we
take logs, and we estimate the coefficients via OLS. In particular, we estimate the following:
      λij
log λjj = Sj − Si − θ log(τij ), with Si ≡ log(Li (wi /bi )−θ ) ∀i recovered from country-specific
fixed effects.11 We normalize all trade costs relative to their domestic counterparts so that
τii = 1 (∀i).
    Without specifying a value for θ, all trade costs (in logs) are scaled by θ. We take these
trade
     costs as well as estimated country-specific coefficients and we recover implied trade shares:
      λ̂ij
log λ̂       = Sˆj − Ŝi − θ log(τ̂ij ). To recover the wages, we substitute estimated trade shares
        jj
into (18) and use data for Li .12 All Li are computed relative to a numeraire country; hence,
the wage rate for that country is set to unity. Finally, we back out cost cutoffs from expression
(20). Notice that the summation terms in the cost cutoffs (modulo proportionality factor), as
defined in equation (20), can be rewritten in terms of the gravity objects, Si , only.
    Given estimates of Si , data on population, and estimated wages, we could back out the
technology parameters bi with the definition of Si = log(Li (wi /bi )−θ ). For each guess of θ, the
                                                            1/θ
technology parameters would satisfy b̂i = exp(         Ŝi )
                                                      Li
                                                                  ŵi , where ŵi is the equilibrium wage
rate computed above. At this step, a value for θ would be needed, which would suggest
that the vector of technology parameters would have to be jointly estimated with the key
parameters, θ and σ. However, given our strategy to identify these two key parameters from
moments that relate to US exporters and non-exporters, the technology parameters are not
necessary. Moreover, given the predictions of the model that we are interested in, the technology
  11
    See Simonovska and Waugh (2014a) for a discussion regarding the separate identification of Si and exi .
  12
    An alternative strategy is to use per-capita income directly from the data. Quantitative results obtained
using this method are very similar and they are available upon request from the authors.


                                                     12
parameters need not be computed. It is for this reason that these parameters were not included
in the set of parameters described at the outset of this section.
    To summarize, the first step in our estimation will be to calculate bilateral (asymmetric)
trade costs, scaled by any θ, and recover the implied trade shares. The second step will be the
computation of wages from market clearing, predicted trade shares, and population data. This
allows us to also characterize cost cutoffs relative to a benchmark country. The third and final
step will be to simulate firms and identify σ and θ.

3.1.1   Identifying θ and σ

To identify these two parameters, we derive the following two moments from the model that we
perfectly match in the US data as documented by BEJK: 1) measured productivity advantage
of exporters over non-exporters (in logs) and 2) domestic sales advantage of exporters over
non-exporters.

Measured Productivity Advantage. To derive the first moment, we first need to charac-
terize measured productivity. Following BEJK, this object is labor productivity, or total value
added divided by employment. The value added for each s from i is:

                                          I
                                          X
                            vai (s) =            δiυ (s)piυ (s)xiυ (s)
                                          υ=1
                                          XI
                                      =          δiυ (s)c̄υ Lυ q̄(t1−σ
                                                                   iυ (s) − tiυ (s))
                                          υ=1


where δiυ (s) is an indicator that takes on the value of one if firm s from i sells in market υ and
tiυ is the change of variables introduced earlier. There are no intermediate goods in this model,
so only labor is used for production. Therefore, the value added is the same as the revenue for
each s.
Employment of the same s is

                               I
                               X               τiυ xiυ (s) ciυ (s)
                  empi (s) =         δiυ (s)
                               υ=1
                                                     τiυ wiυ
                                I                                           −σ
                               X                  tσ+1
                                                   iυ (s) + (σ − 1)tiυ (s) tiυ (s) − 1
                           =     δiυ (s)c̄υ Lυ q̄
                             υ=1
                                                             σ                  wi




                                                         13
Notice that due to the iceberg transportation cost τiυ , a firm must produce τiυ xiυ so that xiυ
units reach the consumer. The measured productivity of s is the ratio of the two objects,
                                                                        
                                                               vai (s)
                                          mpi (s) = log
                                                              empi (s)

It remains to compute the average measured productivity for exporters and non-exporters. To
separate firms into these two groups, we use expression (20) to compute the cost draw necessary
for a firm from i to reach its easiest export destination: c̃xii ≡ maxυ6=i τc̄iυυ . Hence, all firms from
i with cost draws below this cutoff necessarily export to at least one destination, while the
remaining firms serve the domestic market only. To aggregate over exporters and non-exporters,
it is useful to employ the change of variables introduced earlier. Let us characterize t̃ii : the
value for tii that corresponds to the cutoff cost that differentiates exporters from non-exporters.
Focus on expression (10) and let j = i. Then, solve this for the marginal exporter, i.e., set
                                                                                               c̃x
cii = c̃xii into expression (10). It yields the desired value implicitly: (1 − σ)t̃ii + σ c̄iii = t̃σ+1
                                                                                                      ii .
                       c̃x
Notice that t̃ii = f ( c̄i , σ); namely the variable of interest is a function of country i’s domestic
                         ii


cost cutoff and cost cutoff to export as well as σ.
    Integrating over the logged measured productivity of all non-exporters yields the average
non-exporter logged productivity:
                           Z 1
                                                                               tσ+1
                                                                                                                    
                  θ                                                                ii (s) + (σ − 1)tii (s)
                                      1−σ
                                                                  −σ
M PiN X
                                                        
          = θ                   log tii (s) − tii (s) − log tii (s) − 1                                       + log(wi )
              σ (1 − ξiθ ) t̃ii                                                                  σ
           σ+1                      θ−1
           tii (s) + (σ − 1)tii (s)       [(σ + 1)tσii (s) + σ − 1] dtii (s)
                           "                                     θ !                          #
                  θ                    σ θ t̃ii σ − 1 + (t̃ii )σ            NX
          = θ               log(wi )       −                           + βM  P,i (σ, θ, t̃ii )
              σ (1 − ξiθ )             θ                  θ

              c̃x      NX                                                         13
where ξi ≡ c̄iii and βM  P,i (σ, θ, t̃ii ) is a constant term given (σ, θ, t̃ii ).   See Appendix A.4 for the
closed form solution of this constant.
    To compute the equivalent moment for exporters, we rely on a similar change of variables.
For any destination υ, we introduce a mapping between tiυ (s) and tii (s) so as to be able to
integrate over tii (s) in every export destination υ as we did in the case of non-exporters above.
In equation (10), set ciυ = cii τiυ , then (1 − σ)tiυ (s) − tσ+1                                 σ+1
                                                                                                       τ c̄
                                                                  iυ (s) = (1 − σ)tii (s) − tii (s)            ,
                                                                                                          iυ i
                                                                                                          c̄υ
and this allows us to solve for tii (s). Therefore, we use the notation hiυ (tii (s)) to refer to the
implicit solution of hiυ (tii (s)) = tiυ (s). Integrating over the logged measured productivity of
  13
    The above integration requires the conditional distribution of tii . The following relates the cost distribution
                                   θ                                σ+1              θ−1
to the pdf of tii : dµii (c) = c̄i ĉc̄iii  θ
                                           σθ
                                              [(σ + 1)tσii + (σ − 1)] tii  + (σ − 1)tii      dtii .




                                                        14
all exporters yields the average exporter logged productivity:
                                        "         (                                                              )
                         Z       t̃ii
                 θ                                 X
M PiEXP                                                                      hiυ (tii (s))1−σ − hiυ (tii (s))
                                                                                                             
            =                               log          δiυ (s)χiυ Lυ
              (ξi σ)θ        0                       υ
                         (                                                                                                        )#
                          X                                                        hiυ (tii (s))σ+1 + (σ − 1)hiυ (tii (s))
                 − log                  δiυ (s)χiυ Lυ          hiυ (tii (s))−σ − 1
                                 υ
                                                                                                      σ
                                                                                                                                              θ
                                              θ−1                                                                   θ   t̃ii (σ − 1 + t̃σii )
                   tii (s)σ+1 + (σ − 1)tii (s)     [(σ + 1)tii (s)σ + σ − 1] dtii (s) +
                  
                                                                                                                                                 log(wi )
                                                                                                               (ξi σ)θ             θ
                   θ       EX
                                 
                                         I          I
                                                                            1                                        θ
            =          θ
                         β M P,i   {χij }j=1 , {Lj }j=1 , t̃ii , σ, θ   +                        t̃ii (σ − 1 + t̃σii ) log(wi )
                (ξi σ)                                                    (ξi σ)θ
                                                                                                                                                              
                  c̄j
where χij = and   c̄i
                              EX
                             βM P,i               {χij }Ij=1   , {Lj }Ij=1
                                           , t̃ii , σ, θ is a constant for given                                           {χij }Ij=1   , {Lj }Ij=1   , t̃ii , σ, θ .14
   Finally, the productivity moment is defined as:

                 m
                Mi,prod = M PiEXP − M PiN X
                              θ      EX
                                         
                                                     I         I
                                                                                     θ
                        =          β         {χ    }
                                                 ij j=1 , {L }     ,
                                                            j j=1 ii t̃ , σ, θ   − θ          β N X (σ, θ, t̃ii )
                          (ξi σ)θ M P,i                                           σ (1 − ξiθ ) M P,i
                                                θ
                           t̃ii (σ − 1 + t̃σii )                 1
                        +                    θ
                                                   log(wi ) −           log(wi )                                                               (21)
                                   θ
                             (ξi σ) (1 − ξi )                 1 − ξiθ

Sales Advantage. The second moment of interest is the domestic sales advantage of ex-
porters. BEJK report this statistic as the ratio between the average domestic sales of exporters
to non-exporters. Using equations (9) and (10), and integrating, yields the corresponding
statistic in the model:15
                    R t̃ii                                                                             θ−1
 m           1 − ξiθ 0 [tii (s)1−σ − tii (s)] [(σ + 1)tii (s)σ + (σ − 1)] [tii (s)σ+1 + (σ − 1)tii (s)] dtii (s)
Mi,sales   =        R1                                                                                           .
               ξiθ         [tii (s) 1−σ − t (s)] [(σ + 1)t (s)σ + (σ − 1)] [t (s)σ+1 + (σ − 1)t (s)]θ−1 dt (s)
                                           ii             ii                 ii                 ii         ii
                      t̃ii
                                                                                                                                               (22)

Notice that this expression also reduces to a constant characterized in terms of parameters
(σ, θ, t̃ii ).
    Having derived the two moments of interest from the model, we exactly identify {θ, σ}
by perfectly matching the two corresponding moments in US data: MUmS,sales = MUd S,sales and
MUmS,prod = MUd S,prod , where the superscript d denotes data.
    It is worth pointing out that neither of our two moments of interest depend on q̄ or fe as
                                                                                           
  14                                                 EX         I          I
     Although there is no closed form solution for βM P,i {χij }j=1 , {Lj }j=1 , t̃ii , σ, θ it can be solved numeri-
                                                                                             
                                                                  I          I
cally. The main takeaway here is that it depends only on {χij }j=1 , {Lj }j=1 , t̃ii , σ, θ .
  15
     For an explicit closed-form expression of this moment see Appendix A.4.


                                                                                15
can be seen from the moment equations derived above. This observation, together with the
observation made above that cost cutoffs (modulo proportionality constant) are independent
of these parameters, implies that we need not identify these two parameters in order to study
the moments of interest in this paper. It is for this reason that q̄, fe were not included in the
set of parameters Θ defined at the outset of this section.

3.1.2     Summary

In the quantitative section below, we demonstrate that the model can jointly reconcile the
sales and measured productivity advantage of exporters observed in the data. To evaluate
the importance of this flexibility, we then engage in two sets of exercises. First, we derive
aggregate pricing predictions from the model and compare them to data. Second, we derive the
theoretical welfare gains from trade from the model and we quantify them. Before proceeding to
the quantitative exercises, however, we discuss how the model relates to the existing literature.


4        Existing Variable Markup Models
In order to evaluate the contribution of the generalized CES model to the literature, we dis-
cuss key predictions from existing theories: Simonovska (2015) (SIM), Behrens et al. (2014)
(BMMS), and the separable-preference case of Melitz and Ottaviano (2008) (MO).16 We derive
the predictions within the general framework developed at the outset of the paper for compa-
rability. When framed as such, the models fit within the ACDR class of a strong CES import
demand system with a choke price. Along with the generalized CES framework, the three
existing models that we examine feature separable preferences, identical log-linear gravity and
market clearing equations, as well as identical choke prices (modulo proportionality constant).
Hence, the models’ welfare gains can be quantified by invoking theoretical results from ACDR.
    In general equilibrium, the existing models, alongside the generalized one, yield non-constant
demand elasticity along two dimensions. First, in a given destination, firms face heterogeneous
demand elasticities and therefore charge different markups depending on their productivity.
Second, for a given firm, there is markup variation across destination markets because a firm
faces different consumer willingness to pay. Therefore, these models produce an empirically-
relevant non-degenerate markup distribution and predict that firms engage in price discrimina-
tion across markets with different characteristics. The models’ prediction of price discrimination
is key because it represents a plausible explanation for the observation that tradable consump-
tion goods are more expensive in countries with higher per-capita income levels, as documented
    16
    This corresponds to MO preferences with η = 0. For completeness, we quantify the more general case where
η > 0 in Appendix E.


                                                    16
in Alessandria and Kaboski (2011).
    The distinctive feature of all three models is that preferences are non-homothetic. In par-
ticular, the marginal utility from consuming a good is bounded from above so that a consumer
does not have positive demand for all goods. There exists a reservation price at which firms see
zero demand. The reservation price is higher in richer markets, reflecting higher willingness to
pay. Demand elasticities directly reflect this reservation price and drive firms’ pricing behav-
ior. In richer countries, firms face lower demand elasticities, which allows them to raise their
price-cost margin.
    The prediction related to cross-country variation in prices, however, could also be derived
from respective counterparts to the models where firms are monopolistically competitive and
homogeneous in productivity.17 Firm productivity heterogeneity, therefore, enriches the pricing
predictions of these models in that it allows for a non-degenerate mark-up distribution across
firms within a country. In particular, the models predict that more productive firms enjoy
higher mark-ups relative to less productive ones, as documented in De Loecker and Warzynski
(2012). Mark-up differences, however, directly translate into differences in value added, and
consequently measured productivity, and sales across firms. It is these last two predictions of
these models that the existing literature has largely ignored.18
    Below we demonstrate that none of the existing models can simultaneously account for
the cross-sectional variation in firm sales and productivity. We focus on moments from the
distribution of sales and measured productivity per worker for US exporters and non-exporters
for a particular reason: these moments have been provided by BEJK and Bernard et al. (2012),
hence making it possible for us to use them as calibration targets in our quantitative analysis.
First, assuming that firm productivity is Pareto distributed, we show that, the distribution of
firm sales in all the models is characterized by the Pareto shape parameter alone. Second, we
show that the same holds true for the distribution of mark-ups. These two facts imply that
the distribution of measured productivity is also governed by the key Pareto shape parameter.
Hence, the three models can, at best, match moments from the distribution of firm measured
productivity or the distribution of firm sales, but they lack a degree of freedom to be able to
reconcile both. We quantify the implications of this limitation in Section 5.
  17
     See Bertoletti and Etro (2014) for a characterization of a wide class of monopolistically competitive models
with homogeneous firms, which includes the three utility parameterizations used in this paper.
  18
     Recently, ACDR point to these moments, but the authors do not evaluate the models’ quantitative fit to
data. In addition, BMMS examine the measured-productivity moment in their model.




                                                       17
4.1    Simonovska (2015)—SIM
Assume each country is populated by identical consumers of measure L, whose utility is:
                                                   Z
                                           c
                                         U =             log(q c (ω) + q̄)dω                  (23)
                                                   ω∈Ω


where q c (ω) is individual consumption of good ω, Ω is a compact set, and q̄ > 0 is a country-
aspecific constant. Notice that this is a special case of the general model in Section 2, which
occurs when σ → 1.
    To solve the model, we follow the same steps as for the general model above. The resulting
price, mark-up, and sales are:

                                                               1
                                    pij (cij ) = (cij c̄j ) 2                                 (24)
                                                   12
                                                    c̄j
                                    mij (cij ) =                                              (25)
                                                   cij
                                     rij (cij ) = Lj q̄ c̄j − (c̄j cij )1/2 .
                                                                           
                                                                                              (26)

To solve the model we calculate total sales and pin down the maximum cost allowed in order
to serve market j using the cost of the firm with zero demand:

                                           q̄Li fe−1
                                   Tij =               Lj ĉ−θ   θ+1
                                                            ij c̄j
                                       (θ + 1)(1 + 2θ)
                                                                             1
                                                                            θ+1
                                                        P wj θ 
                                       SIM −1  θ+1 1
                       c̄SIM
                         j     ≡ c̄j = fe βJ q̄               I      Lυ bυ
                                                                         υ=1 (τυj wυ )θ


                         2
where βJSIM = (1+2θ)(θ+1)
                    θ
                          . All else equal, a higher income raises the cutoff cost and prices/markups.
Clearly, the cost cutoff (modulo proportionality constant) is identical to the one for the gener-
alized model in expression (20).


4.2    Melitz and Ottaviano (2008) with η = 0—MO
The framework builds on Melitz and Ottaviano (2008) and, in particular, on the extension to
general equilibrium that is outlined in the Web Appendix of Simonovska (2015). Additionally,
we let η = 0, which makes the preference class separable. Assume that each country is populated
by identical consumers of measure L, whose utility function is:
                                     Z                             Z
                                              1
                               c
                             U =               c
                                     q (ω)dω − γ                         (q c (ω))2 dω,
                                 ω∈Ω          2                    ω∈Ω


                                                          18
where γ > 0 governs the degree of product differentiation between the varieties.
The resulting price, mark-up, and sales are:

                                                   1
                                       pij (cij ) =  (cij + c̄j )                        (27)
                                                   2             
                                                   1 cij + c̄j
                                      mij (cij ) =                                       (28)
                                                   2      cij
                                                    Lj
                                                          c̄2j − c2ij .
                                                                     
                                      rij (cij ) =                                       (29)
                                                   4c̄j γ

We refer to the Web Appendix of Simonovska (2015) for derivations of the positive relationship
between destination per-capita income and prices/markups.
   To solve the model we calculate total sales and the cost cutoffs, which are:

                                               Li fe−1 Lj c̄θ+1
                                                            j
                                 Tij =
                                        ĉθij 2γ(θ + 2)(θ + 1)
                                                                            1
                                                                           θ+1
                                                               P wj θ 
                                                           1
                        c̄M O
                                        M O  θ+1
                          j     ≡ c̄j = fe βJ 2γ                 I  Lυ bυ
                                                                υ=1 (τυj wυ )θ


where βjM O = (θ + 2)(θ + 1). Clearly, the cost cutoff (modulo proportionality constant) is
identical to the one for the generalized model from expression (20).


4.3    Behrens et al. (2014)—BMMS
Behrens et al. (2014) assume that each country is populated by identical consumers of measure
L, whose utility function is:
                                            Z
                                                               c
                                       c
                                                       1 − e−αq (ω) dω
                                                                  
                                     U =
                                              ω∈Ω


where α > 0 governs the degree of “love of variety.”




                                                       19
The resulting price, mark-up, and sales are:

                                                         c
                                         pij (cij ) =     ij                                              (30)
                                                           c
                                                        W c̄ijj e
                                                               1
                                        mij (cij ) =                                                      (31)
                                                                  cij
                                                        W         c̄j
                                                                      e
                                                                           
                                                                      cij
                                                     Lj     1 − W     c̄j
                                                                          e
                                        rij (cij ) =    cij              ,                                (32)
                                                     α            c
                                                              W c̄ijj e

                                                                                              
                                                                                       cij
where W denotes the Lambert W function with argument             .19 As in the generalized CES
                                                                                       c̄j
                                                                                           e
model, per-capita income is positively associated with prices and mark-ups (see Behrens et al.
(2014) for derivations).
   We follow Behrens et al. (2014) in order to derive closed form solutions of aggregates that
involve the Lambert function. We define the following change of variables:
                                                             
                                                      cii                 cii
                                         z≡W              e       ⇒           e = zez .
                                                      c̄i                 c̄i

Then cij = c̄j zij ezij −1 and dcij = (ezij −1 c̄j ) (1 + zij )dzij with integration bounds between 0 and
1. Incorporating this change of variable and solving for the free entry measure of entrants we
obtain total sales and cutoffs:
                                                                           Z 1
             Lj       −1            θ+1 −θ                          −(θ+1)
       Tij =     Li fe κ1 (θ) (c̄j ) ĉij , where κ1 (θ) = θe                  (z −1 − z − 1 + z 2 )(zez )θ ez dz
              α                                                             0
                                                        1
                                                       θ+1
                             1
    BM M S              αfe θ+1         wj
  c̄j      ≡ c̄j =                   PI      Lυ bθυ
                                                      
                      κ1 (θ)                        θ
                                        υ=1 (τυj wυ )


Clearly, the cost cutoff (modulo proportionality constant) is identical to the one for the gener-
alized model from expression (20).


4.4        Firm Sales and Markup Distribution
In this section, we show that the sales and markup distributions in the three models outlined
above depend only on the parameter θ (the dispersion parameter of the Pareto productivity
distribution), which makes it impossible for any of the three models to jointly match empirical
moments from the sales and productivity distributions.
  19
       The Lambert function is defined as ϕ = W (ϕ)eW (ϕ) .


                                                              20
    We follow Arkolakis (2010) and Eaton et al. (2011) and examine the (normalized) sales of a
                                                                                 R c̄
firm from country i in destination j, relative to the average sales there, r̄ij = 0 j rij (c)dµij (c):20
                                                             
                                                        cij            rij (cij )
                                               r̃                 =
                                                        c̄j            r̄ij (c̄j )

The normalized firm-level sales for the three models are:
                                                       12 !
                     c ij                           c ij                                                              cij
        r̃SIM        SIM
                             = (1 + 2θ) 1 − SIM                                                            if 0 ≤           ≤1     (33)
                   c̄j                            c̄j                                                               c̄SIM
                                                                                                                      j
                                                   2 !
                      c ij     θ +  2          c ij                                                                    cij
          r̃M O M O =                   1 − MO                                                             if 0 ≤          ≤1      (34)
                    c̄j          2           c̄j                                                                     c̄M
                                                                                                                       j
                                                                                                                         O

                                                      !                    
                                           cij                         
                   cij           1  W c̄BM     M S e −1             cij                                            cij
   r̃BM M S                  =         e   j
                                                           −                                           if 0 ≤              ≤ 1,   (35)
               c̄BM
                 j
                       MS
                               κ2 (θ)                            c̄BM
                                                                   j
                                                                       MS
                                                                                                                 c̄BM
                                                                                                                   j
                                                                                                                      MS



                         R1
where κ2 (θ) = θe−(θ+1) 0 (z −1 − z)(zez )θ ez dz is a positive constant that depends only on θ.
Notice that in all three cases, sales are increasing, concave in firm productivity (inverse of
cost), and bounded from above.21 Furthermore, the normalized firm-level sales are once again
neither source nor destination specific since cost draws relative to cutoffs, cij /c̄j , lie between 0
and 1. For this reason there are no country subscripts on the normalized firm sales.
    Using these expressions for normalized sales, we derive the distributions of (normalized)
firm sales following the steps from Eaton et al. (2011). The distribution is:
                                                                                              θ
                                                     min                                 cij
                                 P r[R̃≥ r̃|R̃≥ r̃         ] = 1 − F (r̃) =                         ,                              (36)
                                                                                         c̄j

where r̃min = r̃(c̄j /c̄j ) and F is the distribution of r̃. Therefore, for each model we can derive
the distribution of normalized sales as:
                                                 2θ
                      SIM                    r̃
                   F      (r̃) = 1 − 1 −
                                          2θ + 1
                                                θ
                     MO                     2r̃ 2
                    F (r̃) = 1 − 1 −
                                          θ+2
                                    "                                            −θ #
                                                              1
                 F BM M S (r̃) = 1 − (r̃κ2 (θ))θ                                −1      ,
                                                   W ([1 − F BM M S (r̃)]1/θ e)
  20
     rij (c) are model-specific firm revenues. For the SIM, MO, and BMMS models they are given by (26), (29),
and (32) respectively.
  21
     In the three cases, cij = c̄j yields zero sales and cij → 0 yields positive but finite sales.



                                                                  21
where the last expression constitutes an implicit function. Notice that these distributions are
a function solely of the parameter θ. Although there is no closed form solution for the BMMS
distribution, it is evident that it is implicitly defined as a function of θ.
    A similar result applies for the markup distributions. Using the definitions for firm-level
markups given above for all three models, the average markup in each model is:

                                                                        θ
                                                         m̄SIM =
                                                                    θ − 0.5
                                                                    θ − 0.5
                                                          m̄M O   =
                                                                     θ−1
                                                       m̄BM M S   = κ2 (θ)
                  
             cij
Let m̃       c̄j
                       be the markup relative to the mean markup. Its distribution in each model is:

                                                                −2θ
                               SIM                     θ − 0.5
                             Γ        (m̃) = 1 −
                                                         θm̃
                                                              −θ
                                 MO             2θ − 1
                              Γ (m̃) = 1 −             m̃ − 1
                                                 θ−1
                                                                                     θ
                             BM M S              W ([1−ΓBM M S (m̃)]1/θ e)−1  1     1
                           Γ        (m̃) = 1 − e                                             ,
                                                                              m̃  κ2 (θ)

where once again the only parameter that governs the distributions is θ.
    The two sets of distributions derived above demonstrate the limitations of the existing
models: they are not flexible enough to jointly reconcile moments from the distribution of firm
sales and measured productivity. Due to space constraints, we relegate derivations of the two
moments that characterize the exporter sales and measured productivity advantage for each
model to Appendices B-D.


4.5      Linear Demand with Non-Separable Preferences
Before proceeding to the quantitative analysis, we discuss the non-separable version of the MO
model, namely the case in which η > 0. We outline the model, derive moments so as to identify
the model’s parameters, and report quantitative results in Appendix E. We show that the model
is able to jointly match the sales and the measured productivity advantage of exporters in US
data. The reason behind this flexibility is the following: while the model generates identical
functional forms for the distributions of firm sales and mark-ups as its restricted counterpart,
the general model yields different cost cutoff expressions. In fact, the cost cutoffs are no longer
solely characterized by “macro variables” and θ as was the case for all the other models that


                                                                  22
we examine in this paper (including the generalized CES model). In the non-separable MO
model, η > 0 affects the relative cutoffs across destinations, thus yielding a flexible number of
exporters and non-exporters. The implication is the following: a value of θ and a value of η
can reconcile the measured productivity advantage of exporters as well as the sales advantage
by adjusting relative cutoffs rather than the curvature of the sales distribution.
    While this added flexibility of the model is a desirable feature in theory, we show that,
in order for the model to match the moments in US data, it would require an unreasonably
high fraction of exporters—in fact, it would predict that exporters are in the majority, which
is not in line with data. In addition, the model would predict an extremely high level of price
discrimination and an extremely low variance in sales, whose distribution is still governed by
the Pareto shape parameter. As we demonstrate below, the separable non-homothetic models
quantitatively outperform this non-separable framework along all dimensions in the data.


5     Quantitative Analysis
In this section, we report the quantitative fit of the four separable models and we discuss the
welfare implications.


5.1     Data
                                                                                                    X
We use data on 71 countries for the year 2004. We construct bilateral trade shares, λij = Yijj , us-
ing nominal trade flows Xij and gross output, adjusted for trade imbalances Yj 22 , from UNIDO.
To estimate parameters from the gravity equation, we use country-pair gravity variables from
CEPII. The Penn World Table (PWT) 8.0 provides our variable L, population.
    We also rely on two moments that characterize firm behavior: US exporter sales advantage in
the domestic market, which is 4.8 according to BEJK, and US exporter measured productivity
advantage (in logs), which is 33 percent according to BEJK. These two moments serve to
identify the two parameters that govern the size and productivity distribution of firms (θ, σ).


5.2     Results
The quantitative results for the generalized CES model verify our claim that adding curvature
to the demand function (relative to the SIM benchmark), or allowing σ to be greater than one,
is necessary to jointly match the two firm-level moments of interest. Notice that σ affects the
size distribution of firms by varying the substitution across goods. As σ increases, the market
  22
     For each country, this corresponds to gross manufacturing production minus manufacturing exports (in the
sample) plus manufacturing imports (in the sample) to j.


                                                     23
power of each firm is smaller, and more productive firms gain sales relative to less productive
firms as consumers do not value variety as much. The Pareto shape parameter determines the
variability in firm productivity, so a lower θ (more variance) raises the measured productivity
advantage of more productive firms.

                                   Table 1: Moments and Parameters

  Model                           Data/Targets                 σ       θ          Simulated Moment

  Generalized CES         Msales = 4.80, Mprod = 0.33 1.41           1.92 Msales = 4.80, Mprod = 0.33
  SIM (MP)                         Mprod = 0.33                1     2.11    Msales   = 4.16,   Mprod   = 0.33
  SIM (SA)                         Msales = 4.80               1     3.33    Msales   = 4.80,   Mprod   = 0.20
  MO (η = 0) (MP)                  Mprod = 0.33                –     2.44    Msales   = 3.04,   Mprod   = 0.33
  MO (η = 0) (SA)                  Msales = 4.80               –     6.46    Msales   = 4.80,   Mprod   = 0.10
  BMMS (MP)                        Mprod = 0.33                –     2.37    Msales   = 3.47,   Mprod   = 0.33
  BMMS (SA)                        Msales = 4.80               –     5.09    Msales   = 4.80,   Mprod   = 0.13

    Table 1 displays the calibrated parameter values for all the separable models. For the
existing models, we calibrate θ to match either the measured productivity advantage (MP) or
the sales advantage of exporters (SA). We demonstrated theoretically that it is impossible to
match both moments with the same value for θ. In the second row of the table, we successfully
match only the productivity advantage in the SIM model with a θ close to the general model.
In the third row, for a higher value of the Pareto shape parameter, the sales advantage is
attainable but at the cost of a very low productivity advantage.
    The separable MO and BMMS models behave qualitatively similarly to the SIM model, but
there are notable quantitative differences.23 Having reconciled the productivity advantage, the
two models struggle more to generate a dispersion in sales. Notice that, when the SIM model
matches the measured productivity dispersion, it generates a sales dispersion that falls only
somewhat short of the moment observed in the data. This is further confirmed by the fact that
the generalized CES model requires a value for σ that is only 40% higher than unity to match
the sales advantage in the data, conditional on matching the measured productivity with a
value for the Pareto shape parameter of 1.92, which is only slightly below the 2.11 value that
the SIM model requires.
  23
    The value of the Pareto parameter that we obtain is lower than in Behrens et al. (2014) who calibrate it
to be 8.5. Our strategies are different in terms of the sample of countries used, wages (they use labor income
share for gross output), and, most importantly, trade cost specification: Behrens et al. (2014) posit that trade
costs are symmetric.




                                                      24
5.3     Model Predictions and Fit to Data
Given that the general model is consistent with the cross-sectional observations on firm pro-
ductivity and sales, we also test how the model fits other aspects of the data. Throughout, we
maintain a comparison to the fit of the restricted models under the two values for θ reported
above. We examine the following moments in the data: i) percentage of US firms that export,
ii) the export intensity of exporting firms, iii) the standard deviation in log domestic sales,
iv) the elasticity of prices of tradables with respect to per capita income, and v) the average
markup.

5.3.1   Exporting Firms

The first prediction that we examine is the fraction of firms that export. Bernard et al. (2012)
report that in 2002, 18% of American manufacturing firms exported, and BEJK report this
number to be 21% in 1992 data. In our model, there are two determinants of export entry:
i) iceberg trade barriers raise the cost to serve foreign markets and ii) destination specific
aggregates determine the cutoff cost to sell in each country. The fraction of firms that export
is given by the following equation:

                                           m         (c̃xii )θ
                                          Mi,ex =              ,                              (37)
                                                     (c̄i )θ

where the numerator is the familiar cost cutoff for firms from country i that serve at least one
export destination j. We are interested in the relative cutoffs of the US and its easiest exporting
destination, which corresponds to Canada in the simulated models.

                               Table 2: US Exporters, % of Total

              Model                  Data      σ           θ       % of Firms that Export

              Generalized CES      18-21%    1.41       1.92               41.4%
              SIM (M P )           18-21%      1        2.11               42.7%
              SIM (SA)             18-21%      1        3.33               49.2%
              MO (η = 0) (MP)      18-21%      –        2.44               44.8%
              MO (η = 0) (SA)      18-21%      –        6.46               57.1%
              BMMS (MP)            18-21%      –        2.37               44.4%
              BMMS (SA)            18-21%      –        5.09               54.5%




                                                25
    Table 2 presents the results for the four models along with the data. The generalized CES
model and the restricted models, under the MP parameterization, predict a very similar frac-
tion of exporters, which is below 50%—hence, exporters are in the minority as documented
in BEJK.24 The small difference in the values of the last column are solely attributed to the
(relatively) small difference in the Pareto shape parameter across the calibrated models. How-
ever, when the restricted models fit the sales advantage moment, they severely overpredict the
fraction of exporters, which is problematic.

5.3.2     Export Intensity

BEJK report that even the small fraction of firms that do export sell mostly at home. To
evaluate the models’ predictions along this dimension, for US exporters, we also compute the
fraction of total firm sales that are exported and call this the export intensity:
                                                                     1−σ
                                             P
                                              υ6=i δiυ (s)c̄υ Lυ q̄(tiυ (s) − tiυ (s))
                             EXIN Ti (s) =   PI                      1−σ
                                              υ=1 δiυ (s)c̄υ Lυ q̄(tiυ (s) − tiυ (s))


with firms indexed by s. Then, as in BEJK, we measure the percentage of exporters that fall
into certain ranges of export intensity.

                  Table 3: % of Exporting Plants Conditional on Export Intensity

        Exp. Intensity (%)    Data (%)   General CES     SIM (MP)     MO (η = 0) (MP)    BMMS (MP)
               0-10              66         88.3            85.9           79.5            82.2
               10-20             16         11.4            13.7           20.0            17.3
              20-30             7.7          0.1             0.2            0.1             0.2
              30-40             4.4          0.1             0.1            0.1             0.1
              40-50             2.4          0.1             0.1            0.1             0.1
              50-60             1.5           0               0             0.1             0.1
              60-100            2.8           0               0             0.1              0



    In Table 3, we report the moments in the data and the models. We condition on only
exporting firms and split export intensity into deciles in order to measure the percentage of
firms that fall within a certain range of export intensity. For example, the first row shows that
in the generalized CES model 88.3% of exporting firms have export revenue that is less than
10% of their total revenue. In the simulated generalized CES model, there are many very small
exporting firms, more-so than in the data. Part of this is due to the fact that trade costs are
large when θ is only 1.92. This increases the difference between the domestic cutoff cost and
the cutoff for exporting. Still, we are able to pick up the small number of exporters that have
  24
    All four models overpredict the fraction of exporters. Similarly, BEJK find that their calibrated model
overpredicts the fraction of exporters—the authors obtain a value of 51%.

                                                       26
a very large export intensity in the lower rows. 0.1% of the simulated exporters have an export
intensity between 40-50%, and none greater than 50%.
    Reducing σ can also reduce the fraction of exporters with very low export intensity because
with less substitution there is a lower sales advantage for the very productive firms. When
σ = 1, the value in the first row of the fourth column decreases, although by little. The
separable MO and BMMS models show little bit better predictions for the portion of exporters
with higher export intensity. All the separable models that match the SA moment yield similar
numbers but exhibit higher weight on lower export intensities.

5.3.3   Variability of Domestic Sales

We compute the standard deviation of the log of normalized domestic sales.      Log (normalized)
domestic sales are firm domestic sales relative to total domestic sales: log riiTii(s) (as given by
(9) and (12)). Tii is constant (as shown in Section 2), so the standard deviation of log domestic
sales relative to total domestic sales is equivalent to the standard deviation of log domestic sales,
but the normalization allows us to compute the desired statistics without having to calibrate
additional parameters from the models.
    For the generalized CES model, the value amounts to 1.26, which falls somewhat short of
the statistic in the US in 1992 of 1.67, as reported in BEJK. Similarly, BEJK struggle to match
this statistic using the model that they develop. As in BEJK, higher values of σ raise the sales
variance, but they also raise the sales advantage of exporters relative to non-exporters. To the
extent that we discipline the model along the second dimension, we fall short along the first.
    In the SIM model, the statistics are comparable and amount to 1.20 (MP) and 1.22 (SA).
The values are considerably lower in the remaining separable models. The standard deviations
of log domestic sales in the MO model are 1.04 (MP) and 1.17 (SA), whereas in BMMS they
are 1.10 (MP) and 1.19 (SA).

5.3.4   Prices and Income

An important aspect of the data that the models analyzed in this paper attempt to explain
is price dispersion across markets. A major feature of variable markup models is that they
can explain a large portion of the variation in the prices of identical tradable goods (see the
discussion in Simonovska (2015)). In particular, as argued in previous sections, the models
yield a positive relationship between prices and per-capita income of destinations. Below,
we quantify this relationship and we compare the findings to those that we obtain from two
commonly-employed price datasets.
    To begin, we investigate the relationship between price and income in the data using prices


                                                 27
reported by the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) and the International Comparison Program
(ICP). The EIU reports prices of 110 goods sold in all the countries in our sample. The EIU
surveys the prices of individual goods across various cities in two types of retail stores: mid-
priced, or branded stores, and supermarkets, or chain stores. The dataset contains the nominal
prices of goods and services, reported in local currency, as well as nominal exchange rates
relative to the US dollar, which are recorded at the time of the survey. While in the majority
of the countries, price surveys are conducted in a single major city, in 17 of the 71 countries
multiple cities are surveyed. For these countries, we use the price data from the city which
provided the maximum coverage of goods. In most instances, the location that satisfied this
requirement was the largest city in the country.
    For comparison, we also examine prices from the ICP. The ICP collects price data on goods
with identical characteristics across retail locations in 123 countries during the 2003-2005 period.
The basic-heading level represents a narrowly-defined group of goods for which expenditure data
are available. The data set contains a total of 129 basic headings, which include goods and
services. We employ a subsample of 62 tradable categories in order to maintain consistency
with the models’ assumption that all products are potentially tradable.25 For both datasets,
we construct price indices by taking a geometric average across goods within a country, where
all individual good prices are normalized relative to the US.
    We follow a similar strategy to generate price indices from the models. However, before
constructing price indices, we need to simulate individual good prices. We proceed by following
a simulation and sampling methodology introduced by Simonovska and Waugh (2014a), which
aims to replicate steps taken to construct the ICP database. In particular, we construct a set
of “common” goods and then we draw 100 random samples of 110 products from the set. We
compute relative prices and geometric average price indices for each sample and we plot the
mean index across all 100 samples for each country. What remains is to discuss the definition of
a “common” good. We define a good to be “common” if it appears in at least 30 destinations—
nearly half the destinations used in our analysis. Since each good is produced by a single firm,
this rule implies that we consider firms that serve at least 30 destinations. The motivation to
follow this rule is that Eaton et al. (2004) report that only 1.5% of exporters serve more than
50 destinations but many exporters (20%) serve at least 10 destinations. We choose a value in
the middle that would still include a significant number of exporters.
    Figure 1 illustrates the geometric price index, plotted against per capita income, in the data
and in the four simulated models, when the Pareto shape parameter is calibrated to match the
measured productivity moment. In the EIU data (with 71 countries), the slope of the best fit
  25
    For more detailed information about the ICP data, see the discussions in Simonovska and Waugh (2014a)
and Deaton and Heston (2010).



                                                   28
                         Figure 1: Geometric Mean of Relative Prices versus Income per Capita

                                                            Price-Income: EIU Data                                                                                      Price-Income: ICP Data


                          2.5




                                                                                                                                     2.5
                          2




                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ISL
              Geometric Price Index




                                                                                                                          Geometric Price Index
                                                                                                  JPN                                                                                                             JPNNOR
                           1.5




                                                                                                                                       1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  FINCHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    IRL
                                                                                                  FRA  NOR
                                                                                                     DNK                                                                                AGO             GNQ NZL    SWE
                                                                                                      CHE
                                                                                                     ISL                                                                                            GAB         ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                  COM                        CYP  BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 AUS
                                                                        CIV                 KOR    AUT
                                                                                                   GBR
                                                                                                   FIN                                                                      CAF                            KOR   FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                             GRCDEU
                                                                                                    SWE
                                                                                                     IRL                                                                                COGCPV              PRT
                                                                      NGA           RUS           DEU
                                                                                                   BEL                                                                              STP        NAM            ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ISR
                                                                                                                                                                                               FJI TURHRV SVN
                                                                              CHN                   USA                                                                        TCD DJI
                                                                                                                                                                                     CIV                           USA
                  1




                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                              ISR AUS
                                                                                                NZL
                                                                                                 ITA                                                                  COD    GNB
                                                                                                                                                                             TGOZMB
                                                                                                                                                                                  LSOCMR SWZ VEN   BWAEST
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ZAF
                                                                                                ESP                                                                                 SEN
                                                                                                                                                                           RWA MLINGA
                                                                                                                                                                          MWI              MARTUN  LBN
                                                                                                                                                                                                     POL
                                                                                                                                                                                                    CHL HUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                         CZE BRN
                                                                 CAF SEN      JOR
                                                                        AZE MAR
                                                                                     TUR
                                                                               IRN ZAF
                                                                                       MEXCZE
                                                                                               GRC
                                                                                             PRT  CAN                                                                  BDI MOZBEN GHA
                                                                                                                                                                                 SDN         PER
                                                                                                                                                                                                BRA
                                                                                                                                                                                               ROU
                                                                                                                                                                                             BIH
                                                                                                                                                                                             COL URY
                                                                                                                                                                                                   MUSSVK
                                                                                                                                                                                                    LVA
                                                                                                                                                                                                      MEX
                                                                                                                                                                                                     LTU SAU
                                                                                                                                                                                                        OMN
                                                            ETH                       POLSAU                                                                                  BFA MRT CHN
                                                                                                                                                                                KEN         JOR
                                                                                                                                                                                             ECU
                                                                                                                                                                                             MKD      MYS
                                                                    VNM IDNUKR ECU
                                                                                COL
                                                                                 BGR     OMN BRN
                                                                                       SVK
                                                                                        MYS
                                                                                         HUN                                                                                  GMB
                                                                                                                                                                             TZA
                                                                                                                                                                            UGAGIN     ARM THARUS
                                                                                                                                                                                      LKA
                                                                                                                                                                                       GEO
                                                                                                                                                                                       IDN
                                                                                                                                                                                       PHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                               BGR
                                                                   KEN         PER
                                                                                 TUN
                                                                                  ROUCHL                                                                               ETH NPL LAO
                                                                                                                                                                                 VNM
                                                                                                                                                                                   MDA BTN
                                                                                                                                                                                      AZE     KAZ
                                                                   ZMB     SYR THA VEN
                                                                                  BRA
                                                                                   URY                                                                                        BGD
                                                                                                                                                                               KGZ
                                                                                                                                                                             TJK  PAK  PRY
                                                                                                                                                                                   INDBOL
                                                                                                                                                                                        SYR BLR
                                                                                                                                                                                       EGY
                                                                         EGY
                          .5




                                                                                                                                     .5
                                                                NPL IND LKA     KAZARG                                                                                                  UKR IRN
                                                                     PAK PHL
                                                                          PRY
                          0




                                                                                                                                     0
                                         -8           -6            -4            -2            0            2                                      -8           -6            -4            -2            0                  2
                                                           Log Income per Capita relative to US                                                                       Log Income per Capita relative to US


                                              Price-Income: General Model (30 destinations)                                                                Price-Income: SIM Model (30 destinations)
                          2.5




                                                                                                                                      2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NZL        FIN




                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ISL
                          2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                AUS
              Geometric Price Index




                                                                                                                           Geometric Price Index
                                                                                                    NZL                                                                                                                NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AUTKOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     IRL




                                                                                                                                          1.5
                                                                                       ISL AUS            KOR                                                                                                           JPN
                                                                                                         JPN
                           1.5




                                                                                                         FIN                                                                                                  MYS           BEL
                                                                                                          SWE CHE                                                                                                       DEU
                                                                                                NOR
                                                                                                MYS DNK
                                                                                                      AUT                                                                                                             FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                URY ARG HUN CZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ITA
                                                                                  URY ARG                                                                                                        CHL SVK
                                                                                   CHL      HUN       IRLDEU BEL
                                                                                              CZE ITACAN                                                                                                   ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                     PRT THA
                                                                            PER        PRT
                                                                                        SVKTHA         FRA                                                                                 BRN     ZAF

                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                     ZAF     ESP                                                                                                            USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                    BRA ISR GBR
                                                                              BRN
                                                                        VEN MEX                                                                                                          PER    GRC
                                                                                      BRA     USA
                  1




                                                                   COL PHLSAUBGR  GRC
                                                                                    IDN                                                                                                    SAUBGR RUS
                                                                                                                                                                                     VEN MEX        POL
                                                                                      POL ISR GBR                                                                                  OMN             UKR
                                                                                                                                                                                                  IDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                  TUR
                                                                 ECUCIVOMN TUN ROU TUR
                                                                                     UKR
                                                                                    RUS                                                                                          CIV KAZ
                                                                                                                                                                                COL       TUN ROU
                                                                                                                                                                                        PHL
                                                                   PRYMAR                                                                                                     ECU
                                                                                                                                                                                PRY                  CHN
                                                                                                                                                                                    MAR
                                                                                                                          .5
                                                                          KAZ          CHN                                                                                        JOR
                                                                                                                                                                                    LKAVNM
                                                                     JOR
                                                                       LKAVNM
                                                                                                                                                                           IRN EGY PAK
                                                              IRN EGY PAK
                          .5




                                                       SEN
                                                      CAF                                                                                                         CAF
                                                                                                                                                                   SEN SYR
                                                                                                                                                                  ZMB
                                                                                                                                                                 NPL
                                                                                                                                                                 KEN                 IND
                                                      ZMB SYR
                                                     NPL                IND                                                                                        AZE
                                                     KEN
                                                       AZE                                                                                         ETH
                                        ETH                                                                                                         NGA
                                                                                                                                      0




                                         NGA
                          0




                                           -8          -6          -4             -2            0            2                                        -8          -6          -4             -2            0                  2
                                                   Log Income per Capita relative to US (calibrated)                                                          Log Income per Capita relative to US (calibrated)


                                      Price-Income: Separable BMMS Model (30 destinations)                                                         Price-Income: Separable MO Model (30 destinations)
                    2.5




                                                                                                                                 2.5
                    2




                                                                                                                                 2
          Geometric Price Index




                                                                                                                      Geometric Price Index
                       1.5




                                                                                                                                   1.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FIN
                                                                                                 NZL       FIN                                                                                            NZL
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ISL         SWE CHE
                                                                                         ISL AUS            SWE CHE                                                                                   AUS NOR CAN
                                                                                                   NOR CAN KOR                                                                                                    IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AUTKOR
                                                                                                       DNK
                                                                                                        IRL
                                                                                                        AUTJPN                                                                                                       JPN BEL
                                                                                                   MYS                                                                                                      MYS      DEU
                                                                                    URY   ARG HUN
                                                                                                CZE        DEU BEL
                                                                                                         FRA                                                                                  URY         CZE ITA FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ARG HUN
                                                                                     CHL SVKTHAUSA ITA                                                                                         CHLPRT
                                                                                                                                                                                                   SVK ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ISRUSAGBR
              1




                                                                                                                          1




                                                                              BRN        PRT ESP
                                                                                        BRA
                                                                                       ZAF    ISR GBR                                                                                    BRN
                                                                                                                                                                                              GRC BRA THA
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ZAF
                                                                                   GRC
                                                                              SAU BGR RUS                                                                                                SAUBGR
                                                                                                                                                                                       PER      RUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                  POL
                                                                      OMN PER          UKR
                                                                                        POL
                                                                                      IDN                                                                                        OMN             UKR
                                                                                                                                                                                                IDN
                                                                   PRY    KAZMEX ROU TURCHN
                                                                        VEN                                                                                                          KAZMEX ROU TUR
                                                                                                                                                                                   VEN TUN
                                                                 ECUCIV
                                                                   COL      TUN
                                                                           PHL                                                                                                 CIV
                                                                                                                                                                              PRY
                                                                                                                                                                            ECU       PHL          CHN
                                                                       LKA
                                                                       MAR
                                                                     JOR  VNM                                                                                                 COL MAR
                                                                                                                                                                                JOR
                                                                                                                                                                                  LKAVNM
                                                              IRN EGY PAK                                                                                                IRN EGY PAK
                                                     CAF
                    .5




                                                                                                                                 .5




                                                      SEN               IND                                                                                      CAF
                                                                                                                                                                  SEN
                                                      AZE SYR
                                                     ZMB
                                                    NPL                                                                                                          ZMB SYR
                                                                                                                                                                NPL                IND
                                                    KEN                                                                                                         KEN
                                                                                                                                                                  AZE
                                       ETH
                                        NGA                                                                                                        ETH
                                                                                                                                                    NGA
                    0




                                                                                                                                 0




                                          -8          -6          -4             -2            0             2                                       -8           -6          -4             -2            0                 2
                                                  Log Income per Capita relative to US (calibrated)                                                           Log Income per Capita relative to US (calibrated)




line is a statistically significant 0.11 (standard deviation, 0.015). For robustness, in the top
right plot, we show results obtained from the ICP database, which samples a different set of
goods than the EIU one and covers a broader set of countries (123 in total). The price-income
relationship is almost identical to the one in the EIU data, with the slope of the line of best
fit being equal to 0.10 (standard deviation, 0.011). We simulate the models and compute price
indices for the set of countries covered in the EIU database. The generalized CES model yields
a (statistically significant) slope of 0.12 (standard deviation, 0.009), while its more restricted
counterpart yields a coefficient of 0.17 (standard deviation, 0.011), under the calibration that
targets measured-productivity. Similarly, the BMMS model yields a slope of 0.10 (standard
deviation, 0.006), while the separable MO model yields a slope of 0.11 (standard deviation,


                                                                                                                 29
0.006).26 Hence, the models behave similarly along this dimension and are quantitatively in
line with the data.

5.3.5    Average Markups

The average markup is another important price statistic emphasized by the empirical trade
and macro literature. Jaimovich and Floetotto (2008) conduct a survey of the literature and
document that the average markup found using value added data is in the range of 20-40%.
We compute the average markup on domestic sales for domestic firms in our simulation as
R c̄i pii (cii )
 0       cii
                 dµii (c). Although we use only domestic firms27 , the average is not source-specific so
this number would not change if foreign firms were included.
      In the generalized CES model, the average markup of producers selling domestically amounts
to 31%, which lies in the middle of the range provided by Jaimovich and Floetotto (2008).
In the restricted counterpart, the average markups are 31% and 18% for the MP and SA
calibrations, respectively. Hence, when the restricted model’s parameters are calibrated to
match the measured-productivity advantage of exporters, the model yields a comparable average
mark-up to the generalized counterpart. As in De Loecker and Warzynski (2012), exporters
have higher markups than non-exporters. The relative markups of exporters to non-exporters
amount to 5.7 in the generalized CES model and in the restricted model they amount to roughly
6.4 between the two calibration strategies.
      In the remaining two models, the average level of mark-ups is more sensitive to the calibra-
tion of choice. In the BMMS model, the mark-ups are 32% (MP) and 12% (SA), respectively.
In the separable MO model that matches the productivity advantage moment the mark-up is
35%, however the mark-up drops to a mere 9% in the alternative calibration. Hence, the three
separable models yield average mark-ups that are in line with data when their parameters are
calibrated to match the measured-productivity moments, but they predict significantly lower
mark-ups under the alternative calibration strategy. The sensitivity of the average mark-up to
the calibration strategy of choice appears to be lowest for the SIM model.


5.4     Welfare
Having demonstrated the quantitative fit of the models, we turn to evaluate the predicted
welfare gains from trade. We view this exercise as quantifying the cost of tractability: namely,
  26
     When the models’ parameters are calibrated to match the sales advantage moment, the price elasticities are
0.13 (0.005), 0.06 (0.002), and 0.06 (0.002) for the SIM, MO, and BMMS models, respectively, where standard
deviations are in parentheses.
  27
     Domestic firms are the basis for the markup estimates in Basu and Fernald (1997), Hall (1988), Roeger
(1995), Norrbin (1993) (US), and Martins et al. (1996) (OECD).



                                                      30
the mismeasurement in welfare that would occur by relying on a model that lacks the flexibility
to reconcile salient features of the data.
    An advantage of all the models analyzed in this paper, including the generalized CES model
with an unbounded Pareto productivity distribution, is that they fit within the class of models
studied by Arkolakis et al. (2015) (ACDR). We can therefore refer to their welfare results
for a large change in trade costs and provide a quantitative assessment using our parameter
estimates. An intuitive statistic that we will report is the consumer welfare gain with current
domestic expenditure shares relative to a country in autarky. We interpret this statistic as
representing the welfare gains of moving away from autarky and toward the trade equilibrium
in year 2004. We follow ACDR and compute the following welfare gains from trade:
                                                          1− ρ /θ
                                                      1 ( 1+θ )
                                                 
                                       ∆Wj =                       − 1,                                   (38)
                                                     λjj

where λjj is the domestic expenditure share in the data. ρ stands for the weighted average
markup elasticity with respect to marginal cost (or one minus the price-cost pass through
elasticity).28
    Therefore, what remains is to characterize ρ in the models. In the generalized CES model,
markups are the implicit solution to the following function:

                                H(mij , cij ) = (1 − σ)mij + σ − mσ+1 σ
                                                                  ij vij ,

                                                                                                       dmij
where vij ≡ cij /c̄j and mij is the mark-up. The implicit function theorem implies that                dvij
                                                                                                              =
   σmσ+1  σ−1
      ij vij
(1−σ)−(σ+1)mσ
                 . The Pareto assumption guarantees that markup elasticities do not depend on
                 σ
             ij vij
the source. Following ACDR, we compute ρ as the expenditure weighted average of the markup
elasticity. Let i = j = U S since we use moments from US data. The expenditure weight for
                                                                         rii (v)
each firm is its domestic sales relative to total domestic sales: R 1 r (v)dµ           . We then define
                                                                   0 ii        ii (v)dv
the average markup elasticity:
                              R1h                         i
                                0
                                            σ
                                    (σ+1)+(σ−1)m−σ v −σ
                                                              mv [m−σ v −σ − 1] v θ−1 dv
                         ρ=               R1                                                              (39)
                                           0
                                               mv [m−σ v −σ − 1] v θ−1 dv

Since the markup elasticity is not source-specific, we can calculate the average weighted elas-
ticity using only domestic producers (taking the average markups of their domestic sales).
In Appendix F, we apply a similar procedure to compute the corresponding elasticity in the
  28
    We can set their β parameter, which represents the difference between the total price elasticity and cross-
price elasticity, equal to 0 in the additively separable cases.



                                                       31
remaining models.

                                Table 4: Welfare Parameters and Gains from Trade
                                                            ρ
 Model                           θ         ρ       (1 −    1+θ
                                                               )     ∆Wj in US             Average ∆Wj in all
                                                                     (relative to autarky) countries (relative to autarky)

 Generalized CES               1.92      0.41          0.86          4.0%                                16%
 SIM (M P )                    2.11       0.5          0.84          3.5%                                14%
 MO (η = 0, M P )              2.44      0.65          0.81          2.9%                                11.5%
 BMMS (M P )                   2.37        1           0.70          2.6%                                10%


Welfare results are calculated using expression (38). For the average across all countries we drop 6 countries with predicted gains of over 100%:
Azerbaijan, Central African Republic, Ethiopia, Nigeria, Senegal, and Zambia, so that they do not over-influence the result.




    Table 4 displays the results for ρ and θ in the general and restricted models, and the
implications for welfare gains when a country moves from autarky to its current domestic
expenditure share. We examine the parameterization of the restricted models that relies on
an estimate of the Pareto shape parameter from measured-productivity data. As is apparent
from the welfare formula above, welfare gains are falling in θ, thus this parameterization of the
models yields the largest possible welfare gains.
    Notice that in the welfare formula only the domestic share is country-specific. We report
the gains from trade for the United States and an average across countries in our sample. The
generalized model has higher welfare gains for two reasons: i) the markup elasticity is lower,
and ii) the Pareto shape parameter is lower. In a move from autarky to the current domestic
expenditure share, it is easy to verify that welfare strictly decreases with the average markup
elasticity and the Pareto shape parameter.29
    Given the current thought experiment, the consumer welfare gains in the generalized CES
model are 4.0% when the share of consumption that is imported rises from autarky to the
predicted trade share in the United States. The SIM model predicts a 3.5% welfare change
in the United States. This suggests that, for the US, the restricted model when σ = 1 would
underestimate the welfare gains by 14%. The separable MO and BMMS models yield even
lower welfare gains, with the difference from the generalized model’s prediction amounting to
54% in the case of the BMMS framework.
    We also report the average welfare gains for all the countries in our sample in the last column.
  29
     The latter requires that ρ(1 + 2θ) < 1 + 2θ + θ2 . With the parameter restriction of a positive θ and ρ < 1,
this always holds.



                                                                      32
The average welfare gains across the sample range from 16% to 10%—a 60% difference.30
Therefore, the results suggest that the welfare gains from trade are potentially underestimated
by at least 14-54% for the US and at least 60% for a set of 65 countries in the world.


6        Conclusion
In this paper, we quantify a class of commonly-employed general equilibrium models of inter-
national trade and pricing-to-market that feature firm-level heterogeneity and consumers with
non-homothetic preferences. We evaluate the quantitative performance of the models along di-
mensions in the data that relate to firm-level productivity and sales dispersion as well as cross-
country price dispersion, and we discuss the implications for welfare analysis. We view the work
as offering insights to the literature regarding the trade-off between precisely quantifying the
pro-competitive welfare gains from trade and exploiting highly-desirable tractability features of
different models. Admittedly, we evaluate the performance of existing non-homothetic models
along a limited number of dimensions. While we believe that, by focusing on moments that
do not necessarily relate to prices, we put the models to a difficult test, we leave it for future
work to examine the performance of these models along other dimensions as well as to develop
viable alternatives that offer further insights into the sources of the welfare gains from trade.


References
Alessandria, G. and J. P. Kaboski (2011): “Pricing-to-Market and the Failure of Absolute
 PPP,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 3, 91–127.

Arkolakis, C. (2010): “Market Penetration Costs and the New Consumers Margin in Inter-
 national Trade,” Journal of Political Economy, 118, 1151 – 1199.

Arkolakis, C., A. Costinot, D. Donaldson, and A. Rodrigues-Clare (2015): “The
 Elusive Pro-Competitive Effects of Trade,” Working paper.

Basu, S. and J. G. Fernald (1997): “Returns to Scale in U.S. Production: Estimates and
 Implications,” Journal of Political Economy.

Behrens, K., G. Mion, Y. Murata, and J. Sudekum (2014): “Trade, Wages, and Pro-
 ductivity,” International Economic Review, 55, 1305–1348.
    30
    Our calibrated domestic expenditure share is 91.6% in the US, and the average in the whole sample (elim-
inating 6 outliers) is 77%. For the average across all countries we drop 6 countries with predicted gains of
over 100%: Azerbaijan, Central African Republic, Ethiopia, Nigeria, Senegal, and Zambia, so that they do not
over-influence the result.

                                                    33
Bernard, A. B., J. Eaton, J. B. Jensen, and S. Kortum (2003): “Plants and Productivity
 in International Trade,” The American Economic Review, 93, 1268–1290.

Bernard, A. B., J. B. Jensen, S. J. Redding, and P. K. Schott (2012): “The Empirics
 of Firm Heterogeneity and International Trade,” Annual Review of Economics, 4, 283–313.

Bertoletti, P. and F. Etro (2014): “A General Theory of Endogenous Market Struc-
 tures,” DEM Working Papers Series 081, University of Pavia, Department of Economics and
 Management.

Chaney, T. (2008): “Distorted Gravity: The Intensive and Extensive Margins of International
 Trade,” American Economic Review, 98 (4), 1701–121.

De Loecker, J. and F. Warzynski (2012): “Markups and Firm-Level Export Status,”
 American Economic Review, 102, 2437–71.

Deaton, A. and A. Heston (2010): “Understanding PPPs and PPP-Based National Ac-
 counts,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2, 1–35.

deBlas, B. and K. N. Russ (2015): “Understanding Markups in the Open Economy,” Amer-
  ican Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7, 157–80.

Dhingra, S. and J. Morrow (2012): “Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product
 Diversity under Firm Heterogeneity,” Working Paper.

Eaton, J. and S. Kortum (2002): “Technology, Geography, and Trade,” Econometrica, 70
 (5), 1741–1779.

Eaton, J., S. Kortum, and F. Kramarz (2004): “Dissecting Trade: Firms, Industries,
 and Export Destinations,” The American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 94 (2),
 150–154.

——— (2011): “An Anatomy of International Trade: Evidence From French Firms,” Econo-
 metrica, 79, 1453–1498.

Edmond, C., V. Midrigan, and D. Xu (2014): “Competition, Markups and the Gains from
 International Trade,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Feenstra, R. C. (2014): “Restoring the Product Variety and Pro-competitive Gains from
  Trade with Heterogeneous Firms and Bounded Productivity,” NBER Working Papers 19833,
  National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.


                                            34
Feenstra, R. C. and D. E. Weinstein (2010): “Globalization, Markups and U.S. Welfare,”
  NBER Working Papers 15749, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Hall, R. E. (1988): “The Relation between Price and Marginal Cost in U.S. Industry,” Journal
 of Political Economy, 96, 921–47.

Jaimovich, N. and M. Floetotto (2008): “Firm dynamics, Markup variations, and the
  Business Cycle,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 55, 1238–1252.

Martins, J., S. Scarpetta, and D. Pilat (1996): “Mark-up Pricing, Market Structure,
 and the Business Cycle,” OECD Economic Studies, 27, 72–105.

Melitz, M. and G. Ottaviano (2008): “Market Size, Trade, and Productivity,” Review of
 Economic Studies, 75 (1), 295–316.

Melitz, M. J. (2003): “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
 Industry Productivity,” Econometrica, 71 (6), 1695–1725.

Norrbin, S. C. (1993): “The Relation between Price and Marginal Cost in U.S. Industry: A
 Contradiction,” Journal of Political Economy, 101, 1149–64.

Roeger, W. (1995): “Can Imperfect Competition Explain the Difference between Primal
 and Dual Productivity Measures? Estimates for U.S. Manufacturing,” Journal of Political
 Economy, 103, pp. 316–330.

Simonovska, I. (2015): “Income Differences and Prices of Tradables: Insights From An Online
  Retailer,” Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.

Simonovska, I. and M. E. Waugh (2014a): “The Elasticity of Trade: Estimates and Evi-
  dence,” Journal of International Economics, 92, 34–50.

——— (2014b): “Trade Models, Trade Elasticities, and the Gains from Trade,” NBER Working
 Papers 20495, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Waugh, M. E. (2010): “International Trade and Income Differences,” American Economic
 Review, 100, 2093–2124.

Weinberger, A. (2014): “Markups and Misallocation with Trade and Heterogeneous Firms,”
 Working papers, UC Davis.




                                            35
Appendix
A     Generalized CES Model
A.1     Consumer and Firm Problems
                                                      R
Given the utility function and the budget constraint ( ω∈Ω p(ω)q c (ω)dω ≤ w +π), the first order
conditions are:
                                                            σ
                    Z                                    σ−1 −1
                                              σ−1                                   1
                             (q c (ω) + q̄)    σ    dω              (q c (ω) + q̄)− σ = λp(ω),
                       ω∈Ω


where λ is the Lagrange multiplier. We use the FOCs and integrate over all ω to get the total
demand, equation (4), in the main text. The FOC’s of (5) yield:

                                    wj + q̄Pj                         wj + q̄Pj
                   (1 − σ)p−σ
                           ij Lj       1−σ    − Lj q̄ + σcij p−σ−1
                                                              ij   Lj    1−σ    =0                (40)
                                     Pjσ                               Pjσ

This is the expression that is used to obtain the implicit equation for prices (7) in the main
text (substitute (6) into these FOC’s).
    The following provides details on the comparative statics of prices and markups. Define the
following implicit function that attains zero at the optimal price:

                                                                         −σ
                          F (pij , cij ) = (1 − σ)pij + σcij − pσ+1
                                                                ij (c̄j )                         (41)

By the implicit function theorem, dpij /dcij > 0. Hence, high cost firms charge higher prices.
However, price rises by less than proportional with cost. To see this, define the mark-up as
mij = pij /cij . Dividing the both sides of expression (41) by mσ+1
                                                                          
                                                                   ij cij   yields the implicit
function for mark-ups and costs as:

                                                                       −(σ+1)
                       G(mij , cij ) = (1 − σ)m−σ
                                               ij + σmij                        − cσij (c̄j )−σ   (42)

By the implicit function theorem,

                              dmij            cσ−1
                                                ij (c̄j )
                                                          −σ
                                   =                                                              (43)
                              dcij   (σ − 1)m−σ−1
                                             ij    − (σ + 1)m−σ−2
                                                             ij


with dmij /dcij < 0 iff mij < (σ + 1)/(σ − 1), which is larger than the Dixit Stiglitz mark-up.
Notice that if dmij /dcij < 0, then, as cij → 0, mij must approach an upper bound. To find this


                                                           36
upper bound, set G(mij , 0) = 0. Clearly, the solution to this system is mij = σ/(σ − 1)—the
Dixit Stiglitz mark-up—which falls below the necessary bound. Hence, the necessary restriction
always holds and mark-ups fall with costs and converge to the D-S mark-up as costs fall to zero.
Hence the range for mark-ups is [1, σ/(σ − 1)].
   Finally, we do not report the equation for profits in the main text. It is given by:

                 πij (cij ) = (pij (cij ) − cij ) xij (cij )
                            = Lj q̄ (c̄j )σ (pij (cij ))1−σ − pij (cij ) − (c̄j )σ cij (pij (cij ))−σ + cij
                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                               (44)


A.2        Equilibrium
We use the change of variable described in the text to derive the aggregate predictions. Here
we give more details of the work done to arrive at equations (11)-(14). Given the change of
variables, we rewrite profits and sales but normalize both by c̄j :
                             Z c̄j
             Tij
      T̃ij =       = Ji q̄Lj       [t1−σ
                                     ij  − tij ]dµij (c)
             c̄j              0
                    θ
                             Lj q̄θ 1  1−σ
                                     Z
                      c̄j                                                                  θ−1
                                         tij − tij (σ + 1)tσij + (σ − 1) tσ+1
                                                                      
      Tij = Ji c̄j              θ                                          ij + (σ − 1)tij      dtij
                     ĉij     σ        0


                                            cθ−1                           c̄j σ+1                                        c̄j
Notice that we use dµij (c) = θ ĉijθ dcij , where cij =                      (t
                                                                            σ ij
                                                                                      + (σ − 1)tij ) and dcij =            σ
                                                                                                                              ((σ   +
                                      ij
1)tσij + (σ − 1))dtij . Similarly, for profits:
                            Z c̄j
          πij                       1 1−σ
   π̃ij =        = q̄Lj               [tij + tσ+1
                                                ij    − 2tij ]dµij (c)
           c̄j               0      σ
            I         θ
                                  q̄Lj θ 1 
                                          Z
          X             c̄j                            σ+1
                                                                           θ−1     −σ   σ+1
                                                                                                              θ
        =        c̄j                           σt  ij tij   +  (σ −  1)tij      + t ij t ij    + (σ  − 1)t ij
          j=1
                       ĉij       σ θ+1 0
                                               θ−1                              θ                                θ+1
        + σt2σ+1
             ij       tσ+1
                        ij    + (σ − 1)tij            + tσij tσ+1
                                                              ij   + (σ − 1)tij − 2σtσ+1    ij   tσ+1
                                                                                                  ij  + (σ − 1)tij
                                         θ 
        − 2 tσ+1ij    + (σ − 1)tij           dtij

    Since the integration range is between 0 and 1, the integrals reduce to constants. The
following are the constants in the sales and profit equations used in the main text: β1 =
  (σ−3) 2 F1 (1−θ, θ+1 ; σ+θ+1     1
                                ; 1−σ ) (σ+1) 2 F1 (1−θ, 2σ+θ+1  ; 3σ+θ+1      1
                                                                            ; 1−σ ) (σ−1) 2 F1 (1−θ, −σ+θ+1  ; θ+1     1
                                                                                                                   ; 1−σ  )
−                   σ
                  θ+1
                           σ
                                         +                  σ
                                                       2σ+θ+1
                                                                      σ
                                                                                    −                   σ
                                                                                                    σ−θ−1
                                                                                                                σ
                                                                                                                            −
                                                                                                            −σ+θ+1 θ+1
     (σ+3) 2 F1 (1−θ, σ+θ+1  ; 2σ+θ+1
                                       ;  1
                                         1−σ )
                                                         2 2 1(
                                                            F   1−θ,  θ+1 σ+θ+1
                                                                          ;        ;  1
                                                                                     1−σ )
                                                                                             (σ−1) 2 1(
                                                                                                    F  1−θ,           ;        1
                                                                                                                            ; 1−σ )
                    σ+θ+1
                         σ        σ
                                               and β2 =                 σ
                                                                       θ+1
                                                                                σ
                                                                                           −             σ−θ−1
                                                                                                                σ        σ
                                                                                                                                    −




                                                                37
(σ+1) 2 F1 (1−θ, σ+θ+1
                   σ
                       ; 2σ+θ+1
                            σ
                                   1
                                ; 1−σ )
               σ+θ+1
                                        ,     where
                                                           Z 1 β−1
                                                    Γ(δ)      t (1 − t)δ−β−1
                           F2,1 (α, β; δ; z) =                               dt,
                                               Γ(β)Γ(δ − β) 0    (1 − tz)α
                                               Z 1   z−1
                                                         1
                                       Γ(z) =       log       dt
                                                0        t

is the hypergeometric function with vector (α, β) = (1, κ + 1), scalar δ = κ + 2 and element
z = −γx evaluated at the two endpoints:31
    The aggregate price statistics are:

                   I                        θ            Z    1
                   X                   c̄j        θ                  σ+1             θ−1 
                                                                                            (σ + 1)tσ+1
                                                                                                                      
           Pj =          Jυ c̄j                                      tυj + (σ − 1)tυj               υj  + (σ − 1)t υj   dtυj
                   υ
                                      ĉυj        σθ        0
                   I
                   X           c̄θ+1
                                 j   bθυ
               =         Jυ                   βP                                                                               (45)
                   υ          (τυj wυ )θ
                   I                                   1
                           c̄θ+1−σ θ
                                                  Z
        1−σ
                   X                                        σ+1             θ−1 
                                                                                   (σ + 1)tυj + (σ − 1)t1−σ
                                                                                                            
       Pjσ     =         Jυ θ                               tυj + (σ − 1)tυj                            υj    dtυj
                   υ
                              ĉυj σ θ             0
                   I
                   X          c̄θ+1−σ bθυ
               =         Jυ                   βσP                                                                              (46)
                     υ        (τυj wυ )θ

where again we group constants in βP and βσP .
   The measure of entrants results from substituting profits and total sales into FE and IS.
The expression for measure of entrants is:

                                                                                Γ1 Li
                                                                         Ji =                                                  (47)
                                                                                Γ2 fe

                                                                      θ    1
                                                                              1−θ
where we group together constants. Specifically, these are: Γ1 = σθ+1     σ−1
                                                                                   β1 and Γ2 =
 θ    1
        1−θ
σ θ σ−1
             β2 .
    Lastly we get the expression for the cutoff costs (20) by substituting the aggregate price
statistics into (6):
                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                       θ+1
                                                                              wj
                                              c̄j =                                        bθυ
                                                                                                                              (48)
                                                                       − βP )q̄ Iυ Jυ (τ
                                                                               P
                                                               (βσP                               θ
                                                                                           υj wυ )

  31
    In Matlab, however, the Hypergeometric function, hypergeom(a, b, z), corresponds to the generalized Hy-
pergeometric function where a is a vector of “upper parameters”, b is vector of “lower parameters” and z is the
argument. F2,1 (α, β; δ; z) is the special case where a = (α, β) is a 1 by 2 matrix and b = δ is a scalar.



                                                                             38
In the main text we substitute for Jυ which results in equation (20).


A.3    Income Per-Capita and Prices
As stated in the main text we can show analytically that prices of identical goods are higher in
richer destinations. We apply the implicit function theorem to (7) to verify that dpij /dc̄j > 0
and combine this with dc̄j /dwj which can be solved with the closed form solution for cutoff
costs above:

                             dpij   dpij dc̄j
                                  =
                             dwj     dc̄j dwj
                                                             −σ−1
                                    "                               #
                                             σpσ+1   (c̄   )
                                                                            
                                               ij        j             dc̄j
                                  =
                                      (σ + 1)pσij (c̄j )−σ − (1 − σ) dwj
                                    |                {z             }
                                                      >0


We need to verify that the second term is positive:
                                                              1 −1
                                                                θ+1
      ∂c̄j      1                    wj
           =                                                           ×
      ∂wj     θ + 1 (βσP − βP )βJ q̄fe−1 I Lυ bθυ θ
                                         P
                                           υ=1     (τυj wυ )
                                                                                                        
                                                                                             −θ−1     −θ
                                                      wj (βσP − βP )βJ q̄fe−1 Lj bθj (−θ)wj         τjj 
                                                                                                        
                               1
                                                   − h                                               i2
            (βσP − βP )βJ q̄fe−1 PI Lυ bθυ θ                                   −1 PI         bθυ
                                                         (β      −  β   )β  q̄f         L
                                                                                                         
                                  υ=1   (τυj wυ )           σP       P    J e      υ=1 υ (τυj wυ )θ
                                                                                                         
                                                              1                                   
                                                                θ+1
                                                                                    θL bθ w −θ−1
                1                    wj                                   1         j j j
                                                                                                     
           =                                                        ×          +
              θ + 1 (βσP − βP )βJ q̄fe−1 I Lυ bθυ θ                                            θ
                                                                                        Lυ bυ θ 
                                         P                               wj      PI
                                               υ=1    (τυj wυ )                    υ=1     (τυj wυ )
                1      1 + θλjj
           =       c̄j          >0
               θ+1        wj

                                     dpij
The end result is therefore that     dwj
                                            > 0.


A.4    Moments in the Generalized CES
In the main text we simplify the solutions. The full solution for the measured productivity of
                        NX
non-exporters requires βM P,i (σ, θ, t̃ii ):




                                                      39
 NX                            1
βM P,i (σ, θ, t̃ii ) =                  ×
                       (σ − 1)θ(σ + θ)
"                    −θ (                                                               
   θ      1                                                           σ+θ θ           1
 σ               +1          (σθ log σ + θ log σ + σ) 2 F1 1 − θ,         ; + 2;             − (σ − 1)(σ + θ)×
        σ−1                                                            σ    σ        1−σ
                                                           θ        !)
                            θ σ+θ       1             1
  − log σ 2 F1 1 − θ, ;              ;         +           + 1 log σ
                            σ      σ   1−σ           σ−1
                             σ         −θ (                              !
                                                                                                            t̃σii
                                                                                                                 
           σ
                        θ     t̃ii             σ                                          σ+θ θ
− t̃ii t̃ii + σ − 1                  +1        t̃ii σθ log σ + θ log σ + σ 2 F1 1 − θ,           ; + 2; −
                              σ−1                                                            σ    σ        σ−1
                                                                                         θ
                                                                                                           !)#
                                                                t̃σii         t̃σii
                                                                                    
                                                   θ σ+θ
                                                                                    + 1 log t̃σii + σ − 1
                                                                                                         
− (σ − 1)(σ + θ) (− log σ) 2 F1 1 − θ, ;                   ;−           +
                                                   σ   σ      σ−1           σ−1

where 2 F1 is Gauss’s hypergeometric function.
    The sales moment is also not written out completely in the main text. The closed form
solution is:
                          "                                                      1−θ (
                                                                      t̃σii                                 θ + 1 σ + θ + 1 t̃σii
                                                                                                                                 
   m                                                                                  2
  Mi,sales   = (1 −   ξiθ )   t̃2ii (t̃ii (t̃σii           θ−1
                                                   + σ − 1))                +1              F
                                                                                           2 1    1  −   θ,         ;        ;       +
                                                                     σ−1           θ+1                        σ          σ     1−σ

                                                                                          1 − σ + θ θ + 1 t̃σii
                                                                                                                       
                               1               −σ
                                            t̃        (1 − σ)(σ + θ + 1)2 F1 1 − θ,                    ;         ;
              (σ − θ − 1)(σ + θ + 1) ii                                                        σ            σ       1−σ
                                                                                                     !)#
                                                              1 + σ + θ 2σ + θ + 1 t̃σii
                                                                                                 
              − (σ + 1)(σ − θ − 1)t̃2σ     ii 2 F1 1 − θ,                ;              ;                    ÷
                                                                  σ             σ          1−σ
                     "                    1−θ (                                                            
                 θ        θ−1      1                        2                 θ+1 σ+θ+1                  1
             (ξi ) σ                    +1           ×         2 F1 1 − θ,          ;              ;
                                 σ−1                      θ+1                   σ           σ        1−σ
                                                                                                                       
                                  1                                                     1−σ+θ θ+1                     1
              +                                     (1 − σ)(σ + θ + 1)2 F1 1 − θ,                    ;         ;
                   (σ − θ − 1)(σ + θ + 1)                                                     σ            σ      1−σ
                                                                                              !)
                                                           1 + σ + θ 2σ + θ + 1          1
              − (σ + 1)(σ − θ − 1)2 F1 1 − θ,                        ;              ;                 −
                                                               σ            σ         1−σ
                                             σ             1−θ (
                                                                                          θ + 1 σ + θ + 1 t̃σii
                                                                                                                        
               2           σ           θ−1       t̃ii                  2
             t̃ii (t̃ii (t̃ii + σ − 1))                 +1                  F
                                                                           2 1   1 −   θ,        ;                ;        +
                                               σ−1                  θ+1                     σ             σ         1−σ

                                                                                          1 − σ + θ θ + 1 t̃σii
                                                                                                                       
                               1               −σ
                                            t̃        (1 − σ)(σ + θ + 1)2 F1 1 − θ,                    ;         ;
              (σ − θ − 1)(σ + θ + 1) ii                                                        σ            σ       1−σ
                                                                                                     !)#
                                                              1 + σ + θ 2σ + θ + 1 t̃σii
                                                                                                 
              − (σ + 1)(σ − θ − 1)t̃2σ     ii 2 F1 1 − θ,                ;              ;
                                                                  σ             σ          1−σ




                                                                           40
B      Moments in the SIM Model
The moments below can be used to calibrate the value of θ. We compute two firm-level moments
as in BEJK. The first firm level moment is the productivity advantage of exporters over non-
exporters. To construct it, we compute value added for each s as in BEJK, where there are no
intermediate inputs:

                                                           I
                                                           X
                                             vai (s) =           δiυ (s)c̄υ Lυ q̄ (1 − tiυ (s)) ,
                                                           υ=1

                  piυ (s)
where tiυ (s) =     c̄υ
                            and δiυ (s) = 1 if firm s from i sells to υ. Employment of the same s is

                                                          I
                                                          X                tiυ (s) − tiυ (s)2
                                           empi (s) =     δiυ (s)c̄υ Lυ q̄
                                                      υ=1
                                                                                   wi

Measured productivity of s is the ratio of the two objects
                                                                                       
                                                                              vai (s)
                                                        mpi (s) = log
                                                                             empi (s)

For exporters the average measured productivity (in logs) is:
                                       "         ( I                                        )
                            Z   t̃ii
                  θ                               X
    M PiEXP   =                            log          δiυ (s)χiυ Lυ (1 − hiυ (tii (s)))
                (ξi )θ      0                       υ
            ( I                                                                )#
             X                                                                                               1 2θ
                                            hiυ (tii (s)) − hiυ (tii (s))2         2tii (s)2θ−1 dtii (s) +
                                                                           
    − log         δiυ (s)χiυ Lυ                                                                                 t̃ log(wi )   (49)
              υ
                                                                                                             ξiθ ii

                                                  c̃x
As in the general model: ξi = c̄iii , χiυ = c̄c̄υi , hiυ (tii (s)) is the solution of tiυ (s) corresponding
tii (s), and t̃ii is the tii of the marginal exporter in i. The average measured productivity of
non-exporters (in logs) is:

                                                                         1    ξiθ
                                            M PiN X = log(wi ) +           +        log(t̃ii )                                (50)
                                                                         2θ 1 − ξiθ

    We compute the moment as the difference between the average logged measured productivity
                                      SIM
of exporters and non-exporters: Mi,prod    = M PiEXP − M PiN X , for i = U S.
    The second firm level moment is the domestic sales advantage of exporters. BEJK compute
this statistic as the ratio between the average domestic sales among exporters and non-exporters.




                                                                      41
In the model, for i = U S, the statistic is

                              1 − ξiθ                   (t̃ii )2θ /θ − 2(t̃2θ+1
                                       
            SIM                                                            ii   /(2θ + 1))
           Mi,sales   =                                                                                  (51)
                                ξiθ         (1/θ − 2/(2θ + 1) − ((t̃ii ) /θ − 2(t̃ii )2θ+1 /(2θ + 1)))
                                                                         2θ


   In the SIM model, there is only one parameter, θ, that needs to be consistent with both
the measured productivity and sales advantage moments. In Section 5 we showed that it is not
possible with any value of θ to match both moments in this model.


C     Moments in the Separable MO Model (η = 0)
                                            cij (s)
Define a new variable vij (s) ≡               c̄j
                                                    .   Then it must be that:

                                   cij (s) = vij (s)c̄j =⇒ dcij (s) = c̄j dvij (s)                       (52)

   Since we will be integrating over firms indexed by vii we must compute the range of v over
which firms export and do not export. Let the marginal exporting firm be viix .
   We compute the same moments as in the general model, so we start with the relative
advantage of exporters in terms of average logged measured productivity. As in the general
                c̃x
model, let ξi ≡ c̄iii , where c̃xii corresponds to viix .
   Productivity in BEJK is defined as the labor productivity, or total value added divided by
employment. The value added for each s is:

                                                          I
                                                          X                Lυ c̄υ
                                        vai (s) =                δiυ (s)          (1 − viυ (s)2 )
                                                          υ=1
                                                                            4γ

where δiυ (s) = 1 if firm s from i sells to υ. There are no intermediate goods in this model, so
only labor is used for production. Therefore, the value added is the same as the revenue for
each s.
Employment of the same s is

                                                        I
                                                        X                Lυ c̄υ
                                empi (s) =                    δiυ (s)           viυ (s)(1 − viυ (s))
                                                        υ=1
                                                                        (2γ)wi

Measured productivity of s is the ratio of the two objects
                                                                                         
                                                                                vai (s)
                                                  mpi (s) = log
                                                                               empi (s)



                                                                        42
For exporters the average logged measured productivity is:
                           x
                                "          ( I                                               )
                      Z   vii
               θ                            1
                                            X        (θ + 2)wυ
 M PiEXP                                                                1 − (τiυ vii (s))2
                                                                                           
           =             log       δiυ (s)Lυ PI                   −θ θ
             (ξi )θ
                  0            υ=1
                                            2     j=1 Lj (wj τjυ )  c̄υ
                 (I
                                                                                     )#
                 X                   (θ + 2)wυ
           − log     δiυ (s)Lυ PI                       τ v (s)(1 − τiυ vii (s))/wi
                                                  −θ θ iυ ii
                                                                                         vii (s)θ−1 dvii (s)
                 υ=1             j=1 Lj (wj τjυ )   c̄υ
                                                                                                                  (53)

The average logged measured productivity of non-exporters is:
                            Z    1                                                                         
                  θ                            1
    M PiN X                                                         2
                                                                      
              =                           log     + log (1 − vii (s) ) − log (vii (s)(1 − vii (s))) + log(wi )
                1 − ξiθ          x
                                vii            2
              vii (s)θ−1 dvii (s)
                        
                                                                                                                  (54)

Again we compute the moment as the difference between the average logged measured produc-
                                        M O,η=0
tivity of exporters and non-exporters: Mi,prod  = M PiEXP − M PiN X , for i = U S.
    The US domestic sales advantage of exporters is the ratio between the average domestic
sales among exporters and non-exporters. In the model, for i = U S, the statistic is
                                                                                             x )2
                                                                                                   
                                                                                            (vii
                                                 
                                                     1−     ξiθ
                                                                            (viix )θ 1θ − θ+2
                             M O,η=0
                            Mi,sales =                                                                     .    (55)
                                                      ξiθ
                                                                                                   x )2
                                                                         2            x θ 1        (vii
                                                                      θ(θ+2)
                                                                              − (vii ) θ − θ+2

In this model, there is only one parameter, θ, that needs to be consistent with both the measured
productivity and sales advantage moments. In Section 5 we showed that it is not possible with
any value of θ to match both moments in this model.


D      Moments in the BMMS Model
To compute the firm-level moments for the BMMS model, recall the same change of variables
trick as in the main text:
                                            
                                        cii    cii
                              z≡W           e ⇒ e = zez .
                                        c̄i    c̄i

Then cij = c̄j zij ezij −1 and dcij = (ezij −1 c̄j ) (1 + zij )dzij with integration bounds between 0 and
1.
   As in the general model, we compute the relative advantage of exporters in terms of average
logged measured productivity and domestic sales.

                                                                        43
  Productivity in BEJK is defined as the labor productivity, or total value added divided by
employment. The value added for each s is:

                                                   I
                                                   X               Lυ
                                                                      c̄υ (ziυ (s)eziυ (s)−1 ) ziυ (s)−1 − 1
                                                                                                           
                          vai (s) =                      δiυ (s)
                                                   υ=1
                                                                   α

where δiυ (s) = 1 if firm s from i sells to υ. There are no intermediate goods in this model, so
only labor is used for production. Therefore, the value added is the same as the revenue for
each s.
Employment of the same s is

                                                        I
                                                        X               Lυ c̄υ
                              empi (s) =                      δiυ (s)          [1 − ziυ (s)] ziυ (s)eziυ (s)−1
                                                        υ=1
                                                                        αwi

Measured productivity of s is the ratio of the two objects:
                                                                                               
                                                                                      vai (s)
                                                          mpi (s) = log
                                                                                     empi (s)

                                                                                                                          c̃x
     We map ziυ (s) into zii (s) so as to be able to integrate over zii (s). z̃ii = f ( c̄iii ) is once again
                                                                                           c̃x
used for the marginal exporter, where W ( ciυc̄υ(s) e) is solved with costs equal to c̄iii . We rely on a
change of variables to compute the average logged productivity of exporters. We integrate over
zii (s) by using h̃iυ (zii (s)) = ziυ (s) as the implicit solution to ziυ (s) = (zii (s)) τiυc̄υc̄i and solve for
ziυ (s).
     For exporters the average logged measured productivity is:
                                         "         (   I
                                                                                                                                          )
                          Z       z̃ii
                   θ                                   X                                                                           
    M PiEXP    =                             log             δiυ (s)Lυ c̄υ       h̃iυ (zii (s))−1 − 1 h̃iυ (zii (s))eh̃iυ (zii (s))−1
                 (ξi )θ       0                        υ=1
                     (          I
                                                                                                                          )#
                          1 X                                                                    
               − log               δiυ (s)Lυ c̄υ 1 − h̃iυ (zii (s)) h̃iυ (zii (s))eh̃iυ (zii (s))−1
                         wi υ=1
                                  θ−1 zii (s)−1
                zii (s)ezii (s)−1       e        (1 + zii (s))dzii (s)                                                                    (56)

              c̃x
where ξi ≡ c̄iii as in the main text.
   The average logged measured productivity of non-exporters is:
                          Z       1
                 θ                                                                              θ−1
   M PiN X   =                        [log(wi ) − log(zii (s))] zii (s)ezii (s)−1                      ezii (s)−1 (1 + zii (s))dzii (s)   (57)
               1 − ξiθ    z̃ii


We then compute the moment as the difference between the average logged measured produc-


                                                                             44
                                        BM M S
tivity of exporters and non-exporters: Mi,prod  = M PiEXP − M PiN X , for i = U S.
    The domestic sales advantage of exporters in the model is, for i = U S:
                                     R z̃ii
                  BM M S      1 − ξiθ 0 (zii (s)−1 − zii (s))(zii (s)ezii (s) )θ ezii (s) dzii (s)
                 Mi,sales   =        R1                                                                           (58)
                                ξiθ        (z (s)−1 − zii (s))(zii (s)ezii (s) )θ ezii (s) dzii (s)
                                       z̃ii ii


In this model, there is only one parameter, θ, that needs to be consistent with both the measured
productivity and sales advantage moments. In Section 5 we showed that it is not possible with
any value of θ to match both moments in this model.


E     Melitz and Ottaviano Model in General Equilibrium
E.1    Model
The framework comes from Melitz and Ottaviano (2008), with an extension to general equilib-
rium outlined in the Web Appendix of Simonovska (2015). Assume each country is populated
by identical consumers of measure L, whose utility function is:

                 I Z                            Z                                  Z                     !2
                 X                       1                           2       1
         Ujc =               qijc (ω)dω − γ               qijc (ω)        dω − η            qijc (ω)dω        ,
                 i=1   ω∈Ωij             2       ω∈Ωij                        2     ω∈Ωij


with γ > 0 and η > 0. This yields the following price, markup and sales:

                                          1
                              pij (cij ) =  (cij + c̄j )                                                          (59)
                                          2             
                                          1 cij + c̄j
                             mij (cij ) =                                                                         (60)
                                          2       cij
                                                  Lj (θ + 1)
                                                                   c̄2ij − c2ij
                                                                                
                             rij (cij ) =                                                                         (61)
                                          2c̄ij (2γ(θ + 1) + ηNj )

where Nj is the measure of consumed varieties in country j, Ii=1 Nij (see 2). We refer to the
                                                                 P

Web Appendix of Simonovska (2015) for a result that the link between per-capita income and
prices/markups is positive.
                                   c
    We define a new variable vij ≡ c̄ijj . Then it follows that:

                                       cij = vij c̄j =⇒ dcij = c̄j dvij                                           (62)




                                                         45
To solve the model we need total sales and the cost cutoffs. We start with total sales:

                                                        Ji Lj c̄θ+1
                                                                j   (θ + 1)
                                      Tij =       θ
                                                                                                               (63)
                                                ĉij (2γ(θ + 1) + ηNj ) (θ + 2)
                                                                                       P
Substituting total sales into the income-spending equation: wi Li =                      j   Tij and using balanced
      P         P
trade, j Tij = j Tji , yields:

                                   θ + 1 θ+1            wj 2γ(θ + 1)η −θ−1
                                        c̃j − c̃θj wj = PI                 −θ
                                   θ+2                          θ
                                                          υ Jυ bυ (wυ τυj )

                     c̄j
where we let c̃j =    η
                         .   Then, we define cutoffs for all j relative to a numeraire country, k:

                                    θ+1 θ+1
                                       c̃      − wj c̃θj       wj Iυ Lυ bθυ (wυ τυk )−θ
                                                                 P
                                    θ+2 j
                                                             =                          ,                      (64)
                             θ+1
                                 c̃ (K)θ+1     − wk c̃k (K)θ   wk Iυ Lυ bθυ (wυ τυj )−θ
                                                                 P
                             θ+2 k


where K = 2γ(θ + 1)η −θ−1 . In the normalization of the cost cutoffs we solve for c̃k given a
value of K. Given c̃k (K), we find relative cutoffs. Notice that we must also calibrate K since
relative cutoffs change for different values of c̃k (K).
    Since we will be integrating over firms indexed by vii we must compute the range of v over
                                                          cij
which firms export and do not export (with, vij (K) ≡ c̄j (K) ). Let the marginal exporting firm
be viix (K).
    We compute the same moments as in the general model, so we start with the relative
advantage of exporters in terms of average logged measured productivity. As in the general
                     c̃x (K)
model, let ξi (K) ≡ c̄iii (K) .
    Productivity in BEJK is defined as the labor productivity, or total value added divided by
employment. The value added for each s is:

                                         I
                                         X                 Lυ (θ + 1)c̄υ (K)
                             vai (s) =         δiυ (s)                       (1 − viυ (s)2 )
                                         υ=1
                                                         2(2γ(θ + 1) + ηNυ )

where δiυ (s) = 1 if firm s from i sells to υ. There are no intermediate goods in this model, so
only labor is used for production. Therefore, the value added is the same as the revenue for
each s.
Employment of the same s is

                                     I
                                     X               Lυ c̄υ (K)(1 − ηQcυ )
                       emp(s) =            δiυ (s)                         viυ (s)(1 − viυ (s))
                                     υ=1
                                                             (2γ)wi



                                                               46
                                                                                                          PI        R
where Qcj is the aggregate consumption over varieties defined as Qj =                                         i=1      ω∈Ωij
                                                                                                                               qijc (ω)dω =
     Nj
2γ(θ+1)+ηNj
            .
   Measured productivity of s is the ratio of the two objects
                                                                               
                                                                    vai (s)
                                            mp( s) = log
                                                                   empi (s)

For exporters the average logged measured productivity is:
                               x (K)
                                       "   (   I
                                                                                                                  )
                          Z   vii
                   θ                           X       1                w  υ
M PiEXP     =                   log         δiυ (s)Lυ PI                       −θ
                                                                                            (1 − (τiυ vii (s))2 )
              (ξi (K))θ0               υ=1
                                                       2      j=1 Lj (wj τjυ )    c̄υ (K) θ
      ( I                                                                          )#
        X                         wυ                             (1 − τiυ vii (s))
− log       δiυ (s)Lυ PI                −θ
                                                     τiυ vii (s)                       vii (s)θ−1 dvii (s)     (65)
        υ=1             j=1 Lj (wj τjυ )   c̄υ (K) θ                   wi

The average logged measured productivity of non-exporters is:
                            Z 1                                                                    
                   θ                   1
M PiN X                                                    2
                                                             
          =                        log   + log (1 − vii (s) ) − log (vii (s)(1 − vii (s))) + log(wi )
            1 − (ξi (K))θ viix (K)     2
          vii (s)θ−1 dvii (s)
                    
                                                                                                 (66)

We compute the moment as the difference between the average logged measured productivity
                                   MO
of exporters and non-exporters: Mi,prod = M PiEXP − M PiN X , for i = U S.
    The second firm level moment is the domestic sales advantage of exporters, the ratio between
the average domestic sales among exporters and non-exporters. In the model, the statistic is
                                                                                               x (K))2
                                                                                                          
                                                                                     1        (vii
                                 
                                     1 − (ξi (K))   θ
                                                                  (viix (K))θ       θ
                                                                                         −       θ+2
                   MO
                  Mi,sales =                                                                          x (K))2
                                                                                                                                    (67)
                                       (ξi (K))θ             2
                                                                   −       (viix (K))θ        1
                                                                                                  −
                                                                                                      (vii
                                                          θ(θ+2)                              θ          θ+2


   In this non-separable case (η > 0), the relative cost cutoffs are not fixed by wages and
gravity variables, but shift according to the parameter values in K above: namely, they depend
on a combination of parameters θ, γ, η. Therefore we can calibrate θ along with K to match
the two moments.


E.2       Quantitative Analysis
The above discussion suggests that this model, like the generalized CES one, can potentially
match both the sales and the measured productivity advantage of exporters. It does so via a
very different channel: the (normalized) sales distribution is still fixed by θ in this model, but


                                                             47
the value of K allows for a flexible cost cutoff, which is not the case in the separable models.
In this model, the relative cost cutoffs are not fixed by wages and gravity variables, but shift
according to the parameter values of K.
    Below, we compare the quantitative predictions of this model to the generalized CES. The
calibration results are in Table 5. Again wages are computed as the implicit solution to equa-
tion (18) using trade shares predicted from gravity. We calibrate θ and K to match the two
moments derived above.

                               Table 5: Moments and Parameters

 Model                               Data/Targets                  σ       θ     K          Simulated Moment

 Generalized CES               Msales = 4.80, Mprod = 0.33        1.41    1.92    –     Msales = 4.80, Mprod = 0.33
 Melitz and Ottaviano (2008)   Msales = 4.80, Mprod = 0.33          –     2.01   1.21   Msales = 4.80, Mprod = 0.33


    While the model matches the two moments, its out of sample predictions stray widely from
the data and from the predictions of the calibrated non-separable MO model. First, exporters
are now the majority of firms. Table 6 reports that 74% of firms export in the MO model
compared to 41% in the generalized CES (and their calibrated θ are similar). Second, the non-
separable MO model displays counterfactual predictions of export intensity. Table 7 compares
the results for both models. In the MO model, only a minority of firms are in the 0-10% decile
of export intensity.

                               Table 6: US Exporters, % of Total

         Model                            Data         σ      θ         % of Firms that Export

         Generalized CES                18-21%        1.41   1.92                41.4%
         Melitz and Ottaviano (2008)    18-21%         –     2.01                73.6%



   Further, the standard deviation of log domestic sales is 1.0 in the model, compared to a
value of 1.26 in the generalized CES model and a value of 1.67 in the 1992 US Census data as
reported by BEJK.
   Price discrimination across countries in the model is quite high and amounts to three times
more than in the data. The model yields a slope coefficient of 0.35 (standard deviation is 0.04),
which is high compared to the generalized CES case (0.12 with standard deviation of 0.009)
and to the data (0.11 for EIU data and 0.10 for ICP data). The fourth plot in figure 2 shows
the predicted price indices in the MO model. As it can be seen, the model yields a very skewed


                                                 48
                                             Table 7: % of Exporting Plants Conditional on Export Intensity

                                           Exp. Intensity (%)                       Data (%)                 General CES                                Melitz and Ottaviano (2008)
                                                  0-10                                 66                       88.3                                               39.8
                                                 10-20                                 16                       11.4                                               51.4
                                                 20-30                                7.7                        0.1                                                2.6
                                                 30-40                                4.4                        0.1                                                2.2
                                                 40-50                                2.4                        0.1                                                2.1
                                                 50-60                                1.5                         0                                                 0.5
                                                 60-100                               2.8                         0                                                 1.4

  Conditioning on only exporting firms, the export intensity (first column) is the export revenue over total revenue, and we split firms into deciles.
  For example the first row shows that in the generalized CES model 88.3% of exporting firms have export revenue that is less than 10% of their
  total revenue. The data is also reported in Bernard et al. (2003) (using 1992 data for the US).



                             Figure 2: Geometric Mean of Relative Prices versus Income per Capita

                                                            Price-Income: EIU Data                                                                                  Price-Income: ICP Data
                              2.5




                                                                                                                                       2.5
                              2




                                                                                                                                       2                                                                      ISL
                   Geometric Price Index




                                                                                                                        Geometric Price Index

                                                                                                  JPN                                                                                                         JPNNOR
                                1.5




                                                                                                                                     1.5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                              FINCHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                IRL
                                                                                                  FRA  NOR
                                                                                                     DNK                                                                            AGO             GNQ NZL    SWE
                                                                                                      CHE
                                                                                                     ISL                                                                                        GAB         ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                              GBR
                                                                                                                                                                              COM                        CYP  BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                             CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                              AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                             AUS
                                                                        CIV                 KOR    AUT
                                                                                                   GBR
                                                                                                   FIN                                                                  CAF                            KOR   FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                         GRCDEU
                                                                                                    SWE
                                                                                                     IRL                                                                            COGCPV              PRT
                                                                      NGA           RUS           DEU
                                                                                                   BEL                                                                          STP        NAM            ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ISR
                                                                                                                                                                                           FJI TURHRV SVN
                                                                              CHN                   USA                                                                    TCD DJI
                                                                                                                                                                                 CIV                           USA
                       1




                                                                                                                            1




                                                                                              ISR AUS
                                                                                                NZL
                                                                                                 ITA                                                              COD    GNB
                                                                                                                                                                         TGOZMB
                                                                                                                                                                              LSOCMR SWZ VEN   BWAEST
                                                                                                                                                                                              ZAF
                                                                                                ESP                                                                             SEN
                                                                                                                                                                       RWA MLINGA
                                                                                                                                                                      MWI              MARTUN  LBN
                                                                                                                                                                                                 POL
                                                                                                                                                                                                CHL HUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                     CZE BRN
                                                                 CAF SEN      JOR
                                                                        AZE MAR
                                                                                     TUR
                                                                               IRN ZAF
                                                                                       MEXCZE
                                                                                               GRC
                                                                                             PRT  CAN                                                              BDI MOZBEN GHA
                                                                                                                                                                             SDN         PER
                                                                                                                                                                                            BRA
                                                                                                                                                                                           ROU
                                                                                                                                                                                         BIH
                                                                                                                                                                                         COL URY
                                                                                                                                                                                               MUSSVK
                                                                                                                                                                                                LVA
                                                                                                                                                                                                  MEX
                                                                                                                                                                                                 LTU SAU
                                                                                                                                                                                                    OMN
                                                            ETH                       POLSAU                                                                              BFA MRT CHN
                                                                                                                                                                            KEN         JOR
                                                                                                                                                                                         ECU
                                                                                                                                                                                         MKD      MYS
                                                                    VNM IDNUKR ECU
                                                                                COL
                                                                                 BGR     OMN BRN
                                                                                       SVK
                                                                                        MYS
                                                                                         HUN                                                                              GMB
                                                                                                                                                                         TZA
                                                                                                                                                                        UGAGIN     ARM THARUS
                                                                                                                                                                                  LKA
                                                                                                                                                                                   GEO
                                                                                                                                                                                   IDN
                                                                                                                                                                                   PHL
                                                                                                                                                                                             ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                           BGR
                                                                   KEN         PER
                                                                                 TUN
                                                                                  ROUCHL                                                                           ETH NPL LAO
                                                                                                                                                                             VNM
                                                                                                                                                                               MDA BTN
                                                                                                                                                                                  AZE     KAZ
                                                                   ZMB     SYR THA VEN
                                                                                  BRA
                                                                                   URY                                                                                    BGD
                                                                                                                                                                           KGZ
                                                                                                                                                                         TJK  PAK  PRY
                                                                                                                                                                               INDBOL
                                                                                                                                                                                    SYR BLR
                                                                                                                                                                                   EGY
                                                                         EGY
                              .5




                                                                                                                                       .5




                                                                NPL IND LKA     KAZARG                                                                                              UKR IRN
                                                                     PAK PHL
                                                                          PRY
                              0




                                                                                                                                       0




                                            -8        -6            -4            -2            0             2                                    -8        -6            -4            -2            0                       2
                                                           Log Income per Capita relative to US                                                                   Log Income per Capita relative to US


                                              Price-Income: General Model (30 destinations)                                                    Price-Income: Non-separable MO Model (30 destinations)
                          2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CHE

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BEL
                          2




                                                                                                                       Geometric Price Index
               Geometric Price Index




                                                                                                    NZL
                                                                                            ISL AUS      KOR
                                                                                                        JPN                                                                                                                KOR
                            1.5




                                                                                                        FIN                                                                                                               JPN
                                                                                                         SWE CHE                                                                                                          DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SWE
                                                                                               NOR
                                                                                               MYS DNK
                                                                                                     AUT
                                                                                                                   0 .5 1 1.5 2 2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          FIN
                                                                                  URY ARG           CAN DEU BEL
                                                                                   CHL       CZE ITA
                                                                                           HUN       IRL                                                                                                                 FRA
                                                                            PER        PRT
                                                                                       SVKTHA         FRA                                                                                                               AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        IRL
                                                                                     ZAF    ESP                                                                                                                        CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DNK
                                                                              BRN
                                                                        VEN MEX
                                                                                      BRA    USA
                   1




                                                                   COL PHLSAUBGR  GRC
                                                                                    IDN
                                                                                      POL ISR GBR                                                                                                            ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                            GBR
                                                                    CIVOMN TUN ROU TUR
                                                                                     UKR                                                                                                                   MYS
                                                                 ECU                RUS                                                                                                                    NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                         USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                         NZL
                                                                   PRYMAR                                                                                                                        CHN THA CZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                       HUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                     AUS
                                                                          KAZ          CHN                                                                                                        ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                                BRA   ISR
                                                                     JOR
                                                                       LKAVNM                                                                                                                 IDNPRT
                                                                                                                                                                                               ZAFSVK
                                                                                                                                                                                                POL
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ISL
                                                                                                                                                                                               UKR
                                                                                                                                                                                              TUR
                                                                                                                                                                                             CHL
                                                                                                                                                                                              RUS
                                                                                                                                                                                            URY
                                                                                                                                                                                           GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                          BGR
                                                                  EGY                                                                                                           IND
                                                                                                                                                                               LKA PHL
                                                                                                                                                                                  VNM
                                                                                                                                                                                 PAK  SAUROU
                                                                                                                                                                                     MEX
                                                                                                                                                                                      BRN
                                                                                                                                                                                     TUN
                                                                                                                                                                                    PER
                          .5




                                                       SEN
                                                      CAF     IRN        PAK                                                                      NGA
                                                                                                                                                 ETH       KEN
                                                                                                                                                            ZMB
                                                                                                                                                           NPL
                                                                                                                                                            CAF           EGY
                                                                                                                                                              SEN SYR IRNECU
                                                                                                                                                             AZE               MAR
                                                                                                                                                                             JOR
                                                                                                                                                                           COL
                                                                                                                                                                            CIV
                                                                                                                                                                           PRY  VEN
                                                                                                                                                                              OMN KAZ
                                                      ZMB SYR
                                                     NPL
                                                     KEN                IND
                                                       AZE
                                           ETH
                                            NGA
                          0




                                             -8        -6          -4             -2            0            2                                     -8        -6          -4             -2            0                        2
                                                   Log Income per Capita relative to US (calibrated)                                                     Log Income per Capita relative to US (calibrated)



      Relative prices in the data are taken from EIU. In the model, we simulate firms in each calibrated model and capture firm prices to
      each destination. In model and data we define relative prices as the price of a good relative to the price in the US, and then take a
      geometric average of 110 relative prices for each country. For the simulated model, common goods are such that they are sold in at
      least 30 destinations. There are more than 110 common goods available in the sample so to reduce sampling error we have 100 draws
      of 110 random goods. For the simulation we can report the average price-income slope after having computed it for 100 draws.




distribution of prices across countries. The implication is an average markup on domestic sales
of 50%, which exceeds values reported in the data.




                                                                                                                  49
F        Welfare
In this section, we derive the welfare parameters for the remaining separable models. We
recount equation (38):

                                                                1− ρ /θ
                                                            1 ( 1+θ )
                                                       
                                              ∆Wj =                      −1
                                                           λjj

where ρ stands for the weighted average markup elasticity with respect to marginal cost (or one
minus the price-cost pass through elasticity), and θ is the parameter that governs the dispersion
of productivity assuming the distribution is unbounded Pareto.
    ρ and θ are different across models, while trade shares are identical and come from data.
Therefore, the welfare cost of autarky differs in the calibrated models due to the differences in
market power.
    In the SIM model, there is a closed form solution for prices: p(cij , c̄j ) = (cij c̄j )1/2 . Therefore
we can write the log markup as: log(mij ) = 12 log(c̄j ) − 21 log(cij ) and the markup elasticity
becomes:

                                                           ∂ log(mij )  1
                                               ρSIM =                  = .
                                                           ∂ log(vij )  2

Even without taking into consideration the firm distribution and source country, the markup
elasticity is just one half.
    In the separable MO model, the markup is mij = 12 1 + vij−1 where vij = cij /c̄j . Then after
                                                               

we solve for the markup elasticity we again take the expenditure weighted average:
                                                  R1     1
                                    M O,η=0
                                                             r (s)dµii (s)
                                                  0 vii (s)+1 ii                  θ+2
                                ρ             =     R1                       =
                                                          r (s)dµii (s)          2(θ + 1)
                                                      0 ii


Notice that in this model there is a lower bound on the markup elasticity of one-half, which
corresponds to the upper bound in the generalized CES and to the constant markup elasticity
in the SIM model. As θ goes to zero, the markup elasticity approaches one (percentage change
in markups equals the percentage change in costs).
    In the BMMS model, the domestic markup is mii =  1cii  and the markup elasticity
                                                                             W    c̄i
                                                                                        e
 BM M S                                                      32
ρ       = 1, as shown in Behrens et al. (2014). The authors show that the welfare gains from
                                         1
                                           
trade are summarized by: dlnWj = − 1+θ       dlnλjj .



  32
       See p. 1345 in Behrens et al. (2014).


                                                             50
