NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO RISK PREFERENCES CHANGE? EVIDENCE FROM PANEL DATA BEFORE
AND AFTER THE GREAT EAST JAPAN EARTHQUAKE
Chie Hanaoka
Hitoshi Shigeoka
Yasutora Watanabe
Working Paper 21400
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21400

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2015
Previously circulated as "Do Risk Preferences Change? Evidence from Panel Data before and
after the Great East Japan Earthquake." The authors thank Fernando Aragon, Daniel Benjamin,
Prashant Bharadwaj, Michael Callen, John Cawley, Pascaline Dupas, Catherine Eckel, Hiroyuki
Kasahara, Jaimie Lien, Krishna Pendakur, Luigi Pistaferri, Yasuyuki Sawada, Kensuke Teshima,
Eric Weese, and seminar participants at the Canadian Economic Association Meeting, Chukyo
University, Colgate University, Cornell PAM, CUHK, GRIPS, HKUST, ISER, Keio University,
Kyoto Summer Workshop on Applied Economics, NBER Japan meeting, Osaka University,
Otaru University of Commerce, Simon Fraser University, Tohoku University, Tokyo Labor
Economic Workshop, University of Tokyo, The Society for Risk Analysis Annual Conference,
20th International Panel Data Conference (at Hitotsubashi University), and 14th Panel Survey
Conference (at Institute for Research on Household Economics) for their suggestions. This
research utilizes the micro data from the Preference Parameters Study of Osaka University s 21st
Century COE Program “Behavioral Macrodynamics Based on Surveys and Experiments” and its
Global COE project “Human Behavior and Socioeconomic Dynamics” (investigators: Yoshiro
Tsutsui, Fumio Ohtake, and Shinsuke Ikeda). The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Chie Hanaoka, Hitoshi Shigeoka, and Yasutora Watanabe. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Risk Preferences Change? Evidence from Panel Data before and after the Great East Japan
Earthquake
Chie Hanaoka, Hitoshi Shigeoka, and Yasutora Watanabe
NBER Working Paper No. 21400
July 2015, Revised February 2017
JEL No. C23,D81,J16,Q54
ABSTRACT
We investigate whether individuals’ risk preferences change after experiencing a natural disaster,
specifically, the 2011 Great East Japan Earthquake. Exploiting the panels of nationally
representative surveys on risk preferences, we find that men who experienced greater intensity of
the Earthquake became more risk tolerant after the Earthquake. Furthermore, these men gamble
more, which is consistent with the direction of changes in risk preferences. We find no such
pattern for women. Finally, the effects on men’s risk preferences are persistent even five years
after the Earthquake at almost the same magnitude as those shortly after the Earthquake.

Chie Hanaoka
Faculty of Economics
Kyoto Sangyo University
Kamigamo-Motoyama
Kita-ku, Kyoto, JAPAN
hanaoka@cc.kyoto-su.ac.jp
Hitoshi Shigeoka
Department of Economics
Simon Fraser University
8888 University Drive, WMC 4653
Barnaby, BC V5A 1S6
CANADA
and NBER
hitoshi_shigeoka@sfu.ca

Yasutora Watanabe
Department of Economics
HKUST Business School
Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology
Clear Water Bay, Kowloon
HONG KONG
yasutora@ust.hk

1

Introduction

Risk preferences are fundamental determinants of individual decision-making about economic behavior, such as saving, investment, and consumption. Standard economic models assume that
individual risk preferences are stable across time (Stigler and Becker, 1977).1 More recently, a
number of studies suggest that individuals’risk preferences and, hence, risk-taking behavior can
be altered by a variety of negative shocks such as early-life …nancial experiences, …nancial crises,
trauma from con‡ict or violence, and natural disasters.2 However, there is little consensus about
the direction in which such negative shocks a¤ects risk preferences. Some of these studies …nd that
negative shocks may induce people to become more risk averse, while others …nd that negative
shocks may make people more risk tolerant.
A common feature of these studies is that they rely on cross-sectional data collected after
the negative shocks have occurred.3 This can plague the estimates in two ways. First, selective
migration of particular types of individuals may bias the estimates. For example, risk-averse
individuals may be more likely to leave an area after a disaster, and hence, they may not be
observed in post-disaster cross-sectional data. Second, unobserved heterogeneity of individuals
may produce biased estimates under cross-sectional studies. For example, individuals in areas
with frequent disasters may form very di¤erent risk preferences in unobservable ways. At the
same time, the local history of past disasters could be correlated with the negative shock in
consideration, and hence, could bias the estimates.
In this study, we investigate whether individuals’risk preferences change after they experience a
natural disaster— speci…cally, the 2011 Great East Japan Earthquake (the Earthquake, hereafter).
In particular, we test whether individuals who live in locations that endured higher intensity of
the Earthquake become either risk averse or risk tolerant.
The novelty of our study is that we use panel data of 3,221 individuals from 226 municipalities in
1
“One does not argue over tastes for the same reason that one does not argue over the Rocky Mountains — both
are there, will be there next year, too, and are the same to all men” Stigler and Becker (1977).
2
On one hand, Cassar et al. (2011) and Cameron and Shah (forthcoming) …nd increased risk aversion after
exposure to natural disasters in Indonesia, and Thailand, respectively. Kim and Lee (2013) also …nd that those who
spent their early childhood during the peak of the Korean war remain more risk averse at their adulthood. On the
other hand, Eckel et al. (2009) and Voors et al. (2012) demonstrate decreased risk aversion (i.e., increased risk
tolerance) after exposure to Hurricane Katrina and civil con‡ict in Burundi, respectively. In addition, Malmendier
and Nagel (2011) show that early life …nancial experiences are associated with more conservative investing behavior
in later life, and Cohn et al.(2015) also documents that negative shocks makes …nancial professionals more risk averse
in laboratory experiments. Imas (2014) suggests that these inconsistent …ndings can be explained by individuals’
di¤erential responses to “realized” versus paper losses. See also an excellent review by Haushofer and Fehr (2014).
3
Notable exceptions include Sahm (2012) and Guiso et al. (2013). Sahm (2012) uses Health and Retirement
Survey to investigate the e¤ect of life-cycle event on risk preferences but the sample is limited to the elderly over
age 40 and the duration between the pairs of risk measures are 6 years on average. Guiso et al. (2013) use a repeat
survey of a bank’s clients to study the e¤ect of 2008 …nancial crisis. Our study di¤ers from these as our data are
nationally-representative survey covering all types of individuals.

2

a nationally representative survey. Thus, we can track the changes in risk preferences of the same
individuals before and after the Earthquake to control for unobserved individual heterogeneity.
Furthermore, the panel structure allows us to examine if selective migration takes place in our
data.
How the Earthquake or negative shocks in general potentially alter individuals’risk preferences
is not well understood. The literature points out that emotional responses to negative shocks
may alter individuals’risk preferences (e.g., Lerner and Keltner, 2001; Loewenstein et al., 2001).
Furthermore, psychology literature suggests that gender can be a factor in‡uencing such emotional
responses.4
We …nd that men who are exposed to higher intensities of the Earthquake become more risk
tolerant. As for women, we occasionally …nd the opposite patterns (i.e., they become more risk
averse) at the high-intensity locations, although the results for women are not very robust. While
previous studies show that men are less risk averse than women in many dimensions,5 to the best
of our knowledge, ours is the …rst study that documents gender di¤erences in susceptibility of risk
preferences and their direction. Our …ndings suggest that men’s risk preferences are more likely
to change than those of women and that men become less risk averse in response to a negative
shock, despite their already low level of risk aversion.
In terms of magnitude, as the intensity of the Earthquake increases by 2— which corresponds to
10-fold increase of ground acceleration— the relative risk aversion for men decreases by 5.3 percent
from the mean before the Earthquake for men. Put another way, the size of the reduction is
roughly half of the mean di¤erence in relative risk aversion between men and women before the
Earthquake.
Our results are robust to a number of potential concerns. First, we verify that selective migration does not occur in our setting by exploiting the panel structure of our data. Then, we conduct
a variety of speci…cation checks. Our results are hardly a¤ected after controlling for changes in
income, assets, property price, and home ownership. Moreover, our results are robust to di¤erent
ways of constructing the intensity measure and risk preference measures of the Earthquake.
Throughout our study, the intensity measure used is the seismic intensity of the Earthquake
(Shindo in Japanese), which is a metric of the strength of an earthquake at a speci…c location.
We do not use other metrics, such as the level of radiation and fatality rate, because both these
measures are too concentrated in a small number of municipalities and little variation exists for
4

For example, Lerner et al. (2003) document that emotional responses mediate the gender di¤erences in risk
attitudes.
5
See, for example, Eckel and Grossman (2008) and Croson and Gneezy (2009) for surveys of economics, and
Byrnes et al. (1999) for a survey of psychology on gender di¤erences in preferences. See also Charness and Gneezy
(2012).

3

the municipalities covered in our survey. Moreover, we add radiation level and fatality rate as
controls and con…rm that our results on risk preferences are robust to these controls.
In addition to the change in risk preferences, we ask whether risk-taking behavior is a¤ected
by the Earthquake. We …nd corroborative evidence that men who live in the hardest-hit locations
gamble and drink more as the intensity of the Earthquake increases. However, because risktaking behavior is a¤ected not only by risk preferences but also by many other factors (e.g., time
preferences and peer e¤ects), we need to view the results on risk-taking behavior with caution.
Finally, by comparing the estimates from cross-sectional and panel speci…cations, we demonstrate that the estimate relying on cross-sectional data collected after the negative shocks may
be biased. In fact, we fail to obtain the same results using cross-sectional speci…cation: men who
were exposed to larger intensity of the Earthquake no longer become more risk tolerant. This
result indicates that the estimate is biased, at least in our setting, by unobserved individual heterogeneity, which cross-sectional speci…cation cannot fully control. In fact, we show that, at the
time of the Earthquake, risk-averse individuals tended to live in locations with lower estimates
of future catastrophic earthquakes, implying unobservable di¤erences in risk preference formation
before the Earthquake.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data, and Section 3
presents our identi…cation strategy highlighting the di¤erence between panel and cross-sectional
speci…cations. Section 4 reports our …ndings, and Section 5 discusses their implications. Section
6 concludes.

2
2.1

Data
Intensity of the Great East Japan Earthquake

Although Japan has a long history of coping with earthquakes, the 2011 Earthquake is by far
the largest in the country’s history since modern measurement of earthquakes began. It is the
fourth largest earthquake on record in the world with a magnitude of 9.0 on the Richter scale.
The Earthquake occurred in the afternoon of March 11, 2011, triggering a tsunami and causing
more than 15,800 deaths and 3,000 cases of missing people (Fire and Disaster Management Agency,
2013). One of the Earthquake’s features is that its e¤ects spread over a very wide area of East Japan
in various ways. About 130,000 homes were destroyed. Both cellular and landline phones were
dysfunctional over a wide area for a few days (Ministry of Internal A¤airs and Communications,
2011). In addition, approximately 8.6 million households experienced power outages, and 2.3
million households, disruption in water supply (Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science

4

and Technology, 2012). Further planned power outages were inevitable because of the accident at
the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Station.
The degree of negative shock di¤ers signi…cantly, depending on location. As our interest is
to understand how risk preferences are a¤ected by negative shocks, an ideal explanatory variable
would be one that captures the wide variation of negative shocks for people who su¤ered most
severely to people who are not a¤ected at all. One straightforward variable would be distance
from the epicenter of the Earthquake. This variable, however, is not necessarily ideal because it
may not necessarily capture local di¤erences in the intensity of negative shocks— the severity with
which an earthquake hits a particular location depends heavily on subsurface structure. Instead,
the main explanatory variable we use is seismic intensity of the Earthquake, which is a metric of
the strength of an earthquake at a speci…c location (see, e.g., Scawthorn, 2003).6
The seismic intensity of earthquakes (Shindo) is constructed by the Japanese Meteorological
Association (JMA).7 The JMA operates more than 1,700 monitoring stations to measure the
intensity of earthquakes at each location. People in Japan are very familiar with this intensity
measure, Shindo. In fact, Shindo is regularly used in media coverage for intensity of an earthquake
at each location (it is similar to a weather report). We focus on seismic intensities measured for
the main Earthquake on March 11, 2011. Approximately, an increase of the seismic intensity by
two means 10-fold of acceleration (See Appendix A for details). Our intensity measure is the
weighted average of seismic intensities from the three closest monitoring stations, where weight is
the inverse of the distance between the city hall of the municipality and each monitoring station.
Our results are robust to di¤erent ways of constructing an intensity measure.
In addition, we collect data on the level of fatalities (which were largely due to the tsunami
following the Earthquake) and radiation (following an accident at the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear
Power Plant). However, we use these two measures only as complementary explanatory variables
for a robustness check (in Subsection 4.3) mainly because radiation and fatalities are too concentrated in a small number of municipalities and little variation exists for the municipalities covered
in our nationally representative survey data (see Appendix Table A11 for details of these variables).
Figure 1 shows the intensity of the Earthquake measured by Shindo in quintiles, together with
the location of the epicenter. The darker color indicates higher levels of intensity. As the intensity of
an earthquake depends not only on distance from the epicenter but subsurface structure, there are
reasonable variations in intensity measure, even within the same distance from the epicenter.8 Of
6

The magnitude of an earthquake is a metric of the energy released by the earthquake, and hence, takes a single
value for each earthquake, while seismic intensity varies by location.
7
Torch (2011) uses seismic intensity as a proxy for maternal stress to study the e¤ects of stress on birth outcomes.
8
The correlation between the distance from the epicenter of the Earthquake and our seismic intensity measure at
the municipality level is –0.896 (N=226) in all locations, –0.662 (N=79) in locations with intensity of 4 and higher,

5

Japan’s 1,724 municipalities as of April 1, 2011, the survey covers 226 municipalities (as described
in Subsection 2.2), which are shown with black outlines in Figure 1. The …gure shows that our
survey data cover throughout Japan, and thus, there is considerable variation in intensity level
among our surveyed municipalities. In addition, the …gure demonstrates that our sample includes
very few coastal municipalities in the high intensity regions, where the vast majority of casualties
were caused by the tsunami. In fact, of our 226 municipalities, only 6 (2.7 percent) report some
population living in ‡ooded areas. In addition, none of the 11 municipalities directly a¤ected by
the accident at the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant are covered in the survey.

2.2

Panel survey on risk preference

Our measure of risk preferences is elicited directly from a hypothetical lottery question in the
Japan Household Panel Survey on Consumer Preferences and Satisfaction (JHPS-CPS) in 2011
and 2012. The JHPS-CPS is a nationally representative annual panel survey of the resident
population in Japan. The sample is strati…ed according to two criteria: geographical area and
city size.9 The data are collected using self-administered paper questionnaires, which are handdelivered to and picked up from the houses of participating households.10 The initial wave of the
survey was conducted in 2003. The data before the Earthquake are from the 2011 survey and the
data after the Earthquake are from the 2012 survey.11 Both surveys are conducted in January and
February each year. Thus, the data before the Earthquake were collected 1 or 2 months before the
Earthquake, and the data after the Earthquake were collected 10–11 months after the Earthquake.
The JHPS-CPS asks respondents about their willingness to pay for a hypothetical lottery with
a 50 percent chance of winning JPY 100,000 (USD 1,000) or nothing otherwise.12 Appendix B
shows the exact format of the survey question. A respondent is presented with 8 di¤erent prices
in ascending order, from a price of JPY 10 (USD 0.1) in the …rst row of the survey question to a
price of JPY 50,000 (USD 500) in the last row. For each row, starting from the …rst, a respondent
is required to choose one of two options: buy a lottery ticket at the price (option A) or not buy the
ticket (option B). Thus, the reservation price ( ) should lie in the interval between the two prices.
This is the price at which a respondent switches from option A to option B and the price in the
and –0.837 (N=147) in locations with intensity lower than 4.
9
All municipalities are classi…ed into 40 stratums: 10 geographical areas and 4 categories corresponding to population size. The number of sample subjects in each stratum is distributed in proportion to the resident population
aged 20–69 years. The unit of sampling spot in each stratum is the census unit and is selected by random systematic
sampling.
10
All respondents are given a JPY 1,500 (USD 15) cash voucher by completing the survey.
11
Unfortunately, we cannot use the data before 2011 because the queries on risk aversion di¤er from those used
in 2011 and 2012.
12
This approach is similar to that used in Cramer et al. (2002), Hartog et al. (2002) and Guiso and Paiella (2008).

6

row immediately before the switch. In this study, we de…ne the reservation price as the midpoint
of the two prices.13 This provides an implicit point estimate of the measure of an individual’s risk
preference. Note that the question we use is the only survey question eliciting risk preference in
the JHPS-CPS that is available as panel data.14 Unfortunately, other important measures, such
as time preferences and social preferences, are not available in the panel fashion, and thus, we do
not examine them in this study.
Respondents who switch more than once (multiple switches) comprise 5.8 percent of the sample
and are eliminated.15 For those who choose option A in all choices (1 percent of the sample), risk
preference is estimated using the lower bound of the reservation price, that is, the price in the last
decision row. Similarly, for those who choose option B in all choices (4 percent of the sample), we
use the upper bound of the reservation price, that is, the price in the …rst decision row.
Our measure of risk preference has several advantages. First, one cannot easily isolate the
change in risk preference from the change in risk perception because risk perception is likely to
change when risk preference changes. However, we can identify changes in risk preferences owing
to the fact that we present survey respondents with the same explicit stakes and probabilities both
before and after the Earthquake. Second, because of low complexity of the lottery question in the
JHPS-CPS, the nonresponse rate is quite low— 2.4 percent of the original data— in contrast with
a high nonresponse rate observed in previous studies with more complex questions.16 Third, while
the samples in previous studies are highly restricted (e.g., to investors or clients), the measure in
this study is obtained using a large nationally representative sample.
One concern of self-reported measures based on a non-incentivized hypothetical question is
whether they actually re‡ect an individual’s underlying risk traits. Several studies document that
risk measures obtained by hypothetical survey questions are reliable predictors of actual risk-taking
behavior (e.g., Barsky et al., 1997; Donkers et al., 2001; Anderson and Mellor, 2008; Dohmen et al.,
2011). In order to check the validity of our risk measures, described in detail in what follows, we
simply run regressions of risky behavior on our risk measures. One expects a negative correlation
between risk-aversion measures and risk-taking behavior. Appendix Table A2 con…rms the validity
13

We treat the discrete variable for our risk aversion measure as continuous. Because our risk aversion measure is
censored above at the price of JPY 50,000 and below at the price of JPY 10, the econometric methods should account
for the censoring of the risk aversion measure. As a robustness check, we use the estimation method proposed by
Honoré (1992), which explicitly accounts for the censoring of a dependent variable with …xed e¤ects. The results are
nearly identical to those using our basic speci…cation, suggesting that our …ndings are likely una¤ected by treating
the discrete variable for our risk aversion measure as continuous (the results are available upon request).
14
Because this is the only question we can use as panel data, we cannot disentangle risk preference and loss
aversion as Callen et al. (2014) did, based on Andreoni and Sprenger (2011).
15
As a robustness check for multiple switches, we use the …rst switch as the reported willingness to pay and
re-estimate the models. The estimates are quantitatively unchanged (the results are available upon request).
16
For example, Guiso and Paiella (2008) report a 27 percent nonresponse rate.

7

of our risk measures; the results show a signi…cant correlation between our risk measures and risky
behavior (gambling, drinking, and smoking) with the expected signs.17
We take two approaches to convert the reservation price ( )— obtained from a respondent’s
choice in hypothetical lottery— to a measure of risk aversion, following Cramer et al. (2002). We
denote Z as a prize of the lottery and
JPY 100,000 (USD 1,000), and

as the probability of winning the prize. In our case, Z is

is 0.5, and thus, the expected value Z is JPY50,000.

The …rst approach is a simple transformation of the reservation price:
Transformed price = 1
= 1

= Z
=50; 000

(1)

Note that the greater a respondent’s value of transformed price, the more risk averse the respondent
is. In our setting, the values of transformed price only take values between zero and one, where
the value of zero corresponds to the case of perfectly risk-neutral preference.18 The …rst table in
Appendix Table A1 shows the values of transformed price in our settings.
The second approach is to use the Arrow–Pratt measure of absolute risk aversion (Pratt, 1964),
=

00

0

U =U , where U (W ) is a standard concave utility function of wealth, W . In expected utility

theory, the utility of wealth without participation in the lottery is equal to expected utility when
participating at reservation price : U (W ) = (1

)U (W

) + U (W + Z

). By taking a

second-order Taylor expansion around U (W ), we obtain an estimate of the Arrow–Pratt measure
of absolute risk aversion as follows
)=[(1=2)( Z 2

Absolute risk aversion = ( Z

2 Z +

2

)]

(2)

See Cramer et al. (2002) for details on derivation. Note that the greater a respondent’s value of
absolute risk aversion, the more risk averse the respondent is. In our setting, the values of absolute
risk aversion are bounded below and above in a similar manner to the transformed price, where
the value of zero corresponds to the case of perfectly risk-neutral preference. The …rst table in
Appendix Table A1 reports the values of absolute risk aversion. As shown in Subsection 4.3, our
17

Another concern is that our risk measures capture only risk preferences in the …nancial domain. However,
Dohmen et al. (2011) show that risk preferences in di¤erent domains or contexts are not perfectly but strongly
correlated to each other.
18
The lottery’s expected value is JPY 50,000 and, thus, risk-averse individuals should be willing to pay less
than JPY 50,000 while risk-loving individuals should opt to pay more than JPY 50,000. Because the maximum
ticket price in our survey is indeed JPY 50,000, risk-loving individuals can only choose up to JPY 50,000, possibly
underestimating risk tolerance. However, this may be of little concern because only a small fraction of respondents
chooses JPY 50,000 (1.4 percent in 2011 and 1.3 percent in 2012).

8

results are robust to the choice of two risk aversion measures.19
We also conduct analysis that does not depend how we construct these two cardinal riskpreference measures in Subsection 4.3. Speci…cally, we exploit the panel nature of the data, and
create an ordinal risk measure that takes 1 if the choice of risk category after the Earthquake is
higher (i.e., more risk-averse) than the one before the Earthquake, –1 if opposite, and 0 if there is
no change. Our results are robust to using this alternative outcome.
The original data consists of 4,934 respondents in the 2011 survey. The attrition rate is fairly
low at 7 percent. We focus only on those who have no missing values for the lottery question,
risk-taking behavior, age, gender, and household income in both surveys. This procedure reduces
the sample to 3,829. Of those remaining, 198 respondents who switched more than once in the
lottery question are eliminated. Of the remaining 3,631 samples, 147 respondents who moved
municipalities between surveys are eliminated. Of the remaining 3,484 samples, 263 respondents
who drop from the sample in 2012 are eliminated. This produces a …nal sample size of 3,221
respondents located across 226 municipalities. We demonstrate in Subsection 4.2 that migration
and attrition do not seem to a¤ect our results.
We merge the JHPS-CPS data with the earthquake intensity data at the municipality level
because the municipality is the most detailed unit of location available in the JHPS-CPS.
Table 1 presents the summary statistics of our …nal sample. The mean of transformed price,
which takes a value between 0 and 1, is 0.8. The intensity measure of the Earthquake takes a
value between 0 and 6.06, with a mean of 2.83. The mean age of the individuals is 52.1 years and
47 percent are male. About 70 percent are employed, more than 80 percent are married, and 55
percent of educational attainment is at the level of high school graduation or below.

3

Identi…cation strategy

We examine the e¤ect of the Earthquake on risk preference using panel data before and after the
Earthquake. Our identi…cation strategy exploits the variation in the intensity of the Earthquake,
while controlling for time-invariant individual characteristics using the individual …xed e¤ects
model. Our basic idea is similar to di¤erence-in-di¤erence: we capture the e¤ect of the Earthquake
by comparing individuals with zero intensity (control group) and non-zero intensity (treatment
group), assuming that the response would have been the same in the absence of the Earthquake.
19

Because both risk aversion measures are bounded above and below, we alternatively use the logit transformation
of each risk preference measure as outcomes. This method is conventionally used for regression analysis when a
dependent variable is a fractional variable bounded between zero and one, such as fractions (McDowell and Cox,
2001). The results using logit-transformed values are quantitatively the same (the results are available upon request).
Here, we replace the 0 values in risk preference by 0.0001 when they are logit transformed.

9

By using panel data, we can isolate the e¤ects of the exogenous treatment (the Earthquake)
by comparing the di¤erences before and after the Earthquake across individuals who experienced
di¤erent levels of intensity of the treatment. The departure from di¤erence-in-di¤erence is that our
treatment is not binary and we can exploit the variation in intensity of the exogenous treatment.
More formally, the basic model to test whether the Earthquake in‡uences risk preference can
be written as follows
Yijt =
where

t

t

+ Xjt + Zijt + Wi + "ijt

(3)

is a year e¤ect and Yijt is a measure of risk preference for individual i at location j at

time t. Xjt is intensity of the Earthquake at location j at time t and takes the value of zero before
the Earthquake. Zijt represents time-varying individual characteristics, Wi represents unobserved
time-invariant individual characteristics, and "ijt is a random shock. The coe¢ cient
the e¤ect of the Earthquake that is common to all individuals and

captures

measures the e¤ect of the

Earthquake on risk preference, depending on the intensity of the Earthquake.
A major econometric issue is the possible presence of unobserved individual …xed e¤ects, Wi ,
such as di¤erential risk preference formation in response to past earthquake damage. For example,
individuals that have experienced severe earthquakes in the past might form di¤erent social norms
and attitudes toward risk that results in unobservable di¤erences in risk preferences (Postlewaite,
2011). At the same time, severity of the part earthquake damage could be correlated with the
intensity of this Earthquake, Xjt (e.g., because of geological factors), leading to omitted variable
bias.
Fortunately, we have panel data and can take advantage of the …xed e¤ects estimator to isolate
the e¤ects of the unobserved individual characteristics by considering the following speci…cation
Yijt =
where

+ Xj +

Zijt +

"ijt

indicates the di¤erence of variables before and after the Earthquake. We denote

(4)
Xjt

as Xj for notational convenience (given that Xjt = 0 for all observations before the Earthquake).
The speci…cation is di¤erence-in-di¤erence, with Xj taking a continuous variable (Xj takes a value
of zero if the intensity of the Earthquake is zero.)
If unobserved characteristics Wi do not play an important role, the estimates from …xed e¤ects
speci…cation (4) and the estimates using cross-sectional speci…cation must be similar. However,
we …nd a signi…cant di¤erence between the estimates from the two speci…cations (see Subsection
5.1), which implies the existence of potential bias resulting from the unobserved …xed e¤ect.
In addition to the issue of unobserved …xed e¤ects, another econometric issue is possible non-

10

linearity in the e¤ects of intensity of the Earthquake. In fact, JMA classi…es an intensity level
of four as a level at which “many people are frightened.” Appendix A documents the de…nition
of the JMA’s intensity scale as well as its description of di¤erent levels of intensity. Re‡ecting
the characterization of intensity scale by the JMA, our main speci…cation considers the possibility
that the e¤ect of the Earthquake can be kinked as follows
Yijt =
where the coe¢ cient

+ Xj + I[Xj

4](Xj

4) +

Zijt +

"ijt

captures the additional linear e¤ect of the Earthquake intensity for locations

with intensity higher than four. In addition, we consider speci…cations in which we use I[Xj
and I[Xj

(5)

5] instead of I[Xj

4:5]

4], and most of our results are robust to the change in the cut-o¤

between 4, 4.5, and 5, as shown in Subsection 4.1. We also adopt a speci…cation with X squared
instead of I[Xj

4] to account for the nonlinearity, and most of our results also remain unchanged.

We estimate Equation (5) using ordinary least squares (OLS).20 We cluster the standard error at
the municipality level to allow for arbitrary serial correlation within each municipality (Bertrand
et al., 2004).

4

Results

4.1

Main results

Figure 2 shows the relationship between the intensity of the Earthquake and changes in risk
preference. Here, we plot the changes in residual of transformed price regressed on individual
characteristics.21 Each dot in the graph represents the mean of observations within each bin of 0.2
in intensity measure and the size of the dot re‡ects the number of observations in each bin.22 The
solid …tted line is the lowess curve with a bandwidth of 0.5. Panels (a)–(c) show the …gures for
20

Alternatively, one could use estimation models that account for the discrete, ordinary nature of our risk aversion
measure as the dependent variable. However, in short panels, it is known that the …xed e¤ect estimators in discrete
models appear to be biased substantially (e.g., Greene, 2004). Therefore, we rely on …xed e¤ect estimation in linear
models. One concern with our approach is that the risk aversion measure is treated as a continuous variable by
using the midpoint of the interval between the two risk aversion categories. As a robustness check, we construct an
ordinal risk aversion measure that does not rely on the interval of the risk aversion categories described in detail in
Subsection 4.3. The results shown in Appendix Table A7 are essentially unchanged from our main results, suggesting
that our linear model approach probably has no e¤ect on our …ndings.
21
Speci…cally, the individual controls we use are age, age squared, a female dummy (only for the full sample),
income, marital status, and education. Alternatively, for robustness checks, we use the logarithm of income or the
dummy variables for each income bracket instead of a continuous measure of income. The results are unchanged
(the results are available upon request). As some marital status and education data are missing, we replace them
with zeros and add a dummy to indicate that they are missing.
22
Each bin includes 12.4 municipalities on average, ranging from 1 to 30 municipalities, and 173.5 individuals on
average, ranging from 6 to 400 individuals.

11

the full sample, men, and women, respectively. We divide the sample by gender as a large body
of literature provides evidence that gender plays an important role in decision making under risk
(e.g., Croson and Gneezy, 2009).
Panel (a) shows that there is no systematic change in risk aversion with respect to the intensity
of the Earthquake for the full sample. However, Panel (a) masks striking gender di¤erences shown
in Panels (b) and (c) for men and women, respectively. Panel (b) shows that men who live in
locations above the intensity level of roughly four become more risk tolerant as the intensity of the
Earthquake increases (recall that a higher number indicates higher risk aversion).23 Interestingly,
Panel (c) shows that the same pattern is not observed among women. Unlike men, we do not
observe much change in risk preference after the Earthquake, except a slight increase in risk
aversion at very high intensity locations.
Here, note that risk aversion is much higher among women than men at the level before the
Earthquake. In fact, the mean of risk aversion (transformed price) before the Earthquake is 0.738
for men and 0.868 for women. This observation is consistent with the large body of literature
that documents that men are less risk averse than women in the vast majority of environments
and tasks (for reviews, see Eckel and Grossman, 2008, and Croson and Gneezy, 2009). However,
the literature is silent on whether men’s risk preference is more “malleable” to the experience of
negative events than that of women, and to which direction risk preferences may change. Our
…ndings suggest that men’s risk preferences are more likely to change than those of women and,
furthermore, that men become less risk averse, despite their already low level of risk aversion, at
least in this setting.
Table 2 con…rms our …ndings in the …gures. Table 2 summarizes the estimates for running speci…cation (5) in which the outcome is the transformed price. Note that a negative coe¢ cient implies
a decrease (increase) in the slope of risk aversion (tolerance) as the intensity of the Earthquake
increases. Columns (1)–(4) show no observable or discernable relationship between the intensity
of the Earthquake and risk aversion among the full sample, as can be seen in Panel (a) in Figure
2.
However, Column (5) shows that men become more risk tolerant at high intensity locations.
While the estimate of intensity is slightly positive, the sign on the interaction term is negative,
which suggests there is a decline in slope at an intensity of around four. Because the magnitude
of the interaction term (–0.039) is much larger than that of the intensity term (0.009), we can
easily calculate the intensity where the change in risk aversion becomes negative, that is, where
23

See the second table of Appendix Table A1 for the transition matrix of risk aversion category before and after
the Earthquake (men only).

12

men become risk tolerant. Note that in Table 2, we present this level of intensity as Value of X
when

Y = 0 below the row on the estimate of the constant.24 Such intensity level is 5.34, which

is consistent with Panel (b) in Figure 2. Furthermore, we test the null hypothesis that individuals
with intensity level, X larger than 5.34 have

Y = 0. The null is rejected with a p-value of 0.02.

With regard to magnitude, as the intensity of the Earthquake increases by 2— which corresponds to 10-fold increase of acceleration— above the threshold of 4, our risk aversion measure
decreases by 0.06 [= 2

(–0.039 + 0.009)]. This corresponds to 8.1 percent reduction from the

mean risk aversion of 0.738 before the Earthquake for men. Put another way, the size of the
reduction is roughly half of the mean di¤erence in risk aversion between men and women (0.13 =
0.868–0.738) before the Earthquake.
Columns (6) and (7) show that our estimates are robust to the alternative intensity thresholds
of 4.5 and 5; the estimates on the interaction term are negative and statistically signi…cant at
the 1 percent level, and the magnitude of the estimates are much larger than those on X. As a
result, the intensity level at which men become risk tolerant is very similar across speci…cations.
Finally, Column (8) shows estimates from a more ‡exible form of speci…cation. Speci…cally, we do
not impose kink and instead include the quadratic of intensity measures. It is reassuring that the
value of intensity measure when

Y = 0 is similar across these di¤erent speci…cations.

Interestingly, women show the opposite pattern to men. The result in Column (9) suggests
that women become more risk averse at some point above an intensity of 4, speci…cally, 4.9, which
is consistent with Panel (c) in Figure 2.25 Note, however, that the result is barely signi…cant in
Columns (9), (10), and (12) and is not signi…cant in Column (11). While we view the contrast
between men and women as interesting, the results for women are much less robust than those for
men. Thus, henceforth, we focus only on men.

4.2

Selective migration

Selective migration of particular types of individuals has potential to bias the estimate when postdisaster data are used. For example, risk-averse individuals may be more likely to leave an area
after a disaster (Callen, forthcoming), and hence, they may not be observed in the cross-sectional
data collected after the negative shock. One advantage of panel data is that, in fact, we can
examine whether selective migration takes place.
First, we test the null hypothesis that the mean risk preference of those who migrated after
24

Without any time-varying individual characteristics in the speci…cation (5) (i.e., Zijt = 0), such intensity X
should satisfy Y = + X + (X
4)=0. Thus, X = (4 + )=( + ). In similar vein, we can calculate X
when threshold intensities are 4.5 and 5.
25
We estimate the speci…cation (5) fully interacted with a gender dummy and …nd that the slope is di¤erent
between men and women at 1 percent level (results are available upon request).

13

the Earthquake (N=60) and those who did not (N=1,514) are the same. The null could not be
rejected with a p-value of 0.46, which implies that the risk preferences of those who migrated after
the Earthquake are not statistically di¤erent from those who did not.
Second, we regress a dummy for migration (1 if migrated after the Earthquake, and 0 otherwise)
on the same set of variables as in Equation (5) to check if the migration decision is correlated with
intensity of the Earthquake. Table 3 shows that migration is not systematically correlated with
intensity of the Earthquake.
Both these exercises provide no evidence of selective migration after the Earthquake in our
setting. This is probably because our data do not include municipalities that were hit most
severely by the tsunami or directly a¤ected by the accident at the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear
Power Plant. In our analysis, we drop individuals who migrated from the …nal sample because it
is di¢ cult to assign intensity of the Earthquake to such individuals.26
Furthermore, attrition may plague our results in a very similar way to selective migration.27
We conduct the same procedure to verify that attrition is not a concern in our data. We …rst test
the null hypothesis that the mean risk preference of those who did not complete the survey after the
Earthquake (N=147) and those who did (N=1,514) are the same. The null could not be rejected
with a p-value of 0.975, which implies that the risk preferences of those who did not complete
the survey after the Earthquake are not statistically di¤erent from those who did. Second, we
regress indicators for attrition on the same sets of variables in Equation (5) as we do for selective
migration. Appendix Table A3 demonstrates that attrition is not systematically associated with
intensity of the Earthquake.

4.3
4.3.1

Robustness checks
Income and wealth

An alternative explanation for our …nding is that households and/or individuals hit hardest by
the Earthquake gained an income windfall after the Earthquake. A signi…cant increase in income
might have an e¤ect on risk aversion. We do not include income or assets as controls in the main
regressions in Tables 2 because they are potentially endogenous.
Broadly speaking, there are two types of income windfall for households that are hit by the
Earthquake.28 One source comprises income transfers from donations by the Japanese Red Cross,
26

As a robustness check, we estimate the same speci…cation as (5) using all samples in which we assign the intensity
measures from the municipalities reported in 2011 to those individuals who moved between 2011 and 2012. The
results are essentially unchanged (the results are available upon request).
27
The reasons for non-response are available as follows (no breakdown for men is available) : refused (51.3 percent),
moved away (22.9 percent), temporarily absent (7.2 percent), and others (18.6 percent).
28
Speci…cally, income is the total income before taxes of all earnings of a respondent’s entire household, including

14

and other organizations, channeled through local governments to a¤ected households. Requirements for eligibility for these transfers include either the loss of a family member or the damage
(half or complete) of housing. In fact, our sample of 226 municipalities includes only 25 municipalities that channeled these transfers. In addition, the possibility that the surveyed individuals in
the municipality happened to be eligible for the transfer is extremely small for the municipalities
in our data set because the number of surveyed individuals in each municipality is less than 15
on average. Furthermore, the amount of payment is rather small.29 Hence, by construction of
the dataset, our results are unlikely to be driven by government transfers to households in these
municipalities.
The second channel of income transfer is compensation from the Tokyo Electric Power Company
(TEPCO) to households and organizations directly a¤ected by the accident at the Fukushima
Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant. The total cumulative payment was roughly JPY 2 trillion (about
US$ 20 billion) at the end of March 2013, which is about 6 times larger than payments via the
…rst channel. Compensation to households is limited to those located in 11 municipalities within
a 30-kilometer radius from the power plant or those speci…ed by the government. None of these
11 municipalities is included in our data set. Thus, the only way TEPCO compensation could
matter systematically to the individuals in our data set is through compensation to organizations,
such as agricultural and …shing cooperatives. Compensation to organizations accounts for 21
percent of total compensation and payment to agricultural and …shing cooperatives (87 percent)
dominates payment to organizations. However, the proportion of workers in these two industries
is very small in the municipalities in our dataset. In fact, among 1,514 men in our sample, only 43
individuals (2.8 percent) work in the agriculture and …shery industries. Even if we limit the sample
to individuals who live in locations hit by an intensity level of more than 4, only 20 individuals
(1.3 percent) work in these two industries.
Table 4 summarizes our robustness checks against concerns about income transfer.30 To
facilitate the comparison, Column (1) in Table 4 replicates the estimate from our baseline in
Table 2. Column (2) adds interaction of a dummy variable of the intensity measure above four
and a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 for men who work in the agriculture and …shery
industries in order to capture the di¤erential impact of the Earthquake by most a¤ected industries.
The estimates for both intensity and its interaction terms barely change, which is not surprising
bonus payments and transfers. In addition, assets comprise …nancial assets and house ownership; …nancial assets
are the balance of …nancial assets (savings, stocks, bonds, insurance, and so on) of a respondent’s entire household
and house ownership is determined by whether any household member is the owner of the residence.
29
For example, a family that lost one family member receives JPY 350,000 (about USD 3,500) as compensation.
30
We also conduct the robustness checks for income and assets using the alternative measure of risk preference and
the di¤erent intensity threshold, and …nd that the results are very similar (the results are available upon request).

15

given that the proportion of workers in these two industries is very low. Column (3) controls for
self-reported income but the estimate is again hardly a¤ected. We need to view this result with
caution because income is reported in brackets of JPY 2 million (roughly USD 20,000 in 2012),
and thus, it is possible that income does indeed change within each bracket.
To compensate for the rough measure of income, even though it is far from perfect, Columns
(4)–(6) show separate estimates for those who experience an increase, decrease, and no change in
reported income across brackets. Column (4) shows that our results are driven mainly by men
whose income does not change within brackets. Furthermore, it is reassuring that we do not
observe any discernable patterns for the subsample of men who experience an income increase
across brackets in Column (5).
Our results are also robust to changes in expected future income. We control for two survey
measures for the percentage change in expected income 1 year or 5 years after the survey, instead
of the reported change in current income, as shown in Column (3). The results remain unchanged
(the results are available upon request).
In addition, we control for assets in Columns (7) and (8). Column (7) controls for assets
measured in brackets of JPY 2.5 million (roughly USD 25,000) and the estimates are hardly
a¤ected. Column (8) adds a dummy that takes the value of 1 if the person owns a house but
the estimates on intensity measure and its interaction are once again una¤ected.31 The result
is in accordance with previous literature that …nds no wealth e¤ects on elicited risk tolerance or
risk-taking behavior (e.g., Sahm, 2012; Brunnermeier and Nagel, 2008). Finally, we control for the
ratio of property values before and after the Earthquake at the municipality level. Column (9)
shows that estimates are unchanged.32
4.3.2

Radiation and fatalities

Throughout the study, we use the intensity of the Earthquake as the measure of the severity of the
Earthquake. However, one may argue that radiation due to the accident at the Fukushima Daiichi
Nuclear Power Station may be another factor that a¤ects people’s risk preferences (Goodwin et
al., 2012).33 Another possible intensity measure, which is often used in the literature (especially
31

For Columns (7) and (8), we replace the missing value for assets and housing ownership with 0, and add a dummy
for such observations in the estimation. In addition, we drop these observations and perform a re-estimation, but
the estimates are essentially identical.
32
Data on property values are not available for …ve municipalities. We replace the missing value with zero and
add a dummy for such observations in the estimation. We also drop these observations and perform a re-estimation
but the estimates are essentially identical.
33
Using the data collected 11–13 weeks after the Earthquake, Goodwin et al. (2012) show that anxiety about
future earthquakes and nuclear threats is correlated with changes in both preventive actions (keeping an earthquake
kit and modifying living quarters) and avoidance behavior (avoiding certain foods or going outside, wearing masks,
and contemplating emigration).

16

in violent con‡icts), is the fatality rate.
As mentioned in Subsection 2.1, we do not use radiation level or fatality rate as our intensity
measure in the main speci…cation because both measures are too concentrated in a small number of
municipalities and little variation exists for the municipalities covered in our sample. In fact, while
the nuclear accident forced thousands of residents in the vicinity of the plant to evacuate, none
of these municipalities is included in our data. In addition, a very large proportion of fatalities is
due to the tsunami following the Earthquake, and again, very few municipalities in our data set
have a coastline facing the Paci…c Ocean, as seen in Figure 1. In fact, only 6 of 226 municipalities
(2.7 percent) report non-zero population who lived in ‡ooded areas.
Nonetheless, to assess whether radiation and fatalities are driving our results on changes in
men’s risk preferences, we add the level of radiation and the fatality rate for each municipality to
our baseline speci…cation (5) as controls.34 The results are summarized in Table 5.
Column (1) in Table 5 replicates the baseline estimate from Table 2 for ease of comparison
across speci…cations. Columns (2) and (3) add the level of radiation and fatality rate, respectively,
while Column (4) adds both measures simultaneously. The estimates on the interaction term are
quantitatively similar to the baseline in Column (1). In addition, the estimates on radiation and
fatalities are not statistically signi…cant.35 Note that we do not claim that radiation and fatalities
do not a¤ect risk preferences; we simply do not have enough variation to precisely estimate their
e¤ects.
4.3.3

Outliers and mean reversion

A potential concern for the results is that they may be driven by outliers. One way to address this
concern is to use M-estimation (Huber, 1964), which puts less weight on residuals that are more
likely to be outliers. In addition, we reestimate the model by excluding some observations that
look like outliers. The results are not di¤erent, as shown in Appendix Table A5.
34
Alternatively, as a further robustness check, we exclude subjects who lived in locations hit hardest by the
Earthquake from the estimation sample and re-estimate equation (5). As for radiation, we exclude subjects who
lived in locations exposed to 2.3 Sv/h or more, which is the level adopted as a standard for planned evacuation
zones after the accident at the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant (20 of 226 municipalities, or 8.8 percent of
the sample). As for fatalities, we exclude subjects who lived in locations that reported non-zero population who
lived in ‡ooded areas (6 of 226 municipalities, or 2.7 percent of the sample). The results are similar (the results are
available upon request).
35
Some studies show that fear of or risk perception about nuclear power plants increased after the Fukushima
Daiichi Nuclear Plant accident in countries far from Japan, speci…cally in Germany (Goebel et al., 2013) and China
(Huang et al., 2013). Therefore, one may argue that our intensity measure captures the e¤ect of fear among those
who live close to nuclear power plants other than the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Plant. In fact, there are 52 nuclear
power plants in 18 locations across Japan. To address this concern, we control for the log distance from nearby
nuclear power plants interacted with the Earthquake intensity measure. Appendix Table A4 shows that the estimates
hardly change with this control. In addition, the estimate on the distance interacted with the intensity measure is
not statistically signi…cant at the conventional level.

17

Another potential concern for the result is whether we may simply capture the mean reversion
of people with high-risk aversion. However, mean reversion is not likely to drive our results. We
are not aware of any event that occurred during the survey before the Earthquake for those who
lived in high-intensity regions. In addition, from our data, we can show that such a concern may
not be valid. We reestimate the same speci…cation (5) in Table 2 by excluding the individuals
whose risk categories are highest and second highest (categories 8 and 9 in Appendix Table A1)
before the Earthquake. Our estimates remain unchanged, as shown in Appendix Table A6.36
4.3.4

Alternative measures of risk preference

To examine whether our results are driven by a particular form of risk preference measure, we
consider two alternative ways to measure risk preferences. First, we construct another cardinal
measure of risk preference de…ned by Equation (2) in Subsection 2.2, absolute risk aversion. We
estimate our baseline speci…cation (Equation (5)) using this alternative risk aversion measure in
Appendix Table A7. The results show similar patterns to the corresponding columns in Table
2, though the estimate on square of intensity measure in Column (4) is marginally insigni…cant.
Though the coe¢ cients across the two tables are not comparable due to the di¤erence in the
de…nition of the two measures, the intensity level at which men become more risk tolerant is
similar across speci…cations. Using the estimates from Column (1) in Appendix Table A7, as the
intensity of the Earthquake increases by 2 above the threshold of 4, absolute risk aversion decreases
by 0.094 [= 2

(–0.059 + 0.012)], which corresponds to 5.3 percent reduction o¤ the mean of 1.758

before the Earthquake. Note that since the relative risk aversion is approximately the product
of absolute risk aversion and wealth (Cramer et al., 2002; Hartog et al., 2002), the change in the
relative risk aversion is also 5.3 percent, which is the same as that of the absolute risk aversion.
Alternatively, the size of decrease is again roughly a half of the mean di¤erence in risk aversion
between men and women (0.177=1.935–1.758) before the Earthquake.
Second, as an alternative to the cardinal measure of risk preferences that we use so far, we
consider an ordinal risk aversion measure. A potential concern we would like to address is that
36

A natural way to examine the mean reversion would be to compare the data between 2010 (two years before
the Earthquake) and 2011 (a year before the Earthquake). Unfortunately, as mentioned in Footnote 11, we cannot
compare 2010 and 2011, because the questions on risk aversion before 2011 di¤er from those used in 2011 and 2012.
Instead, we compare the data between 2009 and 2010 which asks the same (but di¤erent from those of 2011 and 2012)
questions for measuring risk aversion though such comparison is not necessarily ideal because elicitation technique
are di¤erent between two years (a matching technique in 2009 and a choice technique in 2010). Lévy-Garboua et al.
(2011) point out that di¤erences in elicitation technique a¤ect the levels of risk aversion measures but we are not
aware of any evidence indicating that di¤erences in elicitation technique induce changes in these measures over the
intensity of the Earthquake, which is our focus. We estimate our main speci…cation (5) using the data in 2009 and
2010 and …nd no systematic di¤erence in risk preferences measures in the pre-period years (the results are available
upon request).

18

our results could be driven by the cardinal nature of the risk aversion measure as well as potential
dependence on the particular way we construct these cardinal measures. To mitigate this concern,
we construct an ordinal measure that takes 1 if the choice of risk category after the Earthquake
is higher (i.e., more risk-averse) than that before the Earthquake, –1 if the opposite is the case,
and 0 if there is no change between the two surveys. Appendix Table A8 shows that the result is
very similar using this measure. The intensity level at which the change in risk aversion becomes
negative is almost the same across speci…cations as well as those reported in Table 2 and Appendix
Table A7, where the outcomes are cardinal risk preference measures.
4.3.5

Alternative measures of intensity

Finally, Appendix Table A9 demonstrates the robustness of our results to di¤erent ways of constructing the intensity measure. Column (1) replicates our baseline estimates; we use the weighted
average of the three closest monitoring stations. As noted in Subsection 2.1, the weight is the
inverse of the distance from the city hall of each municipality to each monitoring station. Columns
(2)–(4) construct the intensity measure using only the two closest monitoring stations, the simple
average of intensity at the three closest stations, and the only closest station. The estimates are
quantitatively similar to the baseline estimates, and thus, the intensity levels at which men become
risk tolerant are quite similar across speci…cations.37

5
5.1

Discussion
Panel vs. cross-sectional estimates

The biggest advantage of our research design is that our data comprise a panel, and thus, we can
track changes in risk preferences among the same individuals before and after the Earthquake.
To the extent that unobserved time-invariant individual characteristics are correlated with both
the intensity of the Earthquake and risk preference, there is potential for an omitted variable bias
in the estimates obtained from cross-sectional data collected only after the negative shocks have
occurred (i.e., using only “after” data), which is often the case in the literature.
37
One may be concerned also with measurement error in the intensity measure. We use the location of residence
to assign the severity of the Earthquake. However, the Earthquake took place on a weekday (Friday) afternoon, so
some adult men were probably at work. Thus, their assigned value of earthquake severity is possibly measured with
an error. To mitigate this concern, we exclude men whose commute to work takes 15 minutes or longer (remaining
N = 564), and 30 minutes or longer (remaining N = 753). The results are quantitatively similar. In fact, with an
intensity threshold of 4, the value of the intensity measure (X) when Y =0 is 5.06 when N = 564 and 4.93 when N
= 753 (the results are available upon request). In any case, measurement error in the intensity measure causes our
estimates to be at the lower bound because of attenuation bias.

19

Past experience of earthquakes can be such an example, as it may be correlated with both formation of risk preferences and intensity of the Earthquake. For instance, individuals in areas that
were damaged severely by earthquakes in the past might form di¤erent social norms (Postlewaite,
2011), which can a¤ect risk preference formation in an unobserved way. At the same time, the
local history of earthquakes could be correlated with the intensity of the Earthquake.
In fact, Figure 3 shows that there are substantial regional variations in pre-Earthquake risk
preference measures.38

These regional variations before the Earthquake indicate that studies

that rely on cross-sectional data can be biased, even if the location of the earthquake is indeed
random. For example, if the earthquake occurs near regions where individuals with high (low)
pre-earthquake risk measures live, a cross-sectional study may …nd a spurious positive (negative)
relationship between the severity of the earthquake and the risk aversion measure, even in the
absence of any changes in risk preferences.
While the exact reason for such regional variations is outside the scope of the current
study, Figure 4 shows that before the Earthquake, risk-averse individuals indeed tended to live
in locations with lower probability of future catastrophic earthquakes, predicted by a Japanese
government agency using the criteria for the probability of experiencing a large earthquake in
the next 30 years (see Appendix Table A11 for details of this variable).39 To the extent that
such residential choice and/or formation of risk preference are driven by unobserved individual
characteristics that the cross-sectional model cannot fully account for— such as physical and mental
stress tolerance and susceptibility to local social norms (Postlewaite, 2011)— the estimates based
on the cross-sectional data after the natural disaster can be biased, at least in this setting.40
To investigate whether such unobserved heterogeneity is present and indeed biases the estimates
of cross-sectional speci…cation in practice, we run the same speci…cation as (5), but this time use
the cross-sectional data collected after the Earthquake and compare it to the estimate from the
panel speci…cation. The results on comparing the two speci…cations are reported in Table 6. To
facilitate the comparison, Column (1) replicates the results from the baseline speci…cation in Table
2 using panel data. Column (2) reports the estimates based on cross-sectional data collected after
38

We control for the usual individual covariates (age, age squared, income, marital status, and education) and
plot the residuals.
39
Interestingly, such a pattern is more apparent among women than men. Of course, it is di¢ cult to separate
whether this result re‡ects residential sorting (i.e., more risk-averse people migrate to safer locations) or di¤erential
formation of risk preferences at each location. Using data from Germany, Jaeger et al. (2010) and Bauernschuster
et al. (2014) show that individuals who are more willing to take risks are more likely to migrate. On the other hand,
Dohmen et al. (2012) document that risk preference among children is signi…cantly related to the prevailing risk
preferences in the region, controlling for parental risk preferences.
40
As a robustness check, we add these pre-Earthquake hazard predictions as well as their interaction terms with
intensity measure to our baseline speci…cation (5) as controls. The estimates are unchanged (the results are available
upon request).

20

the Earthquake without any individual controls. Column (2) shows that the coe¢ cient on the
interaction term is no longer statistically signi…cant and the magnitude of the coe¢ cient is much
smaller than the estimate reported in Column (1). In addition, the sign is di¤erent from that
of Column (1). One may argue that the di¤erence between Columns (1) and (2) is explained by
a lack of proper individual controls. To address such a concern, we add observable individual
controls, speci…cally, age, age squared, and income in Column (3). However, the estimate on the
interaction term is not statistically signi…cant at the conventional level either.41 Furthermore, the
estimate on the interaction term in Column (3) barely changes from that in Column (2). This
result implies that unobserved individual characteristics that are positively correlated with risk
aversion are more likely to cause upward bias of the estimate obtained from cross-sectional data
in our setting.
In order to test our claim further, we test the null hypothesis that the explanatory variables are
uncorrelated with unobserved individual-speci…c error.42 If the null hypothesis were rejected, then
it would be necessary to consider a model that accounts for the correlation between unobserved
individual-speci…c error and the explanatory variables. We use a cluster-robust version of the
Hausman test based on the di¤erence between the …xed e¤ect estimator and the random e¤ect
estimator, proposed by Wooldridge (2002). The statistics of a Wald test show the null hypothesis
is rejected: 20.5 (p-value = 0.0001). Again, this …nding supports the notion that the estimates
obtained from a cross-sectional approach are likely to be biased.

5.2

Risk-taking behavior

So far, our focus has been on how the Earthquake alters individuals’ risk preferences. In this
section, we examine whether risk-taking behavior, such as drinking, also changes with the intensity
of the Earthquake. It is important to mention that because risk-taking behavior can be a¤ected
by many factors other than risk preferences (e.g., time preferences and peer e¤ects), we have to
view the results on risk-taking behavior with caution.43
Figure 5 plots the proportion of people who drink 5 or more 12 oz-cans of beer or its equivalent
almost every day. Following Figure 2, we plot the changes in outcomes of residuals regressed on
individual covariates in relation to the intensity of the Earthquake. Panels (a)–(c) show the …gures
41

Recognizing the sample size reduction due to missing values, we further add the following controls: marital
status, employment status, …nancial assets, house ownership, and years of education. However, the estimate is
quantitatively unchanged (the results are available upon request).
42
The test is conducted using the “xtoverid” command in Stata software, which is developed by Scha¤er and
Stillman (2006).
43
Unfortunately, the survey we use does not have questions on time preference and social preference in a panel
manner.

21

for the full sample, men, and women, respectively. Panel (b) shows an increasing trend of intense
drinking at very high intensity locations as the intensity of the Earthquake increases among men.
While we see similar patterns among women in Panel (c), the magnitude is much smaller.
Table 7 summarizes the estimates from running speci…cation (5) for the following three forms
of risk-taking behavior for men: gambling, drinking, and smoking.44 Note that all the variables
we construct here capture the most extreme form of behavior that we can observe in the data.45
Speci…cally, a gambling dummy takes one if the person is engaged in gambling (such as horse
racing and Japanese pinball, or pachinko) at least once a week. Similarly, a smoking dummy takes
1 if the person smokes more than 30 cigarettes a day. A drinking dummy is the same variable
as in Figure 5. The mean of gambling, drinking, and smoking dummies among men before the
Earthquake is quite low— 14.5, 2.4, and 2.4 percent, respectively.
Column (1) shows the estimates for gambling. The interaction term is positive and statistically
signi…cant, and much larger in magnitude than the negative coe¢ cient on intensity. This result
suggests that men who live in locations hit by an intensity level higher than four become more
engaged in gambling as the intensity of the Earthquake increases. This result is consistent with our
results that men become more risk tolerant after the Earthquake. In addition, Column (2) shows
that men in these locations become more engaged in heavy drinking, even though the estimate
on the interaction term is marginally statistically signi…cant. Column (3) shows that we do not
observe a similar pattern for smoking.
An alternative interpretation of our results is that men who lost their jobs because of the
Earthquake have spare time for risk-taking behavior, such as gambling and drinking. However,
job loss does not seem to drive our results. First, we control for the change in employment status,
recognizing its endogeneity. Second, we limit the sample to men whose employment status does
not change before and after the Earthquake. The point estimates are quantitatively una¤ected in
either case (the results are available upon request).46 For completeness, we present the result for
women in Appendix Table A10. The results do not show any e¤ects on risk–taking behavior for
women.47
44
Even though our risk measure is based on the …nancial question, our analysis on risk-taking behavior do not
examine …nancial risk-taking behavior (e.g., saving, investment, and portfolio choice). This is because …nancial risktaking behavior is confounded with the change in risk perception and risk preferences. Moreover, our data includes
only a very coarse measure of such behavior.
45
In fact, we do not observe any statistically signi…cant change in the mean number of drinks, gambling, and
cigarettes (the results are available upon request).
46
In addition, we attempt to limit the sample to retired men (i.e., those whose income and time available are less
subject to change) but the sample size is too small (N=142) to gain any meaningful estimate.
47
Note that the mean of each outcome among women before the Earthquake is by order of magnitude smaller
than that of men, making it hard to detect any changes, if any.

22

5.3

A potential mechanism: Emotional responses

Thus far, we show solid evidence that men who are exposed to higher intensities of the Earthquake
become more risk tolerant. However, how does the experience of high intensity of the Earthquake
alter men’s risk preferences? The literature points out that emotional responses to negative shocks
may alter risk preferences (e.g., see Loewenstein et al., 2001, for a “risk as feelings”framework). In
addition, many studies document the relationship between anxiety/stress and risk-taking behavior,
such as gambling and drinking (e.g., Coman et al., 1997; Dawson et al., 2005). While it is beyond
the scope of our study to understand fully the mechanism behind our …ndings, we attempt to shed
light on a potential underlying mechanism here.48
Fortunately, the survey collects three variables that may be related to the emotional stakes of
respondents. Speci…cally, the survey asks respondents to indicate how well each of the following
applies to them: feeling stressed lately (“stressed”); feeling depressed lately (“depressed”); or have
not been sleeping well lately (“sleep problems”). Each variable is answered on a scale of 1–5, where
1 means “particularly true for me” and 5 means “does not hold true at all for me.” Therefore, a
higher score indicates that respondents have less mental/emotional issues.
Because these variables are highly positively correlated, we construct a summary index measure
by taking the unweighted average of the standardized values of three emotional variables. For each
variable, the standardized value is calculated by subtracting the mean and dividing by standard
deviation using two years of data, so that each component of the index has a mean of zero and
standard deviation of one. The aggregation improves the statistical power to detect e¤ects that
are in the same direction among similar outcomes (Kling et al., 2007).49 One limitation of this
approach is that we implicitly weight each outcome equally, which may not be appropriate.
Table 8 summarizes the estimates from running speci…cation (5), in which the outcome is
the summary index measure. Note that the higher the score, the lower the mental issues of
the individual (i.e., he or she is more mentally healthy). Column (1) for men shows that the
interaction term is negative and statistically signi…cant, and much larger in magnitude than the
positive coe¢ cient on intensity measure. This result suggests that men who live in locations hit
by an intensity level higher than four become less mentally healthy.50 This pattern is consistent
48
There is a growing body of literature in economics on the e¤ects of emotions (e.g., fear, sadness, and anger)
on decision making under risk, especially in laboratory settings in which …lms or stories are often used to induce
emotions. For example, see Raghunathan and Pham (1999), Fehr-Duda et al. (2011), Kugler et al. (2012), Tre¤ers
et al. (2012), Drichoutis and Nayga (2013), Campos-Vazquez and Cuilty (2014), and Conte et al. (2014).
49
Another approach of aggregation is to calculate the average standardized treatment e¤ect in which the coe¢ cient
of regression for each outcome is divided by the standard deviation of each outcome to be standardized, and a simple
average of all standardized coe¢ cients is calculated. See Kling and Liebman (2004) and Finkelstein et al. (2012) for
this approach to aggregation. The approach yields very similar estimates (the results are available upon request).
50
Some studies document the impact of natural disasters on short- and medium-run mental health (Frankenberg

23

with our results that men become more risk tolerant and engage more in risk-taking behavior after
the Earthquake at high intensity locations. Interestingly, Column (3) shows that the estimate on
the interaction term for women is not statistically signi…cant at the conventional level.51
An alternative explanation for these results is that men who lost jobs due to the Earthquake
have greater mental issues. In fact, some studies document the link between job loss and mental
health (e.g., Burgard et al., 2007; Schaller and Stevens, 2014). Therefore, we control for change
in employment status, once again recognizing its endogeneity, in Column (2). The estimate is
essentially unchanged.
We cannot conclude that emotional responses drive our results on changes in risk preferences
because there are many alternative explanations. However, it is interesting that the emotional
response patterns correspond to those of risk preferences and risk-taking behavior, and that we
observe such a strong pattern only among men, while the pattern among women is much weaker.

6

Conclusion

Attitudes toward risk under uncertainty are the key determinants of economic decision making.
Standard economic models assume that risk preferences are stable across time but recent studies
suggest that risk preferences may be altered by various shocks. However, little is yet known how
risk preferences can be altered.
To shed light on this research question, we test whether experience of the Great East Japan
Earthquake alters risk preferences of individuals. We exploit a unique panel dataset that enables us
to track changes in risk preference of the same individuals before and after the Earthquake, unlike
previous studies that use cross-sectional data collected only after the negative shocks occurred.
Furthermore, the panel structure of our data allows us to address the issue of selective migration.
We …nd that men who experienced higher intensity of the Earthquake become more risk
tolerant. Furthermore, we …nd corroborative evidence that these men become more engaged in
gambling and drinking.
This study may be especially important because natural disasters are becoming increasingly prevalent all over the world, including in developed countries. Past studies have predominantly examined cases in developing countries. Our results show that the risk preferences of people
in Japan— a developed country with a history of coping with frequent natural disasters— are also
a¤ected by a very large negative shock.
et al., 2008; Paxson et al., 2012; Rhodes et al., 2010).
51
Note that we fail to reject the null hypothesis that the estimate on the interaction term I[Xj
4](Xj 4) are
the same for male and female ( 2 (1) = 0.48 (p-value = 0.4868)). The estimates come from Columns (2) and (4) in
Table 8.

24

Our study has some limitations. First, we can examine the e¤ects of the Earthquake
on only a limited number of risk-taking behavioral forms, such as gambling. Second, we do not
examine the persistence of such changes in risk preferences because of data limitation. Third,
we cannot fully understand the mechanism of how experience of high intensity of the Earthquake
alters individuals’risk preferences. The intensity measures of the Earthquake we use indeed capture
the degree of shock physically felt by each individual, and thus, such shocks can plausibly a¤ect
people’s risk preferences. While we show some suggestive evidence of emotional responses stories,
it is impossible to identify whether our results are driven entirely by the emotional responses, by
other channels, or by combinations of these channels. These questions are beyond the scope of our
study but clearly remain as an avenue for future research.

References
Anderson, Lisa R., and Jennifer M. Mellor. 2008. “Predicting Health Behaviors with an Experimental Measure of Risk Preference.” Journal of Health Economics, 27(5): 1260–1274.
Andreoni, James, and Charles Sprenger. 2011. “Uncertainty Equivalents: Testing the Limits of
the Independence Axiom.” Unpublished.
Barsky, Robert B., F. Thomas Juster, Miles S. Kimball, and Matthew D. Shapiro. 1997. “Preference Parameters and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the Health and
Retirement Survey.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112 (2): 537–579.
Bauernschuster, Stefan, Oliver Falck, Stephan Heblich, Jens Suedekum, and Alfred Lameli. 2014.
“Why are educated and risk-loving persons more mobile across regions?”Journal of Economic
Behavior and Organization, 98: 56–69.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Du‡o, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. “How Much Should We Trust
Di¤erences-in-Di¤erences Estimates?”The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (1): 249–275.
Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Stefan Nagel. 2008 “Do Wealth Fluctuations Generate TimeVarying Risk Aversion? Micro-Evidence on Individuals’Asset Allocation.”American Economic
Review, 98(3): 713–736.
Burgard, Sarah, Jennie Brand, and James House. 2007. “Toward a Better Estimation of the E¤ect
of Job Loss on Health.” Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 48: 369–384.
Byrnes, James P., David C. Miller, and William D. Schafer. 1999. “Gender Di¤erences in RiskTaking: A Meta-analysis.” Psychological Bulletin, 125(3): 367–383.

25

Callen, Michael. forthcoming.“Catastrophes and Time Preference: Evidence from the Indian Ocean
Earthquake.” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization.
Callen, Michael, Mohammad Isaqzadeh, James D. Long, and Charles Sprenger. 2014. “Violence
and Risk Preference: Experimental Evidence from Afghanistan.”American Economic Review,
104(1): 123–148.
Cameron, Lisa, and Manisha Shah. 2015. “Risk-Taking Behavior in the Wake of Natural Disasters.”
Journal of Human Resources, 50(2): 484–515.
Campos-Vazquez, Raymundo M., and Emilio Cuilty. 2014. “The Role of Emotions on Risk Aversion: A Prospect Theory Experiment.” Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Economics,
50: 1–9.
Cassar, Alessandra, Andrew Healy, and Carl von Kessler. 2011. “Trust, Risk and Time Preferences
after a Natural Disaster: Experimental Evidence from Thailand.” Unpublished.
Charness, Gary, and Uri Gneezy. 2012. “Strong Evidence for Gender Di¤erences in Risk Taking.”
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 83(1): 50–58.
Coman, Greg J., Graham D. Burrows, and Barry J. Evans. 1997. “Stress and Anxiety as Factors in
the Onset of Problem Gambling: Implications for Treatment.”Stress Medicine, 13(4): 235–244.
Cohn, Alain, Jan Engelmann, Ernst Fehr, and Michel Maréchal. 2015. “Evidence for countercyclical
risk aversion: an experiment with …nancial professionals.”American Economic Review, 105(2):
860–885
Conte, Anna, M. Vittoria Levati, and Chiara Nardi. 2014. “Risk Preferences and the Role of
Emotions.” Unpublished.
Cramer, Jan S., Joop Hartog, Nicole Jonker, and Mirjam van Praag. 2002. “Low Risk Aversion
Encourages the Choice for Entrepreneurship: An Empirical Test of a Truism.” Journal of
Economic Behavior and Organization, 48(1): 29–36.
Croux, Christophe, Geert Dhaene, and Dirk Hoorelbeke. 2003. “Robust standard errors for robust
estimators.” Discussions Paper Series (DPS) 03.16, Center for Economic Studies.
Croson, Rachel, and Uri Gneezy. 2009. “Gender Di¤erences in Preferences.” Journal of Economic
Literature, 47(2): 448–474.
Dawson, Deborah A., Bridget F. Grant, and June W. Ruan. 2005. “The Association between Stress
and Drinking: Modifying E¤ects of Gender and Vulnerability.”Alcohol and Alcoholism, 40(5):
453–460.

26

Dohmen, Thomas, Armin Falk, David Hu¤man, Uwe Sunde, Jürgen Schupp, and Gert G. Wagner.
2011. “Individual Risk Attitudes: Measurement, Determinants and Behavioral Consequences.”
Journal of the European Economic Association, 9(3): 522–550.
Dohmen, Thomas, Armin Falk, David Hu¤man, and Uwe Sunde. 2012. “The Intergenerational
Transmission of Risk and Trust Attitudes.” Review of Economic Studies, 79(2): 645–677.
Donkers, Bas, Bertrand Melenberg, and Arthur van Soest. 2001. “Estimating Risk Attitudes Using
Lotteries: A Large Sample Approach.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 22(2): 165–195.
Drichoutis, Andreas C., and Rodolfo M. Nayga Jr. 2013. “Eliciting Risk and Time Preferences
under Induced Mood States.” The Journal of Socio-Economics, 45: 18–27.
Eckel, Catherine C., Mahmoud A. El Gamalb, and Rick K. Wilson. 2009. “Risk Loving After
the Storm: A Bayesian-Network Study of Hurricane Katrina Evacuees.” Journal of Economic
Behavior and Organization, 69: 110–124.
Eckel, Catherine C., and Philip J Grossman. 2008. “Men, women and risk aversion: Experimental
evidence.”Chapter 113. In Handbook of Experimental Economics Results, Charles R. Plott and
Vernon L. Smith (eds.), Vol. 1, New York, Elsevier Press.
Fehr-Duda, Helga, Thomas Epper, Adrian Bruhin, and Renate Schubert. 2011. “Risk and Rationality: The E¤ects of Mood and Decision Rules on Probability Weighting.” Journal of Economic
Behavior and Organization, 78(1–2): 14–24.
Finkelstein, Amy, Sarah Taubman, Bill Wright, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber, Joseph P.
Newhouse, Heidi Allen, Katherine Baicker, and the Oregon Health Study Group. 2012. “The
Oregon Health Insurance Experiment: Evidence from the First Year.” The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 127(3): 1057–1106.
Fire and Disaster Management Agency. 2013. Heisei 23 Nen Touhoku Chihou Taiheiyou
Oki Jishin Ni Tsuite (Report on the Great East Japan Earthquake),

Vol 149.

http://www.fdma.go.jp/bn/higaihou/pdf/jishin/149.pdf (in Japanese) [accessed April 3, 2014].
Frankenberg, Elizabeth , Jed Friedman, Thomas Gillespie, Nicholas Ingwersen, Robert Pynoos, Iip
Umar Rifai, Bondan Sikoki, Alan Steinberg, Cecep Sumantri, Wayan Suriastini, and Duncan
Thomas. 2008. “Mental Health in Sumatra after the Tsunami.” American Journal of Public
Health, 98(9): 1671–1677.
Gardner, Margo, and Laurence Steinberg. 2005. “Peer In‡uence on Risk Taking, Risk Preference,
and Risky Decision Making in Adolescence and Adulthood: An Experimental Study.” Developmental Psychology, 41(4): 625–635.
27

Goebel, Jan, Christian Krekel, Tim Tiefenbach, and Nicolas R. Ziebarth. 2013. “Natural Disaster,
Policy Action, and Mental Well-Being: The Case of Fukushima.” Unpublished.
Goodwin, Robin, Masahito Takahashi, Shaojing Sun, and Stanley O. Gaines Jr. 2012. “Modelling
Psychological Responses to the Great East Japan Earthquake and Nuclear Incident.” PLoS
One, 7(5): e37690.
Greene, William. 2004. “The Behaviour of the Maximum Likelihood Estimator of Limited Dependent Variable Models in the Presence of Fixed E¤ects.” Econometrics Journal, 7(1): 98–119.
Guiso, Luigi, and Monica Paiella. 2006. “The Role of Risk Aversion in Predicting Individual
Behavior.” In Insurance: Theoretical Analysis and Policy Implications, Chiappori, P.A., and
C. Gollier (eds.), Cambridge, MIT Press.
Guiso, Luigi, and Monica Paiella. 2008. “Risk Aversion, Wealth, and Background Risk.” Journal
of the European Economic Association, 6(6): 1109–50.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2013. “Time Varying Risk Aversion.” Booth
Working Paper No. 13–64.
Hartog, Joop, Ada Ferrer-i-Carbonell, and Nicole Jonker. 2002. “Linking Measured Risk Aversion
to Individual Characteristics.” Kyklos, 55(1): 3–26.
Haushofer, Johannes, and Ernst Fehr. 2014. “On the psychology of poverty.” Science, 344(6186):
862–867.
Heckhausen, Roger A. Dixon, and Paul B. Baltes. 1989. “Gains and Losses in Development
throughout Adulthood as Perceived by Di¤erent Adult Age Groups.” Developmental Psychology, 25: 109–121.
Honoré, Bo E. 1992. “Trimmed Lad and Least Squares Estimation of Truncated and Censored
Regression Models with Fixed E¤ects.” Econometrica, 60(3): 533–565.
Huang, Lei, Ying Zhou, Yuting Han, James K. Hammitt, Jun Bi, and Yang Liu. 2013. “E¤ect of
the Fukushima Nuclear Accident on the Risk Perception of Residents near a Nuclear Power
Plant in China.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110: 19742–19747.
Huber, Peter J. 1964. “Robust estimation of a location parameter.” Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 35: 73–101.
Imas, Alex. 2014. “The Realization E¤ect: Risk-Taking After Realized Versus Paper Losses.”
Unpublished.

28

Jaeger, David A., Thomas Dohmen, Armin Falk, David Hu¤man, Uwe Sunde, and Holger Bonin.
2010. “Direct Evidence on Risk Attitudes and Migration.”Review of Economics and Statistics,
92: 684–689.
Jann, Ben. 2010. “ROBREG: Stata module providing robust regression estimators.” Available at
https://ideas.repec.org/c/boc/bocode/s457114.html [accessed September 22, 2015].
Kim, Young-Il, and Jungmin Lee. 2013. “The Long-Run Impact of Traumatic Experience on Risk
Aversion.” Unpublished.
Kling, Je¤rey, and Je¤rey Liebman. 2004. “Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood E¤ects on
Youth.”’Unpublished. Available at http://www.nber.org/mtopublic/483.pdf [accessed April 3,
2014].
Kling, Je¤rey, Je¤rey Liebman, and Lawrence Katz. 2007. “Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood E¤ects.” Econometrica, 75(1): 83–119.
Kugler, Tamar, Terry Connolly and Lisa D. Ordóñez. 2012. “Emotion, Decision, and Risk: Betting
on Gambles versus Betting on People.” Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 25: 123–134.
Lerner, Jennifer S., and Dacher Keltner. 2001. “Fear, Anger, and Risk.” Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 81:146–159.
Lerner, Jennifer S., Roxana M. Gonzalez, Deborah A. Small, and Baruch Fischho¤. 2003. “E¤ects
of Fear and Anger on Perceived Risks of Terrorism: A National Field Experiment.”Psychological Science, 14(2): 144–150.
Lévy–Garboua, Louis, Hela Maa…, David Masclet, and Antoine Terracol. 2012. “Risk aversion and
framing e¤ects.” Experimental Economics, 15(1): 128–144.
Loewenstein, George F., Elke U. Weber, Christopher K. Hsee, and Ned Welch. 2001. “Risk as
Feelings.” Psychological Bulletin, 127(2): 267–286.
Malmendier, Ulrike, and Stefan Nagel. 2011. “Depression Babies: Do Macroeconomic Experiences
A¤ect Risk Taking?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(1): 373–416.
Mather, Mara, Nina Mazar, Marissa A. Gorlick, Nichole R. Lighthall, Jessica Burgeno, Andrej
Schoeke, and Dan Ariely. 2012. “Risk Preferences and Aging: The ‘Certainty E¤ect’in Older
Adults’Decision Making.” Psychology and Aging, 27: 801–816.
McDowell,

Allen,

and Nicholas J. Cox. 2001. “Logit Transformation” Available at:

http://www.stata.com/support/faqs/statistics/logit-transformation/ [accessed April 3, 2014].
Ministry
per

of
on

Internal
Information

A¤airs
and

and

Communications.

Communication
29

in

2011.
Japan

White
Available

Paat

http://www.soumu.go.jp/johotsusintokei/whitepaper/eng/WP2011/2011-index.html

[ac-

cessed April 3, 2014].
Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology. 2012. White Paper on Science and
Technology. Available at http://www.mext.go.jp/english/whitepaper/1323541.htm [accessed
April 3, 2014].
Paxson, Christina, Elizabeth Fussell, Jean Rhodes, and Mary Waters. 2012. “Five Years Later:
Recovery from Post Traumatic Stress and Psychological Distress among Low-income Mothers
A¤ected by Hurricane Katrina.” Social Science & Medicine, 74(2):150–157.
Postlewaite, Andrew. 2011. “Social norms and preferences.” Chapter 2. In Handbook for Social
Economics, J. Benhabib, A. Bisin, and M. Jackson (eds.), Vol. 1A, Amsterdam and San Diego:
Elsevier, North-Holland.
Pratt, John W. 1964. “Risk Aversion in the Small and in the Large.” Econometrica, 32: 122–136.
Raghunathan, Rajagopal, and Michel T. Pham. 1999. “All negative moods are not equal: motivational in‡uences on anxiety and sadness on decision making.” Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 79(1): 56–77.
Rhodes, Jean, Christian Chan, Christina Paxson, Cecilia E. Rouse, Mary Waters, and Elizabeth
Fussell. “The Impact of Hurricane Katrina on the Mental and Physical Health of Low-Income
Parents in New Orleans.” American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 80(2): 237–247.
Sahm, Claudia. 2012. “How Much Does Risk Tolerance Change?” Quarterly Journal of Finance,
2(4).
Scawthorn, Charles. 2003. “Earthquakes: Seismogenesis, measurement, and distribution.”Chapter
4. In Earthquake Engineering Handbook, W. Chen, and C. Scawthorn (eds.), Boca Raton, FL,
CRC Press.
Scha¤er, Mark E., and Steven Stillman. 2006. “XTOVERID: Stata module to calculate tests
of overidentifying restrictions after xtreg, xtivreg, xtivreg2, xthtaylor.” Statistical Software
Components S456779, Boston College Department of Economics, revised Nov 2, 2011.
Schaller, Jessamyn, and Ann Hu¤ Stevens. 2014. “Short-run E¤ects of Job Loss on Health Conditions, Health Insurance, and Health Care Utilization.” NBER Working Paper No. 19884.
Stigler, George J., and Gary S. Becker. 1977. “De Gustibus Non Est Disputandum.” American
Economic Review, 67(2): 76–90.
Torch, Florencia. 2011. “The E¤ect of Maternal Stress on Birth Outcomes: Exploiting a Natural
Experiment.” Demography, 48:1473–1491.
30

Tre¤ers, Theresa, Philipp D. Koellinger, and Arnold Picot. 2012. “In the Mood for Risk? A
Random-assignment Experiment Addressing the E¤ects of Moods on Risk Preferences.” Unpublished.
Voors, Maarten J., Eleonora E. M. Nillesen, Philip Verwimp, Erwin H. Bulte, Robert Lensink, and
Daan P. Van Soest. 2012. “Violent Con‡ict and Behavior: A Field Experiment in Burundi.”
American Economic Review, 102(2): 941–964.
Wooldridge, Je¤rey M. 2002. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. Cambridge,
MA, MIT Press.

31

Appendix A: JMA seismic intensity scale (Shindo)
Various seismic intensity scales are used in different countries to measure the degree of
shaking at a specific location. The seismic intensity scale by Japanese Meteorological Association
(JMA) is used in Japan and is computed using acceleration data for each monitoring station. After
adjusting the raw digital acceleration data to the adjusted acceleration (a gal), the JMA seismic
intensity scale (I) can be obtained by I=2log10a+0.94. Thus, the measure can be considered
essentially as the logarithm of the acceleration. In other words, an increase of the JMA intensity
scale corresponds to an exponential increase in acceleration. Approximately, an increase of JMA
seismic intensity scale by two means 10-fold of acceleration. For details, see the JMA
announcement describing seismic intensity (in Japanese, last assessed on July 30, 2014)
http://www.mext.go.jp/b_menu/hakusho/nc/k19960215001/k19960215001.html
The JMA’s descriptions on seismic intensity for human perception and reaction as well as
indoor situations are as follows.
Seismic
intensity

0
1

Human perception and reaction

Indoor situation

Imperceptible to people, but recorded by seismometers.
Felt slightly by some people keeping quiet in buildings.

2

Felt by many people keeping quiet in Hanging objects such as lamps swing slightly.
buildings. Some people may be awoken.

3

Felt by most people in buildings. Felt by Dishes in cupboards may rattle.
some people walking. Many people are
awoken.
Most people are startled. Felt by most Hanging objects such as lamps swing
people walking. Most people are awoken. significantly, and dishes in cupboards rattle.
Unstable ornaments may fall.

4

5 Lower
(4.5 – 5)

Many people are frightened and feel the Hanging objects such as lamps swing
need to hold onto something stable.
violently. Dishes in cupboards and items on
bookshelves may fall. Many unstable
ornaments fall. Unsecured furniture may
move, and unstable furniture may topple over.

5 Upper
(5 – 5.5)

Many people find it hard to move; Dishes in cupboards and items on
walking is difficult without holding onto bookshelves are more likely to fall. TVs may
something stable.
fall from their stands, and unsecured furniture
may topple over.
It is difficult to remain standing.
Many items of unsecured furniture move and
may topple over. Doors may become wedged
shut.
It is impossible to remain standing or Most items of unsecured furniture move and
move without crawling. People may be are more likely to topple over.
thrown through the air.
Most items of unsecured furniture move and
topple over or may even be thrown through
the air.

6 Lower
(5.5 – 6)
6 Upper
(6 – 6.5)
7

Source: Japan Meteorological Agency, http://www.jma.go.jp/jma/en/Activities/inttable.html
32

Appendix B: Survey questions on variables used in this study
The following are survey questions used in the study.
1. Risk Preferences: Suppose there is a “speed lottery” with a 50% chance of winning JPY
100,000. If you win, you get the prize right away. If you lose, you get nothing. How much
would you spend to buy a ticket for this lottery? Choose Option A if you would buy it at that
price or choose Option B if you would not buy at that price. (X ONE Box For EACH Row)
Which ONE do you prefer?
(X ONE Box For EACH Row)
Price of the “speed lottery” ticket
Option A
Option B
(DO NOT buy the “speed
(buy the “speed lottery”
lottery” ticket)
ticket)
JPY 10
(USD 0.1)
1 □
2 □
JPY 2,000
(USD 20)
1 □
2 □
JPY 4,000
(USD 40)
1 □
2 □
JPY 8,000
(USD 80)
1 □
2 □
JPY 15,000
(USD 150)
1 □
2 □
JPY 25,000
(USD 250)
1 □
2 □
JPY 35,000
(USD 350)
1 □
2 □
JPY 50,000
(USD 500)
1 □
2 □
Note: An exchange rate of JPY 100 = USD 1 is used.

2. Gambling: Do you bet on lotteries, casinos, sporting events, or horse races? (X ONE Box)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

□
□
□
□
□
□
□

Don’t gamble at all
Used to gamble but quit gambling now
Hardly gamble
Several times a year or so
Once a month or so
Once a week or so
Almost everyday

3. Drinking: Do you drink alcoholic beverages? (X ONE Box)
1
2
3
4
5
6

□
□
□
□
□
□

Don’t drink at all
Hardly drink (a few times a month or less)
Drink sometimes (a few times a week)
A can of beer (12 oz.) or its equivalent a day, almost every day
3 cans of beer (12 oz. x 3) or its equivalent a day, almost every day
5 or more cans of beer (12 oz. x 5) or its equivalent a day, almost every day

4. Smoking: Do you smoke? (X ONE Box)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

□
□
□
□
□
□
□
□
□
□

Never smoked
Hardly smoke
Occasionally smoke
I smoke about 1 to 5 cigarettes a day
I smoke about 6 to 10 cigarettes a day
I smoke about 11 to 20 cigarettes a day
I smoke about 21 to 30 cigarettes a day
I smoke about 31 to 40 cigarettes a day
I smoke 41 cigarettes or more a day
I used to smoke but I quit
33

Figure 1. Seismic Intensity of the Great East Japan Earthquake

Note: The epicenter of the Earthquake (38.322°N 142.369°E) is marked with a cross. Of the 1,724
municipalities in Japan on April 1, 2011, 226 municipalities in our survey are shown with black outline.
The intensity of the earthquake comes from the seismic intensity of the Earthquake (Shindo in Japanese),
which is a metric of the strength of the earthquake at a specific location, and is constructed by the Japanese
Meteorological Association (JMA). See the main text for construction of our measure and Appendix Table
A13 for the source.

34

Figure 2. The changes in risk preferences and the intensity of the Earthquake
Outcome: Transformed price

(b) Men

1

2

3

4

Seismic Intensity

5

6

.1
.05
0
-.05

Risk Aversion

-.15

-.15
0

-.1

.05
0
-.05

Risk Aversion

.1

.15

.15

(c) Women

-.1

.05
0
-.05
-.1
-.15

Risk Aversion

.1

.15

(a) Full Sample

0

1

2

3

4

Seismic Intensity

5

6

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Seismic Intensity

Note: The data are from the JHPS-CPS. Risk aversion on the y-axis is the transformed price. See the main text for construction of the variable. The seismic
intensity of the Earthquake (Shindo in Japanese) on the x-axis is a metric of the strength of the earthquake at a specific location. We plot the changes in
residual of transformed price regressed on individual characteristics (age, age-squared, gender (for full sample only), income, marital status, and years of
education). Each dot in the graph represents the mean of observations within each bin of 0.2 in intensity measure and the size of the dot reflects the
number of observations in each bin. The solid fitted line is a lowess curve with a bandwidth of 0.5. The vertical dotted lines correspond to seismic intensity
of four. In total, there are 3,221 individuals and 226 municipalities. We address the potential concern of outliers in Section 4.3.3.

35

1.5
1
.5
0
-.5
Hokkaido
Aomori
Iwate
Miyagi
Akita
Yamagata
Fukushima
Ibaraki
Tochigi
Gumma
Saitama
Chiba
Tokyo
Kanagawa
Niigata
Toyama
Ishikawa
Fukui
Yamanashi
Nagano
Gifu
Shizuoka
Aichi
Mie
Shiga
Kyoto
Osaka
Hyogo
Nara
Wakayama
Tottori
Shimane
Okayama
Hiroshima
Yamaguchi
Tokushima
Kagawa
Ehime
Kochi
Fukuoka
Saga
Nagasaki
Kumamoto
Oita
Miyazaki
Kagoshima
Okinawa

-1

Risk Aversion (before earthquake)

Figure 3. Risk Preferences by Prefecture before the Earthquake

Prefectures
Note: Risk aversion before the Earthquake on the y-axis is the residual of transformed price
regressed on individual characteristics (age, age-squared, gender, income, marital status, and
years of education). In total, there are 47 prefectures in Japan. The null hypothesis that
residualized risk aversion at each prefecture is the same is rejected at the 1 percent level
(F(46, 225) = 265.65, p-value = 0.0000).

1
0
-1
-2

Risk Aversion (before earthquake)

Figure 4. Risk Preferences and Earthquake Hazard Prediction
before the Earthquake

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

Pre-Earthquake Hazard Prediction

Note: Pre-Earthquake hazard prediction on the x-axis is the probability of future catastrophic
earthquake, predicted by a Japanese government agency with the criterion being the probability of
experiencing a large earthquake in the next 30 years (see Appendix Table A13 for details). Risk
aversion on the y-axis is the residual of transformed price regressed on individual characteristics
(age, age-squared, gender, income, marital status, and years of education). See the main text for
construction of the variable. The line is a lowess curve with a bandwidth of 0.3.
36

Figure 5. The changes in drinking behavior and the intensity of the Earthquake
Outcome: Fraction of 5 cans of beer (12 oz. per can) or its equivalent a day, almost everyday

(b) Men

0

1

2

3

4

Seismic Intensity

5

6

.1
.05
0

Fraction

-.05
-.1

-.1

-.05

0

Fraction

.05

.05
0
-.1

-.05

Fraction

(c) Women

.1

.1

(a) Full Sample

0

1

2

3

4

Seismic Intensity

5

6

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Seismic Intensity

Note: The data are from the JHPS-CPS. The y-axis is the changes in residual of the fraction of people who report drinking 5 cans of beer (12 oz. per can) or
its equivalent a day, almost every day, regressed on individual characteristics (age, age-squared, gender (for full sample only), income, marital status, and
years of education). The seismic intensity of the Earthquake (Shindo in Japanese) on the x-axis is a metric of the strength of the earthquake at a specific
location. Each dot represents the mean of observations within each bin of 0.2 and the size of the dot reflects the number of observations in each bin. The
solid fitted line is a lowess curve with a bandwidth of 0.5. The vertical dotted lines correspond to seismic intensity of four. In total, there are 3,221
individuals and 226 municipalities.

37

Table 1. Summary Statistics
Variables

N

Mean

SD

Min

Max

Risk aversion measure 1 (transformed price)

3,221

0.8070

0.2149

0

0.9998

Risk aversion measure 2 (absolute risk aversion)

3,221

1.8520

0.3568

0

2.0000

Gambling (once or more a week)

3,221

0.09

0.29

0

1

Drinking (5 or more cans of beer, almost every day)

3,221

0.01

0.12

0

1

Smoking (more than 30 cigarettes per day)

3,221

0.01

0.11

0

1

Age (in years)

3,221

52.1

12.6

22

78

Male

3,221

0.47

0.50

0

1

Agriculture and fishery industries

3,221

0.02

0.15

0

1

Annual household income (in JPY million)

3,221

6.35

3.75

1.0

20

Employment status

3,221

0.71

0.45

0

1

House ownership

3,204

0.88

0.33

0

1

High School graduation or less

3,204

0.55

0.50

0

1

Married

3,171

0.82

0.38

0

1

Assets (in JPY million)

2,983

13.5

17.4

2.5

100

Stress

3,183

2.78

1.05

1

5

Depression

3,183

3.33

1.10

1

5

Sleep problems

3,183

3.82

1.08

1

5

X (seismic intensity)

226

2.83

1.94

0

6.06

Property Price

221

0.97

0.02

0.90

1.03

Radiation (µSv/h)

226

0.10

0.24

0

2.40

A. Individual-Level Variables (before the Earthquake)
Risk Preferences

Behavior

Individual Characteristics

B. Municipal-Level Variables

Fatality rate (per 1,000 population)
226
0.25
2.43
0
26.9
Note: See Appendix Table A13 for construction of each municipal-level variable. Note that the number of
observations for assets, house ownership, education, marital status, and property price differs slightly because of
missing values. Note that the values of absolute risk aversion are multiplied by 1000.

38

Table 2. Results on Risk Preferences
Outcome: Risk Aversion Measure 1 (Transformed Price)
Full Sample

X

(X - 4) * 1[X ≥ 4]

Women

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

0.003

0.002

0.002

0.005

0.009*

0.007*

0.005

0.020**

-0.003

-0.002

-0.001

-0.009*

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.005)

(0.005)

(0.004)

(0.003)

(0.010)

(0.003)

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.005)

-0.011

-0.039**

0.016*

(0.010)

(0.017)

(0.009)

(X - 4.5) * 1[X ≥ 4.5]

-0.017

-0.058***

0.022*

(0.013)

(0.022)

(0.013)

(X - 5) * 1[X ≥ 5]

-0.033*

-0.093***

0.029

(0.020)

(0.032)

(0.018)

X-squared

Constant

Men

-0.001

-0.004**

0.002*

(0.001)

(0.002)

(0.001)

0.003

0.003

0.003

0.003

0.004

0.006

0.009

0.003

0.001

0.001

-0.001

0.003

(0.005)

(0.005)

(0.005)

(0.005)

(0.011)

(0.010)

(0.010)

(0.011)

(0.006)

(0.005)

(0.005)

(0.006)

5.65

5.41

5.40

6.42

5.34

5.27

5.37

5.65

4.90

5.01

5.23

4.86

×

×

×

×

×

×

×

×

×

×

×

×

Mean of Δrisk aversion

0.007

0.007

0.007

0.007

0.018

0.018

0.018

0.018

-0.003

-0.003

-0.003

-0.003

Mean of risk aversion (before)

0.807

0.807

0.807

0.807

0.738

0.738

0.738

0.738

0.868

0.868

0.868

0.868

No. of individuals

3,221

3,221

3,221

3,221

1,514

1,514

1,514

1,514

1,707

1,707

1,707

1,707

R-squared

0.000

0.001

0.001

0.000

0.004

0.004

0.005

0.002

0.002

0.002

0.001

0.002

Value of X when ΔY=0
Individual FE

Note: X is the seismic intensity of the Earthquake (Shindo in Japanese), a metric of the strength of an earthquake at a specific location. Significance levels are *p <
0.10, **p < 0.05, and ***p < 0.01. Standard errors clustered at the municipality are reported in parentheses. Value of X when ΔY=0 is the level of intensity measure (X)
where change in risk aversion (ΔY) switches signs.

39

Table 3. Selective Migration (Men Only)
Men
Outcome
X
(X - 4) * 1[X ≥ 4]

Migration
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.002

-0.001

0.002

-0.012

(0.008)

(0.007)

(0.008)

(0.019)

0.023
(0.031)

(X - 4.5) * 1[X ≥ 4.5]

0.033
(0.038)

(X - 5) * 1[X ≥ 5]

0.018
(0.051)
0.003

X-squared

(0.003)
Constant
Covariates
No. of individuals

0.089

0.088

0.086

0.093

(0.093)

(0.093)

(0.093)

(0.094)

×

×

×

×

1,574

1,574

1,574

1,574

R-squared
0.011
0.012
0.010
0.011
Note: Outcome is a dummy that takes one if the person moved municipalities between surveys in 2011
and 2012. The migration rate is 3.8 percent (60 of 1,574 respondents). X is the seismic intensity of the
Earthquake (Shindo in Japanese), a metric of the strength of an earthquake at a specific location.
Significance levels are *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, and ***p < 0.01. Standard errors clustered at the
municipality are reported in parentheses. Covariates in Columns (2) and (4) are age, age squared, and
income. Results for specifications with (X – 4.5) * 1[X ≥ 4.5], (X - 5) * 1[X ≥ 5], and X-squared are very
similar (available upon request).

40

Table 4. Robustness Checks: Income and Wealth Effects (Men Only)
Outcome: Risk Aversion Measure 1 (Transformed Price)
Men

Additional Control Variables

Baseline

Industry
dummy

Changes in Income Bracket
Income

ΔIncome

ΔIncome

ΔIncome

=0

>0

<0

House
Asset

Ownership
Dummy

Property
Price

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

0.009*

0.009*

0.009*

0.019***

0.003

-0.008

0.009*

0.009*

0.009*

(0.005)

(0.005)

(0.005)

(0.007)

(0.009)

(0.011)

(0.005)

(0.005)

(0.005)

-0.039**

-0.037**

-0.037**

-0.074***

0.005

-0.003

-0.037**

-0.037**

-0.039**

(0.017)

(0.017)

(0.017)

(0.026)

(0.032)

(0.037)

(0.017)

(0.017)

(0.017)

0.004

0.004

0.004

-0.010

0.040

0.069**

0.005

0.005

0.004

(0.011)

(0.011)

(0.011)

(0.015)

(0.032)

(0.033)

(0.011)

(0.011)

(0.017)

×

×
×

×
×
×

×
×

×
×
×

×
×
×

×
×
×
×

×
×
×
×
×

×
×
×
×
×
×

Mean of Δrisk aversion

0.018

0.018

0.018

0.021

0.010

0.017

0.018

0.018

0.018

Mean of risk aversion (before)

0.738

0.738

0.738

0.744

0.730

0.733

0.738

0.738

0.738

No. of individuals

1,514

1,514

1,514

810

344

360

1,514

1,514

1,514

R-squared

0.004

0.005

0.005

0.018

0.015

0.011

0.005

0.007

0.004

X

(X - 4) * 1[X ≥ 4]

Constant

Individual FE
Industry dummy * 1[X ≥ 4]
Income
Asset
House ownership
Property price

Note: X is the seismic intensity of the Earthquake (Shindo in Japanese), a metric of the strength of an earthquake at a specific location. Significance levels
are *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, and ***p < 0.01. Standard errors clustered at the municipality are reported in parentheses. Results for specifications with (X –
4.5) * 1[X ≥ 4.5], (X - 5) * 1[X ≥ 5], and X-squared are very similar (available upon request).
41

Table 5. Robustness Checks: Radiation and Fatality Rate (Men Only)
Outcome: Risk Preference Measure 1 (Transformed Price)
Men
X
(X - 4) * 1[X ≥ 4]

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.009*

0.009*

0.009*

0.009*

(0.005)

(0.005)

(0.005)

(0.005)

-0.039**

-0.042**

-0.036*

-0.039*

(0.017)

(0.019)

(0.019)

(0.020)

Radiation

0.013

0.013

(0.024)

(0.025)

Fatality rate
Constant
Individual FE
Income
No. of individuals

-0.003

-0.004

(0.004)

(0.004)

0.004

0.003

0.004

0.003

(0.011)

(0.011)

(0.011)

(0.011)

×
×

×
×

×
×

×
×

1,514

1,514

1,514

1,514

R-squared
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
Note: X is the seismic intensity of the Earthquake (Shindo in Japanese), a metric of the
strength of an earthquake at a specific location. Radiation is measured in µSv/h. Fatality rate
is the log of the number of deaths plus 1 per 1,000,000 persons. See Appendix Table A13 for
details of these variables. Significance levels are *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, and ***p < 0.01.
Standard errors clustered at the municipality are reported in parentheses. Results for
specifications with (X – 4.5) * 1[X ≥ 4.5], (X - 5) * 1[X ≥ 5], and X-squared are very similar
(available upon request)

42

Table 6. Results on Risk Preferences: Panel versus Cross Section (Men Only)
Outcome: Risk Aversion Measure 1 (Transformed Price)
Men
Specification
X
(X – 4) * 1[X ≥ 4]
Constant
Individual FE

Panel

Cross Section

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.009*

-0.004

-0.003

(0.005)

(0.004)

(0.004)

-0.039**

0.011

0.011

(0.017)

(0.017)

(0.016)

0.004

0.765***

0.653***

(0.011)

(0.011)

(0.096)

×
×

Covariates
No. of individuals

1,514

1,514

1,514

No. of observations

3,028

1,514

1,514

R-squared
0.004
0.001
0.036
Note: X is the seismic intensity of the Earthquake (Shindo in Japanese), a metric of the
strength of an earthquake at a specific location. Significance levels are *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05,
and ***p < 0.01. Standard errors clustered at the municipality are reported in parentheses.
Covariates in Column (3) are age, age squared, and income. Results for specifications with
(X – 4.5) * 1[X ≥ 4.5], (X - 5) * 1[X ≥ 5], and X-squared are very similar (available upon
request).

43

Table 7. Results on Behavior (Men Only)
Men
Outcomes

Gambling

Drinking

Smoking

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.013**

-0.003

-0.001

(0.007)

(0.002)

(0.003)

0.047**

0.018*

0.000

(0.019)

(0.011)

(0.010)

0.042**

0.007

0.012

(0.018)

(0.005)

(0.009)

×
×

×
×

×
×

Mean of Δoutcome

0.018

0.003

0.011

Mean of outcome (before)

0.145

0.024

0.024

No. of individuals

1,514

1,514

1,514

X
(X – 4) * 1[X ≥ 4]
Constant
Individual FE
Income

R-squared
0.004
0.002
0.000
Note: X is the seismic intensity of the Earthquake (Shindo in Japanese), a metric of the
strength of an earthquake at a specific location. Significance levels are *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05,
and ***p < 0.01. Standard errors clustered at the municipality are reported in parentheses. A
gambling dummy takes one if the person is engaged in gambling once or more a week. A
drinking dummy takes 1 if the person drinks 5 or more cans of beer (12 oz. per can) or its
equivalent a day almost every day. A smoking dummy takes 1 if the person smokes more
than 30 cigarettes per day. Results for specifications with (X – 4.5) * 1[X ≥ 4.5], (X - 5) *
1[X ≥ 5], and X-squared are very similar (available upon request).

44

Table 8. Emotional Responses
Men
X
(X - 4) * 1[X ≥ 4]

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.011

0.010

0.015

0.015

(0.015)

(0.015)

(0.015)

(0.015)

-0.124**

-0.123**

-0.071

-0.071

(0.051)

(0.051)

(0.052)

(0.053)

Employment Status
Constant
Individual FE
Income

Women

-0.047

-0.002

(0.102)

(0.067)

-0.005

-0.005

-0.022

-0.022

(0.040)

(0.040)

(0.032)

(0.032)

×
×

×
×
×

×
×

×
×
×

1,493

1,493

1,690

1,690

Employment status
No. of individuals

R-squared
0.005
0.005
0.001
0.001
Note: Outcome is the simple average of the standardized values of three emotion variables:
“stress,” “depression,” and “sleep problems.” All emotion variables are based on
respondents indicating on a 5-point scale how well each of the questions applies to them.
The “Stress” question asked whether a respondent has been feeling stressed lately. The
“Depression” question asked whether a respondent has been feeling depressed lately. The
“Sleep problems” question asked whether a respondent has not been sleeping well lately. A
scale of 1 means “particularly true for me” and 5 means “does not hold true at all for me.”
Therefore, a higher score indicates that the respondent has less mental/emotional issues (i.e.,
is mentally healthier). X is the seismic intensity of the Earthquake (Shindo in Japanese), a
metric of the strength of an earthquake at a specific location. Columns (2) and (4) control for
employment status. Significance levels are *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, and ***p < 0.01. Standard
errors clustered at the municipality are reported in parentheses. Results for specifications
with (X – 4.5) * 1[X ≥ 4.5], (X - 5) * 1[X ≥ 5], and X-squared are very similar (available
upon request).

45

Online Appendix
(Not for Publication)

1

Table A1. Risk Aversion Measures
1.

Risk aversion category, price of the lottery tickets, and risk aversion measures
<- Less risk averse

Risk aversion category

More risk averse ->

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

~50,000

50,000~35,000

35,000~25,000

25,000~15,000

15,000~8,000

8,000~4,000

4,000~2,000

2,000~10

10~

Transformed Price

~0

0~0.30

0.30~0.50

0.50~0.70

0.70~0.84

0.84~0.92

0.92~0.96

0.96~0.99

0.99~

Absolute Risk Aversion

~0

0~1.100

1.100~1.600

1.600~1.879

1.879~1.969

1.969~1.993

1.993~1.998

1.998~2.000

2.000~

Price of the lottery tickets (JPY)

Note: The values of absolute risk aversion are multiplied by 1,000. See the main text for the construction of each risk aversion measure based on the price
of the lottery tickets.

2

Transition Matrix of Risk Aversion Category before and after the Earthquake (Men Only)
a. X ≥ 4
After
More risk averse

->

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

1

1

4

1

2

3

0

1

0

1

13

2

5

13

6

2

4

2

1

1

0

34

3

3

6

11

8

9

2

3

0

0

42

4

2

1

7

14

19

13

2

1

1

60

5

0

1

7

23

44

26

17

4

0

122

6

1

1

2

10

26

14

31

8

1

94

7

1

0

2

0

20

24

36

14

5

102

8

1

0

1

1

6

4

17

13

3

46

9

0

0

0

0

1

5

3

1

11

21

Total

14

26

37

60

132

90

111

42

22

534

averse

2

Less risk averse ->

1

<- More risk

Before

<- Less risk averse

Total

b. X < 4
After
<- Less risk averse

More risk averse

->

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

1

4

5

4

6

5

1

2

0

0

27

2

9

10

10

10

7

3

2

1

1

53

3

4

12

22

20

11

8

6

4

0

87

4

2

5

17

32

34

24

4

3

0

121

5

0

3

10

34

91

47

37

7

3

232

6

1

6

4

7

51

55

39

7

6

176

7

1

1

3

6

29

43

60

30

7

180

8

0

0

1

3

8

8

16

25

5

66

9

0

1

1

3

3

6

0

8

16

38

Total

21

43

72

121

239

195

166

85

38

980

averse

2

Less risk averse ->

1

<- More risk

Before

2.

3

Total

Table A2. The Validity of Risk Aversion Measures
1.

Using the 2011 survey (before the Earthquake)
Outcomes

Gambling

Drinking

Smoking

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.146***

-0.034**

-0.031**

(0.027)

(0.014)

(0.014)

0.208***

0.041***

0.038***

(0.023)

(0.012)

(0.012)

No. of individuals

3,221

3,221

3,221

R-squared

0.012

0.004

0.004

Gambling

Drinking

Smoking

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.188***

-0.034**

-0.017

(0.031)

(0.014)

(0.013)

0.251***

0.043***

0.032***

(0.026)

(0.013)

(0.011)

3,221

3,221

3,221

Risk aversion measure 1
Constant

2.

Using the 2012 survey (after the Earthquake)
Outcomes

Risk aversion measure 1
Constant
No. of individuals

R-squared
0.017
0.003
0.001
Note: Significance levels are *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, and ***p < 0.01. Standard errors clustered
at the municipality are reported in parentheses. Risk Aversion Measure 1 is the transformed
price. See the main text for construction of the variable. A gambling dummy takes one if the
person is engaged in gambling once or more a week. A drinking dummy takes 1 if the person
drinks 5 or more cans of beer (12 oz. per can) or its equivalent a day almost every day. A
smoking dummy takes 1 if the person smokes more than 30 cigarettes per day.

4

Table A3. Attrition
Men
Outcome
X
(X - 4) * 1[X ≥ 4]

Attrition
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.004

-0.002

-0.002

-0.019

(0.006)

(0.005)

(0.004)

(0.013)

0.006
(0.019)
-0.010

(X - 4.5) * 1[X ≥ 4.5]

(0.026)
-0.014

(X - 5) * 1[X ≥ 5]

(0.033)
0.003

X-squared

(0.002)
Constant
Covariates
No. of individuals

0.314***

0.313***

0.314***

0.322***

(0.111)

(0.111)

(0.111)

(0.110)

×

×

×

×

1,661

1,661

1,661

1,661

R-squared
0.006
0.006
0.006
0.007
Note: Outcome is a dummy that takes one if the person drops from the sample in 2012 (after the
Earthquake). The attrition rate is 8.9 percent (147 of 1,661 respondents). X is the seismic intensity
of the Earthquake (Shindo in Japanese), a metric of the strength of an earthquake at a specific
location. Significance levels are *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, and ***p < 0.01. Standard errors clustered at
the municipality are reported in parentheses. Covariates in Columns (2) and (4) are age, age squared,
and income. Results for specifications with (X – 4.5) * 1[X ≥ 4.5], (X - 5) * 1[X ≥ 5], and
X-squared are very similar (available upon request).

5

Table A4. Differential Effects of Distance from Nuclear Power Plants on Risk Preferences (Men Only)
Outcome: Risk Aversion Measure 1 (Transformed Price)
Men
X
(X - 4) * 1[X ≥ 4]

(1a)
0.009*
(0.005)
-0.039**
(0.017)

(1b)
-0.010
(0.018)
-0.036**
(0.018)

(X - 4.5) * 1[X ≥ 4.5]

(2a)
0.007*
(0.004)

(2b)
-0.003
(0.019)

-0.058***
(0.022)

-0.056**
(0.025)

(X - 5) * 1[X ≥ 5]

(3a)
0.005
(0.003)

(3b)
0.004
(0.019)

-0.093***
(0.032)

-0.098**
(0.041)

X-squared
X * log (distance from the nearest nuclear power plant)
log (distance from the nearest nuclear power plant)
Constant

0.004
(0.011)

0.004
(0.003)
-0.011
(0.011)
0.054
(0.051)

0.006
(0.010)

0.002
(0.004)
-0.009
(0.011)
0.048
(0.050)

0.009
(0.010)

0.000
(0.004)
-0.008
(0.010)
0.043
(0.047)

(4a)
0.020**
(0.010)

(4b)
-0.004
(0.021)

-0.004**
(0.002)

-0.003*
(0.002)
0.005
(0.003)
-0.012
(0.012)
0.057
(0.053)

0.003
(0.011)

Individual FE
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
Mean of Δrisk aversion
0.018
0.018
0.018
0.018
0.018
0.018
0.018
0.018
Mean of risk aversion (before)
0.738
0.738
0.738
0.738
0.738
0.738
0.738
0.738
N of individuals
1,514
1,514
1,514
1,514
1,514
1,514
1,514
1,514
R-squared
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.005
0.005
0.005
0.002
0.003
Note: X is the seismic intensity of the Earthquake (Shindo in Japanese), a metric of the strength of an earthquake at a specific location. Significance levels
are *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, and ***p < 0.01. Standard errors clustered at the municipality are reported in parentheses. There are 52 nuclear power plants in
18 locations across Japan and we take the distance between the city hall of the municipality and the nearest nuclear power plant.

6

Table A5. Robustness Checks: Outlier Analysis (Men Only)
Outcome: Risk Aversion Measure 1 (Transformed Price)
Men
Baseline

X
(X - 4) * 1[X ≥ 4]

Exclude four municipalities at X=5.5

(Huber, 1964)

(N=26) in Figure 2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

0.009*

0.007*

0.005

0.020**

0.006*

0.005*

0.003

0.016**

0.008*

0.007*

0.005*

0.016

(0.005)

(0.004)

(0.003)

(0.010)

(0.003)

(0.003)

(0.003)

(0.008)

(0.005)

(0.004)

(0.003)

(0.010)

-0.039**

-0.027**

-0.027*

(0.017)

(0.012)

(0.016)

(X - 4.5) * 1[X ≥ 4.5]

-0.058***

-0.041***

-0.040**

(0.022)

(0.015)

(0.019)

(X - 5) * 1[X ≥ 5]

-0.093***

-0.069***

-0.068***

(0.032)

(0.023)

(0.025)

X-squared
Constant

M-estimation

-0.004**

-0.003**

-0.002

(0.002)

(0.001)

(0.002)

0.004

0.006

0.009

0.003

0.001

0.002

0.003

-0.002

0.005

0.006

0.008

0.004

(0.011)

(0.010)

(0.010)

(0.011)

(0.008)

(0.008)

(0.008)

(0.009)

(0.011)

(0.010)

(0.010)

(0.011)

5.34

5.27

5.37

5.65

5.20

5.19

5.32

5.35

5.98

5.63

5.55

6.56

×

×

×

×

×

×

×

×

×

×

×

×

Mean of Δrisk aversion

0.018

0.018

0.018

0.018

0.018

0.018

0.018

0.018

0.020

0.020

0.020

0.020

Mean of risk aversion (before)

0.738

0.738

0.738

0.738

0.738

0.738

0.738

0.738

0.736

0.736

0.736

0.736

N of individuals

1,514

1,514

1,514

1,514

1,514

1,514

1,514

1,514

1,488

1,488

1,488

1,488

Value of X when ΔY=0
Individual FE

Note: X is the seismic intensity of the Earthquake (Shindo in Japanese), a metric of the strength of an earthquake at a specific location. Significance levels
are *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, and ***p < 0.01. M-estimation (Huber, 1964) minimizes the residual function which puts less weight on residuals that are more
likely to be outliers. M-estimation is run using the “robreg” user-provided package in Stata software (Jann, 2010). Standard errors for OLS are clustered at
the municipality and those for M-estimation are robust standard errors as suggested by Croux et al. (2003). Value of X when ΔY=0 is the level of intensity
measure (X) where change in risk aversion (ΔY) switches signs.

7

Table A6. Robustness Checks: Mean Reversion (Men Only)
Outcome: Risk Aversion Measure 1 (Transformed Price)
Men
Excluding subjects with risk aversion

Excluding subjects with risk aversion

(category 9)

(categories 8 and 9)

before the Earthquake

before the Earthquake

Baseline

X
(X - 4) * 1[X ≥ 4]

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

0.009*

0.007*

0.005

0.020**

0.008

0.006

0.004

0.019*

0.009

0.008*

0.005

0.019*

(0.005)

(0.004)

(0.003)

(0.010)

(0.005)

(0.004)

(0.003)

(0.011)

(0.005)

(0.004)

(0.003)

(0.011)

-0.039**

-0.039**

-0.039*

(0.017)

(0.018)

(0.020)

(X - 4.5) * 1[X ≥ 4.5]

-0.058***

-0.059***

-0.062**

(0.022)

(0.023)

(0.026)

(X - 5) * 1[X ≥ 5]

-0.093***

-0.098***

-0.104***

(0.032)

(0.033)

(0.039)

X-squared
Constant

-0.004**

-0.004*

-0.003*

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.002)

0.004

0.006

0.009

0.003

0.012

0.013

0.016

0.010

0.018

0.019*

0.022**

0.017

(0.011)

(0.010)

(0.010)

(0.011)

(0.011)

(0.011)

(0.010)

(0.012)

(0.012)

(0.011)

(0.011)

(0.012)

5.34

5.27

5.37

5.65

5.40

5.30

5.38

5.69

5.74

5.47

5.47

6.21

×

×

×

×

×

×

×

×

×

×

×

×

Mean of Δrisk aversion

0.018

0.018

0.018

0.018

0.022

0.022

0.022

0.022

0.030

0.030

0.030

0.030

Mean of risk aversion (before)

0.738

0.738

0.738

0.738

0.727

0.727

0.727

0.727

0.706

0.706

0.706

0.706

No. of individuals

1,514

1,514

1,514

1,514

1,455

1,455

1,455

1,455

1,343

1,343

1,343

1,343

R-squared

0.004

0.004

0.005

0.002

0.003

0.005

0.005

0.002

0.003

0.005

0.006

0.002

Value of X when ΔY=0
Individual FE

Note: X is the seismic intensity of the Earthquake (Shindo in Japanese), a metric of the strength of an earthquake at a specific location. Significance levels
are *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, and ***p < 0.01. Standard errors clustered at the municipality are reported in parentheses. Value of X when ΔY=0 is the level of
intensity measure (X) where change in risk aversion (ΔY) switches signs.
8

Table A7. Robustness Checks: Alternative Measure of Risk Preference (Men Only)
Outcome: Risk Aversion Measure 2 (Absolute Risk Aversion)
Men
X
(X - 4) * 1[X ≥ 4]

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.012

0.010

0.005

0.025

(0.009)

(0.008)

(0.006)

(0.019)

-0.059*
(0.031)
-0.096**

(X - 4.5) * 1[X ≥ 4.5]

(0.039)
-0.146***

(X - 5) * 1[X ≥ 5]

(0.055)
X-squared

-0.005
(0.003)

Constant

0.017

0.018

0.024

0.017

(0.022)

(0.021)

(0.020)

(0.023)

5.32

5.23

5.36

5.70

×

×

×

×

Mean of Δrisk aversion

0.031

0.031

0.031

0.031

Mean of risk aversion (before)

1.758

1.758

1.758

1.758

No. of individuals

1,514

1,514

1,514

1,514

R-squared

0.002

0.003

0.003

0.001

Value of X when ΔY=0
Individual FE

Note: X is the seismic intensity of the Earthquake (Shindo in Japanese), a metric of the strength of an

earthquake at a specific location. Significance levels are *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, and ***p < 0.01. Standard
errors clustered at the municipality are reported in parentheses. Value of X when ΔY=0 is the level of
intensity measure (X) where change in risk aversion (ΔY) switches signs. Note that the values of absolute
risk aversion are multiplied by 1000.

9

Table A8. Robustness Checks: Changes in the Choice of Risk Aversion Category (Men
Only)
Outcome: Ordinal Outcome of Risk Aversion Measure
Men
X
(X - 4) * 1[X ≥ 4]

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.036**

0.030**

0.021*

0.085**

(0.018)

(0.014)

(0.011)

(0.038)

-0.145**
(0.064)
-0.213**

(X - 4.5) * 1[X ≥ 4.5]

(0.082)
-0.375***

(X - 5) * 1[X ≥ 5]

(0.129)
X-squared

-0.015**
(0.007)

Constant

-0.012

-0.006

0.003

-0.024

(0.039)

(0.038)

(0.036)

(0.041)

5.19

5.19

5.31

5.36

×

×

×

×

Mean of Δrisk aversion

0.044

0.044

0.044

0.044

Mean of risk aversion category (before)

5.361

5.361

5.361

5.361

No. of individuals

1,514

1,514

1,514

1,514

Value of X when ΔY=0
Individual FE

R-squared
0.004
0.005
0.006
0.003
Note: Outcome is the ordinal outcome of risk aversion measure, which takes 1 if the person chose a higher
risk aversion category after the Earthquake (i.e., is more risk averse) than that before the Earthquake; takes
−1 if the person chose a lower risk aversion category after the Earthquake (i.e., is less risk averse) than
that before the Earthquake; and 0 if the person chose the same category before and after the Earthquake. X
is the seismic intensity of the Earthquake (Shindo in Japanese), a metric of the strength of an earthquake at
a specific location. Significance levels are *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, and ***p < 0.01. Standard errors
clustered at the municipality are reported in parentheses. Value of X when ΔY=0 is the level of intensity
measure (X) where change in risk aversion (ΔY) switches signs.

10

Table A9. Alternative Measure of the Earthquake (Men Only)
Outcome: Risk Preference Measure 1 (Transformed Price)
Men
Intensity Measure
Alternative

Alternative

Alternative

Measure 1

Measure 2

Measure 3

Weighted

Weighted

Simple

Average

Average

Average of

Closest

of Three

of Two

Three

Station

Closest

Closest

Closest

Only

Stations

Stations

Stations

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.009*

0.009*

0.009*

0.009*

(0.005)

(0.005)

(0.005)

(0.005)

-0.039**

-0.036**

-0.041**

-0.035**

(0.017)

(0.017)

(0.017)

(0.016)

0.004

0.004

0.004

0.003

(0.011)

(0.011)

(0.011)

(0.011)

5.34

5.45

5.29

5.53

×

×

×

×

Mean of Δrisk aversion

0.018

0.018

0.018

0.018

Mean of risk aversion (before)

0.738

0.738

0.738

0.738

No. of individuals

1,514

1,514

1,514

1,514

Baseline

Method of constructing
an intensity measure

Intensity Measure
(Intensity Measure – 4) * 1[Intensity Measure ≥ 4]
Constant

Value of X when ΔY=0
Individual FE

0.004
0.003
0.004
0.003
R-squared
Note: X is the seismic intensity of the Earthquake (Shindo in Japanese), a metric of the strength of an
earthquake at a specific location. Significance levels are *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, and ***p < 0.01. Standard
errors clustered at the municipality are reported in parentheses. Weight is the inverse of the distance between
the city hall and each monitoring station. Value of X when ΔY=0 is the level of intensity measure (X) where
change in risk aversion (ΔY) switches signs.

11

Table A10. Results on Behavior (Women Only)
Women
Outcomes

Gambling

Drinking

Smoking

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.004

0.002

-0.000

(0.004)

(0.002)

(0.000)

0.015

0.000

0.000

(0.014)

(0.007)

(0.000)

0.007

-0.004

0.002

(0.009)

(0.004)

(0.002)

×
×

×
×

×
×

Mean of Δoutcome

-0.001

0.001

0.001

Mean of outcome (before)

0.040

0.005

0.002

No. of individuals

1,707

1,707

1,707

X
(X – 4) * 1[X ≥ 4]
Constant
Individual FE
Income

R-squared
0.001
0.002
0.001
Note: X is the seismic intensity of the Earthquake (Shindo in Japanese), a metric of the strength of
an earthquake at a specific location. Significance levels are *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, and ***p < 0.01.
Standard errors clustered at the municipality are reported in parentheses. A gambling dummy takes
one if the person is engaged in gambling once or more a week. A drinking dummy takes 1 if the
person drinks 5 or more cans of beer (12 oz. per can) or its equivalent a day almost every day. A
smoking dummy takes 1 if the person smokes more than 30 cigarettes per day. Results for
specifications with (X – 4.5) * 1[X ≥ 4.5], (X - 5) * 1[X ≥ 5], and X-squared are very similar
(available upon request).

12

Table A11. Source of data and variable lists
1. Intensity of the Earthquake
Detail: http://www.kyoshin.bosai.go.jp/kyoshin/quake/
Accessed: 12:32pm CST, Sep 13, 2013
Data on seismic intensity of the Earthquake is obtained from the Earthquake and
Volcano Data Center, National Research Institute for Earth Science and Disaster
Prevention (NIED), Japan. The Center maintains a strong-motion seismograph network
(K-NET, Kik-net) that includes more than 1,700 observation stations distributed
uniformly every 20 km, covering Japan. The seismic intensity data as well as the
geocode information of each observation station are collected for all major earthquakes
in Japan.
2. Radiation
Detail: https://mapdb.jaea.go.jp/mapdb/portals/60/
Accessed: 3:55pm CST, March 11, 2014
Data on radiation are collected by the Airborne Monitoring Survey of the Ministry
of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology in Japan. The data were
collected by airplane flight with altitudes between 150 and 300m. The flight paths had
a width of at most 5 km and cover almost all municipalities in Japan. The air dose rate
of radiation (µSv/h) is adjusted to reflect the number at a height of 1 m above the
ground. This is the only radiation survey that covered all municipalities across Japan
after the Earthquake and accident at the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant. The
survey was conducted between June 22, 2011 and May 31, 2012. Most of the affected
municipalities were surveyed in 2011 while some of the less or almost non-affected
areas, such as Hokkaido, Hyogo, Kyoto, Mie, Shiga, Shimane, and Tottori, are
measured after March 2012.
3. Pre-Earthquake Hazard Prediction
Detail: http://www.j-shis.bosai.go.jp/download
Accessed: 12:54pm CST, March 12, 2014
This earthquake prediction is based on a 2010 report of the National Seismic
Hazard Maps for Japan by the Headquarters for Earthquake Research Promotion of the
Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Japan. The report
13

presents a detailed prediction on the probability of earthquake occurrence at a 250 m
mesh code level. The prediction combines earthquake occurrence models, seismic
source models, and subsurface structure models to calculate the predicted probability
of different intensity levels at each mesh code level.
4. Fatality Rate
Detail: http://www.stat.go.jp/info/shinsai/zuhyou/data0422.xls
Accessed: 12:30pm CST, Sep 13, 2013
Fatality rate is created from the number of fatalities collected by the Fire and
Disaster Management Agency (Shobo-cho, Saiagi Taisaku Honbu in Japanese) of the
Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications in Japan. The number is as of March
11, 2013, two years after the Earthquake. The numbers of deaths and missing people
are reported at the municipality level for each affected municipality. We use the natural
logarithm of one plus the numbers of deaths and missing people per million at the
municipality level.
5. Property value
Detail: http://nlftp.mlit.go.jp/ksj/jpgis/datalist/KsjTmplt-L01-v1_1.html
Accessed: 11:28am, CST, June 26, 2014
Property value data are constructed by the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure,
Transport and Tourism for the purpose of property tax evaluation based on the
transaction price of nearby properties and other related factors. Property values as of
January 1 for each year are published and the original data include more than 26,000
properties. We use the change of property values for the same property between 2011
and 2012 and take took a simple average of all properties located in each municipality.

14

